{"id": "63744", "revid": "2429012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63744", "title": "Hawker Typhoon", "text": "British single-seater fighter-bomber\nThe Hawker Typhoon was a British single-seat fighter-bomber, produced by Hawker Aircraft. It was intended to be a medium-high altitude interceptor, as a replacement for the Hawker Hurricane, but several design problems were encountered and it never completely satisfied this requirement.\nThe Typhoon was originally designed to mount twelve .303 inch (7.7 mm) Browning machine guns and be powered by the latest engines. Its service introduction in mid-1941 was plagued with problems and for several months the aircraft faced a doubtful future. When the \"Luftwaffe\" brought the new Focke-Wulf Fw 190 into service in 1941, the Typhoon was the only RAF fighter capable of catching it at low altitudes; as a result it secured a new role as a low-altitude interceptor.\nThe Typhoon became established in roles such as night-time intruder and long-range fighter. From late 1942 the Typhoon was equipped with bombs, these bomb-carrying aircraft being nicknamed \"Bomphoon\" by the press. From late 1943 RP-3 rockets were added to its armoury. With those weapons and its four 20\u00a0mm Hispano autocannon, the Typhoon became one of the Second World War's most successful ground-attack aircraft.\nDesign and development.\nOrigins.\nEven as Hurricane production began in March 1937, Sydney Camm embarked on designing its successor. Camm had contacted the Air Ministry and asked what projects Hawker could consider, number two on their list was a single-engined fighter. Two preliminary designs were similar and larger than the Hurricane. These later became known as the \"N\" and \"R\" (from the initial of the engine manufacturers), because they were designed for the newly developed Napier Sabre and Rolls-Royce Vulture, engines respectively. Both engines used 24 cylinders and were designed for over ; the difference between the two was primarily in the arrangement of the cylinders \u2013 an H-block in the Sabre, and an X-block in the Vulture. Hawker submitted these preliminary designs in July 1937, but were advised by the Director of Technical Development to wait until a formal specification for a new fighter to replace the Spitfire and Hurricane was issued. He also cautioned that while they liked the design, they did not think the wing would be stiff enough.\nIn March 1938, Hawker received the complete Specification F.18/37 and invitation to tender for a fighter which would be able to achieve at least at , a ceiling of not less than 35,000 ft and specified a British engine with a two-speed supercharger. The armament fitted was to be twelve .303 inch (7.7 mm) Browning machine guns with 500 rounds per gun, with a provision for alternative combinations of weaponry. As well as Hawker, Gloster, Supermarine and Bristol submitted one or more designs each. Two prototypes of both the Type N and R were ordered on 3 March 1938 Camm and his design team started formal development of the designs and construction of prototypes.\nA contract for 500 Vulture and 500 Sabre engined fighters to F.9/37 was placed with Hawker on 10 July 1939. The official names 'Tornado' and 'Typhoon' were issued in August and December respectively.\nThe basic design of the Typhoon was a combination of traditional Hawker construction, as used in the earlier Hawker Hurricane, and more modern construction techniques; the front fuselage structure, from the engine mountings to the rear of the cockpit, was made up of bolted and welded duralumin or steel tubes covered with skin panels, while the rear fuselage was a flush-riveted, semi-monocoque structure. The forward fuselage and cockpit skinning was made up of large, removable duralumin panels, allowing easy external access to the engine and engine accessories and most of the important hydraulic and electrical equipment.\nThe wing had a span of , with a wing area of . It was designed with a small amount of inverted gull wing bend; the inner sections had a 1\u00b0 anhedral, while the outer sections, attached just outboard of the undercarriage legs, had a dihedral of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442\u00b0. The airfoil was a NACA 22 wing section, with a thickness-to-chord ratio of 19.5% at the root tapering to 12% at the tip.\nThe wing possessed great structural strength, provided plenty of room for fuel tanks and a heavy armament, while allowing the aircraft to be a steady gun platform. Each of the inner wings incorporated two fuel tanks; the \"main\" tanks, housed in a bay outboard and to the rear of the main undercarriage bays, had a capacity of ; while the \"nose\" tanks, built into the wing leading edges, forward of the main spar, had a capacity of each. Also incorporated into the inner wings were inward-retracting landing gear with a wide track of 13\u00a0ft &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6+3\u20444 in.\nBy contemporary standards, the new design's wing was very \"thick\", similar to the Hurricane before it. Although the Typhoon was expected to achieve over in level flight at 20,000\u00a0ft, the thick wings created a large drag rise and prevented higher speeds than the 410\u00a0mph at achieved in tests. The climb rate and performance above that level was also considered disappointing. When the Typhoon was dived at speeds of over , the drag rise caused buffeting and trim changes. These compressibility problems led to Camm designing the Typhoon II, later known as the Tempest, which used much thinner wings with a laminar flow airfoil.\nPrototypes.\nThe first flight of the first Typhoon prototype, \"P5212\", made by Hawker's Chief test Pilot Philip Lucas from Langley, was delayed until 24 February 1940 because problems with the development of the Sabre engine meant a flight engine did not arrive until December 1939. Although unarmed for its first flights, \"P5212\" later carried twelve .303 in (7.7\u00a0mm) Brownings, set in groups of six in each outer wing panel; this was the armament fitted to the first 110 Typhoons, known as the Typhoon IA. \"P5212\" also had a small tail-fin, triple exhaust stubs and no wheel doors fitted to the centre-section. On 9 May 1940 the prototype had a mid-air structural failure, at the join between the forward fuselage and rear fuselage, just behind the pilot's seat. Philip Lucas could see daylight through the split but instead of bailing out, landed the Typhoon and was later awarded the George Medal.\nOn 15 May 1940, the Minister of Aircraft Production, Lord Beaverbrook, ordered that resources should be concentrated on the production of five main aircraft types: the Spitfire and Hurricane fighters and the Armstrong Whitworth Whitley, Vickers Wellington and Bristol Blenheim bombers. As a result, development of the Typhoon was slowed, production plans were postponed and test flying continued at a reduced rate.\nAs a result of the delays the second prototype, \"P5216\", first flew on 3 May 1941: \"P5216\" carried an armament of four belt-fed 20\u00a0mm (0.79\u00a0in) Hispano Mk II cannon, with 140 rounds per gun and was the prototype of the Typhoon IB series. Specification F.9/37 had been modified to include cannon armament as progress with the Westland Whirlwind cannon fighter (to F.37/35) and Boulton Paul's twin-engined turret fighter (F.11/37) with cannon was slow.\nIn the interim between construction of the first and second prototypes, the Air Ministry had given Hawker an instruction to proceed with the construction of 1,000 of the new fighters. It was felt that the Vulture engine was more promising, so the order covered 500 Tornadoes and 250 Typhoons, with the balance to be decided once the two had been compared.\nIt was also decided that because Hawker was concentrating on Hurricane production, the Tornado would be built by Avro and Gloster would build the Typhoons at Hucclecote. Avro and Gloster were aircraft companies within the Hawker Siddeley group. As a result of good progress by Gloster, the first production Typhoon \"R7576\" was first flown on 27 May 1941 by Michael Daunt, just over three weeks after the second prototype.\nOperational service.\nLow-level interceptor.\nIn 1941, the Spitfire Mk Vs, which equipped the bulk of Fighter Command squadrons, were outclassed by the new Focke-Wulf Fw 190 and suffered many losses. The Typhoon was rushed into service with Nos. 56 and 609 Squadrons in late 1941, to counter the Fw 190. This decision proved to be a disaster, as several Typhoons were lost for unknown reasons and the Air Ministry began to consider halting production of the type.\nIn August 1942, Hawker's second test pilot, Ken Seth-Smith, while deputising for Lucas, carried out a straight and level speed test from Hawker's test centre at Langley, and the aircraft broke up over Thorpe, killing the pilot. Sydney Camm and the design team immediately ruled out pilot error, which had been suspected in earlier crashes. Investigation revealed that the elevator mass-balance had torn away from the fuselage structure. Intense flutter developed, the structure failed and the tail broke away. Modification 286 to the structure and the control runs partially solved the structural problem. (The 1940 Philip Lucas test flight incident had been due to an unrelated failing.) Mod 286, which involved fastening external fishplates, or reinforcing plates, around the tail of the aircraft, and eventually internal strengthening, was only a partial remedy, and there were still failures right up to the end of the Typhoon's service life. The Sabre engine was also a constant source of problems, notably in colder weather, when it was very difficult to start, and it suffered problems with wear of its sleeve valves, with consequently high oil consumption. The 24-cylinder engine also produced a very high-pitched engine note, which pilots found very fatiguing.\nThe Typhoon did not begin to mature as a reliable aircraft until the end of 1942, when its excellent qualities \u2013 seen from the start by S/L Roland Beamont of 609 Squadron \u2013 became apparent. Beamont had worked as a Hawker production test pilot while resting from operations, and had stayed with Seth-Smith, having his first flight in the aircraft at that time. During late 1942 and early 1943, the Typhoon squadrons were based on airfields near the south and south-east coasts of England and, alongside two squadrons with the Griffon-engined Spitfire XII, countered the \"Luftwaffe\"'s \"tip and run\" low-level nuisance raids, shooting down a score or more bomb-carrying Fw 190s. Typhoon squadrons kept at least one pair of aircraft on standing patrols over the south coast, with another pair kept at \"readiness\" (ready to take off within two minutes) throughout daylight hours. These sections of Typhoons flew at or lower, with enough height to spot and then intercept the incoming enemy fighter-bombers. The Typhoon finally proved itself in this role; for example, while flying patrols against these low-level raids, 486 (NZ) Squadron claimed 20 fighter-bombers, plus three bombers shot down, between mid-October 1942 and mid-July 1943.\nThe first two Messerschmitt Me 210 fighter-bombers to be destroyed over the British Isles were shot down by Typhoons in August 1942. During a daylight raid by the \"Luftwaffe\" on London on 20 January 1943, four Messerschmitt Bf 109G-4s and one Fw 190A-4 of JG 26 were destroyed by Typhoons. As soon as the aircraft entered service, it was apparent the profile of the Typhoon resembled a Fw 190 from some angles, which caused more than one friendly fire incident involving Allied anti-aircraft units and other fighters. This led to Typhoons first being marked up with all-white noses, and later with high visibility black and white stripes under the wings, a precursor of the markings applied to all Allied aircraft on D-Day.\nSwitch to ground attack.\nBy 1943, the RAF needed a ground attack fighter more than a \"pure\" fighter and the Typhoon was suited to the role (and less-suited to the pure fighter role than competing aircraft such as the Spitfire Mk IX). The powerful engine allowed the aircraft to carry a load of up to two bombs, equal to the light bombers of only a few years earlier. The bomb-equipped aircraft were nicknamed \"Bombphoons\" and entered service with No. 181 Squadron, formed in September 1942.\nFrom September 1943, Typhoons were also armed with four \"60 lb\" RP-3 rockets under each wing. In October 1943, No. 181 Squadron made the first Typhoon rocket attacks. Although the rocket projectiles were inaccurate and took considerable skill to aim and allow for ballistic drop after firing, \"the sheer firepower of just one Typhoon was equivalent to a destroyer's broadside\". By the end of 1943, eighteen rocket-equipped Typhoon squadrons formed the basis of the RAF Second Tactical Air Force (2nd TAF) ground attack arm in Europe. In theory, the rocket rails and bomb-racks were interchangeable; in practice, to simplify supply, some 2nd TAF Typhoon squadrons (such as 198 Squadron) used the rockets only, while other squadrons were armed exclusively with bombs (this also allowed individual units to more finely hone their skills with their assigned weapons).\nBy the Normandy landings in June 1944, 2 TAF had eighteen operational squadrons of Typhoon IBs, while RAF Fighter Command had a further nine. The aircraft proved itself to be the most effective RAF tactical strike aircraft, on interdiction raids against communications and transport targets deep in North Western Europe prior to the invasion and in direct support of the Allied ground forces after D-Day. A system of close liaison with the ground troops was set up by the RAF and army: RAF radio operators in vehicles equipped with VHF radio telegraphy (R/T) travelled with the troops close to the front line and called up Typhoons operating in a \"cab rank\", which attacked the targets, marked for them by smoke shells fired by mortar or artillery, until they were destroyed.\nAnalysis of destroyed tanks after the Normandy battle showed a hit-rate for the air-fired rockets of only 4%. In Operation Goodwood (18\u201321 July), the 2nd Tactical Air Force claimed 257 tanks destroyed. A total of 222 were claimed by Typhoon pilots using rocket projectiles. Once the area was secured, the British \"Operational Research Section 2\" analysts could confirm only ten out of the 456 knocked out German AFVs found in the area were attributable to Typhoons using rocket projectiles.\nAt Mortain, in the Falaise pocket, a German counter-attack (Operation Luttich) that started on 7 August threatened Patton's break-out from the beachhead; this counter-attack was repulsed by 2nd Tactical Air Force Typhoons and the 9th USAAF. During the course of the battle, pilots of the 2nd Tactical Air Force and 9th USAAF claimed to have destroyed a combined total of 252 tanks. Only 177 German tanks and assault guns participated in the battle and only 46 were lost \u2013 of which nine were verified as destroyed by Typhoons, four percent of the total claimed.\nHowever, after-action studies at the time were based on random sampling of wrecks rather than exhaustive surveys, and the degree of overclaim attributed to Typhoon pilots as a result was statistically improbable in view of the far lower known level of overclaim by Allied pilots in air-to-air combat, where claims were if anything more likely to be mistaken. Allied and German witness accounts of Typhoon attacks on German armour indicate that RPs did kill tanks with fair probability. Horst Weber, an SS \"panzergrenadier\" serving with Kampfgruppe Knaust south of Arnhem in the later stages of Operation Market Garden, recalled that, during a battle with British 43rd Wessex Division on 23 September 1944, \"We had four Tiger tanks and three Panther tanks\u00a0... We were convinced that we would gain another victory here, that we would smash the enemy forces. But then Typhoons dropped these rockets on our tanks and shot all seven to bits. And we cried... We would see two black dots in the sky and that always meant rockets. Then the rockets would hit the tanks which would burn. The soldiers would come out all burnt and screaming with pain.\" Stuart Hills, a tank commander, was in an armoured column that was ambushed by a Tiger tank on 2 August 1944. The air officer accompanying them called up four Typhoons off the cab-rank to attack the Tiger and Hills recorded \u201c\u2026the [Typhoons] came in, very low and with a tremendous roar. The second plane scored a direct hit and, when the smoke cleared, we could see the Tiger lying on its side minus its turret and with no sign of any survivors. It was an awesome display of firepower\u2026\u201d\nThe effect on the morale of German troops caught up in a Typhoon RP and cannon attack was decisive, with many tanks and vehicles being abandoned, in spite of superficial damage, such that, at Mortain, a signal from the German Army's Chief of Staff stated that the attack had been brought to a standstill by 13:00 \"due to the employment of fighter-bombers by the enemy, and the absence of our own air-support\". The 20\u00a0mm cannon also destroyed a large number of (unarmoured) support vehicles, laden with fuel and ammunition for the armoured vehicles. On 10 July at Mortain, flying in support of the US 30th Infantry Division, Typhoons flew 294 sorties in the afternoon that day. They engaged the German formations while the US 9th Air Force prevented German fighters from intervening. Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Allied Commander, said of the Typhoons; \"The chief credit in smashing the enemy's spearhead, however, must go to the rocket-firing Typhoon aircraft of the Second Tactical Air Force\u00a0... The result of the strafing was that the enemy attack was effectively brought to a halt, and a threat was turned into a great victory.\"\nAnother form of attack carried out by Typhoons was \"Cloak and Dagger\" operations, using intelligence sources to target German HQs. With medium bombers, 42 Typhoons carried out an attack on 10 June against the headquarters of \"Panzergruppe West\" wounding the general, killing several staff officers and disrupting a planned counterattack against the Allied forces. One of the most effective of these was carried out on 24 October 1944, when 146 Typhoon Wing attacked a building in Dordrecht, where senior members of the German 15th Army staff were meeting; 17 staff officers and 36 other officers were killed and the operations of the 15th Army were adversely affected for some time afterwards.\nOn 24 March 1945, over 400 Typhoons were sent on several sorties each, to suppress German anti-aircraft guns and Wehrmacht resistance to Operation Varsity, the Allied airborne crossing of the Rhine that involved two full divisions of 16,600 troops and 1,770 gliders sent across the river. On 3 May 1945, the \"Cap Arcona\", the , and the \"Deutschland\", large passenger ships in peacetime now in military service, were sunk in four attacks by RAF Hawker Typhoon 1Bs of No. 83 Group RAF, 2nd Tactical Air Force: the first by 184 Squadron, second by 198 Squadron led by Wing Commander John Robert Baldwin, the third by 263 Squadron led by Squadron Leader Martin T. S. Rumbold and the fourth by 197 Squadron led by Squadron Leader K. J. Harding.\nThe top-scoring Typhoon ace was Group Captain J. R. Baldwin (609 Squadron and Commanding Officer 198 Squadron, 146 (Typhoon) Wing and 123 (Typhoon) Wing), who claimed 15 aircraft shot down from 1942 to 1944. Some 246 Axis aircraft were claimed by Typhoon pilots during the war.\n3,317 Typhoons were built, almost all by Gloster. Hawker developed what was originally an improved Typhoon II, but the differences between it and the Mk I were so great that it was effectively a different aircraft, and was renamed the Hawker Tempest. Once the war in Europe was over Typhoons were quickly removed from front-line squadrons; by October 1945 the Typhoon was no longer in operational use, with many of the wartime Typhoon units such as 198 Squadron being either disbanded or renumbered.\nCaptured Typhoons.\nBy 1943, with its change of role to ground attack, the Typhoon was constantly operating over enemy territory: inevitably some flyable examples fell into German hands. The first Typhoon to be flown by the \"Luftwaffe\" was \"EJ956\" SA-I of 486 (NZ) Sqn. On 23 March 1943, two aircraft flown by F/O Smith and F/S Mawson were on a \"Rhubarb\" over France. Just as they were crossing the coast at low altitude, Mawson's Typhoon was hit by light flak. He managed to belly-land in a field near Cany-Barville but the aircraft was captured before he could destroy it. The Typhoon was repaired and test flown at Rechlin a German equivalent to RAE Farnborough, and later served as T9+GK with \"Zirkus Rosarius\". EJ956 overturned and was written off during a forced landing near Meckelfeld, on 10 August 1944. On 14 February 1944, another Typhoon was captured and later flown in Zirkus Rosarius. JP548 of 174 Squadron force landed after engine failure near Blois, France; the pilot, F/O Proddow, evaded capture. This Typhoon crashed at Reinsehlen on 29 July 1944, killing Feldwebel Gold.\nModifications 1941\u20131945.\nAs was usual with many front line Second World War RAF aircraft, the Typhoon was modified and updated regularly, so that a 1945 production example looked quite different from one built in 1941. In the last months of the war, a number of older aircraft were taken out of storage and overhauled, sometimes seeing active service for the first time; for example, R7771 was from one of the first production batches, built in 1942 with the car-door canopy and other early production features. This Typhoon was delivered to, and served on the Fighter Interception Unit in 1942. In February 1945 \"R7771\" was listed as being in front line service on 182 Sqn.; by then it was fitted with a clear-view \"bubble\" hood, rocket rails and other late series features.\nCarbon monoxide seepage.\nThe first problem encountered with the Typhoon after its entry into service was the seepage of carbon monoxide fumes into the cockpit. In an attempt to alleviate this, longer exhaust stubs were fitted in November 1941 (\"Mod [modification] 239\"), and at about the same time the port (left) cockpit doors were sealed. The Pilot's Notes for the Typhoon recommended that \"Unless Mod. No. 239 has been embodied it is most important that oxygen be used \"at all times\" as a precaution against carbon monoxide poisoning.\" Despite the modifications, the problem was never entirely solved, and the standard procedure throughout the war was for Typhoon pilots to use oxygen from engine start-up to engine shut down. In addition to carbon monoxide seepage, pilots were experiencing unpleasantly high cockpit temperatures; eventually a ventilation tube helped alleviate, but did not solve the problem. In addition two small, rear opening vents were added below the port side radio hatch, just below the canopy.\nTail.\nA major problem, afflicting early production Typhoons in particular, was a series of structural failures leading to loss of the entire tail sections of some aircraft, mainly during high-speed dives. Eventually a combination of factors was identified, including harmonic vibration, which could quickly lead to metal fatigue, and a weak transport joint just forward of the horizontal tail unit. The loss of the tailplane of R7692 (having only 11 hours of flight recorded) on 11 August 1942, in the hands of an experienced test pilot (Seth-Smith), caused a major reassessment which concluded that the failure of the bracket holding the elevator mass balance bell crank linkage had allowed unrestrained flutter which led to structural failure of the fuselage at the transport joint.\nStarting in September 1942, a steel strap was fitted internally across the rear fuselage transport joint, although this was soon superseded by Mod 286 (modification number 286), in which 20 alloy \"fishplates\" were riveted externally across the rear fuselage transport joint, while internally some of the rear fuselage frames were strengthened. This was a permanent measure designed to stop rear fuselage structural failures and was introduced on the production line from the 820th aircraft; between December 1942 and March 1943, all Typhoons without Mod 286 were taken out of service and modified. Modified balance weight assemblies were fitted from May 1943. Finally the entire unit was replaced with a redesigned assembly from August 1944.\nAlthough these modifications reduced the numbers of Typhoons being lost due to tail assembly failure, towards the end of the Typhoon's life there were more tail failures, this time caused by a change to the undercarriage latch mechanism in late 1944; in high-speed flight the undercarriage fairings were pulled into the slipstream, creating an uneven airflow over the elevators and rudder resulting in tailplane and then rear fuselage structural failure. In total 25 aircraft were lost and 23 pilots killed due to tail failures.\nCanopy.\nThe Typhoon was first produced with forward-opening \"car door\" style cockpit doors (complete with wind-down windows), with a transparent \"roof\" hinged to open to the left. The first 162 Typhoons featured a built-up metal-skinned dorsal fairing behind the pilot's armoured headrest; the mast for the radio aerial protruded through the fairing. From mid- to late 1941 the solid metal aft dorsal fairing was replaced with a transparent structure (later nicknamed \"The Coffin Hood\"), the pilot's head armour plate was modified to a triangular shape and the side cut-outs were fitted with armoured glass; the first production Typhoon to be fitted with this new structure was \"R7803\". All earlier aircraft were quickly withdrawn and modified. From early 1942 a rear-view mirror was mounted in a perspex blister moulded into the later \"car-door\" canopy roofs. This modification was not very successful, because the mirror was subject to vibration. Despite the new canopy structure, the pilot's visibility was still restricted by the heavy frames and the clutter of equipment under the rear canopy; from August 1943, as an interim measure, pending the introduction of the new \"bubble\" canopy and cut-down dorsal fairing, the aerial mast and its associated bracing was removed and replaced with a whip aerial further back on the rear fuselage.\nStarting in January 1943, \"R8809\" was used to test a new, clear, one piece sliding \"bubble\" canopy and its associated new windscreen structure which had slimmer frames which, together with the \"cut-down\" rear dorsal fairing, provided a far superior all-around field of view to the car-door type. From November 1943 all production aircraft, starting with \"JR333\", were to be so fitted. However, the complex modifications required to the fuselage and a long lead time for new components to reach the production line meant that it took some time before the new canopy became standard. In order to have as many Typhoons of 2nd TAF fitted before \"Operation Overlord\" as possible, conversion kits were produced and used by Gloster, Hawker and Cunliffe-Owen to modify older Typhoons still fitted with the car-door canopy.\nLong-range fighter and fighter-bomber.\nFrom early 1943 the wings were plumbed and adapted to carry cylindrical drop tanks, increasing the Typhoon's range from to up to . This enabled Typhoons to range deep into France, the Netherlands and Belgium. Some units, such as 609 Squadron and 198 Squadron, were able to achieve notable success in air combat and ground attack operations using these long-range Typhoons.\nAs production continued, the Typhoon's role changed from a low-level interceptor fighter to a fighter bomber. Racks capable of carrying bombs were fitted to the wings from October 1942 and were first used operationally by 181 Squadron. By mid-1943, all Typhoons off the production line were capable of carrying bombs. Bigger, solid rubber, grooved \"anti-shimmy\" tail wheel tyres were introduced in March 1943 on all Typhoons from the 1,001st production aircraft, \"EK238\". The new tyres helped to make heavier, bomb-laden Typhoons more manageable during ground manoeuvres. With the introduction of the bomb racks, small extensions were added to the cannon shell case ejector slots. These allowed the casings to drop clear of bombs or drop tanks suspended from the wing racks. Because of the vulnerability of the Typhoon's liquid-cooled engine cooling system to ground fire, some of armour was added, lining the sides and bottom of the cockpit and engine compartments, as well as the radiator bath.\nWith the added weight of the bombs and armour, bigger brake discs were fitted to the main wheels. At first this only applied to \"Bombphoons\", but eventually all Typhoons used these brakes. After tests conducted in 1943, it was determined that the Typhoon was capable of carrying a bomb under each wing. With the increased load, it was decided that the extra take-off performance conferred by a four-bladed propeller was an advantage. This led to the adoption of a four-bladed propeller unit (de Havilland or Rotol) from early 1944. Coinciding with the new propeller, it was also decided that the larger tailplanes of the Hawker Tempest were to be fitted when tests showed that they improved the handling characteristics of the Typhoon when carrying bombs. Problems were experienced with oil seal leaks from the new propeller unit and a growing number of Typhoons were held in Maintenance Units (MUs) awaiting the arrival of new seals from the U.S. Some 200 Typhoons were manufactured with the new Tempest tails and the three-bladed propeller. A modification programme was inaugurated but it took several months before a majority of operational Typhoons had the four-bladed propeller and enlarged tailplane.\nIn June 1943, Hawker fitted a Typhoon with four steel \"Mark I\" rocket rails under each wing. Trials at the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment (A &amp; AEE) and Air Fighting Development Unit (AFDU) showed that the combination of the RP-3 rocket and the stable, high-speed platform of the Typhoon was promising. Carrying the eight rails and rockets, it was found that the top speed was reduced by , with no adverse handling effects. As a result, the Mk I rails and RP-3s were first fitted to production aircraft of 181 Squadron in October 1943. At first attempts were made to arm Typhoons with either bombs or rockets depending on requirements but it was soon decided that squadrons would specialise. By D-Day, the 2nd TAF was able to field 11 RP (\"Rockphoon\") Typhoon squadrons and seven \"Bombphoon\" squadrons.\nLater in 1944, attempts were made to increase the firepower by \"double banking\" rockets on each rail, enabling the Typhoon to carry 16 rockets. The problems involved in operating Typhoons from 2nd TAF airstrips meant that this was not much used, although some Typhoons did fly operationally with 12 rockets, using double-banked rockets on the inner rails. When extra range was required, Typhoons could also operate carrying a drop tank and two rockets outboard of the tank under each wing. From December 1944, aluminium \"Mark III\" rails, which weighed per set, replaced the steel Mk Is, which weighed .\nIn late 1943, Mk III IFF replaced the Mk I and the tailplane tip to fuselage Identification friend or foe (IFF) aerials were replaced by a \"bayonet\" aerial under the wing's centre section. A Beam Approach Beacon System (\"Rebecca\") transponder unit was fitted in 1944, with the associated aerial appearing under the centre section.\nOnce Typhoons started operating from forward landing grounds in Normandy, it was found that the dust clouds stirred up by propeller wash consisted of over 80 percent of hard, abrasive material which was damaging the Sabre engines. The sleeve valves in particular were subject to excessive wear and it was calculated that engines would last for three take-offs. As a result, a \"dome deflector\" was designed and manufactured at great speed by Napier, and within a week most Typhoons had been fitted with it. In operational service these mushroom-shaped air filters, which became red hot, had a propensity for being blown off the air intake at high speed whenever a Sabre engine backfired. They were soon replaced by drum-shaped filters designed by the RAE and Vokes. These had \"cuckoo clock\" doors in front, which swung open with the pressure changes caused by engine backfires. This standardised filter became Typhoon Mod.420.\nAt the end of June 1944, a decision was taken to fit tropical air filters as standard, similar to those fitted to the three Typhoons which had been sent to North Africa in 1943. One thousand sets of the filters were to be manufactured and fitted to front line Typhoons as Mod. 421. It was estimated that these could be fitted to all Typhoons on the production lines by the end of September. Research shows that late Typhoons starting in the \"RB---\" series were fitted with the filters, as were some rebuilt aircraft from earlier production batches. Mod. 421 appeared as a streamlined rectangular \"hump\", just behind the main radiator fairing and between the inner wheel doors, where the updraught carburettor intake was located.\nA small, elongated oval static port appeared on the rear starboard fuselage in late 1944. This was apparently used to more accurately measure the aircraft's altitude.\nOne Typhoon, \"R8694\", was used by Napier for trials with the more powerful Sabre IV, cooled using an annular radiator and driving a four-bladed propeller. The new engine and radiator arrangement required substantial modifications to the forward fuselage and engine bearer structures. Although a maximum speed of was claimed by Napier, it was decided that the modifications would not be worthwhile, mainly because of the promising development of the Tempest, and because the disruption to Typhoon production would not be sufficiently outweighed by any benefit achieved.\nSub-variants.\nIn 1943, one Typhoon, \"R7881\" was converted to a prototype night fighter (N.F. Mk. IB), fitted with aircraft interception radar (A.I.) equipment, a special night-flying cockpit and other modifications.\nAlso in 1943, five Typhoons were modified to \"Tropical\" standard by fitting of an air filter in a fairing behind the main radiator housing. Three underwent trials in Egypt with No. 451 Squadron RAAF, during 1943.\nThe Typhoon FR IB was developed in early 1944 and was used as a tactical reconnaissance fighter. In this version the port inner cannon was removed and three (one forward-facing and two vertical five-inch) F24 cameras were carried in its place. Few FR IBs were built, and most served with 268 Squadron, starting in July 1944. The aircraft was never popular with the pilots, who preferred the older Mustang Is and IAs, and the inherent engine and airframe vibrations meant that photos were invariably blurred. As a consequence of these problems, the FR IB was phased out in January 1945..\nNaval designs.\nIn 1941, as Blackburn's specification N.11/40 high performance base defence fighter (that was carrier transportable) was delayed, the Admiralty looked at navalised version of the Typhoon as an alternative. The Hawker P.1009 design modified for the purpose had a new centre section, extending the wingspan to over , and thus increasing the wing area; the wings themselves were to be folding units, which swung and folded parallel to the fuselage, with the leading edges pointing upwards, much as did the Grumman F6F Hellcat. The rear fuselage was to be longer and a v-style arrestor hook and associated catapult-launching gear was to be fitted. However it was not thought that the redesign and production would be any faster than proceeding with the N.11/40 and the Hawker \"Sea Typhoon\" submission was not taken up. The N.11/40, after changes to its role and Centaurus engine replacing the Sabre entered service postwar as the Blackburn Firebrand.\nA Typhoon (\"DW419\") was later allocated for carrier trials when the idea for using Typhoons (or Tempests) as carrier aircraft due to their stronger construction over the Seafires then in use came up in November 1942. \"DW419\" crashed in February 1943; by December the view was that the Typhoon was not suited to carrier use due to long take-off run and high stall speed.\nFlight characteristics.\nFlight Lieutenant Ken Trott flew Typhoons with 197 Squadron and recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn early March 1943, at Tangmere, the then new Squadron Leader of 486 (NZ) Squadron, Des Scott, flew a Typhoon for the first time:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe performance limitations for speed were noted on the pilot's notes, published by the Air Ministry. Indicated airspeed for diving was set at . The Typhoon could, if needed, be flown at with the cockpit \"hood\" open. Flight with undercarriage and flaps down could be made without incident, at the respective speeds of . Owing to stability problems, when the aircraft was carrying bombs, the speed could not exceed .\nNotes for the management of the fuel system stated that indicated airspeeds (IAS) in excess of were not advisable when fitted with auxiliary drop tanks. Tanks were jettisoned at about , but in an emergency, a release at was permitted. Tanks were to be ejected in straight and level flight only. General flying ability was positive. The maximum climbing rate was up to reducing speed by per above this mark. In stability terms, the aircraft was stable \"directionally\" and \"laterally\" but slightly unstable longitudinally, except at high speed, when it was just stable. Aileron control was light and effective up to maximum speed, but at very low speed response was sluggish, particularly when carrying ordnance. The elevator control was rather light and should not be used harshly. There was a tendency to \"tighten up\" in a looping aircraft. If \"black out\" conditions were accidentally induced in steep turns or aerobatics, the control column was to be pushed forward \"firmly\".\nStalling speeds were quite low. The typical Typhoon trait, as with most aircraft at the time, was to drop a wing sharply with flaps either up or down. The stalling speeds varied. The various loads depended on external fittings. All-up weight plus two bombs ( in total) with flaps up could induce a stall at . With flaps down, stall was initiated at . Normal all-up weight () would see stall at and respectively. With all ammunition and nearly all fuel expended () stall occurred at and .\nSurviving aircraft.\nOnly one complete Hawker Typhoon still survives: serial number \"MN235\". Originally on display at the National Air and Space Museum (part of the Smithsonian Institution) in the United States, it was presented to the Royal Air Force Museum London in Hendon, North London in commemoration of the RAF's 50th Anniversary in exchange for a Hawker Hurricane. The aircraft was on loan to the Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Ottawa, Canada. It was briefly on show in the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight hangar at RAF Coningsby, but returned to the Royal Air Force Museum London in November 2018.\nSeveral other partial airframes are extant:\nAn unidentified cockpit section is on display at the Imperial War Museum Duxford, and another \u2013 the only known original \"car door\" example \u2013 is subject to a static restoration by the Jet Age Museum in Gloucester.\nA Hawker Typhoon replica on display at the \"M\u00e9morial de la Paix\" at Caen, France, was constructed using some original components.\nMemorial.\nOn 9 June 1994, in recognition of the aircraft and crew's role in the liberation of Normandy, a Typhoon memorial was dedicated by Major M. Roland Heudier at Noyers-Bocage, France. Also present at the ceremony were General Yves Paul Ezanno DFC and bar and Squadron Leader Denis Sweeting, both former Squadron Leaders of No. 198 Squadron RAF.\nSpecifications (Typhoon Mk Ib).\n\"Data from\" Mason 1991 unless otherwise statedGeneral characteristics* Crew: One* Airfoil: root: NACA 2219; tip: NACA 2213* Propellers: 3 or 4-bladed de Havilland or Rotol constant-speed propeller\nPerformance* Power/mass: \nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63745", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63745", "title": "Celibate", "text": ""}
{"id": "63747", "revid": "49059523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63747", "title": "Muhammad Ali", "text": "American boxer and activist (1942\u20132016)\nMuhammad Ali ( ; born Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr.; January 17, 1942 \u2013 June 3, 2016) was an American professional boxer and activist. A global cultural icon, widely known by the nickname \"the Greatest\", he is often regarded as the greatest heavyweight boxer of all time. He held the \"Ring\" magazine heavyweight title from 1964 to 1970, was the undisputed champion from 1974 to 1978, and was the WBA and \"Ring\" heavyweight champion from 1978 to 1979. In 1999, he was named Sportsman of the Century by \"Sports Illustrated\" and the Sports Personality of the Century by the BBC.\nBorn in Louisville, Kentucky, he began training as an amateur boxer at age 12. At 18, he won a gold medal in the light heavyweight division at the 1960 Summer Olympics and turned professional later that year. He joined the Nation of Islam in the early 1960s, but later disavowed it in the mid-1970s. He won the world heavyweight championship, defeating Sonny Liston in a major upset on February 25, 1964, at age 22. During that year, he denounced his birth name as a \"slave name\" and formally changed his name to Muhammad Ali. In 1967, Ali refused to be drafted into the military, owing to his religious beliefs and ethical opposition to the Vietnam War, and was found guilty of draft evasion and stripped of his boxing titles. He stayed out of prison while appealing the decision to the Supreme Court, where his conviction was overturned in 1971. He did not fight for nearly four years and lost a period of peak performance as an athlete. Ali's actions as a conscientious objector to the Vietnam War made him an icon for the larger counterculture of the 1960s generation, and he became a prominent, high-profile figure of racial pride for African Americans during the civil rights movement and throughout his career.\nAli fought in several highly publicized boxing matches, including fights with Liston, Joe Frazier (including the Fight of the Century, to that point the biggest boxing event and the Thrilla in Manila), and George Foreman in The Rumble in the Jungle. At a time when many boxers let their managers do the talking, Ali became renowned for his provocative and outlandish persona. He was famous for trash talking, often free-styled with rhyme schemes and spoken word poetry, and is identified as a pioneer in hip-hop. He often predicted in which round he would knock out his opponent. As a boxer, Ali was known for his unorthodox movement, footwork, head movement, and rope-a-dope technique, among others.\nOutside boxing, Ali performed as a spoken word artist, releasing two studio albums: \"I Am the Greatest!\" (1963) and \"The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay\" (1976). Both albums received Grammy Award nominations. He also featured as an actor and writer, releasing two autobiographies. Ali retired from boxing in 1981 and focused on religion, philanthropy, and activism. In 1984, he made public his diagnosis of Parkinson's syndrome, which some reports attributed to boxing-related injuries, though he and his specialist physicians disputed this. He remained an active public figure, but in his later years made fewer public appearances as his condition worsened, and was cared for by his family.\nEarly life.\nCassius Marcellus Clay Jr. () was born on January 17, 1942, in Louisville, Kentucky to Odessa Grady Clay and Cassius Marcellus Clay Sr. Clay Sr. was named after the 19th-century Republican politician and abolitionist Cassius Marcellus Clay. He was a descendant of slaves of the antebellum South, and was predominantly of African descent, with Irish and English heritage. DNA testing performed in 2018 showed that Clay was a descendant of the former slave Archer Alexander, the model of a freed man for the \"Emancipation Memorial\".\nHis father was a sign and billboard painter, and his mother a domestic helper. Although Cassius Sr. was a Methodist, he allowed Odessa to bring up both Cassius Jr. and his younger brother Rudy (later renamed Rahaman Ali), as Baptists. Clay Jr. attended Central High School in Louisville and was dyslexic, which led to difficulties in reading and writing.\nHe grew up amid racial segregation. His mother recalled one occasion when he was denied a drink of water at a store because of his race, saying it \"really affected him.\" He was also strongly affected by the 1955 murder of Emmett Till, taking out his frustration by vandalizing a local rail yard with a friend. He later told his daughter Hana, \"Nothing would ever shake me up (more) than the story of Emmett Till.\"\nAmateur career.\nClay was first directed toward boxing by Louisville police officer and boxing coach Joe E. Martin, who encountered the 12-year-old fuming over a thief having taken his bicycle. He told the officer he was going to \"whup\" the thief. The officer told Clay he had better learn how to box first. Initially, Clay did not take up Martin's offer, but after seeing amateur boxers on a local television boxing program called \"Tomorrow's Champions\", Clay was interested in the prospect of fighting. He then began to work with trainer Fred Stoner, whom he credits with giving him the \"real training\", eventually molding \"my style, my stamina and my system\". For the last four years of Clay's amateur career he was trained by boxing cutman Chuck Bodak.\nClay made his amateur boxing debut in 1954 against local amateur boxer Ronnie O'Keefe. He won by split decision. He went on to win six Kentucky Golden Gloves titles, two Chicago Golden Gloves, two national Golden Gloves titles, two Amateur Athletic Union national titles, the U.S. Olympic Trials, and the light heavyweight gold medal in the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome. Clay's amateur record was 100 wins with five losses. In his 1975 autobiography he recalled that shortly after his return from the Rome Olympics, he threw his gold medal into the Ohio River after he and a friend were refused service at a \"whites-only\" restaurant and fought with a white gang. The story was later disputed, and several of his friends, including Bundini Brown and photographer Howard Bingham, denied it. Brown told \"Sports Illustrated\" writer Mark Kram, \"Honkies sure bought into that one!\" Thomas Hauser's biography of Ali stated that Ali was refused service at the diner but that he lost his medal a year after he won it. Ali received a replacement medal at the Georgia Dome during the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, where he lit the torch to start the Games.\nProfessional career.\nEarly career.\nClay made his professional debut on October 29, 1960, winning a six-round decision over Tunney Hunsaker. From then until the end of 1963, Clay amassed a record of 19\u20130 with 15 wins by knockout. He defeated boxers including Tony Esperti, Jim Robinson, Donnie Fleeman, Alonzo Johnson, George Logan, Willi Besmanoff, LaMar Clark, Doug Jones, and Henry Cooper. Clay also beat his former trainer and veteran boxer Archie Moore in a 1962 match.\nThese early fights were not without trials. Clay was knocked down by both Sonny Banks and Cooper. In the Cooper fight, Clay was floored by a left hook at the end of round four and was saved by the bell, going on to win in the predicted fifth round due to Cooper's severely cut eye. The fight with Doug Jones on March 13, 1963, was Clay's toughest fight during this stretch. The number two and three heavyweight contenders respectively, Clay and Jones fought on Jones' home turf at New York's Madison Square Garden. Jones staggered Clay in the first round, and the unanimous decision for Clay was greeted by boos and a rain of debris thrown into the ring. Watching on closed-circuit TV, heavyweight champ Sonny Liston quipped that if he fought Clay he (Liston) might get locked up for murder. The fight was later named \"Fight of the Year\" by \"The Ring\" magazine.\nIn each of these fights, Clay vocally belittled his opponents and vaunted his abilities. He called Jones \"an ugly little man\" and Cooper a \"bum\". He said he was embarrassed to get in the ring with Alex Miteff and claimed that Madison Square Garden was \"too small for me\". Ali's trash talk was inspired by professional wrestler \"Gorgeous George\" Wagner's, after he saw George's talking ability attract huge crowds to events. In a 1969 interview he stated that he met with George in Las Vegas in 1961, that George told him that talking a big game would earn paying fans who either wanted to see him win or wanted to see him lose, thus Clay transformed himself into a self-described \"big-mouth and a bragger\".\nIn 1960, Clay left Moore's camp, partially due to Clay's refusal to do chores such as washing dishes and sweeping. To replace Moore, Clay hired Angelo Dundee to be his trainer. Clay had met Dundee in February 1957 during Clay's amateur career. Around this time, Clay sought longtime idol Sugar Ray Robinson to be his manager, but was rebuffed.\nWorld heavyweight champion.\nFirst Fight against Liston.\nBy late 1963, Clay had become the top contender for Sonny Liston's title. The fight was set for February 25, 1964, in Miami Beach. Liston was an intimidating personality, a dominating fighter with a criminal past and ties to the mob. Based on Clay's uninspired performance against Jones and Cooper in his previous two fights, and Liston's destruction of former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson in two first-round knockouts, Clay was an 8:1 underdog. Despite this, Clay taunted Liston during the pre-fight buildup, dubbing him \"the big ugly bear\", claiming \"Liston even smells like a bear\" and \"I'm gonna give him to the local zoo after I whup him.\" Clay turned the pre-fight weigh-in into a circus, shouting at Liston that \"someone is going to die at ringside tonight.\" Clay's pulse rate was measured at 120, more than double his normal 54.\nThe outcome of the fight was a major upset. At the opening bell, Liston rushed at Clay, seemingly angry and looking for a quick knockout. However, Clay's superior speed and mobility enabled him to elude Liston, making the champion miss and look awkward. At the end of the first round, Clay opened up his attack and hit Liston repeatedly with jabs. Liston fought better in round two, but at the beginning of the third round Clay hit Liston with a combination that buckled his knees and opened a cut under his left eye. This was the first time Liston had ever been cut. At the end of round four, Clay was returning to his corner when he began experiencing blinding pain in his eyes and asked his trainer, Angelo Dundee, to cut off his gloves. Dundee refused. It has been speculated that the problem was due to ointment used to seal Liston's cuts, perhaps deliberately applied by his corner to his gloves. Though unconfirmed, boxing historian Bert Sugar said that two of Liston's opponents also complained about their eyes \"burning\".\nDespite Liston's attempts to knock out a blinded Clay, Clay was able to survive the fifth round until sweat and tears rinsed the irritation from his eyes. In the sixth, Clay dominated, hitting Liston repeatedly. Liston did not answer the bell for the seventh round, and Clay was declared the winner by TKO. Liston stated that the reason he quit was an injured shoulder. Following the win, a triumphant Clay rushed to the edge of the ring and, pointing to the ringside press, shouted: \"Eat your words!\" He added, \"I am the greatest! I shook up the world. I'm the prettiest thing that ever lived.\"\nAt ringside post fight, Clay appeared unconvinced that the fight was stopped due to a Liston shoulder injury, saying that the only injury Liston had was \"an open eye, a big cut eye!\" When told by Joe Louis that the injury was a \"left arm thrown out of its socket,\" Clay quipped, \"Yeah, swinging at nothing, who wouldn't?\"\nIn winning this fight at the age of 22, Clay became the youngest boxer to take the title from a reigning heavyweight champion. However, Floyd Patterson remained the youngest to win the heavyweight championship, doing so at the age 21 during an elimination bout following Rocky Marciano's retirement. Mike Tyson broke both records in 1986 when he defeated Trevor Berbick to win the heavyweight title at age 20. The feat also made Clay the fastest boxer to win the championship (non-vacant) in the modern era, doing so in 20 bouts.\nSoon after the Liston fight, Clay changed his name to Cassius X, and then later to Muhammad Ali upon converting to the Nation of Islam.\nRematch with Liston.\nAli then faced a rematch with Liston scheduled for May 1965 in Lewiston, Maine. It had been scheduled for Boston the previous November, but was postponed for six months due to Ali's emergency surgery for a hernia three days before. The fight was controversial. Midway through the first round, Liston was knocked down by a difficult-to-see blow the press dubbed a \"phantom punch\". Referee Jersey Joe Walcott did not begin the count immediately after the knockdown, as Ali refused to retreat to a neutral corner. Liston rose after he had been down for about 20 seconds, and the fight momentarily continued. However a few seconds later Walcott, having been informed by the timekeepers that Liston had been down for a count of 10, stopped the match and declared Ali the winner by knockout. The entire fight lasted less than two minutes.\nIt has since been speculated that Liston purposely dropped to the ground. Proposed motivations include threats on his life from the Nation of Islam, that he had bet against himself and that he \"took a dive\" to pay off debts. Slow-motion replays show that Liston was jarred by a chopping right from Ali, although it is unclear whether the blow was a genuine knockout punch.\nFight against Patterson.\nAli defended his title against former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson on November 22, 1965. Before the match, Ali mocked Patterson, who was widely known to call him by his former name Cassius Clay, as an \"Uncle Tom\", calling him \"The Rabbit\". Although Ali had the better of Patterson, who appeared injured during the fight, the match lasted 12 rounds before being called on a technical knockout. Patterson later said he had strained his sacroiliac. Ali was criticized in the sports media for appearing to have toyed with Patterson during the fight. Patterson biographer W. K. Stratton claims that the conflict between Ali and Patterson was not genuine but was staged to increase ticket sales and the closed-circuit viewing audience, with both men complicit in the theatrics. Stratton also cites an interview by Howard Cosell in which Ali explained that rather than toying with Patterson, he refrained from knocking him out after it became apparent Patterson was injured. Patterson later said that he had never been hit by punches as soft as Ali's. Stratton states that Ali arranged the second fight, in 1972, with the financially struggling Patterson to help the former champion earn enough money to pay a debt to the IRS.\nMain Bout.\nAfter the Patterson fight, Ali founded his own promotion company, Main Bout. The company mainly handled Ali's boxing promotions and pay-per-view closed-circuit television broadcasts. The company's stockholders were mainly fellow Nation of Islam members, along with several others, including Bob Arum.\nAli and then-WBA heavyweight champion boxer Ernie Terrell had agreed to meet for a bout in Chicago on March 29, 1966 (the WBA, one of two boxing associations, had stripped Ali of his title following his joining the Nation of Islam). But in February Ali was reclassified by the Louisville draft board as 1-A from 1-Y, and he indicated that he would refuse to serve, commenting to the press, \"I ain't got nothing against no Viet Cong; no Viet Cong never called me nigger.\", although the second part is probably apocryphal. Amidst the media and public outcry over Ali's stance, the Illinois Athletic Commission refused to sanction the fight, citing technicalities.\nInstead, Ali traveled to Canada and Europe and won championship bouts against George Chuvalo, Henry Cooper, Brian London, and Karl Mildenberger.\nAli returned to the United States to fight Cleveland Williams at the Astrodome in Houston on November 14, 1966. The bout drew a record-breaking indoor crowd of 35,460 people. Williams had once been considered among the hardest punchers in the heavyweight division, but in 1964 he had been shot at point-blank range by a Texas policeman, resulting in the loss of one kidney and of his small intestine. Ali dominated Williams, winning a third-round technical knockout in what some consider the finest performance of his career.\nAli fought Terrell in Houston on February 6, 1967. Terrell, who was unbeaten in five years and had defeated many of the boxers Ali had faced, was billed as Ali's toughest opponent since Liston; he was big, strong and had a three-inch reach advantage over Ali. During the lead up to the bout, Terrell repeatedly called Ali \"Clay\", much to Ali's annoyance. The two almost came to blows over the name issue in a pre-fight interview with Howard Cosell. Ali seemed intent on humiliating Terrell. \"I want to torture him\", he said. \"A clean knockout is too good for him.\" The fight was close until the seventh round, when Ali bloodied Terrell and almost knocked him out. In the eighth round, Ali taunted Terrell, hitting him with jabs and shouting between punches, \"What's my name, Uncle Tom ... what's my name?\" Ali won a unanimous 15-round decision. Terrell claimed that early in the fight Ali deliberately thumbed him in the eye, forcing him to fight half-blind, and then, in a clinch, rubbed the wounded eye against the ropes. Because of Ali's apparent intent to prolong the fight to inflict maximum punishment, critics described the bout as \"one of the ugliest boxing fights\". Tex Maule later wrote: \"It was a wonderful demonstration of boxing skill and a barbarous display of cruelty.\" Ali denied the accusations of cruelty but, for Ali's critics, the fight provided more evidence of his arrogance.\nAfter Ali's title defense against Zora Folley on March 22, he was stripped of his title due to his refusal to be drafted to army service. His boxing license was also suspended by the state of New York. He was convicted of draft evasion on June 20 and sentenced to five years in prison and a $10,000 fine. He paid a bond and remained free while the verdict was being appealed.\nDraft resistance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy enemy is the white people, not Viet Cong or Chinese or Japanese. You my opposer when I want freedom. You my opposer when I want justice. You my opposer when I want equality. You won't even stand up for me in America for my religious beliefs\u2014and you want me to go somewhere and fight, but you won't even stand up for me here at home?\n\u2014Muhammad Ali to a crowd of college students during his exile from boxing\nAli registered for conscription in the United States military on his 18th birthday and was listed as 1-A in 1962. In 1964, he was reclassified as Class 1-Y (fit for service only in times of national emergency) after he failed the U.S. Armed Forces qualifying test because his writing and spelling skills were sub-standard, due to his dyslexia. (He was quoted as saying, \"I said I was the greatest, not the smartest!\") By early 1966, the army lowered its standards to permit soldiers above the 15th percentile and Ali was again classified as 1-A. This classification meant he was now eligible for the draft and induction into the U.S. Army at a time when the U.S. was involved in the Vietnam War, a war which put him further at odds with the white establishment.\nWhen notified of this status, Ali declared that he would refuse to serve in the army and publicly considered himself a conscientious objector. Ali stated: \"War is against the teachings of the Qur'an. I'm not trying to dodge the draft. We are not supposed to take part in no wars unless declared by Allah or The Messenger. We don't take part in Christian wars or wars of any unbelievers\". He also said, \"We are not to be the aggressor but we will defend ourselves if attacked.\" He stated: \"Man, I ain't got no quarrel with them Vietcong.\" Ali elaborated: \"Why should they ask me to put on a uniform and go ten thousand miles from home and drop bombs and bullets on brown people in Vietnam while so-called Negro people in Louisville are treated like dogs and denied simple human rights?\" Ali antagonized the white establishment in 1966 by refusing to be drafted into the U.S. military, citing his religious beliefs and opposition to American involvement in the Vietnam War.\nOn April 28, 1967, Ali appeared in Houston for his scheduled induction into the U.S. Armed Forces, but he refused three times to step forward when his name was called. An officer warned him that he was committing a felony punishable by five years in prison and a fine of $10,000. Once more, Ali refused to budge when his name was called, and he was arrested. Later that same day, the New York State Athletic Commission suspended his boxing license and the World Boxing Association stripped him of his title. Other boxing commissions followed suit. Ali remained unable to obtain a license to box in any state for over three years. On June 4, 1967, in a first for sports professionals, a group of high-profile African-American athletes\u2014including Jim Brown, Bill Russell, and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, as well as one political leader, Carl Stokes\u2014assembled with Ali at the Negro Industrial Economic Union in Cleveland for what became known as the \"Cleveland Summit\" or the \"Muhammad Ali Summit\". The meeting was organized by Brown for his peers to question Ali about the seriousness of his convictions, and to decide whether to support him, which they ultimately did.\nAt the trial on June 20, 1967, the jury found Ali guilty after only 21minutes of deliberation of the criminal offense of violating the Selective Service laws by refusing to be drafted. After a Court of Appeals upheld the conviction, the case was reviewed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1971.\nAli remained free in the years between the Appellate Court decision and the Supreme Court ruling. As public opinion began turning against the war and the Civil Rights Movement continued to gather momentum, Ali became a popular speaker at colleges and universities across the country; this itinerary was rare if not unprecedented for a prizefighter. At Howard University, for example, he gave his popular \"Black Is Best\" speech to 4,000 cheering students and community intellectuals, after he was invited to speak by sociology professor Nathan Hare on behalf of the Black Power Committee, a student protest group.\nOn June 28, 1971, the Supreme Court of the United States in \"Clay v. United States\" overturned Ali's conviction by a unanimous 8\u20130 decision (Justice Thurgood Marshall recused himself, as he had been the U.S. Solicitor General at the time of Ali's conviction). The decision was not based on, nor did it address, the merits of Ali's claims per se. Rather, the Court held that since the appeal board gave no reason for the denial of a conscientious objector exemption to Ali, it was therefore impossible to determine which of the three basic tests for conscientious objector status (offered in the Justice Department's brief) the appeal board relied on, and Ali's conviction must be reversed.\nIn a 1974 interview, Ali said, \"If they say stand and salute the flag I do that out of respect, because I'm in the country\". Ali would later say, \"If America was in trouble and real war came, I'd be on the front line if we had been attacked. But I could see that [the Vietnam War] wasn't right.\" He also said, \"Black men would go over there and fight, but when they came home, they couldn't even be served a hamburger.\"\nImpact of Ali's draft refusal.\nAli's example inspired many black Americans and others. However, initially when he refused induction, he became arguably the most hated man in the country and received many death threats. People who supported Ali during this time were also threatened, including sports journalist Jerry Izenberg, whose columns defended Ali's decision not to serve. He wrote, \"Bomb threats emptied our office, making the staff stand out in the snow. My car windshield was smashed with a sledgehammer.\" \"The New York Times\" columnist William Rhoden wrote, \"Ali's actions changed my standard of what constituted an athlete's greatness. Possessing a killer jump shot or the ability to stop on a dime was no longer enough. What were you doing for the liberation of your people? What were you doing to help your country live up to the covenant of its founding principles?\"\nRecalling Ali's anti-war position, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar said: \"I remember the teachers at my high school didn't like Ali because he was so anti-establishment and he kind of thumbed his nose at authority and got away with it. The fact that he was proud to be a black man and that he had so much talent... made some people think that he was dangerous. But for those very reasons I enjoyed him.\"\nCivil rights figures came to believe that Ali had an energizing effect on the freedom movement as a whole. Al Sharpton spoke of his bravery at a time when there was still widespread support for the Vietnam War:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the heavyweight champion of the world, who had achieved the highest level of athletic celebrity, to put all of that on the line\u2014the money, the ability to get endorsements\u2014to sacrifice all of that for a cause, gave a whole sense of legitimacy to the movement and the causes with young people that nothing else could have done. Even those who were assassinated, certainly lost their lives, but they didn't voluntarily do that. He knew he was going to jail and did it anyway. That's another level of leadership and sacrifice.\nAli was honored with the annual Martin Luther King Award in 1970 by civil rights leader Ralph Abernathy, who called him \"a living example of soul power, the March on Washington in two fists\". Coretta Scott King added that Ali was \"a champion of justice and peace and unity\".\nIn speaking of the cost on Ali's career of his refusal to be drafted, his trainer Angelo Dundee said, \"One thing must be taken into account when talking about Ali: He was robbed of his best years, his prime years.\" Ali's promoter Bob Arum did not support Ali's choice at the time, but in 2016 Arum stated: \"when I look back at his life, and I was blessed to call him a friend and spent a lot of time with him, it's hard for me to talk about his exploits in boxing because as great as they were they paled in comparison to the impact that he had on the world. ... He did what he thought was right. And it turned out he was right, and I was wrong.\"\nAli's resistance to the draft was covered in the 2013 documentary \"The Trials of Muhammad Ali\".\nNSA and FBI monitoring of Ali's communications.\nIn a secret operation code-named \"Minaret\", the National Security Agency (NSA) intercepted the communications of leading Americans, including Ali, Senators Frank Church and Howard Baker, Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., prominent U.S. journalists, and others who criticized the U.S. war in Vietnam. A review by the NSA of the Minaret program concluded that it was \"disreputable if not outright illegal\".\nIn 1971, Ali's Fight of the Century with Frazier was used by an activist group, the Citizens' Commission to Investigate the FBI, to pull off a burglary at an FBI office in Pennsylvania; the anticipation for the fight was unlike anything else, so they believed the security would also be focused on the fight. This raid exposed the COINTELPRO operations that included illegal spying on activists involved with the civil rights and anti-war movements. One of the COINTELPRO targets was Ali, and their activities included the FBI gaining access to his records as far back as elementary school; one such record mentioned him loving art as a child.\nExile and comeback.\nIn March 1966, Ali refused to be inducted into the armed forces. He was systematically denied a boxing license in every state and stripped of his passport. As a result, he did not fight from March 1967 to October 1970 until his conviction was overturned in 1971.\nProtesting while exiled.\nDuring this time of inactivity, as opposition to the Vietnam War began to grow and Ali's stance gained sympathy, he spoke at colleges across the nation, criticizing the Vietnam War and advocating African American pride and racial justice. Ali based himself in Chicago. According to most close to him, his Chicago years were formative.\nAt the time, Ali was widely condemned by the American media, with fears that his actions could potentially lead to mass civil disobedience. Despite this, \"Ebony\" magazine noted in the late 1960s that Ali's popularity had increased during this time, especially among black people.\n\"The Super Fight\".\nWhile banned from sanctioned bouts, Ali settled a $1\u00a0million lawsuit against radio producer Murray Woroner by accepting $10,000 to appear in a privately staged fantasy fight against retired champion Rocky Marciano. In 1969 the boxers were filmed sparring for about 75 one-minute rounds; they produced several potential outcomes. A computer program purportedly determined the winner, based on data about the fighters, along with the opinions of approximately 250 boxing experts. Edited versions of the bout were shown in movie theaters in 1970. In the U.S. version Ali lost in a simulated 13th-round knockout, but in the European version Marciano lost due to cuts, also simulated.\nAli suggested that prejudice determined his defeat in the U.S. version; he was reported to have jokingly said, \"That computer was made in Alabama.\"\nReturn.\nOn August 11, 1970, with his case still in appeal, Ali was granted a license to box by the City of Atlanta Athletic Commission. Leroy Johnson, Jesse Hill Jr. and Harry Pett had used their local political influence and set up the company House of Sports to organize the fight, underlining the influential power of Georgia's black politics in Ali's comeback. Ali's first return bout was against Jerry Quarry on October 26, resulting in a win after three rounds after Quarry was cut.\nA month earlier, a victory in federal court forced the New York State Boxing Commission to reinstate Ali's license. He fought Oscar Bonavena at Madison Square Garden in December, an uninspired performance that ended in a dramatic technical knockout of Bonavena in the 15th round. The win left Ali as a top contender against heavyweight champion Joe Frazier.\nFight against Joe Frazier.\nAli and Frazier's first fight, held at the Garden, was on March 8, 1971, while Ali's Supreme Court appeal was still pending. It was nicknamed the \"Fight of the Century\" due to the tremendous excitement surrounding a bout between two undefeated fighters, each with a legitimate claim to be heavyweight champion. Veteran U.S. boxing writer John Condon called it \"the greatest event I've ever worked on in my life.\" The bout was broadcast to 36 countries; promoters granted 760 press passes.\nAdding to the atmosphere were the considerable pre-fight theatrics and name calling. Before the fight, Frazier called Ali \"Cassius Clay,\" angering Ali who responded by calling Frazier a \"dumb tool of the white establishment\" and saying \"Frazier is too ugly to be champ. Frazier is too dumb to be champ.\" Ali also frequently called Frazier an \"Uncle Tom\". Dave Wolf, who worked in Frazier's camp, recalled that \"Ali was saying 'the only people rooting for Joe Frazier are white people in suits, Alabama sheriffs, and members of the Ku Klux Klan. I'm fighting for the little man in the ghetto.' Joe was sitting there, smashing his fist into the palm of his hand, saying, 'What the fuck does he know about the ghetto?'\"\nAli began training at a farm near Reading, Pennsylvania, in 1971 and, finding the country setting to his liking, sought to develop a real training camp in the countryside. He found a five-acre site on a Pennsylvania country road in the village of Deer Lake, Pennsylvania. On this site, Ali carved out what was to become his training camp, where he trained for all his fights from 1972 to the end of his career in 1981.\nThe Monday night fight lived up to its billing. In a preview of their two other fights, a crouching, bobbing and weaving Frazier constantly pressured Ali, getting hit regularly by Ali jabs and combinations, but relentlessly attacking and scoring repeatedly, especially to Ali's body. The fight was even in the early rounds, but Ali was taking more punishment than ever in his career up until that point. On several occasions in the early rounds, he played to the crowd and shook his head \"no\" after he was hit. In the later rounds\u2014in what was the first appearance of the \"rope-a-dope strategy\"\u2014Ali leaned against the ropes and absorbed punishment from Frazier, hoping to tire him. In the 11th round, Frazier connected with a left hook that wobbled Ali, but because it appeared that Ali might be clowning as he staggered backwards across the ring, Frazier hesitated to press his advantage, fearing an Ali counterattack. In the final round, Frazier knocked Ali down with a vicious left hook, which referee Arthur Mercante Sr. said was as hard as a man can be hit. Ali was back on his feet in three seconds. Nevertheless, Ali lost by unanimous decision, his first professional defeat.\nAfter his loss.\nChamberlain challenge and Ellis fight.\nIn 1971, basketball star Wilt Chamberlain challenged Ali to a fight, and a bout was scheduled for July 26. Although the seven-foot-one-inch-tall Chamberlain had formidable physical advantages over Ali\u2014weighing 60pounds more and able to reach 14inches further\u2014Ali was able to influence Chamberlain into calling off the bout by taunting him with calls of \"Timber!\" and \"The tree will fall\" during a shared interview. These statements of confidence unsettled his taller opponent, whom Los Angeles Lakers owner Jack Kent Cooke had offered a record-setting contract, conditional on Chamberlain agreeing to abandon what Cooke termed \"this boxing foolishness\", and he did exactly that.\nMeanwhile, on June 28, 1971, the Supreme Court overturned Ali's draft evasion conviction. To replace Ali's opponent, promoter Bob Arum quickly booked a former sparring partner of Ali's, Jimmy Ellis, who was a childhood friend from Louisville, Kentucky, to fight him. Ali won the bout through a technical knockout when the referee stopped the fight in the twelfth round.\nFights against Quarry, Patterson, Foster, Bugner and Norton.\nAfter Ellis, Ali fought Jerry Quarry, had a second bout with Floyd Patterson, and faced Bob Foster in 1972, winning a total of six fights that year. During two bouts he had in 1973 with Joe Bugner and Ken Norton, he wore a \"People's Choice\" robe given to him by Elvis Presley, who in later years Ali revealed became one of his \"close, personal\" friends. In 1973, before his fight with Norton, Tom Cushman, a boxing writer for the \"Philadelphia Daily News\", said Ali was \"gloriously overconfident\" and didn't consider Norton \"a threat at all\". But during the fight, either in the second round according to most press reports, or the final round according to Norton, Norton broke Ali's jaw and inflicted by decision the second loss of his career. After considering retirement, Ali won a controversial decision against Norton in their second bout. This led to a rematch with Joe Frazier at Madison Square Garden on January 28, 1974; Frazier had recently lost his title to George Foreman.\nSecond fight against Joe Frazier.\nAli was strong in the early rounds of the fight, and staggered Frazier in the second round. Referee Tony Perez mistakenly thought he heard the bell ending the round and stepped between the two fighters as Ali was pressing his attack, giving Frazier time to recover. However, Frazier came on in the middle rounds, snapping Ali's head in round seven and driving him to the ropes at the end of round eight. The last four rounds saw round-to-round shifts in momentum between the two fighters. Throughout most of the bout, however, Ali was able to circle away from Frazier's dangerous left hook and to tie Frazier up when he was cornered, the latter a tactic that Frazier's camp complained of bitterly. Judges awarded Ali a unanimous decision.\nWorld heavyweight champion (second reign).\n\"The Rumble in the Jungle\".\nThe defeat of Frazier set the stage for a title fight against heavyweight champion George Foreman in Kinshasa, Zaire, on October 30, 1974\u2014a bout nicknamed \"The Rumble in the Jungle\". Foreman was considered one of the hardest punchers in heavyweight history. In assessing the fight, analysts pointed out that Joe Frazier and Ken Norton, who had given Ali four tough battles and won two of them, had both been devastated by Foreman in second-round knockouts. Ali was 32 years old and had lost speed and reflexes since his twenties. Contrary to his later persona, Foreman was at the time a brooding and intimidating presence. Almost no one associated with the sport, not even Ali's long-time supporter Howard Cosell, gave the former champion a chance of winning.\nAs usual, Ali was confident and colorful before the fight. He told interviewer David Frost, \"If you think the world was surprised when Nixon resigned, wait till I whup Foreman's behind!\" He told the press, \"I've done something new for this fight. I done wrestled with an alligator, I done tussled with a whale; handcuffed lightning, thrown thunder in jail; only last week, I murdered a rock, injured a stone, hospitalized a brick; I'm so mean I make medicine sick.\" Ali was wildly popular in Zaire, with crowds chanting \"Ali, bomaye\" (\"Ali, kill him\") wherever he went.\nAli opened the fight moving and scoring with right crosses to Foreman's head. Then, beginning in the second round, and to the consternation of his corner, Ali retreated to the ropes and invited Foreman to hit him while covering up, clinching and counterpunching, all while verbally taunting Foreman. The move, which would later become known as the \"Rope-a-dope\", so violated conventional boxing wisdom\u2014letting one of the hardest hitters in boxing strike at will\u2014that at ringside writer George Plimpton thought the fight had to be fixed. Foreman, increasingly angered, threw punches that were deflected and did not land squarely. Midway through the fight, as Foreman began tiring, Ali countered more frequently and effectively with punches and flurries, which electrified the pro-Ali crowd. In the eighth round, Ali dropped an exhausted Foreman with a combination at center ring; Foreman failed to make the count. Against the odds, and amidst pandemonium in the ring, Ali had regained the title by knockout. Reflecting on the fight, George Foreman later said: \"I thought Ali was just one more knockout victim until, about the seventh round, I hit him hard to the jaw and he held me and whispered in my ear: 'That all you got, George?' I realized that this ain't what I thought it was.\"\nIt was a major upset victory, after Ali came in as a 4\u20131 underdog against the previously unbeaten, heavy-hitting Foreman. The fight became famous for Ali's introduction of the rope-a-dope tactic. The fight was watched by a record estimated television audience of 1billion viewers worldwide. It was the world's most-watched live television broadcast at the time.\nFights against Wepner, Lyle and Bugner.\nAli's next opponents included Chuck Wepner, Ron Lyle, and Joe Bugner. Wepner, a journeyman known as \"The Bayonne Bleeder\", stunned Ali with a knockdown in the ninth round; Ali would later say he tripped on Wepner's foot. The fight inspired Sylvester Stallone to create the acclaimed film \"Rocky\".\nThird fight against Joe Frazier.\nAli then agreed to a third match with Joe Frazier in Manila. The bout, known as the \"Thrilla in Manila\", was held on October 1, 1975, in temperatures approaching . In the first rounds, Ali was aggressive, moving and exchanging blows with Frazier. However, Ali soon appeared to tire and adopted the \"rope-a-dope\" strategy, frequently resorting to clinches. During this part of the bout Ali did some effective counterpunching, but for the most part absorbed punishment from a relentlessly attacking Frazier. In the 12th round, Frazier began to tire, and Ali scored several sharp blows that closed Frazier's left eye and opened a cut over his right eye. With Frazier's vision now diminished, Ali dominated the 13th and 14th rounds, at times conducting what boxing historian Mike Silver called \"target practice\" on Frazier's head. The fight was stopped when Frazier's trainer, Eddie Futch, refused to allow Frazier to answer the bell for the 15th and final round, despite Frazier's protests. Frazier's eyes were both swollen shut. Ali, in his corner, winner by TKO, slumped on his stool, spent.\nAn ailing Ali said afterwards that the fight \"was the closest thing to dying that I know\", and, when later asked if he had viewed the fight on videotape, reportedly said, \"Why would I want to go back and see Hell?\" After the fight he cited Frazier as \"the greatest fighter of all times next to me\".\nAfter the third fight with Frazier, Ali considered retirement. He said, \"I'm sore all over. My arms, my face, my sides all ache. I'm so, so tired. There is a great possibility that I will retire. You might have seen the last of me. I want to sit back and count my money, live in my house and my farm, work for my people and concentrate on my family.\"\nLater career.\nOn February 2, 1976, Ali defeated Jean-Pierre Coopman by 5th round knockout. The WBC Heavyweight title was not on the line for this fight. On April 30, 1976, Ali would fight Jimmy Young and win a controversial unanimous decision. Howard Cosell would remark that he had \"never seen Ali so off in his timing\" and when asked on his performance against Young in the post-fight interview, Ali stated that he was \"getting old\" and that he was \"preserving his energy\" for Ken Norton. On May 24, 1976, Ali defeated Richard Dunn, winning by 5th round technical knockout. The punch used to knock Dunn out was taught to Ali by Taekwondo Grandmaster Jhoon Rhee. Rhee called that punch the \"Accupunch\"; he learned it from Bruce Lee. The Dunn fight was the last time Ali would knock an opponent out in his boxing career.\nAli fought Ken Norton for the third time in September 1976. The bout, which was held at Yankee Stadium, resulted in Ali winning a controversial decision that ringside commentators had scored in favor of Norton. Afterwards, he announced he was retiring from boxing to practice his faith, having converted to Sunni Islam after falling out with the Nation of Islam the previous year.\nAfter returning to beat Alfredo Evangelista in May 1977, Ali struggled in his next fight against Earnie Shavers that September, getting pummeled a few times by punches to the head. Ali won the fight by another unanimous decision, but the bout caused his longtime doctor Ferdie Pacheco to quit after he was rebuffed for telling Ali he should retire. Pacheco was quoted as saying, \"the New York State Athletic Commission gave me a report that showed Ali's kidneys were falling apart. I wrote to Angelo Dundee, Ali's trainer, his wife and Ali himself. I got nothing back in response. That's when I decided enough is enough.\"\nIn February 1978, Ali faced Leon Spinks at the Hilton Hotel in Las Vegas. At the time, Spinks had only seven professional fights to his credit, and had recently fought a draw with journeyman Scott LeDoux. Ali sparred less than two dozen rounds in preparation for the fight and was seriously out of shape by the opening bell. He lost the title by split decision. A rematch occurred in September at the Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana. 70,000 people attended the bout and paid a total of $6\u00a0million admission, making it the largest live gate in boxing history at that time. Ali won a unanimous decision in an uninspiring fight, with referee Lucien Joubert scoring rounds 10\u20134, judge Ernie Cojoe 10\u20134, and judge Herman Preis 11\u20134. This made Ali the first heavyweight champion to win the belt three times.\nFollowing this win, on July 27, 1979, Ali announced his retirement from boxing. His retirement was short-lived, however; Ali announced his comeback to face Larry Holmes for the WBC belt in an attempt to win the heavyweight championship an unprecedented fourth time. The fight was largely motivated by Ali's need for money. Boxing writer Richie Giachetti said, \"Larry didn't want to fight Ali. He knew Ali had nothing left; he knew it would be a horror.\"\nIt was around this time that Ali started struggling with vocal stutters and trembling hands. The Nevada Athletic Commission (NAC) ordered that he undergo a complete physical in Las Vegas before being allowed to fight again. Ali chose instead to check into the Mayo Clinic, who declared him fit to fight. Their opinion was accepted by the NAC on July 31, 1980, paving the way for Ali's return to the ring.\nFight stoppage vs. Larry Holmes.\nOn October 2, 1980, Ali returned to the ring to fight Holmes at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas. Holmes, who fought under the nickname \"The Easton Assassin\", easily dominated Ali. After the tenth round, Angelo Dundee stepped into the ring and instructed the referee to stop the fight. It was the only time Ali ever lost by stoppage.\nImmediately after the fight, Ali was given painkillers and antidepressants, in violation of World Boxing Council rules prohibiting the administration of any drug before the postfight urinalysis.\nGiachetti called the fight \"awful...the worst sports event I ever had to cover\". Actor Sylvester Stallone was ringside for the fight and said that it was like watching an autopsy on a man who is still alive. The Holmes fight is said to have contributed to Ali's Parkinson's syndrome. Despite pleas to definitively retire, Ali fought one last time on December 11, 1981, in Nassau, Bahamas, against Trevor Berbick, losing a ten-round decision.\nExhibition bouts.\nIn exhibitions, Ali boxed both well-known boxers and celebrities from other walks of life, including Antonio Inoki, Michael Dokes, Sammy Davis Jr., Richard Pryor, Marvin Gaye, Burt Young, Lyle Alzado, Dave Semenko, and Puerto Rican comedian Jose Miguel Agrelot (with Iris Chacon acting as Agrelot's corner-woman).\nPersonal life.\nSibling.\nRahaman Ali (1943\u20132025) was Ali's only sibling. Though not as successful as his brother, Rahaman, who was born Rudolph Arnett Clay, would also follow in his brother's footsteps and become a professional boxer from 1964 to 1972. After his professional career ended, Rahaman would often travel and train with Muhammad.\nMarriages and children.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Children of Muhammad Ali\nAli was married four times and had seven daughters and two sons. Ali was introduced to cocktail waitress Sonji Roi by Herbert Muhammad, who was to become Ali's long-time manager, and asked her to marry him after their first date. They married approximately one month later on August 14, 1964. They quarreled over Sonji's refusal to join the Nation of Islam. According to Ali, \"She wouldn't do what she was supposed to do. She wore lipstick; she went into bars; she dressed in clothes that were revealing and didn't look right.\" The marriage was childless and they divorced on January 10, 1966. Just before the divorce was finalized, Ali sent Sonji a note: \"You traded heaven for hell, baby.\" Ali's brother Rahaman said that she was Ali's only true love and the Nation of Islam made Ali divorce her and Ali never got over it.\nOn August 17, 1967, Ali married 17-year-old Belinda Boyd. In an interview with NBC 6, Boyd recounted meeting Ali when she was 10 years old at her hometown mosque. Boyd stated Ali signed an autograph for her while humorously remarking on his future fame, saying, \"Listen here little girl. This is my name. Imma be famous. You need to keep that 'cause it's gone be worth a lot of money.\" Boyd said, \"You'll never be famous with that name. And, I walked away.\" Born into a Chicago family that had converted to the Nation Of Islam, she later changed her name to Khalilah Ali, though she was still called Belinda by old friends and family. They had four children: author and rapper Maryum \"May May\" (born 1968); twins Jamillah and Rasheda (born 1970); and Muhammad Ali Jr. (born 1972). Rasheda married Robert Walsh and has two sons: Biaggio Ali (born 1998), who is an amateur MMA fighter, and Nico Ali (born 2000), who is a professional boxer.\nAli was a resident of Cherry Hill, New Jersey, in suburban Philadelphia in the early 1970s. At age 31 in 1973, Ali began an extramarital relationship with 16-year-old Wanda Bolton (who subsequently changed her name to Aaisha Fletcher) with whom he fathered another daughter, Khaliah (born June 1974). While still married to Belinda, Ali married Aaisha in an Islamic ceremony that was not legally recognized. According to Khaliah, Aaisha and her mother lived at Ali's Deer Lake training camp alongside Belinda and her children. In January 1985, Aaisha sued Ali for unpaid palimony. The case was settled when Ali agreed to set up a $200,000 trust fund for Khaliah. In 2001, Khaliah was quoted as saying she believed her father viewed her as \"a mistake\". He had another daughter, Miya (born 1972), from an extramarital relationship with Patricia Harvell.\nBy the summer of 1977, his second marriage ended due to Ali's repeated infidelity, and he had married actress and model Veronica Porch\u00e9. At the time of their marriage, they had a daughter, Hana, and Veronica was pregnant with their second child. Their second daughter, Laila Ali, was born in December 1977, and went on to become a professional boxer. By 1986, Ali and Porch\u00e9 were divorced due to Ali's continuous infidelity. Porch\u00e9 said of Ali's infidelity, \"It was too much temptation for him, with women who threw themselves at him. It didn't mean anything. He didn't have affairs \u2013 he had one-night stands. I knew beyond a doubt there were no feelings involved. It was so obvious, It was easy to forgive him.\"\nOn November 19, 1986, Ali married Yolanda \"Lonnie\" Williams. Lonnie first met Ali at the age of 6 when her family moved to Louisville in 1963. In 1982, she became Ali's primary caregiver and in return, he paid for her to attend graduate school at UCLA. Together they adopted a son, Asaad Amin (born 1986), when Asaad was five months old. In 1992, Lonnie incorporated Greatest of All Time, Inc. (G.O.A.T. Inc) to consolidate and license his intellectual properties for commercial purposes. She served as the vice president and treasurer until the sale of the company in 2006.\nAli then lived in Scottsdale, Arizona with Lonnie. In January 2007, it was reported that they had put their home in Berrien Springs, Michigan, which they had bought in 1975, up for sale and had purchased a home in eastern Jefferson County, Kentucky, for $1,875,000. Both homes were subsequently sold after Ali's death with Lonnie living in their remaining home in Paradise Valley, Arizona. Lonnie converted to Islam from Catholicism in her late twenties.\nAli's daughter Laila was a professional boxer from 1999 until 2007, despite her father's previous opposition to women's boxing. In 1978, he said \"Women are not made to be hit in the breast, and face like that.\" Ali still attended a number of his daughter's fights. Ali's daughter Hana is married to Bellator middleweight fighter Kevin Casey. Hana wrote about her father, \"His love for people was extraordinary. I would get home from school to find homeless families sleeping in our guest room. He'd see them on the street, pile them into his Rolls-Royce and bring them home. He'd buy them clothes, take them to hotels and pay the bills for months in advance.\" She also said celebrities like Michael Jackson and Clint Eastwood would often visit Ali.\nPaternity claims.\nKiiursti Mensah-Ali claims she is Ali's biological daughter with Barbara Mensah, with whom he allegedly had a 20-year relationship, citing photographs and a paternity test conducted in 1988. She said he accepted responsibility and took care of her, but all contacts with him were cut off after he married his fourth wife Lonnie. Kiiursti says she has a relationship with his other children. After his death she again made passionate appeals to be allowed to mourn at his funeral.\nIn 2010, Osmon Williams came forward claiming to be Ali's biological son. His mother Temica Williams (also known as Rebecca Holloway) launched a $3\u00a0million lawsuit against Ali in 1981 for sexual assault, claiming that she had started a sexual relationship with him when she was 12, and that her son Osmon (born 1977) was fathered by Ali when she was 17. She further alleged that Ali had originally supported her and her son financially, but stopped doing so after four years. The case went on until 1986 and was eventually thrown out as her allegations were deemed to be barred by the statute of limitations. According to Veronica, Ali admitted to the affair with Williams, but did not believe Osmon was his son, which Veronica supported by saying: \"Everybody in the camp was going with that girl.\" Ali's biographer and friend Thomas Hauser has said this claim was of \"questionable veracity\".\nReligion and beliefs.\nAffiliation with the Nation of Islam.\nAli said that he first heard of the Nation of Islam when he was fighting in the Golden Gloves tournament in Chicago in 1959 and attended his first Nation of Islam meeting in 1961. He continued to attend meetings, although he kept his involvement hidden from the public. In 1962, Clay met Malcolm X, who soon became his spiritual and political mentor. By the time of the first Liston fight, Nation of Islam members, including Malcolm X, were visible in his entourage. This led to a story in \"The Miami Herald\" just before the fight disclosing that Clay had joined the Nation of Islam, which nearly caused the bout to be canceled. The article quoted Cassius Clay Sr. as saying that his son had joined the Black Muslims when he was 18.\nIn fact, Clay was initially refused entry to the Nation of Islam (often called the Black Muslims at the time) due to his boxing career. However, after he won the championship from Liston in 1964, the Nation of Islam was more receptive and agreed to publicize his membership. Shortly afterwards on March 6, Elijah Muhammad gave a radio address that Clay would be renamed Muhammad (one who is worthy of praise) Ali (most high). Around that time Ali moved to the south side of Chicago and lived in a series of houses, always near the Nation of Islam's Mosque Maryam or Elijah Muhammad's residence. He stayed in Chicago for about 12 years.\nOnly a few journalists, most notably Howard Cosell, accepted the new name at that time. Ali stated that his earlier name was a \"slave name\" and a \"white man's name\" and added that \"I didn't choose it and I don't want it. I am Muhammad Ali, a free name\". The person he was formerly named after was a white slave owner turned abolitionist. Ali explained in his autobiography after studying his works, \"he may have gotten rid of his slaves, 'but (he) held on to white supremacy'\". Ali concluded: \"Why should I keep my white slavemaster's name visible and my black ancestors invisible, unknown, unhonored?\"\nNot afraid to antagonize the white establishment, Ali stated, \"I am America. I am the part you won't recognize. But get used to me. Black, confident, cocky; my name, not yours; my religion, not yours; my goals, my own; get used to me.\" Ali's friendship with Malcolm X ended as Malcolm split with the Nation of Islam a couple of weeks after Ali joined, and Ali remained with the Nation of Islam. Ali later said that turning his back on Malcolm was one of the mistakes he regretted most in his life.\nAligning himself with the Nation of Islam, its leader Elijah Muhammad, and a narrative that labeled the white race as the perpetrator of genocide against African Americans made Ali a target of public condemnation. The Nation of Islam was widely viewed by whites and some African Americans as a black separatist \"hate religion\" with a propensity toward violence; Ali had few qualms about using his influential voice to speak Nation of Islam doctrine. In a press conference articulating his opposition to the Vietnam War, Ali stated, \"My enemy is the white people, not Vietcong or Chinese or Japanese.\"\nWriter Jerry Izenberg once noted that, \"the Nation became Ali's family and Elijah Muhammad became his father. But there is an irony to the fact that while the Nation branded white people as devils, Ali had more white colleagues than most African American people did at that time in America, and continued to have them throughout his career.\"\nConversion to Sunni Islam.\nIn Hauser's biography \"Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times\", Ali stated that he was not a Christian as he thought the idea of God having a son sounded wrong and did not make sense to him, stating, \"God don't beget; man begets\". However, he still believed that even good Christians or good Jews could receive God's blessing and enter heaven as he stated, \"God created all people, no matter what their religion\". He also stated, \"If you're against someone because he's a Muslim that's wrong. If you're against someone because he's a Christian or a Jew, that's wrong\".\nIn a 2004 autobiography, Ali attributed his conversion to mainstream Sunni Islam to Warith Deen Muhammad, who assumed leadership of the Nation of Islam upon the death of his father Elijah Muhammad and persuaded the Nation's followers to become adherents of Sunni Islam. He said some people did not like the change and stuck to Elijah's teachings, but he admired it, and so left Elijah's teachings and became a follower of Sunni Islam.\nAli had gone on the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1972, which inspired him in a similar manner to Malcolm X, meeting people of different colors from all over the world giving him a different outlook and greater spiritual awareness. In 1977, he said that, after he retired, he would dedicate the rest of his life to getting \"ready to meet God\" by helping people, charitable causes, uniting people and helping to make peace. He went on another Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1988.\nAfter the September 11 attacks in 2001, he stated that \"Islam is a religion of peace\" and \"does not promote terrorism or killing people\", and that he was \"angry that the world sees a certain group of Islam followers who caused this destruction, but they are not real Muslims. They are racist fanatics who call themselves Muslims.\" In December 2015, after the November 2015 Paris attacks, he stated that \"True Muslims know that the ruthless violence of so-called Islamic jihadists goes against the very tenets of our religion\", that \"We as Muslims have to stand up to those who use Islam to advance their own personal agenda\", and that \"political leaders should use their position to bring understanding about the religion of Islam, and clarify that these misguided murderers have perverted people's views on what Islam really is.\"\nHe also developed an interest in Sufism, which he referenced in his 2003 autobiography, \"The Soul of a Butterfly\". According to Ali's daughter, Hana Yasmeen Ali, who co-authored \"The Soul of a Butterfly\" with him, Ali was attracted to Sufism after reading the books of Inayat Khan, which contain Sufi teachings.\nMuhammad Ali received guidance from Islamic scholars such as Grand Mufti of Syria Al Marhum Al Sheikh Ahmed Kuftaro, Hisham Kabbani, Imam Zaid Shakir, Hamza Yusuf, and Timothy J. Gianotti, who planned his funeral.\nHealth.\nDuring his amateur career, Ali refrained from smoking, drugs, and drinking alcohol and soda pop, and adopted an idiosyncratic diet. Upon his acceptance of the dietary restrictions of Islam, the Nation of Islam recruited cooks to prepare his meals.\nEntertainment career.\nActing.\nAli had a cameo role in the 1962 film version of \"Requiem for a Heavyweight\", and during his exile from boxing, he starred in the short-lived 1969 Broadway musical, \"Buck White\". He also appeared in the documentary film \"Black Rodeo\" (1972) riding both a horse and a bull.\nHis autobiography \"\", written with Richard Durham, was published in 1975. In 1977 the book was adapted into a film called \"The Greatest\", in which Ali played himself and Ernest Borgnine played Angelo Dundee.\nThe film \"Freedom Road\", made in 1978, features Ali in a rare acting role as Gideon Jackson, a former slave and Union soldier in 1870s Virginia, who gets elected to the U.S. Senate.\nSpoken word poetry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nIn 1963, Ali released an album of spoken word music on Columbia Records titled, \"I Am the Greatest\", and in 1964, he recorded a cover version of the rhythm and blues song \"Stand by Me\". \"I Am the Greatest\" sold 500,000 copies, and has been identified as an early example of rap music and a precursor to hip-hop. It reached number 61 on the album chart and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album at the 6th Annual Grammy Awards in 1964. He later received a second Grammy nomination, for \"Best Recording for Children\", with his 1976 spoken word novelty record, \"The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay\".\nProfessional wrestling.\nAli was involved with professional wrestling at different times in his career.\nOn June 1, 1976, as Ali was preparing for his bout with Inoki, he attended a match featuring Gorilla Monsoon. After the match was over, Ali removed his shirt and jacket and confronted professional wrestler Gorilla Monsoon in the ring after his match at a World Wide Wrestling Federation show in Philadelphia Arena. After dodging a few punches, Monsoon put Ali in an airplane spin and dumped him to the mat. Ali stumbled to the corner, where his associate Butch Lewis convinced him to walk away.\nOn March 31, 1985, Ali was the special guest referee for the main event of the inaugural WrestleMania event.\nIn 1995, Ali led a group of Japanese and American professional wrestlers, including his 1976 opponent Antonio Inoki and Ric Flair, on a sports diplomacy mission to North Korea. Ali was guest of honor at the record-breaking Collision in Korea, a wrestling event with the largest attendance of all time.\nAli was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by The Undertaker at the 2024 ceremony.\nTelevision appearances.\nMuhammad Ali's fights were some of the world's most-watched television broadcasts, setting television viewership records. His most-watched fights drew an estimated 1\u20132\u00a0billion viewers worldwide between 1974 and 1980, and were the world's most-watched live television broadcasts at the time. Outside of fights, he made many other television appearances. The following table lists known viewership figures of his non-fight television appearances. For television viewership figures of his fights, see \"Boxing career of Muhammad Ali: Television viewership\".\nArt.\nAli was also an amateur artist and made dozens of drawings and paintings in the 1970s. In 1977, Rodney Hilton Brown, who owned an art gallery in NYC, asked Ali if he was interested in painting. Ali took him up on the offer and produced several paintings for him to sell. Brown is the author of \"Muhammad Ali: The Untold Story: Painter, Poet and Prophet\". In October 2021, 26 of his drawings and arts were placed on auction and sold for close to US$1 Million.\nLater life.\nBy the end of his boxing career Ali had absorbed an estimated 200,000 hits.\nIn 1984, Ali was diagnosed with Parkinson's syndrome, which sometimes results from head trauma from violent physical activities such as boxing. Ali still remained active during this time, later participating as a guest referee at WrestleMania I.\nPhilanthropy, humanitarianism and politics.\nAli was known for being a humanitarian and philanthropist. He focused on practicing his Islamic duty of charity and good deeds, donating millions to charity organizations and disadvantaged people of all religious backgrounds. It is estimated that Ali helped to feed more than 22million people afflicted by hunger across the world. Early in his career, one of his main focuses was youth education. He spoke at several historically black colleges and universities about the importance of education and became the largest single black donor to the United Negro College Fund in 1967 by way of a $10,000 donation ($78,000 in 2020 USD). In late 1966, he also pledged to donate a total of $100,000 to the UNCF (specifically promising to donate much of the proceeds of his title defense against Cleveland Williams) and paid $4,500 per closed circuit installation at six HBCUs so they could watch his fights.\nAli began visiting Africa, starting in 1964 when he visited Nigeria and Ghana. In 1974, he visited a Palestinian refugee camp in Southern Lebanon, where Ali declared \"support for the Palestinian struggle to liberate their homeland\". During that visit Ali also declared that the \"United States is the stronghold of Zionism and imperialism.\" In 1978, following his loss to Spinks and before winning the rematch, Ali visited Bangladesh and received honorary citizenship there. The same year, he participated in The Longest Walk, a protest march in the United States in support of Native American rights, along with singer Stevie Wonder and actor Marlon Brando.\nIn early 1980, Ali was recruited by President Jimmy Carter for a diplomatic mission to Africa, in an effort to persuade a number of African governments to join the US-led boycott of the Moscow Olympics in protest of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Having arrived in Tanzania, Ali told cameras, \"Russia is invading a Muslim country, Asiatic country,\" and that its probable intention to head to oil-rich Persia to take wells and ports \"could lead to nuclear war. My purpose in coming here was to try to stop that.\" However, according to Ali biographer Thomas Hauser, \"at best, it was ill-conceived; at worst, a diplomatic disaster.\" The Tanzanian government was insulted that Carter had sent an athlete to discuss a serious political issue. One official asked whether the United States would \"send Chris Evert to negotiate with London\". Consequently, Ali was only received by the youth and culture minister, rather than President Julius Nyerere. Ali was unable to explain why the African countries should join the US boycott when it had failed to support the African boycott of the 1976 Olympics (in protest of Apartheid in South Africa), although neither did the Soviet Union, and was unaware of the sentiment that the Soviet Union had backed some popular revolutions on the continent, although none of the countries on the itinerary were Soviet allies. The Nigerian government also rebuffed him and confirmed that they would be participating in the Moscow Games. Ali did, however, convince the government of Kenya to boycott the Soviet Olympics.\nOn January 19, 1981, in Los Angeles, Ali talked a suicidal man down from jumping off a ninth-floor ledge, an event that made national news.\nIn 1984, Ali announced his support for the re-election of United States President Ronald Reagan. When asked to elaborate on his endorsement of Reagan, Ali told reporters, \"He's keeping God in schools and that's enough.\" In 1985, he visited Israel to request the release of Muslim prisoners at Atlit detainee camp, which Israel declined.\nAround 1987, the California Bicentennial Foundation for the U.S. Constitution selected Ali to personify the vitality of the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights. Ali rode on a float at the following year's Tournament of Roses Parade, launching the U.S. Constitution's 200th birthday commemoration. In 1988, during the First Intifada, Ali participated in a Chicago rally in support of Palestine. The same year, he visited Sudan to raise awareness about the plight of famine victims. According to \"Politico\", Ali supported Orrin Hatch politically. In 1989, he participated in an Indian charity event with the Muslim Educational Society in Kozhikode, Kerala, along with Bollywood actor Dilip Kumar.\nIn 1990, Ali traveled to Iraq prior to the Gulf War and met with president Saddam Hussein in an attempt to negotiate the release of American hostages. Ali secured the release of the hostages, in exchange for promising Hussein that he would bring America \"an honest account\" of Iraq. Despite arranging the hostages' release, he received criticism from president George H. W. Bush, and Joseph C. Wilson, the highest-ranking American diplomat in Baghdad.\nIn 1994, Ali campaigned to the United States government to come to the aid of refugees afflicted by the Rwandan genocide, and to donate to organizations helping Rwandan refugees.\nIn 1996, he lit the flame at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia. It was watched by an estimated 3.5billion viewers worldwide.\nAfter Ali met a lesbian couple who were fans of his in 1997, he smiled and said to friend and biographer Thomas Hauser, \"They look like they're happy together.\" Hauser wrote about the story, \"The thought that Liz and Roz (the lesbian couple he met) were happy pleased Muhammad. Ali wanted people to be happy.\"\nOn November 17, 2002, Ali went to Afghanistan as the \"U.N. Messenger of Peace\". He was in Kabul for a three-day goodwill mission as a special guest of the UN.\nOn September 1, 2009, Ali visited Ennis, County Clare, Ireland, the home of his great-grandfather, Abe Grady, who emigrated to the U.S. in the 1860s, eventually settling in Kentucky.\nOn July 27, 2012, Ali was a titular bearer of the Olympic flag during the opening ceremonies of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. He was helped to his feet by his wife Lonnie to stand before the flag due to his Parkinson's syndrome rendering him unable to carry it into the stadium. The same year, he was awarded the Philadelphia Liberty Medal in recognition of his lifelong efforts in activism, philanthropy and humanitarianism.\nEarnings.\nBy 1978, Ali's total fight purse earnings were estimated to be nearly $60million (inflation-adjusted $), including an estimated $47.45million grossed between 1970 and 1978. By 1980, his total fight purse earnings were estimated to be up to $70million (inflation-adjusted $million).\nIn 1978, Ali revealed that he was \"broke\" and several news outlets reported his net worth to be an estimated $ (inflation-adjusted $million). The press attributed his decline in wealth to several factors, including taxes consuming at least half of his income, management taking a third of his income, his lifestyle, and spending on family, charity and religious causes.\nIn 2006, Ali sold his name and image for $50million, after which \"Forbes\" estimated his net worth to be $55million in 2006. Following his death in 2016, his fortune was estimated to be between $50million and $80million.\nDeclining health.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI'm blessed and thankful to God that I understand he's trying me. This is a trial from God. He gave me this illness to remind me that I am not number one; He is.\n\u2014Muhammad Ali reflecting on having Parkinson's disease\nAli's Parkinson's syndrome led to a gradual decline in his health, though he was still active into the early 2000s, promoting his own biopic, \"Ali\", in 2001. That year he also contributed an on-camera segment to the \"\" benefit concert.\nIn 1998, Ali began working with actor Michael J. Fox, who has Parkinson's disease, to raise awareness and fund research for a cure. They made a joint appearance before Congress to push the case in 2002. In 2000, Ali worked with the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research to raise awareness and encourage donations for research.\nIn February 2013, Ali's brother Rahaman Ali said Muhammad could no longer speak and could be dead within days. Ali's daughter May May Ali responded to the rumors, stating that she had talked to him on the phone the morning of February 3 and he was fine. On December 20, 2014, Ali was hospitalized for a mild case of pneumonia. Ali was once again hospitalized on January 15, 2015, for a urinary tract infection after being found unresponsive at a guest house in Scottsdale, Arizona. He was released the next day.\nDeath.\nAli was hospitalized in Scottsdale, Arizona, on June 2, 2016, with a respiratory illness. Though his condition was initially described as fair, it worsened, and he died the following day at the age of 74 from septic shock.\nNews coverage and tributes.\nFollowing Ali's death, he was the number-one trending topic on Twitter for over 12 hours and on Facebook for several days. BET played their documentary \"Muhammad Ali: Made In Miami\". ESPN played four hours of non-stop commercial-free coverage of Ali. News networks, such as ABC News, BBC, CNN, and Fox News, also covered him extensively.\nHe was mourned globally, and a family spokesman said the family \"certainly believes that Muhammad was a citizen of the world ... and they know that the world grieves with him\". Politicians such as Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, Bill Clinton, Donald Trump, David Cameron and more paid tribute to Ali. Ali also received numerous tributes from the world of sports including Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods, Floyd Mayweather, Mike Tyson, the Miami Marlins, LeBron James, Steph Curry and more. Then-Louisville mayor Greg Fischer stated, \"Muhammad Ali belongs to the world. But he only has one hometown.\"\nThe day after Ali's death, the UFC paid tribute to Ali at their UFC 199 event in a lengthy video tribute package, crediting Ali for his accomplishments and inspiring multiple UFC champions.\nMemorial.\nAli's funeral had been pre-planned by himself and others for several years prior to his actual death. The services began in Louisville on June 9, 2016, with an Islamic Janazah prayer service at Freedom Hall on the grounds of the Kentucky Exposition Center. The Janazah prayer was attended by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan. On June 10, 2016, the funeral procession passed through the streets of Louisville ending at Cave Hill Cemetery, where his body was interred during a private ceremony. A public memorial service for Ali at downtown Louisville's KFC Yum! Center was held during the afternoon of June 10. Billy Crystal, Ali's wife Lonnie Ali, sports journalist Bryant Gumbel and former President Bill Clinton all gave the eulogies. The pallbearers included Will Smith, Lennox Lewis and Mike Tyson, with honorary pallbearers including George Chuvalo, Larry Holmes and George Foreman. Ali's memorial was watched by an estimated 1billion viewers worldwide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the measure of greatness is to gladden the heart of every human being on the face of the earth, then he truly was the greatest. In every way he was the bravest, the kindest and the most excellent of men.\u2014\u200a\nLegacy.\nIn boxing.\nAli remains the only three-time lineal heavyweight champion. He is the only boxer to be named \"The Ring\" magazine Fighter of the Year six times and was involved in more \"Ring\" \"Fight of the Year\" bouts than any other fighter. He was one of only three boxers to be named \"Sportsman of the Year\" by \"Sports Illustrated\". He was also named BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year three times. \"The Sporting News\" recognized him as the Fighter of the Decade for the 1960s.\nAli was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in its first year and held wins over seven other Hall of Fame inductees during an era that has been called the golden age of heavyweight boxing. His joint records of beating 21 boxers for the world heavyweight title and winning 14 unified title bouts stood for 35 years.\nThe World Boxing Council ranks Ali as their greatest heavyweight champion of all time.\nIn hip-hop.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nAli often used rhyme schemes and spoken word poetry when trash talking in boxing, and also delivered political poetry in his activism outside of boxing. He played a role in the shaping of the black poetic tradition, paving the way for the Last Poets in 1968, Gil Scott-Heron in 1970, and the emergence of hip-hop in the 1970s. Ali has been referred to as \"the first rapper\". As a \"rhyming trickster\", he was noted for his boasts, \"funky delivery\", \"comical trash talk\", and \"endless quotables\". \"Rolling Stone\" notes his \"freestyle skills\" and his \"rhymes, flow, and braggadocio\" would \"one day become typical of old school MCs like Run DMC and LL Cool J\", and his \"outsized ego foreshadowed the vainglorious excesses of Kanye West, while his Afrocentric consciousness and cutting honesty pointed forward to modern bards like Rakim, Nas, Jay-Z, and Kendrick Lamar.\"\nIn 2006, the documentary \"Ali Rap\" was produced by ESPN, with Chuck D of Public Enemy as the host. Other rappers narrated the documentary as well, including Doug E. Fresh, Ludacris and Rakim who all spoke on Ali's behalf in the film.\nAli has been cited as an inspiration by many celebrated rappers throughout the following decades, such as LL Cool J, Chuck D, Jay-Z, Eminem, Sean Combs, Slick Rick, Nas and MC Lyte, and is frequently mentioned in popular hip-hop songs.\nIn Ali's hometown.\nIn 1978, shortly after becoming heavyweight champion of the world for the third time, and three years before his permanent retirement, Ali received a round of accolades in his hometown of Louisville. In September, at a tribute ceremony held at Fairgrounds Stadium, then-Governor of Kentucky Julian Carroll proclaimed 1978 the \"Year of Ali\" and presented to Ali the Governor's Distinguished Service Award. Carroll said he signed the proclamation because \"no single day or week \u2013 or even month \u2013 ever could contain the deeds of this man.\" In November, the Louisville Board of Aldermen voted 6\u20135 to rename downtown thoroughfare Walnut Street to Muhammad Ali Boulevard, via an ordinance shortly signed into law by then-Mayor William B. Stansbury. This was controversial at the time, as within a week 12 of the 70 street signs were stolen.\nAs the street renaming was under consideration, a committee of the Jefferson County Public Schools (Kentucky) considered renaming Ali's alma mater, Central High School, in his honor. Despite an initial endorsement by then-Jefferson County Judge/Executive and current U.S. Senator Mitch McConnell, and an affirmative vote by the Jefferson County Fiscal Court, the committee decided not to proceed, citing long-time school tradition and alumni disagreement, even though they urged other ways to honor Ali in the community. In time, Muhammad Ali Boulevard\u2014and Ali himself\u2014came to be well accepted in his hometown.\nIn November 2005, Ali and his wife Lonnie Ali opened the $54million, 93,000ft2, non-profit Muhammad Ali Center in downtown Louisville. In addition to displaying his boxing memorabilia, the center focuses on core themes of peace, social responsibility, respect, and personal growth.\nOn January 16, 2019, the Louisville Regional Airport Authority voted to change the name of the city's main airport to \"Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport\" in honor of Ali. Then-Louisville mayor Greg Fischer upon the occasion said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Muhammad Ali belonged to the world, but he only had one hometown, and fortunately, that is our great city of Louisville. Muhammad became one of the most well-known people to ever walk the Earth and has left a legacy of humanitarianism and athleticism that has inspired billions of people. It [is] important that we, as a city, further champion The Champ's legacy, and the airport renaming is a wonderful next step. On June 6, 2019, the airport unveiled its new logo, featuring \"Ali's silhouette, arms up and victorious, against the background of a butterfly.\"\nAround the US and world.\nMartial artist and actor Bruce Lee was influenced by Ali, whose footwork he studied and incorporated into his own style while developing Jeet Kune Do in the 1960s.\nOpened in 1976, Ali Mall, located in Araneta Center, Quezon City, Philippines, is named after Ali. Construction of the mall, the first of its kind in the Philippines, began shortly after his victory in a match with Joe Frazier in nearby Araneta Coliseum in 1975. Ali attended its opening. The Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki fight the same year played an important role in the history of mixed martial arts. In Japan, the match inspired Inoki's students Masakatsu Funaki and Minoru Suzuki to found Pancrase in 1993, which in turn inspired the foundation of Pride Fighting Championships in 1997. Pride was acquired by its rival, Ultimate Fighting Championship, in 2007.\nAli was the recipient of the 1997 Arthur Ashe Courage Award. He was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Bill Clinton in January 2001 and with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush in November 2005. For his work with the civil rights movement and the United Nations, he received the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold from the UN Association of Germany (DGVN) in Berlin in December 2005.\nThe Muhammad Ali Boxing Reform Act was introduced in 1999 and passed in 2000, to protect the rights and welfare of boxers in the United States. In May 2016, a bill was introduced to United States Congress by Markwayne Mullin, a politician and former MMA fighter, to extend the Ali Act to mixed martial arts. In June 2016, US senator Rand Paul proposed an amendment to the US draft laws named after Ali, a proposal to eliminate the Selective Service System.\nIn June 2007, Ali received an honorary doctorate of humanities at Princeton University's 260th graduation ceremony.\nIn 2015, \"Sports Illustrated\" renamed its Sportsman Legacy Award to the \"Sports Illustrated\"'s Muhammad Ali Legacy Award. The annual award was originally created in 2008 and honors former \"sports figures who embody the ideals of sportsmanship, leadership and philanthropy as vehicles for changing the world\". Ali first appeared on the magazine's cover in 1963 and went on to be featured on numerous covers during his storied career.\nThe Society of Voice Arts and Sciences created the Muhammad Ali Voice of Humanity Honor in 2016, which is presented at its annual Voice Arts Awards. The award was created in collaboration with the Muhammad Ali Center and is presented to \"an individual whose voice, through humanitarianism, activism or personal sacrifice, has made a decidedly positive impact on our national or global condition as a society\". Sculptor Marc Mellon created the bronze sculpture for the award, which depicts Ali mid-speech. Recipients of the honor include Dr. Henry Louis Gates, Ken Burns, Vance Jones, Lonnie Ali, Stacey Abrams, Wes Studi, and Manuela Testolini.\nIn January 2017, the Muhammad Ali Commemorative Coin Act was introduced into the 115th Congress but was not enacted.\nOn May 31, 2025, the first full-body bronze statue of Ali in the United States was unveiled in Lewiston, Maine, where he fought his second bout with Sonny Liston.\n20th-century superlatives.\nBy the end of the 20th century, Ali had made it onto several superlatives lists or otherwise was mentioned in superlative terms covering the century or a large portion thereof.\nAli was ranked at or near the top of most lists of the 20th century's greatest boxers. He was crowned Sportsman of the Century by \"Sports Illustrated\". Named BBC's Sports Personality of the Century, he received more votes than the other five candidates combined. The Associated Press ranked him as the second best boxer and best heavyweight of the 20th century. He was named Athlete of the Century by \"USA Today\", the second best athlete of the 20th century behind Pel\u00e9 by the International Olympic Committee and ranked as the third . Ali was named \"Kentucky Athlete of the Century\" by the Kentucky Athletic Hall of Fame in ceremonies at the Galt House East.\nAli was named one of the 100 most influential Americans of the 20th century by Life magazine in 1990. In 1993, the Associated Press reported that Ali was tied with Babe Ruth as the most recognized athlete, out of over 800 dead or living athletes, in America. The study found that over 97% of Americans over 12 years of age identified both Ali and Ruth. In 1999, he was one of three athletes, alongside Pel\u00e9 and Jackie Robinson, named in \"Time\" magazine's list of the .\nIn August 2024, the International Sports Press Association (AIPS) voted him as the best male athlete of the last 100 years above Usain Bolt, Michael Jordan and Pel\u00e9.\nIn media and popular culture.\nAs a world champion boxer, activist and pop culture icon, Ali was the subject of numerous creative works including books, films, music, video games, TV shows, and other. Muhammad Ali was often dubbed the world's \"most famous\" person in the media. Several of his fights were watched by an estimated 1\u20132\u00a0billion viewers between 1974 and 1980, and his lighting of the torch at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics was watched by an estimated 3.5billion viewers.\nAli appeared on the cover of \"Sports Illustrated\" on 38 different occasions, second only to Michael Jordan's 50. He also appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine 5 times. In 2015, Harris Poll found that Ali was one of the three most recognizable athletes in the United States, along with Michael Jordan and Babe Ruth.\nOn the set of \"Freedom Road\" Ali met Canadian singer-songwriter Michel, and subsequently helped create Michel's album \"The First Flight of the Gizzelda Dragon\" and an unaired television special featuring them both.\nAli was the subject of the British television program \"This Is Your Life\" in 1978 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews. Ali was featured in \"Superman vs. Muhammad Ali\", a 1978 DC Comics comic book pitting the champ against the superhero. In 1979, Ali guest starred as himself in an episode of the NBC sitcom \"Diff'rent Strokes\". The show's title itself was inspired by the quote \"Different strokes for different folks\" popularized in 1966 by Ali, who also inspired the title of the 1967 Syl Johnson song \"Different Strokes\", one of the most sampled songs in pop music history.\nHe also wrote several bestselling books about his career, including ', \"Healing: A Journal of Tolerance and Understanding\", and \"The Soul of a Butterfly\". The Muhammad Ali effect, named after Ali, is a term that came into use in psychology in the 1980s, as he stated in \"The Greatest: My Own Story\": \"I only said I was the greatest, not the smartest.\" According to this effect, when people are asked to rate their intelligence and moral behavior in comparison to others, people will rate themselves as more moral, but not more intelligent than others. Ali cooperated with Thomas Hauser on a biography, '. The oral history was released in 1991.\n\"When We Were Kings\", a 1996 documentary about the \"Rumble in the Jungle\", won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. The 2001 biopic \"Ali\" garnered a Best Actor Oscar nomination for Will Smith for his portrayal of Ali. Prior to making the film, Smith rejected the role until Ali requested that he accept it. Smith said the first thing Ali told him was: \"Man, you're almost pretty enough to play me.\"\nIn 2002, Ali was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the entertainment industry. His star is the only one to be mounted on a vertical surface, out of deference to his request that the name Muhammad\u2014a name he shares with the Islamic prophet\u2014not be walked upon.\nHis 1966 fight against George Chuvalo was the subject of the 2003 documentary film \"\". A decade later, \"The Trials of Muhammad Ali\", a documentary directed by Bill Siegel that focuses on Ali's refusal of the draft during the Vietnam War, opened in Manhattan in August 2013. A 2013 made-for-TV movie titled \"Muhammad Ali's Greatest Fight\" dramatized the same aspect of Ali's life.\nAli was portrayed by Eli Goree in Regina King's film \"One Night in Miami\", a fictionalized account of the meeting on February 25, 1964, between Ali, Malcolm X, Jim Brown, and Sam Cooke in a room at the Hampton House, celebrating Ali's surprise title win over Sonny Liston.\nAntoine Fuqua's documentary \"\" was released in 2019. Then in September 2021, documentary filmmaker Ken Burns released the four-part docuseries \"Muhammad Ali\", spanning over eight hours on Ali's life. The series, which Burns began developing in early 2016, was broadcast on PBS. Dave Zirin, who watched an 8-hour rough cut of this documentary, called it \"utterly outstanding\" and said \"the footage they found will blow minds\".\nWhile an officially authorized musical \"Ali\", based on Ali's life, has been planned, it has been postponed indefinitely.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPhoto essays"}
{"id": "63750", "revid": "299991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63750", "title": "The Two Towers", "text": "1954 part of novel by J. R. R. Tolkien\nThe Two Towers, first published in 1954, is the second volume of J. R. R. Tolkien's high fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\". It is preceded by \"The Fellowship of the Ring\" and followed by \"The Return of the King\". The volume's title is ambiguous, as five towers are named in the narrative, and Tolkien himself gave conflicting identifications of the two towers. The narrative is interlaced, allowing Tolkien to build in suspense and surprise. The volume was largely welcomed by critics, who found it exciting and compelling, combining epic narrative with heroic romance. It formed the basis for the 2002 film \"\", directed by Peter Jackson.\nPublication.\n\"The Lord of the Rings\" is composed of six \"books\", aside from an introduction, a prologue and six appendices. However, the novel was originally published as three separate volumes, to reduce the cost of publication. \"The Two Towers\" covers Books Three and Four.\nContents.\nSome editions of the volume contain a Synopsis for readers who have not read the earlier volume. The body of the volume consists of Book Three: The Treason of Isengard, and Book Four: The Ring Goes East.\nBook III: The Treason of Isengard.\nA party of large Orcs\u2014Uruk-hai, sent by Saruman, and other Orcs sent by Sauron and led by Grishn\u00e1kh\u2014attack the Fellowship. Boromir tries to protect Merry and Pippin from the Orcs, but they kill him and capture the two hobbits. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas decide to pursue the Orcs taking Merry and Pippin to Saruman. In the kingdom of Rohan, the Orcs are killed by Riders of Rohan, led by \u00c9omer. Merry and Pippin escape into Fangorn Forest, where they are befriended by Treebeard, the oldest of the tree-like Ents. Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas track the hobbits to Fangorn. There they unexpectedly meet Gandalf, resurrected from the dead.\nGandalf explains that he killed the Balrog. He was also killed in the fight, but was sent back to Middle-earth to complete his mission. He is clothed in white and is now Gandalf the White, for he has taken Saruman's place as the chief of the wizards. Gandalf assures his friends that Merry and Pippin are safe. Together they ride to Edoras, capital of Rohan. Gandalf frees Th\u00e9oden, King of Rohan, from the influence of Saruman's spy Gr\u00edma Wormtongue. Th\u00e9oden musters his fighting strength and rides with his men to the ancient fortress of Helm's Deep, while Gandalf departs to seek help from Treebeard.\nMeanwhile, the Ents, roused by Merry and Pippin from their peaceful ways, attack and destroy Isengard, Saruman's stronghold, and flood it, trapping the wizard in the tower of Orthanc. Gandalf convinces Treebeard to send an army of Huorns to Th\u00e9oden's aid. He brings an army of Rohirrim to Helm's Deep, and they defeat the Orcs, who flee into the forest of Huorns, never to be seen again. Gandalf, Th\u00e9oden, Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli ride to Isengard, and are surprised to find Merry and Pippin relaxing amidst the ruins. Gandalf offers Saruman a chance to turn away from evil. When Saruman refuses to listen, Gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers. After Saruman leaves, Wormtongue throws down a hard round object to try to kill Gandalf. It misses and Pippin picks it up; Gandalf swiftly takes it, but Pippin steals it in the night. It is revealed to be a \"palant\u00edr\", a seeing-stone that Saruman used to speak with Sauron, and that Sauron used to ensnare him. Pippin begins to be entranced by its power. While Gandalf sleeps, Pippin examines the \"palant\u00edr\", inadvertently causing Sauron to see him; as Pippin is a hobbit, Sauron believes Pippin has the One Ring. Gandalf is awoken by the commotion and is able to save the incapacitated Pippin. Gandalf immediately rides for Minas Tirith, the chief city of Gondor, taking Pippin with him.\nBook IV: The Ring Goes East.\nFrodo and Sam, heading for Mordor to destroy the One Ring, struggle through the barren hills and cliffs of the Emyn Muil. They become aware they are being watched and tracked; on a moonlit night they capture Gollum, who has followed them from Moria. Frodo makes Gollum swear to serve him, as Ringbearer, and asks him to guide them to Mordor. Gollum leads them across the Dead Marshes. Sam overhears Gollum debating with his alter ego, Sm\u00e9agol, whether to break his promise and steal the Ring.\nThey find that the Black Gate of Mordor is too well guarded to pass through, so instead they travel south through the land of Ithilien to a secret pass that Gollum knows. On the way, they are captured by rangers led by Faramir, Boromir's younger brother, and brought to the secret fastness of Henneth Ann\u00fbn. Unlike his brother, Faramir resists the temptation to seize the Ring and, disobeying standing orders to arrest strangers found in Ithilien, releases them.\nGollum \u2013 who is torn between his loyalty to Frodo and his desire for the Ring \u2013 guides the hobbits to the pass of Cirith Ungol, but leads them into the lair of the great spider Shelob in the tunnels there. Frodo holds up the gift given to him in Lothl\u00f3rien: the Phial of Galadriel, which holds the light of E\u00e4rendil's star. The light drives Shelob away, and Frodo and Sam are able to get through the pass safely. However, after they leave the pass, Shelob appears and attacks Frodo; before he can help his master, Sam is attacked by Gollum. After fighting off Gollum, Sam picks up Frodo's sword, Sting; and the Phial. He seriously wounds and drives off Shelob, but after the fight, he finds Frodo unresponsive. Believing him to be dead, Sam takes the Ring to continue the quest alone. Before Sam gets far, however, Orcs find Frodo; Sam overhears them and learns that Frodo is still alive.\nMeaning of title.\nIn a letter to Rayner Unwin in August 1953, Tolkien proposed the volume's title and considered leaving it vague, naming the ambiguous two as Orthanc and Barad-d\u00fbr, or Minas Tirith and Barad-d\u00fbr, or Orthanc and the Tower of Cirith Ungol. In another letter, in January 1954, he stated that he was \"not at all happy about the title \"The Two Towers\"\", writing that if the title had \"any real reference in it to Vol II\" it would have to \"refer to \"Orthanc\" and the \"Tower of Cirith Ungol\" (his italics). He at once added that this would however be \"very misleading\", since there was \"so much made of the basic opposition of the Dark Tower and Minas Tirith\". However, a month later, he wrote a note that is included at the end of \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", and later drew a cover illustration, both of which identified the pair as Minas Morgul and Orthanc. In the illustration, Minas Morgul is a white tower, with a thin waning moon above it, in reference to its original name, Minas Ithil, the Tower of the Rising Moon. Orthanc is shown as a black tower, three-horned, with Saruman's sign of the White Hand beside it. A Nazg\u00fbl flies between the two towers.\nInterwoven narratives.\nThe narrative in the volume is interlaced, unlike the largely linear narrative in \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", as the Fellowship is broken and the different groups pursue their own quests. The main quest, to destroy the One Ring, does not progress at all in book 3; conversely, the other quests do not make progress in book 4 as Frodo and Sam continue their dangerous journey towards Mordor. The timeline is more complex than this would suggest, as many smaller-scale interlacings occur as the characters travel through Middle-earth.\nInterlacing allowed Tolkien to weave an elaborately intricate story, presented through the eyes of the Hobbit protagonists, \"underscoring [their] frequent bewilderment and disorientation\". Most directly, this is achieved by letting the reader know only what one character sees as he struggles forwards, not knowing what lies ahead, where his friends are, or whether the quest has already failed. The bewilderment of the reader is minimized by the use of synchronizing 'narrative landmarks', such as the brooch dropped by Pippin and discovered by Aragorn. Equally, interlacing enables Tolkien to create suspense and \"cliffhanger\" section endings, as when the Ents and Huorns appear suddenly and decisively in the eucatastrophe on the battlefield of Helm's Deep.\nThe Tolkien scholar Richard C. West writes that every reader must notice to some degree \"the apparently meandering manner of the plot\", where things happen apparently casually, as if by chance, as in real life. West illustrates this by examining Merry and Pippin's meeting with the Ents. This causes the Ents to overthrow their enemy Saruman, who was also the enemy of the kingdom of Rohan. This frees up Rohan to go to the aid of Gondor in their war with Sauron. The two Hobbits would never have met the Ents unless Saruman's Orcs had captured them. The Hobbits would not have escaped the Orcs unless \u00c9omer's band of Riders of Rohan, disobeying orders from the King, had hunted the Orc intruders down. West states that each group and character has their own motivation, but their stories interact. It feels natural, and may appear \"loose\", but \"everything is interconnected.\" The interlacing allows Tolkien to make hidden connections that can only be grasped retrospectively, as the reader realizes on reflection that certain events happened at the same time. Interlace, West notes, can \"show purpose or pattern behind change\". This can appear, Shippey writes, as luck, where in daily life it is uncertain whether this is \"something completely humdrum and practical or something mysterious and supernatural\".\nReception.\nDonald Barr in \"The New York Times\" gave the book a positive review, calling it \"an extraordinary work \u2013 pure excitement, unencumbered narrative, moral warmth, barefaced rejoicing in beauty, but excitement most of all\".\nAnthony Boucher, reviewing the volume in \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", wrote that \"The Two Towers\" \"makes inordinate demands upon the patience of its readers\" with passages which \"could be lopped away without affecting form or content\". Nevertheless, he lavished praise on the volume, saying \"no writer save E. R. Eddison has ever so satisfactorily and compellingly created his own mythology and made it come vividly alive ... described in some of the most sheerly beautiful prose that this harsh decade has seen in print.\"\n\"The Times Literary Supplement\" called it a \"prose epic in praise of courage\" and stated that Tolkien's Westernesse \"comes to rank in the reader's imagination with Asgard and Camelot\".\nJohn Jordan, admiring the book's narrative in the \"Irish Press\", wrote of its \"weaving of epic, heroic romance, parable, and fairy tale, and the more adventurous kind of detective story, into a pattern at once strange and curiously familiar to our experience\". He compared the wizard Gandalf's death and reappearance to Christ's resurrection, writing that this could be done \"without irreverence\" because of Tolkien's seriousness about good and evil.\nMahmud Manzalaoui, in the \"Egyptian Gazette\", wrote that the book \"has not pleased readers of the staple modern psychological novel\", but that it signified a new trend in fiction.\nIn \"The Observer\", the Scottish poet Edwin Muir, who had praised \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", called Tolkien's invention of the Ents and his account of the Battle of Helm's Deep magnificent. He wrote that contrary to some people's assumption, one could not equate the Ring to the atomic bomb; rather, it directly represented evil.\nAdaptations.\nPeter Jackson's 2002 film \"\" is based on \"The Two Towers\". It adds some new material, such as the scene where Aragorn falls over a cliff; it imports some material from the preceding volume, \"The Fellowship of the Ring\", such as the Wargs' attack on refugees from Edoras; and it leaves some material to be covered in the following film, such as the scene with the giant spider Shelob. The film was acclaimed by critics and was highly successful at the box office.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63751", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63751", "title": "The Return of the King", "text": "1955 part of novel by J. R. R. Tolkien\nThe Return of the King is the third and final volume of J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\", following \"The Fellowship of the Ring\" and \"The Two Towers\". It was published in 1955. The story begins in the kingdom of Gondor, which is soon to be attacked by the Dark Lord Sauron.\nThe volume was praised by literary figures including W. H. Auden, Anthony Price, and Michael Straight, but attacked by Edwin Muir, who had praised \"The Fellowship of the Ring\".\nThe chapter \"The Scouring of the Shire\", and a chapter-length narrative in the appendices, \"The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen\", have attracted discussion by scholars and critics. \"The Scouring of the Shire\" has been called the most important chapter in the whole novel, providing in its internal quest to restore the Shire a counterbalance to the main quest to destroy the Ring. Commentators have read into it a variety of contemporary political allusions including a satire of socialism and a strand of environmentalism. Tolkien described \"The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen\" as essential to the plot of the novel. It covers events both before and after the main narrative, and differs from it in not being from the hobbits' point of view. Scholars have discussed the tale's themes including love and death, Tolkien's balance between open Christianity and treating the characters as pagan; and the fact that having the tale as an appendix deprives the main story of much of its love-interest.\nTitle and publication.\nTolkien conceived of \"The Lord of the Rings\" as a single work comprising six \"books\" plus extensive appendices. In 1953, he proposed titles for the six books to his publisher, Rayner Unwin; Book Five was to be \"The War of the Ring\", while Book Six was to be \"The End of the Third Age\". These titles were eventually used in the (2000) \"Millennium edition\". Unwin however split the work into three volumes, publishing the fifth and sixth books with the appendices into the final volume with the title \"The Return of the King\". Tolkien felt the chosen title revealed too much of the story, and indicated that he preferred \"The War of the Ring\" as a title for the volume.\n\"The Return of the King\" was in the end published as the third and final volume of \"The Lord of the Rings\", on 20 October 1955 in the UK.\nContents.\nSome editions of the volume contain a synopsis for readers who have not read the earlier volumes. The body of the volume consists of books five and six. Book six has variously been titled \"The Return of the King\" (clashing with the title of the third volume) and \"The End of the Third Age\", though in many editions the Books are untitled. The volume ends with a set of appendices and an index, varying in different editions.\nBook V: The War of the Ring.\nSauron sends a great army against Gondor. Gandalf arrives at Minas Tirith to warn Denethor of the attack, while Th\u00e9oden musters the Rohirrim to ride to Gondor's aid. Minas Tirith is besieged; the Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl uses a spell-wound battering ram to destroy the city's gates. Denethor, deceived by Sauron, falls into despair. He burns himself alive on a pyre; Pippin and Gandalf rescue his son Faramir from the same fate.\nAragorn, accompanied by Legolas, Gimli, and the Rangers of the North, takes the Paths of the Dead to recruit the Dead Men of Dunharrow, oathbreakers who are bound by an ancient curse which denies them rest until they fulfil their oath to fight for the King of Gondor. Aragorn unleashes the Army of the Dead on the Corsairs of Umbar invading southern Gondor. With that threat eliminated, Aragorn uses the Corsairs' ships to transport the men of southern Gondor up the Anduin, reaching Minas Tirith just in time to turn the tide of battle. Th\u00e9oden's niece \u00c9owyn, who joined the army in disguise, kills the Lord of the Nazg\u00fbl with help from Merry; both are wounded. Together, Gondor and Rohan defeat Sauron's army in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, though at great cost; Th\u00e9oden is among the dead.\nAragorn enters Minas Tirith and heals Faramir, \u00c9owyn, and Merry. He leads an army of men from Gondor and Rohan, marching through Ithilien to the Black Gate to distract Sauron from his true danger. At the Battle of the Morannon, his army is vastly outnumbered.\nBook VI: The End of the Third Age.\nMeanwhile, Sam rescues Frodo from the tower of Cirith Ungol. They set out across Mordor. When they reach the edge of the Cracks of Doom, Frodo cannot resist the Ring any longer. He claims it for himself and puts it on. Gollum suddenly reappears. He struggles with Frodo and bites off Frodo's finger with the Ring still on it. Celebrating wildly, Gollum loses his footing and falls into the Fire, taking the Ring with him. When the Ring is destroyed, Sauron loses his power forever. All he created collapses, the Nazg\u00fbl perish, and his armies are thrown into such disarray that Aragorn's forces emerge victorious.\nAragorn is crowned King of Arnor and Gondor, and weds Arwen, daughter of Elrond. Th\u00e9oden is buried and \u00c9omer is crowned King of Rohan. His sister \u00c9owyn is engaged to marry Faramir, now Steward of Gondor and Prince of Ithilien. Galadriel, Celeborn, and Gandalf meet and say farewell to Treebeard, and to Aragorn.\nThe four hobbits make their way back to the Shire, only to find that it has been taken over by men directed by \"Sharkey\" (whom they later discover to be Saruman). The hobbits, led by Merry, raise a rebellion and scour the Shire of Sharkey's evil. Gr\u00edma Wormtongue turns on Saruman and kills him in front of Bag End, Frodo's home. He is killed in turn by hobbit archers. Merry and Pippin are celebrated as heroes. Sam marries Rosie Cotton and uses his gifts from Galadriel to help heal the Shire. But Frodo is still wounded in body and spirit, having borne the Ring for so long. A few years later, in the company of Bilbo and Gandalf, Frodo sails from the Grey Havens west over the Sea to the Undying Lands to find peace.\nAppendices.\nThe appendices outline more details of the history, cultures, genealogies, and languages that Tolkien imagined for the peoples of Middle-earth. They provide background details for the narrative, with much detail for Tolkien fans who want to know more about the stories.\n\"Annals of the Kings and Rulers\".\nProvides extensive background to the larger world of Middle-earth, with brief overviews of the events of the first two Ages of the world, and then more detailed histories of the nations of Men in Gondor and Rohan, as well as a history of the royal Dwarvish line of Durin during the Third Age.\nThe embedded \"Tale of Aragorn and Arwen\" tells how it happened that an immortal elf came to marry a man, as told in the main story, which Arwen's ancestor L\u00fathien had done in the First Age, giving up her immortality.\n\"The Tale of Years\" (Chronology of the Westlands).\nProvides a timeline of events throughout the series, and ancient events affecting the narrative, and in lesser detail, it gives the stories' context in the fictional chronology of the larger mythology.\nIt tells that Sam gives his daughter Elanor the fictional \"Red Book of Westmarch\" \u2013 which contains the autobiographical stories of Bilbo's adventures at the opening of the war, and Frodo's role in the full-on War of the Ring, and serves as Tolkien's source for \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\" (with Tolkien representing himself as a translator, rather than an epic novelist). It says that there was \"a tradition\" that after handing over the book, Sam crossed west over the sea himself, the last of the ring-bearers; and that some years later, after the deaths of Aragorn and Arwen, Legolas and Gimli also sailed together \"over Sea\".\n\"Family Trees\" (Hobbits).\nGives hobbit genealogies \u2013 not only for Bilbo and Frodo's Baggins family, but also their relations the Tooks and Brandybucks, which connect them to Pippin and Merry.\n\"Calendars\".\nDescribes some of the calendars used by the characters in the story, and explains that the Roman month names in the text are \"translations\" of the names in the hobbits' calendar. (Tolkien was a linguist, and provided Germanic-sounding names for the hobbit calendar by extrapolating names of German and Old English months forward to what he thought they might have become if all were still used in modern English, as \"Yule\" and \"Easter\" are.)\n\"Writing and Spelling\".\nDescribes dwarves' runes and the elvish runes used by the other peoples of Middle-earth; the names of the runes and letters incidentally give some information about dwarvish and elvish languages.\n\"Languages and Peoples of the Third Age\" and \"On Translation\".\nPresented as two sections. In addition to outlines of the various languages in current use during the narrative, and mentioned or seen in the story, it discusses hobbits' names at length. It sorts out names which Tolkien pretended to have translated into English, and names which he said he had left in their original form (since they had no meaning in hobbits' everyday language).\nReception.\nOf the volume.\nIn a review for \"The New York Times\", the poet W. H. Auden praised \"The Return of the King\" and found \"The Lord of the Rings\" a \"masterpiece of the genre\".\nThe science fiction author and critic Anthony Boucher, in a review for \"The Magazine of Fantasy &amp; Science Fiction\", praised the volume as \"a masterly narration of tremendous and terrible climactic events\", but wrote that Tolkien's prose \"seems sometimes to be protracted for its own sake\".\nThe author Anthony Price, reviewing the novel for \"The Oxford Mail\", called it \"more than immense; it is complete\", praising Tolkien's Middle-earth as \"an absolutely real and unendingly exciting world\". He admired the characterization of Tom Bombadil, the Ents, and Gollum. In his view, the One Ring was destroyed \"with terrifying logic\", though he did not demand that the text end there, noting that the hobbits' return to the Shire put the larger events in perspective.\nThe novelist and publisher Michael Straight, reviewing the whole of \"The Lord of the Rings\" in \"The New Republic\", wrote that the devastated landscapes in the work recalled Tolkien's First World War experiences, just as the snowstorm in the Misty Mountains recalled his climbing trip in Switzerland, and the Shire reflected England. He concluded by calling the novel a work of genius.\nThe Scottish poet and critic Edwin Muir, who had praised \"The Fellowship of the Ring\" in 1954, attacked the completed book in 1955 in \"The Sunday Observer\" as \"a boy's adventure story\". He compared it to the works of Rider Haggard, and stated that \"except for a few old wizards\", all the characters \"are boys masquerading as adult[s]\".\nOf \"The Scouring of the Shire\".\nCritics have considered the volume's penultimate chapter, \"The Scouring of the Shire\", the most important chapter in the whole of \"The Lord of the Rings\". Although Tolkien denied that the chapter was an allegory for Britain in the aftermath of World War II, commentators have argued that it can be applied to that period, with clear contemporary political references that include a satire of socialism, echoes of Nazism, allusions to the shortages in postwar Britain, and a strand of environmentalism. According to Tolkien, the idea of such a chapter was planned from the outset as part of the overall formal structure of \"The Lord of the Rings\", though its details were not worked out until much later. The chapter was intended to counterbalance the larger plot, concerning the physical journey to destroy the One Ring, with a moral quest upon the return home, to purify the Shire and to take personal responsibility. Tolkien considered other identities for the wicked Sharkey before settling on Saruman late in his composition process. The chapter has been called one of the most famous anticlimaxes in literature.\nOf \"The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen\".\nTolkien called \"The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen\", in the appendices at the end of the volume, \"really essential to the story\". In contrast to the non-narrative appendices it extends the main story of the book to cover events both before and after it, one reason it would not fit in the main text. Tolkien gave another reason for its exclusion, namely that the main text is told from the hobbits' point of view. The tale to some extent mirrors the \"Tale of Beren and L\u00fathien\", also a story of the love between a Man and an Elf, set in an earlier age of Middle-earth. This creates a feeling of historical depth, in what scholars note is an approach similar to that of Dante in his \"Inferno\". Aspects of the tale discussed by scholars include the nature of love and death; the balance Tolkien strikes between open Christianity and his treatment of his characters as pagan; and the resulting paradox that although Tolkien was a Roman Catholic and considered the book fundamentally Catholic, Middle-earth societies lack religions of their own. It has been noted also that the tale's relegation to an appendix deprives the main story of much of its love-interest, shifting the book's emphasis towards action.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63752", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63752", "title": "Cemetery", "text": "Place of burial\nA cemetery, burial ground, gravesite, graveyard, or a green space called a memorial park or memorial garden, is a place where the remains of many dead people are buried or otherwise entombed. The word \"cemetery\" (from Greek 'sleeping place') implies that the land is specifically designated as a burial ground and originally applied to the Roman catacombs. The term \"graveyard\" is often used interchangeably with cemetery, but a graveyard primarily refers to a burial ground within a churchyard.\nThe intact or cremated remains of people may be interred in a grave, commonly referred to as burial, or in a tomb, an \"above-ground grave\" (resembling a sarcophagus), a mausoleum, a columbarium, a niche, or another edifice. In Western cultures, funeral ceremonies are often observed in cemeteries. These ceremonies or rites of passage differ according to cultural practices and religious beliefs. Modern cemeteries often include crematoria, and some grounds previously used for both continue as crematoria as a principal use long after the interment areas have been filled.\nHistory.\nPalaeolithic.\nThe Taforalt cave in Morocco is possibly the oldest known cemetery in the world. It was the resting place of at least 34 Iberomaurusian individuals, the bulk of whom have been dated to 15,100 to 14,000 years ago.\nNeolithic.\nNeolithic cemeteries are sometimes referred to by the term \"grave field\". They are one of the chief sources of information on ancient and prehistoric cultures, and numerous archaeological cultures are defined by their burial customs, such as the Urnfield culture of the European Bronze Age.https://\nMiddle Ages.\nDuring the Early Middle Ages, the reopening of graves and manipulation of the corpses or artifacts contained within them was a widespread phenomenon and a common part of the life course of early medieval cemeteries across Western and Central Europe. The reopening of furnished or recent burials occurred over the broad zone of European row-grave-style furnished inhumation burial, especially from the 5th to the 8th centuries CE, which comprised the regions of today's Romania, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Switzerland, Austria, Germany, the Low Countries, France, and south-eastern England.\nEarly Christianity.\nFrom about the 7th century CE, in Europe a burial was under the control of the Church and could only take place on consecrated church ground. Practices varied, but in continental Europe, bodies were usually buried in a mass grave until they had decomposed. The bones were then exhumed and stored in ossuaries, either along the arcaded bounding walls of the cemetery or within the church under floor slabs and behind walls.\nIn most cultures those who were vastly rich, had important professions, were part of the nobility or were of any other high social status were usually buried in individual crypts inside or beneath the relevant place of worship with an indication of their name, date of death and other biographical data. In Europe, this was often accompanied by a depiction of their coat of arms.\nMost others were buried in graveyards again divided by social status. Mourners who could afford the work of a stonemason had a headstone engraved with a name, dates of birth and death and sometimes other biographical data, and set up over the place of burial. Usually, the more writing and symbols carved on the headstone, the more expensive it was. As with most other human property such as houses and means of transport, richer families used to compete for the artistic value of their family headstone in comparison to others around it, sometimes adding a statue (such as a weeping angel) on the top of the grave.\nThose who could not pay for a headstone at all usually had some religious symbol made from wood on the place of burial such as a Christian cross; however, this would quickly deteriorate under the rain or snow. Some families hired a blacksmith and had large crosses made from various metals put on the places of burial.\nModernity.\nStarting in the early 19th century, the burial of the dead in graveyards began to be discontinued, due to rapid population growth in the early stages of the Industrial Revolution, continued outbreaks of infectious disease near graveyards and the increasingly limited space in graveyards for new interments. In many European states, burial in graveyards was eventually outlawed altogether through legislation.\nInstead of graveyards, completely new places of burial were established away from heavily populated areas and outside of old towns and city centers. Many new cemeteries became municipally owned or were run by their own corporations, and thus independent from churches and their churchyards.\nIn some cases, skeletons were exhumed from graveyards and moved into ossuaries or catacombs. A large action of this type occurred in 18th century Paris when human remains were transferred from graveyards all over the city to the Catacombs of Paris. The bones of an estimated six million people are to be found there.\nAn early example of a landscape-style cemetery is P\u00e8re Lachaise in Paris. This embodied the idea of state- rather than church-controlled burial, a concept that spread through the continent of Europe with the Napoleonic invasions. This could include the opening of cemeteries by private or joint stock companies. The shift to municipal cemeteries or those established by private companies was usually accompanied by the establishing of landscaped burial grounds outside the city (e.g. extramural).\nIn Britain the movement was driven by dissenters and public health concerns. The Rosary Cemetery in Norwich was opened in 1819 as a burial ground for all religious backgrounds. Similar private non-denominational cemeteries were established near industrialising towns with growing populations, such as Manchester (1821) and Liverpool (1825). Each cemetery required a separate Act of Parliament for authorisation, although the capital was raised through the formation of joint-stock companies.\nIn the first 50 years of the 19th century the population of London more than doubled from 1 million to 2.3 million. The small parish churchyards were rapidly becoming dangerously overcrowded, and decaying matter infiltrating the water supply was causing epidemics. The issue became particularly acute after the cholera epidemic of 1831, which killed 52,000 people in Britain alone, putting unprecedented pressure on the country's burial capacity. Concerns were also raised about the potential public health hazard arising from the inhalation of gases generated from human putrefaction under the then prevailing miasma theory of disease.\nLegislative action was slow in coming, but in 1832 Parliament finally acknowledged the need for the establishment of large municipal cemeteries and encouraged their construction outside London. The same bill also closed all inner London churchyards to new deposits. The Magnificent Seven, seven large cemeteries around London, were established in the following decade, starting with Kensal Green in 1832.\nUrban planner and author John Claudius Loudon was one of the first professional cemetery designers, and his book \"On the Laying Out, Planting and Managing of Cemeteries\" (1843) was very influential on designers and architects of the period. Loudon himself designed three cemeteries \u2013 Bath Abbey Cemetery, Histon Road Cemetery, Cambridge, and Southampton Old Cemetery.\nThe Metropolitan Burial Act 1852 legislated for the establishment of the first national system of government-funded municipal cemeteries across the country, opening the way for a massive expansion of burial facilities throughout the late 19th century.\nIn the United States, rural cemeteries became recreational areas in a time before public parks, hosting events from casual picnics to hunts and carriage races.\nTypes.\nThere are a number of different styles of cemetery in use. Many cemeteries have areas based on different styles, reflecting the diversity of cultural practices around death and how it changes over time.\nUrban.\nThe urban cemetery is a burial ground located in the interior of a village, town, or city. Early urban cemeteries were churchyards, which filled quickly and exhibited a haphazard placement of burial markers as sextons tried to squeeze new burials into the remaining space. As new burying grounds were established in urban areas to compensate, burial plots were often laid out in a grid to replace the chaotic appearance of the churchyard. Urban cemeteries developed over time into a more landscaped form as part of civic development of beliefs and institutions that sought to portray the city as civilized and harmonious.\nUrban cemeteries were more sanitary (a place to safely dispose of decomposing corpses) than they were aesthetically pleasing. Corpses were usually buried wrapped in cloth, since coffins, burial vaults, and above-ground crypts inhibited the process of decomposition. Nonetheless, urban cemeteries which were heavily used were often very unhealthy. Receiving vaults and crypts often needed to be aired before entering, as decomposing corpses used up so much oxygen that even candles could not remain lit. The sheer stench from decomposing corpses, even when buried deeply, was overpowering in areas adjacent to the urban cemetery. Decomposition of the human body releases significant pathogenic bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses which can cause disease and illness, and many urban cemeteries were located without consideration for local groundwater. Modern burials in urban cemeteries also release toxic chemicals associated with embalming, such as arsenic, formaldehyde, and mercury. Coffins and burial equipment can also release significant amounts of toxic chemicals such as arsenic (used to preserve coffin wood) and formaldehyde (used in varnishes and as a sealant) and toxic metals such as copper, lead, and zinc (from coffin handles and flanges).\nUrban cemeteries relied heavily on the fact that the soft parts of the body would decompose in about 25 years (although, in moist soil, decomposition can take up to 70 years). If room for new burials was needed, older bones could be dug up and interred elsewhere (such as in an ossuary) to make space for new interments. It was not uncommon in some places, such as England, for fresher corpses to be chopped up to aid decomposition, and for bones to be burned to create fertilizer. The re-use of graves allowed for a steady stream of income, which enabled the cemetery to remain well-maintained and in good repair. Not all urban cemeteries engaged in re-use of graves, and cultural taboos often prevented it. Many urban cemeteries have fallen into disrepair and become overgrown, as they lacked endowments to fund perpetual care. Many urban cemeteries today are thus home to wildlife, birds, and plants which cannot be found anywhere else in the urban area, and many urban cemeteries in the late 20th century touted their role as an environmental refuge.\nMany urban cemeteries are characterized by multiple burials in the same grave. Multiple burials is a consequence of the limited size of the urban cemetery, which cannot easily expand due to adjacent building development. It was not uncommon for an urban cemetery to begin adding soil to the top of the cemetery to create new burial space.\nMonumental.\nA \"monumental cemetery\" is the traditional style of cemetery where headstones or other monuments made of marble, granite or similar materials rise vertically above the ground (typically around 50\u00a0cm but some can be over 2 metres high). Often the entire grave is covered by a slab, commonly concrete, but it can be more expensive materials such as marble or granite, and/or has its boundaries delimited by a fence which may be made of concrete, cast iron or timber. Where a number of family members are buried together (either vertically or horizontally), the slab or boundaries may encompass a number of graves.\nMonumental cemeteries are often regarded as unsightly due to the random collection of monuments and headstones they contain. Also, as maintenance of the headstones is the responsibility of family members (in the absence of a proscribed Perpetual Care and Maintenance Fund), over time many headstones are forgotten about and decay and become damaged. For cemetery authorities, monumental cemeteries are difficult to maintain. While cemeteries often have grassed areas between graves, the layout of graves makes it difficult to use modern equipment such as ride-on lawn mowers in the cemetery. Often the maintenance of grass must be done by more labour-intensive (and therefore expensive) methods. In order to reduce the labour cost, devices such as string trimmers are increasingly used in cemetery maintenance, but such devices can damage the monuments and headstones. Cemetery authorities dislike the criticism they receive for the deteriorating condition of the headstones, arguing that they have no responsibility for the upkeep of headstones, and typically disregard their own maintenance practices as being one of the causes of that deterioration. \nRural or garden.\nThe rural cemetery or garden cemetery is a style of burial ground that uses landscaping in a park-like setting. It was conceived in 1711 by the British architect Sir Christopher Wren, who advocated the creation of landscaped burial grounds which featured well-planned walkways which gave extensive access to graves and planned plantings of trees, bushes, and flowers. Wren's idea was not immediately accepted. But by the early 1800s, existing churchyards were growing overcrowded and unhealthy, with graves stacked upon each other or emptied and reused for new burials. As a reaction to this, the first \"garden\" cemetery\u00a0\u2013 P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris\u00a0\u2013 opened in 1804. Because these cemeteries were usually on the outskirts of town (where land was plentiful and cheap), they were called \"rural cemeteries\", a term still used to describe them today. The concept quickly spread across Europe.\nGarden/rural cemeteries were not necessarily outside city limits. When land within a city could be found, the cemetery was enclosed with a wall to give it a garden-like quality. These cemeteries were often not sectarian, nor co-located with a house of worship. Inspired by the English landscape garden movement, they often looked like attractive parks. The first garden/rural cemetery in the United States was Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston, Massachusetts, founded by the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1831. Following the establishment of Mount Auburn, dozens of other \"rural\" cemeteries were established in the United States\u00a0\u2013 perhaps in part because of Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story's dedication address\u00a0\u2013 and there were dozens of dedication addresses, including the famous Gettysburg Address of President Abraham Lincoln.\nThe cost of building a garden/rural cemetery often meant that only the wealthy could afford burial there. Subsequently, garden/rural cemeteries often feature above-ground monuments and memorials, mausoleums, and columbaria. The excessive filling of rural/garden cemeteries with elaborate above-ground memorials, many of dubious artistic quality or taste, created a backlash which led to the development of the lawn cemetery.\nLawn cemetery.\nIn a review of British burial and death practises, Julie Rugg wrote that there were \"four closely interlinked factors that explain the 'invention' and widespread adoption of the lawn cemetery: the deterioration of the Victorian cemetery; a self-conscious rejection of Victorian aesthetics in favour of modern alternatives; resource difficulties that, particularly after World War II, increasingly constrained what might be achieved in terms of cemetery maintenance; and growing professionalism in the field of cemetery management.\"\nTypically, lawn cemeteries comprise a number of graves in a lawn setting with trees and gardens on the perimeter. Adolph Strauch introduced this style in 1855 in Cincinnati.\nWhile aesthetic appeal to family members has been the primary driver for the development of lawn cemeteries, cemetery authorities initially welcomed this new style of cemetery enthusiastically, expecting easier maintenance. Selecting (or grading) the land intended for a lawn cemetery so that it is completely flat allows the use of large efficient mowers (such as ride-on mowers or lawn tractors) - the plaques (being horizontally set in the ground) lie below the level of the blades and are not damaged by the blades. In practice, while families are often initially attracted to the uncluttered appearance of a lawn cemetery, the common practice of placing flowers (sometimes in vases) and increasingly other items (e.g. small toys on children's graves) re-introduces some clutter to the cemetery and makes it difficult to use the larger mowers. While cemetery authorities increasingly impose restrictions on the nature and type of objects that can be placed on lawn graves and actively remove prohibited items, grieving families are often unwilling to comply with these restrictions and become very upset if the items are removed. Another problem with lawn cemeteries involves grass over-growth over time: the grass can grow over and cover the plaque, to the distress of families who can no longer easily locate the grave. Grasses that propagate by an above-ground stolon (runner) can cover a plaque very quickly. Grasses that propagate by a below-ground rhizome tend not to cover the plaque as easily.\nLawn beam.\nThe lawn beam cemetery, a recent development, seeks to solve the problems of the lawn cemetery while retaining many of its benefits. Low (10\u201315\u00a0cm) raised concrete slabs (beams) are placed across the cemetery. Commemorative plaques (usually standardised in terms of size and materials similar to lawn cemeteries) stand on these beams adjacent to each grave. As in a lawn cemetery, grass grows over the graves themselves. The areas between the beams are wide enough to permit easy mowing with a larger mower. As the mower blades are set lower than the top of the beam and the mowers do not go over the beam, the blades cannot damage the plaques. Up on the beam, the plaques cannot be easily overgrown by grass, and spaces between the plaques permit families to place flowers and other objects out of reach of the mowing.\nNatural.\nA \"natural cemetery,\" \"eco-cemetery,\" \"green cemetery\" or \"conservation cemetery\", is a new style of cemetery as an area set aside for natural burials (with or without coffins). Natural burials are motivated by a desire to be environmentally conscious with the body rapidly decomposing and becoming part of the natural environment without incurring the environmental cost of traditional burials. Certifications may be granted for various levels of green burial. Green burial certifications are issued in a tiered system reflecting level of natural burial practice. Green burial certification standards designate a cemetery as Hybrid, Natural, or Conservation Burial Grounds.\nMany scientists have argued that natural burials would be a highly efficient use of land if designed specifically to save endangered habitats, ecosystems and species.\nThe opposite has also been proposed. Instead of letting natural burials permanently protect wild landscapes, others have argued that the rapid decomposition of a natural burial, in principle, allows for the quick re-use of grave sites in comparison with conventional burials. However, it is unclear if reusing cemetery land will be culturally acceptable to most people.\nIn keeping with the intention of \"returning to nature\" and the early re-use potential, natural cemeteries do not normally have conventional grave markings such as headstones. Instead, exact GPS recordings and or the placing of a tree, bush or rock often marks the location of the dead, so grieving family and friends can visit the precise location of a grave.\nColumbarium wall.\n\"Columbarium walls\" are a common feature of many cemeteries, reflecting the increasing use of cremation rather than burial. While cremated remains can be kept at home by families in urns or scattered in some significant or attractive place, neither of these approaches allows for a long-lasting commemorative plaque to honour the dead nor provide a place for the wider circle of friends and family to come to mourn or visit. Therefore, many cemeteries now provide walls (typically of brick or rendered brick construction) with a rectangular array of niches, with each niche being big enough to accommodate a person's cremated remains. Columbarium walls are a very space-efficient use of land in a cemetery compared with burials and a niche in a columbarium wall is a much cheaper alternative to a burial plot. A small plaque (about 15\u00a0cm x 10\u00a0cm) can be affixed across the front of each niche and is generally included as part of the price of a niche. As the writing on the plaques has to be fairly small to fit on the small size of the plaque, the design of columbarium walls is constrained by the ability of visitors to read the plaques. Thus, the niches are typically placed between 1 metre to 2 metres above the ground so the plaques can be easily read by an adult. Some columbarium walls have niches going close to ground level, but these niches are usually unpopular with families as it is difficult to read the plaque without bending down very low (something older people in particular find difficult or uncomfortable to do).\nAs with graves, the niches may be assigned by the cemetery authorities or families may choose from the unoccupied niches available. It is usually possible to purchase (or pay a deposit) to reserve the use of adjacent niches for other family members. The use of adjacent niches (vertically or horizontally) usually permits a larger plaque spanning all the niches involved, which provides more space for the writing. As with graves, there may be separate columbarium walls for different religions or for war veterans. As with lawn cemeteries, the original expectation was that people would prefer the uncluttered simplicity of a wall of plaques, but the practice of leaving flowers is very entrenched. Mourners leave flowers (and other objects) on top of columbarium walls or at the base, as close as they can to the plaque of their family member. In some cases, it is possible to squeeze a piece of wire or string under the plaque allowing a flower or small posy to be placed on the plaque itself or clips are glued onto the plaque for that purpose. Newer designs of columbarium walls take this desire to leave flowers into account by incorporating a metal clip or loop beside each plaque, typically designed to hold a single flower stem or a small posy. As the flowers decay, they simply fall to the ground and do not create a significant maintenance problem.\nFamily.\nWhile uncommon today, family (or private) cemeteries were a matter of practicality during the settlement of America. If a municipal or religious cemetery had not been established, settlers would seek out a small plot of land, often in wooded areas bordering their fields, to begin a family plot. Sometimes, several families would arrange to bury their dead together. While some of these sites later grew into true cemeteries, many were forgotten after a family moved away or died out.\nToday, it is not unheard of to discover groupings of tombstones, ranging from a few to a dozen or more, on undeveloped land. As late 20th-century suburban sprawl pressured the pace of development in formerly rural areas, it became increasingly common for larger exurban properties to be encumbered by \"religious easements\", which are legal requirements for the property owner to permit periodic maintenance of small burial plots located on the property but technically not owned with it. Often, cemeteries are relocated to accommodate building. However, if the cemetery is not relocated, descendants of people buried there may visit the cemetery.\nThere is also the practice of families with large estates choosing to create private cemeteries in the form of burial sites, monuments, crypts, or mausoleums on their property; the mausoleum at Fallingwater is an example of this practice. Burial of a body at a site may protect the location from redevelopment, with such estates often being placed in the care of a trust or foundation. In the United States, state regulations have made it increasingly difficult, if not impossible, to start private cemeteries; many require a plan to care for the site in perpetuity. Private cemeteries are nearly always forbidden on incorporated residential zones.\nMany people will bury a beloved pet on the family property.\nArabian tribal.\nAll of the Saudis in Al Baha are Muslims, and this is reflected in their cemetery and funeral customs. \"The southern tribal hinterland of Baha\u00a0\u2013 home to especially the Al-Ghamdi and Al-Zahrani tribes\u00a0\u2013 has been renowned for centuries for their tribal cemeteries that are now slowly vanishing\", according to the \"Asharq Al-Awsat\" newspaper: \"One old villager explained how tribal cemeteries came about. 'People used to die in large numbers and very rapidly one after the other because of diseases. So the villagers would dig graves close by burying members of the same family in one area. That was how the family and tribal burial grounds came about... If the family ran out of space, they would open old graves where family members had been buried before and add more people to them.\nThis process is known as \"khashf\". During famines and outbreaks of epidemics huge numbers of people would die and many tribes faced difficulties in digging new graves because of the difficult weather. In the past, some Arab winters lasted for more than six months and would be accompanied with much rain and fog, impeding movement. But due to tribal rivalries many families would guard their cemeteries and put restrictions on who was buried in them. Across Baha, burial grounds have been constructed in different ways. Some cemeteries consist of underground vaults or concrete burial chambers with the capacity of holding many bodies simultaneously. Such vaults include windows for people to peer through and are usually decorated ornately with text, drawings, and patterns. At least one resident believes that the graves unique in the region because many are not oriented toward Mecca, and therefore must pre-date Islam.\nTerraced.\nGraves are terraced in Yagoto Cemetery, which is an urban cemetery situated in a hilly area in Nagoya, Japan, effectively creating stone walls blanketing hillsides.\nMiscellaneous.\nThe Cross Bones is a burial ground for prostitutes in London. The Neptune Memorial Reef is an underwater columbarium near Key Biscayne.\nOnline memorials.\nIn the 2000s and 2010s, it has become increasingly common for cemeteries and funeral homes to offer online services. There are also stand-alone online \"cemeteries\" such as https:// Find a Grave, Canadian Headstones, Interment.net, and the https://.\nCustoms and practices.\nFlowers.\nIn Western countries, and many others, visitors to graves commonly leave cut flowers, especially during major holidays and on birthdays or relevant anniversaries. Cemeteries usually dispose of these flowers after a few weeks in order to keep the space maintained. Some companies offer perpetual flower services, to ensure a grave is always decorated with fresh flowers. Flowers may often be planted on the grave as well, usually immediately in front of the gravestone. For this purpose roses are highly common.\nIn some regions flowers are put out at specific times called Decoration Days.\nStones.\nVisitors to loved ones interred in Jewish cemeteries often leave a small stone on the top of the headstone. There are prayers said at the gravesite, and the stone is left on the visitor's departure. It is done as a show of respect; as a general rule, flowers are not placed at Jewish graves. Flowers are fleeting; the symbology inherent in the use of a stone is to show that the love, honor, memories, and soul of the loved one are eternal. This practice is seen in the closing scene of the film \"Schindler's List\", although in that case it is not on a Jewish grave.\nCrosses.\nWar graves will commonly have small timber remembrance crosses left with a red poppy attached to its centre. These will often have messages written on the cross. More formal visits will often leave a poppy wreath. Jewish war graves are sometimes marked by a timber Star of David.\nCandles.\nPlacing burning grave candles on the cemetery to commemorate the dead is a very common tradition in Catholic nations, for example, Poland. It is mostly practised on All Souls' Day. The traditional grave candles are called \"znicz\" in Polish. A similar practice of grave candles is also used in Eastern Orthodox Christian nations, as well as the Lutheran Christian Nordic countries.\nToys.\nIn the American South, graves of children are often decorated with emblems of childhood. These include favorite toys, balloons, seasonal decorations, religious figurines, and more.\nContemporary management.\nTraditionally, cemetery management only involves the allocation of land for burial, the digging and filling of graves, and the maintenance of the grounds and landscaping. The construction and maintenance of headstones and other grave monuments are usually the responsibilities of surviving families and friends. However, increasingly, many people regard the resultant collection of individual headstones, concrete slabs and fences (some of which may be decayed or damaged) to be aesthetically unappealing, leading to new cemetery developments either standardising the shape or design of headstones or plaques, sometimes by providing a standard shaped marker as part of the service provided by the cemetery.\nGrave digging.\nCemetery authorities normally employ a full-time staff of caretakers to dig graves. The term \"gravedigger\" is still used in casual speech, though many cemeteries have adopted the term \"caretaker\", since their duties often involve maintenance of the cemetery grounds and facilities. The employment of skilled personnel for the preparation of graves is done not only to ensure the grave is dug in the correct location and at the correct depth, but also to relieve families from having to dig the grave for a recently dead relative, and as a matter of public safety, in order to prevent inexperienced visitors from injuring themselves, to ensure unused graves are properly covered, and to avoid legal liability that would result from an injury related to an improperly dug or uncovered grave.\nPreparation of the grave usually begins before mourners arrive for the burial. The cemetery caretakers fill the grave after the burial, generally after the mourners have departed. Mechanical equipment, such as backhoes, are used to reduce labour cost of digging and filling, but some hand shovelling may still be required.\nIn the United Kingdom the minimum depth from the surface to the highest lid is . There must be between each coffin, which on average is high. If the soil is free-draining and porous, only of soil on top is required. Coffins may be interred at lesser depths or even above ground as long as they are encased in a concrete chamber. Before 1977, double graves were dug to and singles to . As a single grave is now dug to , old cemeteries contain many areas where new single graves can be dug on \"old ground\". This is considered a valid method of resource management and provides income to keep older cemeteries viable, thus forestalling the need for permanent closure, which would result in a reduction of their work force.\nCemetery key.\nThe key is a central element of Christianity. Keys of death and hell as a metaphor and synonym for these often stands the cemetery key. Today it is also integrated in many games as the \"graveyard key holder\".\nBurial registers.\nUsually there is a legal requirement to maintain records regarding the burials (or interment of ashes) within a cemetery. These burial registers usually contain (at a minimum) the name of the person buried, the date of burial and the location of the burial plots within the cemetery, although some contain far more detail. The Arlington National Cemetery, one of the United States' largest military cemeteries, has a registry, \"The ANC Explorer\", which contains details such as photographs of the front and back of the tombstones. Burial registers are an important resource for genealogy.\nLand use.\nIn order to physically manage the space within the cemetery (to avoid burials in existing graves) and to record locations in the burial register, most cemeteries have some systematic layout of graves in rows, generally grouped into larger sections as required. Often the cemetery displays this information in the form of a map, which is used both by the cemetery administration in managing their land use and also by friends and family members seeking to locate a particular grave within the cemetery.https://\nPressures.\nCemetery authorities face a number of tensions in regard to the management of cemeteries.\nOne issue relates to cost. Traditionally, a single payment is made at the time of burial, but the cemetery authority incurs expenses in cemetery maintenance over many decades. Many cemetery authorities find that their accumulated funds are not sufficient for the costs of long-term maintenance. This shortfall in funds for maintenance results in three main options: charge much higher prices for new burials, obtain some other kind of public subsidy, or neglect maintenance. For cemeteries without space for new burials, the options are even more limited. Public attitudes towards subsidies are highly variable. People with family buried in local cemeteries are usually quite concerned about neglect of cemetery maintenance and will usually argue in favour of public subsidy of local cemetery maintenance, whereas other people without personal connection to the cemetery often argue that public subsidies of private cemeteries is an inappropriate use of their taxes. Some jurisdictions require a certain amount of money be set aside in perpetuity and invested so that the interest earned can be used for maintenance.\nAnother issue relates to limited amount of land. In many larger towns and cities, the older cemeteries which were initially considered to be large often run out of space for new burials and there is no vacant adjacent land available to extend the cemetery or even land in the same general area to create new cemeteries. New cemeteries are generally established on the periphery of towns and cities, where large tracts of land are still available. However, people often wish to be buried in the same cemetery as other relatives, and are not interested in being buried in new cemeteries with which there is no sense of connection to their family, creating pressure to find more space in existing cemeteries.\nA third issue is the maintenance of monuments and headstones, which are generally the responsibility of families, but often become neglected over time. Decay and damage through vandalism or cemetery maintenance practices can render monuments and headstones either unsafe or at least unsightly. On the other hand, some families do not forget the grave but constantly visit, leaving behind flowers, plants, and other decorative items that create their own maintenance problem.\nRe-use of graves.\nAll of these issues tend to put pressure on the re-use of grave sites within cemeteries. The re-use of graves already used for burial can cause considerable upset to family members. Although the authorities might declare that the grave is sufficiently old that there will be no human remains still present, nonetheless many people regard the re-use of graves (particularly their family's graves) as a desecration. Also re-use of a used grave involves the removal of any monuments and headstones, which may cause further distress to families (although families will typically be allowed to take away the monuments and headstones if they wish).\nOn the other hand, cemetery authorities are well aware that many old graves are forgotten and not visited and that their re-use will not cause distress to anyone. However, there may be some older graves in a cemetery for whom there are local and vocal descendants who will mount a public campaign against re-use. One pragmatic strategy is to publicly announce plans to re-use older graves and invite families to respond if they are willing or not. Re-use then only occurs where there are no objections allowing the \"forgotten\" graves to be re-used. Sometimes the cemetery authorities request a further payment to avoid re-use of a grave, but often this backfires politically.\nA practical problem with regard to contacting families is that the person who initially purchased the burial plot(s) may have subsequently died and locating living family members, if any, many decades later is virtually impossible (or at least prohibitively expensive). Public notice about the proposed re-use of graves may or may not reach family members living further afield who may object to such practices. Therefore, it is possible that re-use could occur without family awareness.\nSome cemeteries did foresee the need for re-use and included in their original terms and conditions a limited tenure on a grave site and most new cemeteries follow this practice, having seen the problems faced by older cemeteries. Common practice in Europe is to place bones in an ossuary after the proscribed burial period is over.\nHowever, even when the cemetery has the legal right to re-use a grave, strong public opinion often forces the authorities to back down on that re-use. Also, even when cemeteries have a limited tenure provision in place, funding shortages can force them to contemplate re-use earlier than the original arrangements provided for.\nAnother type of grave site considered for re-use are empty plots purchased years ago but never used. In principle it would seem easier to \"re-use\" such grave sites as there can be no claims of desecration, but often this is made complicated by the legal rights to be buried obtained by the pre-purchase, as any limited tenure clause only takes effect after there has been a burial. Again, cemetery authorities suspect that in many cases the holders of these burial rights are probably dead and that nobody will exercise that burial right, but again some families are aware of the burial rights they possess and do intend to exercise them as and when family members die. Again the difficulty of being unable to locate the holders of these burial rights complicates the re-use of those graves.\nAs historic cemeteries begin to reach their capacity for full burials, alternative memorialization, such as collective memorials for cremated individuals, is becoming more common. Different cultures have different attitudes to destruction of cemeteries and use of the land for construction. In some countries it is considered normal to destroy the graves, while in others the graves are traditionally respected for a century or more. In many cases, after a suitable period of time has elapsed, the headstones are removed and the now former cemetery is converted to a recreational park or construction site. A more recent trend, particularly in South American cities, involves constructing high-rise buildings to house graves.\nCemeteries in the US may be relocated if the land is required for other reasons. For instance, many cemeteries in the southeastern United States were relocated by the Tennessee Valley Authority from areas about to be flooded by dam construction. Cemeteries may also be moved so that the land can be reused for transportation structures, public buildings, or even private development. Cemetery relocation is not necessarily possible in other parts of the world; in Alberta, Canada, for instance, the \"Cemetery Act\" expressly forbids the relocation of cemeteries or the mass exhumation of marked graves for any reason whatsoever. This has caused significant problems in the provision of transportation services to the southern half of Calgary, as the main southbound road connecting the south end of the city with downtown threads through a series of cemeteries founded in the 1930s. The light rail transit line running to the south end eventually had to be built directly under the road.\nIn Singapore, burials are limited to 15 years before graves are exhumed. This has led to a preference of cremation over burial among Singaporeans.\nAbandonment.\nAn abandoned graveyard or cemetery is no longer being used or maintained, and has fallen into a state of disrepair. Graveyards may be abandoned for various reasons, such as financial difficulty, natural disaster, unpleasant reputation and/or accessibility. Abandoned cemeteries ordinarily fade away in gradual manner. Abandoned cemeteries are of particular interest to urban explorers. There are thousands of abandoned graveyards in the United States.\nLocating and identifying individual graves in an abandoned cemetery may be hard due to lithophytes or lichens overgrowing on the tombstone markings. In some cases, it may be difficult because the tombstones have been vandalized.\nSuperstitions.\nIn many countries, cemeteries are places believed to hold both superstition and legend characteristics, being used, usually at night times, as an altar in supposed black magic ceremonies or similarly clandestine happenings, such as devil worshipping, grave-robbing (gold teeth and jewelry are preferred), thrilling sex encounters, or drug and alcohol abuse not related to the cemetery aura.\nThe legend of zombies, as romanticized by Wade Davis in \"The Serpent and the Rainbow\", is not exceptional among cemetery myths, as cemeteries are believed to be places where witches and sorcerers get skulls and bones needed for their sinister rituals.\nIn the Afro-Brazilian urban mythos (such as Umbanda), there is a character loosely related to cemeteries and its aura: the Z\u00e9 Pilintra (in fact, Z\u00e9 Pilintra is more related to bohemianism and night life than with cemeteries, where the reigning entity is \"Exu Caveira\" or \"Exu Cemit\u00e9rio\", similar to Voodoo Baron Samedi).https://\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63753", "revid": "47694464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63753", "title": "Rationalism", "text": "Epistemological view centered on reason\nIn philosophy, rationalism is the epistemological view that \"regards reason as the chief source and test of knowledge\" or \"the position that reason has precedence over other ways of acquiring knowledge\", often in contrast to other possible sources of knowledge such as faith, tradition, or sensory experience. More formally, rationalism is defined as a methodology or a theory \"in which the criterion of truth is not sensory but intellectual and deductive\".\nIn a major philosophical debate during the Enlightenment, rationalism (sometimes here equated with innatism) was opposed to empiricism. On the one hand, rationalists like Ren\u00e9 Descartes emphasized that knowledge is primarily innate and the intellect, the inner faculty of the human mind, can therefore directly grasp or derive logical truths; on the other hand, empiricists like John Locke emphasized that knowledge is not primarily innate and is best gained by careful observation of the physical world outside the mind, namely through sensory experiences. Rationalists asserted that certain principles exist in logic, mathematics, ethics, and metaphysics that are so fundamentally true that denying them causes one to fall into contradiction. The rationalists had such a high confidence in reason that empirical proof and physical evidence were regarded as unnecessary to ascertain certain truths\u00a0\u2013 in other words, \"there are significant ways in which our concepts and knowledge are gained independently of sense experience\".\nDifferent degrees of emphasis on this method or theory lead to a range of rationalist standpoints, from the moderate position \"that reason has precedence over other ways of acquiring knowledge\" to the more extreme position that reason is \"the unique path to knowledge\". Given a pre-modern understanding of reason, rationalism is identical to philosophy, the Socratic life of inquiry, or the zetetic (skeptical) clear interpretation of authority (open to the underlying or essential cause of things as they appear to our sense of certainty).\nBackground.\nRationalism has a philosophical history dating from antiquity. The analytical nature of much of philosophical enquiry, the awareness of apparently a priori domains of knowledge such as mathematics, combined with the emphasis of obtaining knowledge through the use of rational faculties (commonly rejecting, for example, direct revelation) have made rationalist themes very prevalent in the history of philosophy.\nSince the Enlightenment, rationalism is usually associated with the introduction of mathematical methods into philosophy as seen in the works of Descartes, Leibniz, and Spinoza. This is commonly called continental rationalism, because it was predominant in the continental schools of Europe, whereas in Britain empiricism dominated.\nEven then, the distinction between rationalists and empiricists was drawn at a later period and would not have been recognized by the philosophers involved. Also, the distinction between the two philosophies is not as clear-cut as is sometimes suggested; for example, Descartes and Locke have similar views about the nature of human ideas.\nProponents of some varieties of rationalism argue that, starting with foundational basic principles, like the axioms of geometry, one could deductively derive the rest of all possible knowledge. Notable philosophers who held this view most clearly were Baruch Spinoza and Gottfried Leibniz, whose attempts to grapple with the epistemological and metaphysical problems raised by Descartes led to a development of the fundamental approach of rationalism. Both Spinoza and Leibniz asserted that, \"in principle\", all knowledge, including scientific knowledge, could be gained through the use of reason alone, though they both observed that this was not possible \"in practice\" for human beings except in specific areas such as mathematics. On the other hand, Leibniz admitted in his book \"Monadology\" that \"we are all mere Empirics in three fourths of our actions.\"\nPolitical usage.\nIn politics, rationalism, since the Enlightenment, historically emphasized a \"politics of reason\" centered upon rationality, deontology, utilitarianism, secularism, and irreligion\u00a0\u2013 the latter aspect's antitheism was later softened by the adoption of pluralistic reasoning methods practicable regardless of religious or irreligious ideology. In this regard, the philosopher John Cottingham noted how rationalism, a methodology, became socially conflated with atheism, a worldview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the past, particularly in the 17th and 18th centuries, the term 'rationalist' was often used to refer to free thinkers of an anti-clerical and anti-religious outlook, and for a time the word acquired a distinctly pejorative force (thus in 1670 Sanderson spoke disparagingly of 'a mere rationalist, that is to say in plain English an atheist of the late edition...'). The use of the label 'rationalist' to characterize a world outlook which has no place for the supernatural is becoming less popular today; terms like 'humanist' or 'materialist' seem largely to have taken its place. But the old usage still survives.\nPhilosophical usage.\nRationalism is often contrasted with empiricism. Taken very broadly, these views are not mutually exclusive, since\u00a0\u2013 on some definitions\u00a0\u2013 a philosopher can be both rationalist and empiricist. Taken to extremes, the empiricist view holds that all ideas come to us \"a posteriori\", that is to say, through experience; either through the external senses or through such inner sensations as pain and gratification. The empiricist essentially believes that knowledge is based on or derived directly from experience. The rationalist believes we come to knowledge \"a priori\"\u00a0\u2013 through the use of logic\u00a0\u2013 and is thus independent of sensory experience. In other words, as Galen Strawson once wrote, \"you can see that it is true just lying on your couch. You don't have to get up off your couch and go outside and examine the way things are in the physical world. You don't have to do any science.\"\nBetween both philosophies, the issue at hand is the fundamental source of human knowledge and the proper techniques for verifying what we think we know. Whereas both philosophies are under the umbrella of epistemology, their argument lies in the understanding of the warrant, which is under the wider epistemic umbrella of the theory of justification. Part of epistemology, this theory attempts to understand the justification of propositions and beliefs. Epistemologists are concerned with various epistemic features of belief, which include the ideas of justification, warrant, rationality, and probability. Of these four terms, the term that has been most widely used and discussed by the early 21st century is \"warrant\". Loosely speaking, justification is the reason that someone (probably) holds a belief.\nIf \"A\" makes a claim and then \"B\" casts doubt on it, \"A\"'s next move would normally be to provide justification for the claim. The precise method one uses to provide justification is where the lines are drawn between rationalism and empiricism (among other philosophical views). Much of the debate in these fields are focused on analyzing the nature of knowledge and how it relates to connected notions such as truth, belief, and justification.\nAt its core, rationalism consists of three basic claims. For people to consider themselves rationalists, they must adopt at least one of these three claims: the intuition/deduction thesis, the innate knowledge thesis, or the innate concept thesis. In addition, a rationalist can choose to adopt the claim of Indispensability of Reason and or the claim of Superiority of Reason, although one can be a rationalist without adopting either thesis.\nThe indispensability of reason thesis: \"The knowledge we gain in subject area, \"S\", by intuition and deduction, as well as the ideas and instances of knowledge in \"S\" that are innate to us, could not have been gained by us through sense experience.\" In short, this thesis claims that experience cannot provide what we gain from reason.\nThe superiority of reason thesis: '\"The knowledge we gain in subject area \"S\" by intuition and deduction or have innately is superior to any knowledge gained by sense experience\". In other words, this thesis claims reason is superior to experience as a source for knowledge.\nRationalists often adopt similar stances on other aspects of philosophy. Most rationalists reject skepticism for the areas of knowledge they claim are knowable \"a priori\". When you claim some truths are innately known to us, one must reject skepticism in relation to those truths. Especially for rationalists who adopt the Intuition/Deduction thesis, the idea of epistemic foundationalism tends to crop up. This is the view that we know some truths without basing our belief in them on any others and that we then use this foundational knowledge to know more truths.\nIntuition/deduction thesis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Some propositions in a particular subject area, S, are knowable by us by intuition alone; still others are knowable by being deduced from intuited propositions.\"&lt;ref name=\"The Intuition/Deduction Thesis\"&gt;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, http:// First published August 19, 2004; substantive revision March 31, 2013 cited on May 20, 2013.&lt;/ref&gt;\nGenerally speaking, intuition is \"a priori\" knowledge or experiential belief characterized by its immediacy; a form of rational insight. We simply \"see\" something in such a way as to give us a warranted belief. Beyond that, the nature of intuition is hotly debated. In the same way, generally speaking, deduction is the process of reasoning from one or more general premises to reach a logically certain conclusion. Using valid arguments, we can deduce from intuited premises.\nFor example, when we combine both concepts, we can intuit that the number three is prime and that it is greater than two. We then deduce from this knowledge that there is a prime number greater than two. Thus, it can be said that intuition and deduction combined to provide us with \"a priori\" knowledge\u00a0\u2013 we gained this knowledge independently of sense experience.\nTo argue in favor of this thesis, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, a prominent German philosopher, says,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The senses, although they are necessary for all our actual knowledge, are not sufficient to give us the whole of it, since the senses never give anything but instances, that is to say particular or individual truths. Now all the instances which confirm a general truth, however numerous they may be, are not sufficient to establish the universal necessity of this same truth, for it does not follow that what happened before will happen in the same way again. \u2026 From which it appears that necessary truths, such as we find in pure mathematics, and particularly in arithmetic and geometry, must have principles whose proof does not depend on instances, nor consequently on the testimony of the senses, although without the senses it would never have occurred to us to think of them\u2026\nEmpiricists such as David Hume have been willing to accept this thesis for describing the relationships among our own concepts. In this sense, empiricists argue that we are allowed to intuit and deduce truths from knowledge that has been obtained \"a posteriori\".\nBy injecting different subjects into the Intuition/Deduction thesis, we are able to generate different arguments. Most rationalists agree mathematics is knowable by applying the intuition and deduction. Some go further to include ethical truths into the category of things knowable by intuition and deduction. Furthermore, some rationalists also claim metaphysics is knowable in this thesis. Naturally, the more subjects the rationalists claim to be knowable by the Intuition/Deduction thesis, the more certain they are of their warranted beliefs, and the more strictly they adhere to the infallibility of intuition, the more controversial their truths or claims and the more radical their rationalism.\nIn addition to different subjects, rationalists sometimes vary the strength of their claims by adjusting their understanding of the warrant. Some rationalists understand warranted beliefs to be beyond even the slightest doubt; others are more conservative and understand the warrant to be belief beyond a reasonable doubt.\nRationalists also have different understanding and claims involving the connection between intuition and truth. Some rationalists claim that intuition is infallible and that anything we intuit to be true is as such. More contemporary rationalists accept that intuition is not always a source of certain knowledge\u00a0\u2013 thus allowing for the possibility of a deceiver who might cause the rationalist to intuit a false proposition in the same way a third party could cause the rationalist to have perceptions of nonexistent objects.\nInnate knowledge thesis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We have knowledge of some truths in a particular subject area, S, as part of our rational nature.\"\nThe Innate Knowledge thesis is similar to the Intuition/Deduction thesis in the regard that both theses claim knowledge is gained \"a priori\". The two theses go their separate ways when describing how that knowledge is gained. As the name, and the rationale, suggests, the Innate Knowledge thesis claims knowledge is simply part of our rational nature. Experiences can trigger a process that allows this knowledge to come into our consciousness, but the experiences do not provide us with the knowledge itself. The knowledge has been with us since the beginning and the experience simply brought into focus, in the same way a photographer can bring the background of a picture into focus by changing the aperture of the lens. The background was always there, just not in focus.\nThis thesis targets a problem with the nature of inquiry originally postulated by Plato in \"Meno\". Here, Plato asks about inquiry; how do we gain knowledge of a theorem in geometry? We inquire into the matter. Yet, knowledge by inquiry seems impossible. In other words, \"If we already have the knowledge, there is no place for inquiry. If we lack the knowledge, we don't know what we are seeking and cannot recognize it when we find it. Either way we cannot gain knowledge of the theorem by inquiry. Yet, we do know some theorems.\" The Innate Knowledge thesis offers a solution to this paradox. By claiming that knowledge is already with us, either consciously or unconsciously, a rationalist claims we don't really learn things in the traditional usage of the word, but rather that we simply use words we know.\nInnate concept thesis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"We have some of the concepts we employ in a particular subject area, S, as part of our rational nature.\"\nSimilar to the Innate Knowledge thesis, the Innate Concept thesis suggests that some concepts are simply part of our rational nature. These concepts are \"a priori\" in nature and sense experience is irrelevant to determining the nature of these concepts (though, sense experience can help bring the concepts to our conscious mind).\nIn his book \"Meditations on First Philosophy\", Ren\u00e9 Descartes postulates three classifications for our ideas when he says, \"Among my ideas, some appear to be innate, some to be adventitious, and others to have been invented by me. My understanding of what a thing is, what truth is, and what thought is, seems to derive simply from my own nature. But my hearing a noise, as I do now, or seeing the sun, or feeling the fire, comes from things which are located outside me, or so I have hitherto judged. Lastly, sirens, hippogriffs and the like are my own invention.\"\nAdventitious ideas are those concepts that we gain through sense experiences, ideas such as the sensation of heat, because they originate from outside sources; transmitting their own likeness rather than something else and something you simply cannot will away. Ideas invented by us, such as those found in mythology, legends and fairy tales, are created by us from other ideas we possess. Lastly, innate ideas, such as our ideas of perfection, are those ideas we have as a result of mental processes that are beyond what experience can directly or indirectly provide.\nGottfried Wilhelm Leibniz defends the idea of innate concepts by suggesting the mind plays a role in determining the nature of concepts, to explain this, he likens the mind to a block of marble in the \"New Essays on Human Understanding\",\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is why I have taken as an illustration a block of veined marble, rather than a wholly uniform block or blank tablets, that is to say what is called \"tabula rasa\" in the language of the philosophers. For if the soul were like those blank tablets, truths would be in us in the same way as the figure of Hercules is in a block of marble, when the marble is completely indifferent whether it receives this or some other figure. But if there were veins in the stone which marked out the figure of Hercules rather than other figures, this stone would be more determined thereto, and Hercules would be as it were in some manner innate in it, although labour would be needed to uncover the veins, and to clear them by polishing, and by cutting away what prevents them from appearing. It is in this way that ideas and truths are innate in us, like natural inclinations and dispositions, natural habits or potentialities, and not like activities, although these potentialities are always accompanied by some activities which correspond to them, though they are often imperceptible.\"\nSome philosophers, such as John Locke (who is considered one of the most influential thinkers of the Enlightenment and an empiricist), argue that the Innate Knowledge thesis and the Innate Concept thesis are the same. Other philosophers, such as Peter Carruthers, argue that the two theses are distinct from one another. As with the other theses covered under the umbrella of rationalism, the more types and greater number of concepts a philosopher claims to be innate, the more controversial and radical their position; \"the more a concept seems removed from experience and the mental operations we can perform on experience the more plausibly it may be claimed to be innate. Since we do not experience perfect triangles but do experience pains, our concept of the former is a more promising candidate for being innate than our concept of the latter.\nHistory.\nRationalist philosophy in Western antiquity.\nAlthough rationalism in its modern form post-dates antiquity, philosophers from this time laid down the foundations of rationalism. In particular, the understanding that we may be aware of knowledge available only through the use of rational thought.\nPythagoras (570\u2013495 BCE).\nPythagoras was one of the first Western philosophers to stress rationalist insight. He is often revered as a great mathematician, mystic and scientist, but he is best known for the Pythagorean theorem, which bears his name, and for discovering the mathematical relationship between the length of strings on lute and the pitches of the notes. Pythagoras \"believed these harmonies reflected the ultimate nature of reality. He summed up the implied metaphysical rationalism in the words 'All is number'. It is probable that he had caught the rationalist's vision, later seen by Galileo (1564\u20131642), of a world governed throughout by mathematically formulable laws\". It has been said that he was the first man to call himself a philosopher, or lover of wisdom.\nPlato (427\u2013347 BCE).\nPlato held rational insight to a very high standard, as is seen in his works such as Meno and The Republic. He taught on the Theory of Forms (or the Theory of Ideas) which asserts that the highest and most fundamental kind of reality is not the material world of change known to us through sensation, but rather the abstract, non-material (but substantial) world of forms (or ideas). For Plato, these forms were accessible only to reason and not to sense. In fact, it is said that Plato admired reason, especially in geometry, so highly that he had the phrase \"Let no one ignorant of geometry enter\" inscribed over the door to his academy.\nAristotle (384\u2013322 BCE).\nAristotle's main contribution to rationalist thinking was the use of syllogistic logic and its use in argument. Aristotle defines syllogism as \"a discourse in which certain (specific) things having been supposed, something different from the things supposed results of necessity because these things are so.\" Despite this very general definition, Aristotle limits himself to categorical syllogisms which consist of three categorical propositions in his work \"Prior Analytics\". These included categorical modal syllogisms.\nMiddle Ages.\nAlthough the three great Greek philosophers disagreed with one another on specific points, they all agreed that rational thought could bring to light knowledge that was self-evident\u00a0\u2013 information that humans otherwise could not know without the use of reason. After Aristotle's death, Western rationalistic thought was generally characterized by its application to theology, such as in the works of Augustine, the Islamic philosopher Avicenna (Ibn Sina), Averroes (Ibn Rushd), and Jewish philosopher and theologian Maimonides. The Waldensians sect also incorporated rationalism into their movement. One notable event in the Western timeline was the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas who attempted to merge Greek rationalism and Christian revelation in the thirteenth-century. Generally, the Roman Catholic Church viewed Rationalists as a threat, labeling them as those who \"while admitting revelation, reject from the word of God whatever, in their private judgment, is inconsistent with human reason.\"\nClassical rationalism.\nRen\u00e9 Descartes (1596\u20131650).\nDescartes was the first of the modern rationalists and has been dubbed the 'Father of Modern Philosophy.' Much subsequent Western philosophy is a response to his writings, which are studied closely to this day.\nDescartes thought that only knowledge of eternal truths\u00a0\u2013 including the truths of mathematics, and the epistemological and metaphysical foundations of the sciences\u00a0\u2013 could be attained by reason alone; other knowledge, the knowledge of physics, required experience of the world, aided by the scientific method. He also argued that although dreams appear as real as sense experience, these dreams cannot provide persons with knowledge. Also, since conscious sense experience can be the cause of illusions, then sense experience itself can be doubtable. As a result, Descartes deduced that a rational pursuit of truth should doubt every belief about sensory reality. He elaborated these beliefs in such works as \"Discourse on the Method\", \"Meditations on First Philosophy\", and \"Principles of Philosophy\". Descartes developed a method to attain truths according to which nothing that cannot be recognised by the intellect (or reason) can be classified as knowledge. These truths are gained \"without any sensory experience\", according to Descartes. Truths that are attained by reason are broken down into elements that intuition can grasp, which, through a purely deductive process, will result in clear truths about reality.\nDescartes therefore argued, as a result of his method, that reason alone determined knowledge, and that this could be done independently of the senses. For instance, his famous dictum, \"cogito ergo sum\" or \"I think, therefore I am\", is a conclusion reached \"a priori\" i.e., prior to any kind of experience on the matter. The simple meaning is that doubting one's existence, in and of itself, proves that an \"I\" exists to do the thinking. In other words, doubting one's own doubting is absurd. This was, for Descartes, an irrefutable principle upon which to ground all forms of other knowledge. Descartes posited a metaphysical dualism, distinguishing between the substances of the human body (\"\"res extensa\") and the mind or soul (\"res cogitans\"\"). This crucial distinction would be left unresolved and lead to what is known as the mind\u2013body problem, since the two substances in the Cartesian system are independent of each other and irreducible.\nBaruch Spinoza (1632\u20131677).\nThe philosophy of Baruch Spinoza is a systematic, logical, rational philosophy developed in seventeenth-century Europe. Spinoza's philosophy is a system of ideas constructed upon basic building blocks with an internal consistency with which he tried to answer life's major questions and in which he proposed that \"God exists only philosophically.\" He was heavily influenced by Descartes, Euclid and Thomas Hobbes, as well as theologians in the Jewish philosophical tradition such as Maimonides. But his work was in many respects a departure from the Judeo-Christian-Islamic tradition. Many of Spinoza's ideas continue to vex thinkers today and many of his principles, particularly regarding the emotions, have implications for modern approaches to psychology. To this day, many important thinkers have found Spinoza's \"geometrical method\" difficult to comprehend: Goethe admitted that he found this concept confusing. His \"magnum opus\", \"Ethics\", contains unresolved obscurities and has a forbidding mathematical structure modeled on Euclid's geometry. Spinoza's philosophy attracted believers such as Albert Einstein and much intellectual attention.\nGottfried Leibniz (1646\u20131716).\nLeibniz was the last major figure of seventeenth-century rationalism who contributed heavily to other fields such as metaphysics, epistemology, logic, mathematics, physics, jurisprudence, and the philosophy of religion; he is also considered to be one of the last \"universal geniuses\". He did not develop his system, however, independently of these advances. Leibniz rejected Cartesian dualism and denied the existence of a material world. In Leibniz's view there are infinitely many simple substances, which he called \"monads\" (which he derived directly from Proclus).\nLeibniz developed his theory of monads in response to both Descartes and Spinoza, because the rejection of their visions forced him to arrive at his own solution. Monads are the fundamental unit of reality, according to Leibniz, constituting both inanimate and animate objects. These units of reality represent the universe, though they are not subject to the laws of causality or space (which he called \"well-founded phenomena\"). Leibniz, therefore, introduced his principle of pre-established harmony to account for apparent causality in the world.\nImmanuel Kant (1724\u20131804).\nKant is one of the central figures of modern philosophy, and set the terms by which all subsequent thinkers have had to grapple. He argued that human perception structures natural laws, and that reason is the source of morality. His thought continues to hold a major influence in contemporary thought, especially in fields such as metaphysics, epistemology, ethics, political philosophy, and aesthetics.\nKant named his brand of epistemology \"Transcendental Idealism\", and he first laid out these views in his famous work \"The Critique of Pure Reason\". In it he argued that there were fundamental problems with both rationalist and empiricist dogma. To the rationalists he argued, broadly, that pure reason is flawed when it goes beyond its limits and claims to know those things that are necessarily beyond the realm of every possible experience: the existence of God, free will, and the immortality of the human soul. Kant referred to these objects as \"The Thing in Itself\" and goes on to argue that their status as objects beyond all possible experience by definition means we cannot know them. To the empiricist, he argued that while it is correct that experience is fundamentally necessary for human knowledge, reason is necessary for processing that experience into coherent thought. He therefore concludes that both reason and experience are necessary for human knowledge. In the same way, Kant also argued that it was wrong to regard thought as mere analysis. \"In Kant's views, a priori concepts do exist, but if they are to lead to the amplification of knowledge, they must be brought into relation with empirical data\".\nContemporary rationalism.\nRationalism has become a rarer label of philosophers today; rather many different kinds of specialised rationalisms are identified. For example, Robert Brandom has appropriated the terms \"rationalist expressivism\" and \"rationalist pragmatism\" as labels for aspects of his programme in \"Articulating Reasons\", and identified \"linguistic rationalism\", the claim that the contents of propositions \"are essentially what can serve as both premises and conclusions of inferences\", as a key thesis of Wilfred Sellars.\nOutside of academic philosophy, some participants in the internet communities surrounding LessWrong and Slate Star Codex have described themselves as \"rationalists\" or the \"rationalist community\" in reference to rationality, rather than rationalism. The term has also been used in this way by critics such as Timnit Gebru.\nCriticism.\nRationalism was criticized by American psychologist William James for being out of touch with reality. James also criticized rationalism for representing the universe as a closed system, which contrasts with his view that the universe is an open system.\nProponents of emotional choice theory criticize rationalism by drawing on new findings from emotion research in psychology and neuroscience. They point out that the rationalist paradigm is generally based on the assumption that decision-making is a conscious and reflective process based on thoughts and beliefs. It presumes that people decide on the basis of calculation and deliberation. However, cumulative research in neuroscience suggests that only a small part of the brain's activities operate at the level of conscious reflection. The vast majority of its activities consist of unconscious appraisals and emotions. The significance of emotions in decision-making has generally been ignored by rationalism, according to these critics. Moreover, emotional choice theorists contend that the rationalist paradigm has difficulty incorporating emotions into its models, because it cannot account for the social nature of emotions. Even though emotions are felt by individuals, psychologists and sociologists have shown that emotions cannot be isolated from the social environment in which they arise. Emotions are inextricably intertwined with people's social norms and identities, which are typically outside the scope of standard rationalist accounts. Emotional choice theory seeks to capture not only the social but also the physiological and dynamic character of emotions. It represents a unitary action model to organize, explain, and predict the ways in which emotions shape decision-making.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63754", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63754", "title": "Akallab\u00eath", "text": ""}
{"id": "63755", "revid": "29449026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63755", "title": "Valaquenta", "text": ""}
{"id": "63756", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63756", "title": "Gl\u00f3in", "text": ""}
{"id": "63757", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63757", "title": "Numenor", "text": ""}
{"id": "63758", "revid": "50440052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63758", "title": "Ainulindal\u00eb", "text": "Creation myth in J. R. R. Tolkien's fictional universe\nThe (; \"Music of the Ainur\") is the creation account in J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium, published posthumously as the first part of \"The Silmarillion\" in 1977. The sets out a central part of the cosmology of Tolkien's legendarium, telling how the Ainur, a class of angelic beings, perform a great music prefiguring the creation of the material universe, \"E\u00e4\", including Middle-Earth.\nThe creator Eru Il\u00favatar introduces the theme of the sentient races of Elves and Men, not anticipated by the Ainur, and gives physical being to the prefigured universe. Some of the Ainur decide to enter the physical world to prepare for their arrival, becoming the Valar and Maiar.\nTolkien wrote the initial version of the between November 1919 and the spring of 1920 as \"Music of the Ainur\", and then completely rewrote it in 1930. He continued to make further revisions throughout his life. The early version was eventually published by his son Christopher in \"The Book of Lost Tales 1\".\nContext.\nJ. R. R. Tolkien was an English author and philologist of ancient Germanic languages, specialising in Old English, and a devout Roman Catholic; he spent much of his career as a professor at the University of Oxford. He is best known for his novels about his invented Middle-earth, \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\". He described \"The Lord of the Rings\" as \"a fundamentally religious and Catholic work\", rich in Christian symbolism. He however spent much of his life working on his Middle-earth legendarium, which was unpublished when he died in 1973. That large body of stories was edited after his death by his son Christopher, initially in 1977 as a single text, \"The Silmarillion\", containing a version of the . That was followed, between 1983 and 1996, by the twelve volumes of \"The History of Middle-earth\", which revealed and annotated the many drafts of the overlapping stories of the legendarium, including other versions of the .\nSynopsis.\nThe recounts the creation of Arda by the deity Eru Il\u00favatar. The story begins with a description of the Ainur as \"children of Il\u00favatar's thought\". They are taught the art of music, which becomes the subject of their immortal lives. The Ainur sing alone or in small groups about themes given to each of them by Il\u00favatar, who proposes a \"great\" plan for them all: a collaborative symphony between Melkor's discord and the other Ainur themes where they would sing together in harmony, resolving contradictions amongst them into unity, also uniting the Possible and the Impossible into one. Although the Ainur embody Il\u00favatar's thoughts, they are expected to use their freedom to assist the development of the \"great\" plan.\nThe most powerful of the Ainur, Melkor, is introduced to the music. Although his \"loud, and vain\" music disrupts the harmony, Il\u00favatar stands, smiles and raises his left hand to begin a new theme. When Melkor again spoils the second theme, Il\u00favatar rises sternly and raises his right hand to begin a third. Melkor tries to corrupt this theme with the volume of his music, but it is powerful enough to prevent him from succeeding. Il\u00favatar ends the music, chastises Melkor and leaves the Ainur to their thoughts.\nThe deity takes the Ainur to see how music, at the end of the Void, created Arda. When the third theme results in the arrival of the Children of Il\u00favatar, the Elves and the Men, many Ainur want to go into the world to visit them. Although Melkor was the first of the Ainur to be named, Ulmo was the first to take action in Arda. Despite Melkor's efforts, Ulmo's water cannot be ruined by heat or cold; he and Manw\u00eb are revealed as the primary agents of Il\u00favatar's plans.\nSome Ainur remain in the Timeless Halls with Il\u00favatar, and others go into Arda as the Valar and Maiar. The Ainur begin to prepare for the arrival of the Children of Il\u00favatar; Melkor repeatedly thwarts their preparations, desiring to rule Arda. Manw\u00eb summons the Ainur to resist Melkor, who retreats. When the Valar later assume bodily form, the first war of E\u00e4 begins, but Manw\u00eb's efforts make the Earth habitable for Elves and Men.\nWriting.\nTolkien initially intended the (\"The Music of the Ainur\") to be part of \"The Book of Lost Tales\", which he wrote in the 1910s and 1920s. In a letter, Tolkien stated that he had written the first version of the between November 1918 and the spring of 1920, while he was working on the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nThe first draft of the story, written in pencil, does not vary significantly from the published version; future changes involved the addition of Manw\u00eb and Aul\u00eb. The narrator in the earlier version is the elf R\u00famil of Tirion and the language differs from that of the \"Silmarillion\" version. \"Melkor\" is spelt \"Melko\", and Il\u00favatar weeps before he creates the third theme. At the end is a section about the Valar, which was later moved to the \"Valaquenta\".\nTolkien abandoned the for many years. Although it did not appear in the \"Sketch of the Mythology\", in which he summarised his legendarium in 1926, the subject was briefly mentioned in \"Annals of Valinor\" and \"Quenta Silmarillion\". Tolkien rewrote \"The Music of the Ainur\" during the 1930s, leaving most of its storyline intact.\nIn 1946, while he was drafting \"The Lord of the Rings\", Tolkien wrote a new version of the of which only half a torn page survives. His legendarium then changed radically, so that Arda had always existed, the Sun existed when the world was formed, and the Moon was formed as a result of Melkor's destruction. Tolkien's concept of the Lamps of the Valar was abandoned in favour of a more coherent creation myth, with scientific elements. The idea of a spherical world was abandoned after a reader said that she preferred a flat one.\nIn 1948 Tolkien began a new version, eliminating mentions of the Sun and the Moon, and introducing the concept that Il\u00favatar created the world after the visions of the Ainur died away. In this version, which added several new details, the story is framed by a fictional narrator, the elf Pengolo\u00f0.\nAnalysis.\nThe , written early in Tolkien's career, demonstrates the importance of music in his legendarium. According to John Gardner, \"Music is the central symbol and the total myth of \"The Silmarillion\", a symbol that becomes interchangeable with light (music's projection).\" The scholar Verlyn Flieger, too, stresses the pervasive themes of music and light from the creation onwards.\n\"The Music of the Ainur\", as it appears in \"The Book of Lost Tales\", is based on Norse mythology. Like Hesiod's \"Theogony\" or the \"Gylfaginning\" in the \"Prose Edda\", it answers questions of cosmogony, and its style has been compared to that of old Norse texts. Although the wording differs substantially, the Valar and the \u00c6sir are alike in influencing the world and being influenced by their actions; Manw\u00eb has been compared to Odin in this context.\nDespite the story's Norse pagan elements, such as the Ainur performing the creative work of Il\u00favatar, other aspects of the reflect Tolkien's Catholicism. His pre-Christian story has been called \"Tolkien's Genesis essay\"; according to another source, \"The Biblical parallels evinced by the creation account of the \u00a0... are inescapable.\"\nThe Tolkien scholar Marjorie Burns, who studied the different versions of the , said that Tolkien increasingly Christianised the Valar and reduced the influence of Norse mythology in successive revisions. In the story, Tolkien expresses a global view of Christianity, with good and evil parallelling the stories in the Book of Genesis. As Tolkien has Elrond say in \"The Council of Elrond\" in \"The Lord of the Rings\", \"For nothing is evil in the beginning. Even Sauron was not so.\" In the , Il\u00favatar creates everything good; evil intrudes later. Though evil is brought about in the creation song by Melkor's pride, Il\u00favatar incorporates it into the conclusion of his divine plan. The theme of evil being a perversion of good correlates to Christian theology regarding the existence of evil in a world made by a benevolent creator. Even Melkor's pride is Eru's will. As Eru himself declares \"no theme may be played that hath not its uttermost source in me, nor can any alter the music in my despite\".\nReception and legacy.\nAlthough commentary on \"The Silmarillion\" has primarily focused on the work as a whole, the reaction to the has been generally positive. Joseph Pearce, a Roman Catholic commentator, called it \"the most important part of \"The Silmarillion\"\" and said, \"The myth of creation is perhaps the most significant and most beautiful of Tolkien's works.\" The scholar of humanities Brian Rosebury considered the a success, with \"appropriately 'scriptural'\" prose. Several Jesuits have praised the story; James V. Schall said, \"I have never read anything as beautiful as the first page of \"The Silmarillion\"\" and Robert Murray said, \"In all literature, from the formation of the sacred books of humanity, it is very difficult to find a comparable mythological story of creation by its beauty and imaginative power.\"\nAccording to \"Fantasy Literature: A Core Collection and Reference Guide\", \"Every part of [\"The Silmarillion\"] benefits from the power and audacity of imaginative genius Tolkien and his brilliant style\" and the has \"organ tones\". Although Ralph C. Wood called it \"one of the finest and most original of [Tolkien's] writings\", the stylistic differences between this story and the rest of \"The Silmarillion\" have been the subject of debate.\nThe American opera singer Adam C. J. Klein composed an opera, \"Leithian\", based on \"The Silmarillion\", while the American contemporary classical composer Frank Felice wrote an orchestral version of the . According to the Tolkien scholar Colin Duriez, the may have inspired C. S. Lewis to have his fictional world of Narnia created from a song.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63759", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63759", "title": "Cashew nut", "text": ""}
{"id": "63760", "revid": "11526809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63760", "title": "Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age", "text": ""}
{"id": "63761", "revid": "16416757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63761", "title": "The Pale", "text": "Part of Ireland controlled by England in the Late Middle Ages\nThe Pale (Irish: \"An Ph\u00e1il\") or the English Pale (' or ') was the part of Ireland directly under the control of the English government in the Late Middle Ages. It had been reduced by the late 15th century to an area along the east coast stretching north from Dalkey, just south of Dublin, to the garrison town of Dundalk. The inland boundary went to Naas and Leixlip around the Earldom of Kildare, towards Trim and north towards Kells. In this district, many townlands have English or Norman-French names, the latter associated with Anglo-Norman influence in England.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"pale\", meaning a fence, is derived from the Latin word ', meaning \"stake\", specifically a stake used to support a fence. A paling fence is made of pales ganged side by side, and the word \"palisade\" is derived from the same root. From this came the figurative meaning of \"boundary\". The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" is dubious about the popular notion that the phrase ', as something outside the boundary\u2014i.e., uncivilised\u2014derives from this specific Irish meaning. Also derived from the \"boundary\" concept was the idea of a pale as an area within which local laws were valid. The term was used not only for the Pale in Ireland but also for various other English overseas settlements, notably English Calais. The term was also used to refer to specific regions in other nations: the term Pale of Settlement was applied to the area in the west of Imperial Russia where Jews were permitted to reside.\nHistory.\nThe Pale was a strip of land that stretched north from Dalkey in Dublin to Dundalk in Louth; it became the base of English rule in Ireland. The Norman invasion of Ireland, beginning in 1169, created the Lordship of Ireland and brought Ireland under the theoretical control of the Plantagenet Kings of England. From the 13th century onwards, the Hiberno-Norman occupation in Ireland at first faltered, then waned. Across most of Ireland, the Normans increasingly assimilated into Irish culture after 1300. They made alliances with neighbouring autonomous Gaelic lords. In the long periods when there was no large royal army in Ireland, the Norman lords, like their Gaelic neighbours in the provinces, acted essentially as independent rulers in their own areas.\nThe Lordship controlled by the English king shrank accordingly, and as parts of its perimeter in counties Meath and Kildare were fenced or ditched, it became known as the Pale, deriving from the Latin word , a stake, or, synecdochically, a fence. Parts can still be seen west of Clane on the grounds of what is now Clongowes Wood College. The military power of the crown itself was greatly weakened by the Hundred Years War (1337\u20131453), and the Wars of the Roses (1455\u201385). The Parliament of Ireland was created, often sitting at Drogheda until the Tudors took a greater interest in Irish affairs from 1485 and moved it back to Dublin. The Pale generally consisted of fertile lowlands which were easier for the garrison to defend from ambush than hilly or wooded ground. For reasons of trade and administration, a version of English became the official language. Its closest modern derivative is said to be the accent used by natives of Fingal.\nIn 1366, so that the English Crown could assert its authority over the settlers, a parliament was assembled in Kilkenny and the Statute of Kilkenny was enacted. The statute decreed that intermarriage between English settlers and Irish natives was forbidden. It also forbade the settlers from using the Irish language and adopting Irish modes of dress or other customs, as such practices were already common. The adoption of Gaelic Brehon property law, in particular, undermined the feudal nature of the Lordship. The Act was never implemented successfully, even in the Pale itself. This inability to enforce the statute indicated that Ireland was withdrawing from English cultural norms.\nBy the Tudor period, the Irish culture and language had reestablished itself in regions conquered by the Anglo-Normans: \"even in the Pale, all the common folk\u00a0... for the most part are of Irish birth, Irish habit and of Irish language\". At a higher social level, there was extensive intermarriage between the Gaelic Irish aristocracy and Anglo-Norman lords, beginning not long after the invasion.\nBy the late 15th century, the Pale became the only part of Ireland that remained subject to the English king, with most of the island paying only token recognition of the overlordship of the English crown. The tax base shrank to a fraction of what it had been in 1300. A proverb quoted by Sir John Davies said that \"whoso lives by west of the Barrow, lives west of the law.\" The earls of Kildare ruled as lords deputy from 1470 (with more or less success), aided by alliances with the Gaelic lords. This lasted until the 1520s, when the earls passed out of royal favour, but the 9th earl was reinstated in the 1530s. The brief revolt by his son \"Silken Thomas\" in 1534\u201335 served in the following decades to hasten the Tudor conquest of Ireland, in which Dublin and the surviving Pale were used as the crown's main military base. A book \"A Perambulation of Leinster, Meath, and Louth, of which consist the English Pale\" (1596) expressed contemporary usage.\nThe Pale was composed of Dublin and its surrounding area, the population of which was mainly made of Old English merchants who were loyal to the crown.\nFortification.\nThe Pale boundary essentially consisted of a fortified ditch and rampart built around parts of the medieval counties of Louth, Meath, Dublin and Kildare, leaving out half of Meath, most of Kildare, and southwest County Dublin. Border or garrison towns of the pale included Ardee, Siddan, Kells, Athboy, Trim, Kilcock, Clane, Naas, Harristown, Ballymore Eustace, Rathmore, Kilteel, Saggart, Tallaght and Dalkey. The northern frontier of the Pale was marked by the De Verdon fortress of Castle Roche, while the southern border lay slightly south of the present day M50 motorway in Dublin, which crosses the site of what was Carrickmines Castle. The following description is from \"The Parish of Taney: A History of Dundrum, near Dublin, and Its Neighbourhood\" (1895):\nIn the period immediately after the Norman Settlement was constructed the barrier, known as the \"Pale,\" separating the lands occupied by the settlers from those remaining in the hands of the Irish. This barrier consisted of a ditch, raised some ten or twelve feet from the ground, with a hedge of thorn on the outer side. It was constructed, not so much to keep out the Irish, as to form an obstacle in their way in their raids on the cattle of the settlers, and thus give time for a rescue. The Pale began at Dalkey, and followed a southwesterly direction towards Kilternan; then turning northwards passed Kilgobbin, where a castle still stands, and crossed the Parish of Taney to the south of that part of the lands of Balally now called Moreen, and thence in a westerly direction to Tallaght, and on to Naas in the County of Kildare. In the wall bounding Moreen is still to be seen a small watch-tower and the remains of a guard-house adjoining it. From this point a beacon-fire would raise the alarm as far as Tallaght, where an important castle stood. A portion of the Pale is still to be seen in Kildare between Clane and Clongowes Wood College at Sallins.\nWithin the confines of the Pale, the leading gentry and merchants lived lives not too different from those of their counterparts in England, save for the constant fear of attack from the Gaelic Irish.\nPortions of the Pale ditch can still be seen in the Sandyford/Kilgobbin/Ballyogan areas of South Dublin. The best-preserved section can be visited and lies just south of the Ballyogan Road within the Ballyogan Recycling Park. It consists of pair of ditches on either side of a high flat-topped bank. The bank is 2 to 3 meters wide on the top and is approximately 2 meters above the bottom of the ditches. The entire length of this section is roughly 500 meters and the top of the bank is planted with hedgerow shrubs, indicating that the Pale ditch subsequently served as a field boundary.\nAnother section of the Pale ditch lies in the Clay Farm Ecopark, near the Ballyogan Road. This section is very different from the previous section, in that it does not consist of a double ditch and bank. Rather, the builders made use of an existing shallow escarpment, steepening the slope to create a 2 meter high barrier to movement from north to south. The purpose of this was probably to make it hard for Irish raiders to herd stolen cattle from the Pale to the Wicklow mountains to the south. That this feature was part of the Pale ditch was originally proposed by Rob Goodbody in the 1990s, and recently confirmed by archaeology during the building of the Clay Farm housing development.\nBoth the sections described above are part of a single linear earthwork, designed to connect Kilgobbin and Carrickmines castles, fortifications built by the Walsh Family during the medieval period to defend the southern marches of the Pale. Another, slightly less well-preserved section of the Pale ditch can be seen at Kilcross Crescent within the Kilcross housing estate near Sandyford village. This section consists of a bank approximately 200 metres long, although the associated ditches are no longer clearly visible.\nPotential section at Kiltalown.\nIn 1996, a linear earthwork running along the southern boundary of Kiltalown House near Jobstown in Tallaght was noted by the National Monuments Service as resembling that of the Pale ditch as found elsewhere. A survey and small-scale excavation of the tree-lined earthwork was carried out in March 1998, but found that establishing the archaeological significance of the earthwork was difficult, considering how similarly a potential section of the Pale ditch resembles an earthwork typical of a medieval enclosure. As \"excavations.ie\" notes:\nThe Kiltalown earthwork belongs to the late medieval tradition of protective enclosure that reaches its apogee in the attempted enclosure of the English Pale in 1494\u20135, and the identification of it as part of the Pale is a reasonable one, but it may equally have enclosed an area of medieval parkland.\nEnd.\nThe idea of the Pale was inseparable from the notion of a separate Anglo-Irish polity and culture. After the 17th century, and especially after the Anglican Reformation and the Plantation of Ulster, the \"Old English\" settlers were gradually assimilated into the Irish population. This was in large part due to their relative reluctance to give up Roman Catholicism (those who did not worship in the Church of Ireland bore a variety of legal disabilities). They kept their version of the English language, though by that time many of them also spoke Irish. Several of these men were notable contributors to literature in Irish, including Pierce Ferriter and Geoffrey Keating. Christopher Nugent, 6th Baron Delvin, wrote an Irish-language primer for Elizabeth I.\nModern usage.\nThe term Ulster Pale has been used to describe Northern Ireland as it remains a part of the United Kingdom.\nThe term continues to be used in contemporary Irish speech to refer to County Dublin and nearby counties, generally critically\u2014for example, a government department may be criticised for concentrating its resources on the Pale.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63763", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63763", "title": "Solved game", "text": "Game whose outcome can be correctly predicted\nA solved game is a game whose outcome (win, lose or draw) can be correctly predicted from any position, assuming that both players play perfectly. This concept is usually applied to abstract strategy games, and especially to games with full information and no element of chance; solving such a game may use combinatorial game theory or computer assistance.\nOverview.\nA two-player game can be solved on several levels:\n Prove whether the first player will win, lose or draw from the initial position, given perfect play on both sides &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. This can be a non-constructive proof (possibly involving a strategy-stealing argument) that need not actually determine any details of the perfect play.\n Provide one algorithm for each of the two players, such that the player using it can achieve at least the optimal outcome, regardless of the opponent's moves, from the start of the game, using reasonable computational resources.\n Provide an algorithm that uses reasonable computational resources and finds optimal plays for both players from all legal positions.\nStrong solution.\nDespite their name, many game theorists believe that \"ultra-weak\" proofs are the deepest, most interesting and valuable. \"Ultra-weak\" proofs require a scholar to reason about the abstract properties of the game, and show how these properties lead to certain outcomes if perfect play is realized.\nBy contrast, \"strong\" proofs often proceed by brute force\u2014using a computer to exhaustively search a game tree to figure out what would happen if perfect play were realized. The resulting proof gives an optimal strategy for every possible position on the board. However, these proofs are not as helpful in understanding deeper reasons why some games are solvable as a draw, and other, seemingly very similar games are solvable as a win.\nGiven the rules of any two-person game with a finite number of positions, one can always trivially construct a minimax algorithm that would exhaustively traverse the game tree. However, since for many non-trivial games such an algorithm would require an infeasible amount of time to generate a move in a given position, a game is not considered to be solved weakly or strongly unless the algorithm can be run by existing hardware in a reasonable time. Many algorithms rely on a huge pre-generated database and are effectively nothing more.\nAs a simple example of a strong solution, the game of tic-tac-toe is easily solvable as a draw for both players with perfect play (a result manually determinable). Games like nim also admit a rigorous analysis using combinatorial game theory.\nWhether a game is solved is not necessarily the same as whether it remains interesting for humans to play. Even a strongly solved game can still be interesting if its solution is too complex to be memorized; conversely, a weakly solved game may lose its attraction if the winning strategy is simple enough to remember (e.g., Maharajah and the Sepoys). An ultra-weak solution (e.g., Chomp or Hex on a sufficiently large board) generally does not affect playability.\nPerfect play.\nIn game theory, perfect play is the behavior or strategy of a player that leads to the best possible outcome for that player regardless of the response by the opponent. Perfect play for a game is known when the game is solved. Based on the rules of a game, every possible final position can be evaluated (as a win, loss or draw). By backward reasoning, one can recursively evaluate a non-final position as identical to the position that is one move away and best valued for the player whose move it is. Thus a transition between positions can never result in a better evaluation for the moving player, and a perfect move in a position would be a transition between positions that are equally evaluated. As an example, a perfect player in a drawn position would always get a draw or win, never a loss. If there are multiple options with the same outcome, perfect play is sometimes considered the fastest method leading to a good result, or the slowest method leading to a bad result.\nPerfect play can be generalized to non-perfect information games, as the strategy that would guarantee the highest minimal expected outcome regardless of the strategy of the opponent. As an example, the perfect strategy for rock paper scissors would be to randomly choose each of the options with equal (1/3) probability. The disadvantage in this example is that this strategy will never exploit non-optimal strategies of the opponent, so the expected outcome of this strategy versus any strategy will always be equal to the minimal expected outcome.\nAlthough the optimal strategy of a game may not (yet) be known, a game-playing computer might still benefit from solutions of the game from certain endgame positions (in the form of endgame tablebases), which will allow it to play perfectly after some point in the game. Computer chess programs are well known for doing this.\n The variant of Oware allowing game ending \"grand slams\" was strongly solved by Henri Bal and John Romein at the Vrije Universiteit in Amsterdam, Netherlands (2002). Either player can force the game into a draw.\n Strongly solved. If two players both play perfectly, the game will go on indefinitely.\n Solved first by James D. Allen on October 1, 1988, and independently by Victor Allis on October 16, 1988. The first player can force a win. Strongly solved by John Tromp's 8-ply database (Feb 4, 1995). Weakly solved for all boardsizes where width+height is at most 15 (as well as 8\u00d78 in late 2015) (Feb 18, 2006). Solved for all boardsizes where width+height equals 16 on May 22, 2024. In 2025, the classic 7x6 board was strongly solved in terms of a win-draw-loss look-up table.\n Solved by Victor Allis (1993). The first player can force a win without opening rules.\n Solved by Alan Frank using the \"Official Scrabble Players Dictionary\" in 1987.\n3\u00d73 variant solved as a win for black, several other larger variants also solved.\n Most variants solved by Geoffrey Irving, Jeroen Donkers and Jos Uiterwijk (2000) except Kalah (6/6). The (6/6) variant was solved by Anders Carstensen (2011). Strong first-player advantage was proven in most cases.\n Easily solvable. Either player can force the game into a draw.\n This asymmetrical game is a win for the sepoys player with correct play.\n Strongly solved.\n Solved by Ralph Gasser (1993). Either player can force the game into a draw.\n Order (First player) wins.\n Weakly solved by humans, but proven by computers. (Dakon is, however, not identical to Ohvalhu, the game which actually had been observed by de Voogt)\nStrongly solved by Jason Doucette (2001). The game is a draw. There are only two unique first moves if you discard mirrored positions. One forces the draw, and the other gives the opponent a forced win in 15 moves.\n Strongly solved by Geoffrey Irving with use of a supercomputer at NERSC. The first player wins.\n Solved by Luc Goossens (1998). Two perfect players will always draw.\n Claimed to be solved by J\u00e1nos Wagner and Istv\u00e1n Vir\u00e1g (2001). A first-player win.\n Solved by Guy Steele (1998). Depending on the variant either a first-player win or a draw.\n Trivially solvable. Either player can force the game into a draw.\n Strongly solved by Johannes Laire in 2009, and weakly solved by Ali Elabridi in 2017. It is a win for the blue pieces (Cardinal Richelieu's men, or, the enemy).\n Extremely trivially strongly solvable because of the small game tree. The game is a draw if no mistakes are made, with no mistake possible on the opening move.\n Strongly solved by W. A. Wythoff in 1907.\n This 8\u00d78 variant of draughts was weakly solved on April 29, 2007, by the team of Jonathan Schaeffer. From the standard starting position, both players can guarantee a draw with perfect play. Checkers has a search space of 5\u00d71020 possible game positions. The number of calculations involved was 1014, which were done over a period of 18 years. The process involved from 200 desktop computers at its peak down to around 50.\n Weakly solved by Maarten Schadd. The game is a draw.\n Weakly solved in 2016 as a win for White beginning with 1.\u00a0e3.\nWeakly solved in 2023 by Hiroki Takizawa, a researcher at Preferred Networks. However, the paper's conclusions are contested. From the standard starting position on an 8\u00d78 board, a perfect play by both players will result in a draw. Othello is the largest game solved to date, with a search space of 1028 possible game positions. \n Weakly solved by H. K. Orman. It is a win for the first player.\n Weakly solved by Oren Patashnik (1980) and Victor Allis. The first player wins.\n Weakly solved: win for the second player.\nWeakly solved by Yew Jin Lim (2007). The game is a draw.\n Fully solving chess remains elusive, and it is speculated that the complexity of the game may preclude it ever being solved. Through retrograde computer analysis and endgame tablebases, strong solutions have been found for all three- to seven-piece endgames, counting the two kings as pieces.\n Some variants of chess on a smaller board with reduced numbers of pieces have been solved. Some other popular variants have also been solved; for example, a weak solution to Maharajah and the Sepoys is an easily memorable series of moves that guarantees victory to the \"sepoys\" player.\n The 5\u00d75 board was weakly solved for all opening moves in 2002. The 7\u00d77 board was weakly solved in 2015. Humans usually play on a 19\u00d719 board, which is over 145 orders of magnitude more complex than 7\u00d77.\n A strategy-stealing argument (as used by John Nash) shows that all square board sizes cannot be lost by the first player. Combined with a proof of the impossibility of a draw, this shows that the game is a first player win (so it is ultra-weak solved). On particular board sizes, more is known: it is strongly solved by several computers for board sizes up to 6\u00d76. Weak solutions are known for board sizes 7\u00d77 (using a swapping strategy), 8\u00d78, and 9\u00d79; in the 8\u00d78 case, a weak solution is known for all opening moves. Strongly solving Hex on an \"N\"\u00d7\"N\" board is unlikely as the problem has been shown to be PSPACE-complete. If Hex is played on an \"N\"\u00d7(\"N\" + 1) board then the player who has the shorter distance to connect can always win by a simple pairing strategy, even with the disadvantage of playing second.\n All endgame positions with two through seven pieces were solved, as well as positions with 4\u00d74 and 5\u00d73 pieces where each side had one king or fewer, positions with five men versus four men, positions with five men versus three men and one king, and positions with four men and one king versus four men. The endgame positions were solved in 2007 by Ed Gilbert of the United States. Computer analysis showed that it was highly likely to end in a draw if both players played perfectly.\n Strongly solved by G\u00e1bor E. G\u00e9vay (2015). The first player wins in optimal play. \n It is trivial to show that the second player can never win; see strategy-stealing argument. Almost all cases have been solved weakly for \"k\" \u2264 4. Some results are known for \"k\" = 5. The games are drawn for \"k\" \u2265 8.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63764", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63764", "title": "Dysentery", "text": "Intestinal inflammation causing bloody diarrhea\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nDysentery ( , ), historically known as the bloody flux, is a type of gastroenteritis that results in bloody diarrhea. Other symptoms may include fever, abdominal pain, and a feeling of incomplete defecation. Complications may include dehydration.\nThe cause of dysentery is usually the bacteria from genus \"Shigella\", in which case it is known as shigellosis, or the amoeba \"Entamoeba histolytica\"; then it is called amoebiasis. Other causes may include certain chemicals, other bacteria, other protozoa, or parasitic worms. It may spread between people. Risk factors include contamination of food and water with feces due to poor sanitation. The underlying mechanism involves inflammation of the intestine, especially of the colon.\nEfforts to prevent dysentery include hand washing and food safety measures while traveling in countries of high risk. While the condition generally resolves on its own within a week, drinking sufficient fluids such as oral rehydration solution is important. Antibiotics such as azithromycin may be used to treat cases associated with travelling in the developing world. While medications used to decrease diarrhea such as loperamide are not recommended on their own, they may be used together with antibiotics.\n\"Shigella\" results in about 165 million cases of diarrhea and 1.1 million deaths a year with nearly all cases in the developing world. In areas with poor sanitation nearly half of cases of diarrhea are due to \"Entamoeba histolytica\". \"Entamoeba histolytica\" affects millions of people and results in more than 55,000 deaths a year. It commonly occurs in less developed areas of Central and South America, Africa, and Asia. Dysentery has been described at least since the time of Hippocrates.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe most common form of dysentery is bacillary dysentery, which is typically a mild sickness, causing symptoms normally consisting of mild abdominal pains and frequent passage of loose stools or diarrhea. Symptoms normally present themselves after 1\u20133 days, and are usually no longer present after a week. The frequency of urges to defecate, the large volume of liquid feces ejected, and the presence of blood, mucus, or pus depends on the pathogen causing the disease. Temporary lactose intolerance can occur, as well. In some occasions, severe abdominal cramps, fever, shock, and delirium can all be symptoms.\nIn extreme cases, people may pass more than one liter of fluid per hour. More often, individuals will complain of diarrhea with blood, accompanied by extreme abdominal pain, rectal pain and a low-grade fever. Rapid weight loss and muscle aches sometimes also accompany dysentery, while nausea and vomiting are rare.\nOn rare occasions, the amoebic parasite will invade the body through the bloodstream and spread beyond the intestines. In such cases, it may more seriously infect other organs such as the brain, lungs, and most commonly the liver.\nCause.\nDysentery results from bacterial or parasitic infections. Viruses do not generally cause the disease. These pathogens typically reach the large intestine after entering orally, through ingestion of contaminated food or water, oral contact with contaminated objects or hands, and so on. Each specific pathogen has its own mechanism or pathogenesis, but in general, the result is damage to the intestinal linings, leading to the inflammatory immune responses. This can cause elevated physical temperature, painful spasms of the intestinal muscles (cramping), swelling due to fluid leaking from capillaries of the intestine (edema) and further tissue damage by the body's immune cells and the chemicals, called cytokines, which are released to fight the infection. The result can be impaired nutrient absorption, excessive water and mineral loss through the stools due to breakdown of the control mechanisms in the intestinal tissue that normally remove water from the stools, and in severe cases, the entry of pathogenic organisms into the bloodstream. Anemia may also arise due to the blood loss through diarrhea.\nBacterial infections that cause bloody diarrhea are typically classified as being either invasive or toxogenic. Invasive species cause damage directly by invading into the mucosa. The toxogenic species do not invade, but cause cellular damage by secreting toxins, resulting in bloody diarrhea. This is also in contrast to toxins that cause watery diarrhea, which usually do not cause cellular damage, but rather they take over cellular machinery for a portion of life of the cell.\nDefinitions of dysentery can vary by region and by medical specialty. The U. S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) limits its definition to \"diarrhea with visible blood\". Others define the term more broadly. These differences in definition must be taken into account when defining mechanisms. For example, using the CDC definition requires that intestinal tissue be so severely damaged that blood vessels have ruptured, allowing visible quantities of blood to be lost with defecation. Other definitions require less specific damage.\nAmoebic dysentery.\nAmoebiasis, also known as amoebic dysentery, is caused by an infection from the amoeba \"Entamoeba histolytica\", which is found mainly in tropical areas. Proper treatment of the underlying infection of amoebic dysentery is important; insufficiently treated amoebiasis can lie dormant for years and subsequently lead to severe, potentially fatal, complications.\nWhen amoebae inside the bowel of an infected person are ready to leave the body, they group together and form a shell that surrounds and protects them. This group of amoebae is known as a cyst, which is then passed out of the person's body in the feces and can survive outside the body. If hygiene standards are poor \u2013 for example, if the person does not dispose of the feces hygienically \u2013 then it can contaminate the surroundings, such as nearby food and water.\nIf another person then eats or drinks food or water that has been contaminated with feces containing the cyst, that person will also become infected with the amoebae. Amoebic dysentery is particularly common in parts of the world where human feces are used as fertilizer.\nAfter entering the person's body through the mouth, the cyst travels down into the stomach. The amoebae inside the cyst are protected from the stomach's digestive acid. From the stomach, the cyst travels to the intestines, where it breaks open and releases the amoebae, causing the infection. The amoebae can burrow into the walls of the intestines and cause small abscesses and ulcers to form. The cycle then begins again.\nBacillary dysentery.\nDysentery may also be caused by shigellosis, an infection by bacteria of the genus \"Shigella\", and is then known as bacillary dysentery (or Marlow syndrome). The term \"bacillary dysentery\" etymologically might seem to refer to any dysentery caused by any bacilliform bacteria, but its meaning is restricted by convention to \"Shigella\" dysentery.\nOther bacteria.\nSome strains of \"Escherichia coli\" cause bloody diarrhea. The typical culprits are enterohemorrhagic \"Escherichia coli\", of which is the best known. These types of \"E. coli\" also make Shiga toxin.\nDiagnosis.\nA diagnosis may be made by taking a history and doing a brief examination. Dysentery should not be confused with hematochezia, which is the passage of fresh blood through the anus, usually in or with stools.\nPhysical exam.\nThe mouth, skin, and lips may appear dry due to dehydration. Lower abdominal tenderness may also be present.\nStool and blood tests.\nCultures of stool samples are examined to identify the organism causing dysentery. Usually, several samples must be obtained due to the number of amoebae, which changes daily. Blood tests can be used to measure abnormalities in the levels of essential minerals and salts.\nPrevention.\nEfforts to prevent dysentery include hand washing and food safety measures while traveling in areas of high risk.\nVaccine.\nAlthough there is currently no vaccine that protects against \"Shigella\" infection, several are in development. Vaccination may eventually become a part of the strategy to reduce the incidence and severity of diarrhea, particularly among children in low-resource settings. For example, \"Shigella\" is a longstanding World Health Organization (WHO) target for vaccine development, and sharp declines in age-specific diarrhea/dysentery attack rates for this pathogen indicate that natural immunity does develop following exposure; thus, vaccination to prevent this disease should be feasible. The development of vaccines against these types of infection has been hampered by technical constraints, insufficient support for coordination, and a lack of market forces for research and development. Most vaccine development efforts are taking place in the public sector or as research programs within biotechnology companies.\nTreatment.\nDysentery is managed by maintaining fluids using oral rehydration therapy. If this treatment cannot be adequately maintained due to vomiting or the profuseness of diarrhea, hospital admission may be required for intravenous fluid replacement. In ideal situations, no antimicrobial therapy should be administered until microbiological microscopy and culture studies have established the specific infection involved. When laboratory services are not available, it may be necessary to administer a combination of drugs, including an amoebicidal drug to kill the parasite, and an antibiotic to treat any associated bacterial infection. Laudanum (Deodorized Tincture of Opium) may be used for severe pain and to combat severe diarrhea.\nIf shigellosis is suspected and it is not too severe, letting it run its course may be reasonable \u2013 usually less than a week. If the case is severe, antibiotics such as ciprofloxacin or TMP-SMX may be useful. However, many strains of \"Shigella\" are becoming resistant to common antibiotics, and effective medications are often in short supply in developing countries. If necessary, a doctor may have to reserve antibiotics for those at highest risk for death, including young children, people over 50, and anyone suffering from dehydration or malnutrition.\nAmoebic dysentery is often treated with two antimicrobial drugs such as metronidazole and paromomycin or iodoquinol.\nPrognosis.\nWith correct treatment, most cases of amoebic and bacterial dysentery subside within 10 days, and most individuals achieve a full recovery within two to four weeks after beginning proper treatment. If the disease is left untreated, the prognosis varies with the immune status of the individual patient and the severity of disease. Extreme dehydration can delay recovery and significantly raises the risk for serious complications including death.\nEpidemiology.\nInsufficient data exists, but \"Shigella\" is estimated to have caused the death of 34,000 children under the age of five in 2013, and 40,000 deaths in people over five years of age. Amoebiasis infects over 50 million people each year, of whom 50,000 die (one per thousand).\nHistory.\nShigella evolved with the human expansion out of Africa 50,000 to 200,000 years ago.\nThe seed, leaves, and bark of the kapok tree have been used in traditional medicines by indigenous peoples of the rainforest regions in the Americas, west-central Africa, and Southeast Asia in the treatment of this disease.\nIn 1915, Australian bacteriologist Fannie Eleanor Williams was serving as a medic in Greece with the Australian Imperial Force, receiving casualties directly from Gallipoli. In Gallipoli, dysentery was severely affecting soldiers and causing significant loss of manpower. Williams carried out serological investigations into dysentery, co-authoring several groundbreaking papers with Sir Charles Martin, director of the Lister Institute. The result of their work into dysentery was increased demand for specific diagnostics and curative sera.\n\"Bacillus subtilis\" was marketed throughout America and Europe from 1946 as an immunostimulatory aid in the treatment of gut and urinary tract diseases such as rotavirus and \"Shigella\", but declined in popularity after the introduction of consumer antibiotics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63769", "revid": "29449026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63769", "title": "Ring Bearer (Middle-earth)", "text": ""}
{"id": "63771", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63771", "title": "LVF", "text": "LVF may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63778", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63778", "title": "Uncertainty", "text": "Situations involving imperfect or unknown information\nUncertainty or incertitude refers to situations involving imperfect or unknown information. It applies to predictions of future events, to physical measurements that are already made, or to the unknown, and is particularly relevant for decision-making. Uncertainty arises in partially observable or stochastic or complex or environments, as well as due to ignorance, indolence, or both. It arises in any number of fields, including insurance, philosophy, physics, statistics, economics, entrepreneurship, finance, medicine, psychology, sociology, engineering, metrology, meteorology, ecology and information science.\nConcepts.\nAlthough the terms are used in various ways among the general public, many specialists in decision theory, statistics and other quantitative fields have defined uncertainty, risk, and their measurement as:\nUncertainty.\nThe lack of certainty, a state of limited knowledge where it is impossible to exactly describe one or more of the following: the existing state or goal or set of options, the full set of possible future states or their probabilities or their values or utilities to stakeholders, the full set of stakeholders involved, or any other piece of information that inhibits the calculation of the full set of expected values for the options available. \nMeasurement.\nUncertainty, only when considered as objective or subjective risk, can be measured through a set of possible states or outcomes where probabilities are assigned to each possible state or outcome \u2013 this also includes the application of a probability density function to continuous variables.\nSecond-order uncertainty.\nIn statistics and economics, second-order uncertainty - expressed as the confidence over outcome probability estimates - is represented in probability density functions over (first-order) probabilities.\nOpinions in subjective logic carry this type of uncertainty.\nRisk.\nRisk exists when the future realized point value of a distribution of possible outcomes is not known but an estimated value can be calculated, and where some possible outcomes have an undesired effect or significant loss. Measurement of risk includes a set of outcome probabilities along with the valuations of those outcomes, where some possible outcomes involve losses. This also includes loss functions over continuous variables. Because an expected value for a decision can be calculated, some do not consider risk to be a true type of uncertainty (see below).\nRisk versus variability.\nThere is a difference between risk and variability. Risk is quantified by a probability distribution which depends upon knowledge about the likelihood of what the single, true value of the future quantity will be, as in the case of a roll of the dice. Variability is quantified by a distribution of frequencies of multiple instances of the quantity, derived from observed data, as in the case of a batting average.\nKnightian uncertainty.\nIn economics, in 1921 Frank Knight distinguished uncertainty from risk with uncertainty being lack of knowledge which is immeasurable and impossible to calculate. To Knight, uncertainty is uninsurable while risk is (hypothetically) insurable. Because of the absence of clearly defined statistics in most economic decisions where people face uncertainty, he believed that we cannot measure probabilities in such cases; this is now referred to as Knightian uncertainty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Uncertainty must be taken in a sense radically distinct from the familiar notion of risk, from which it has never been properly separated... The essential fact is that 'risk' means in some cases a quantity susceptible of measurement, while at other times it is something distinctly not of this character; and there are far-reaching and crucial differences in the bearings of the phenomena depending on which of the two is really present and operating... It will appear that a measurable uncertainty, or 'risk' proper, as we shall use the term, is so far different from an unmeasurable one that it is not in effect an uncertainty at all.\u2014\u200a\nKnight pointed out that the unfavorable outcome of known risks can be insured during the decision-making process because it has a clearly defined expected probability distribution. Uncertainties have no known expected probability distribution, which can lead to extreme outcomes when borne. Because Knight refers to those who do bear uncertainty as 'entrepreneurs', the field of entrepreneurship includes a stream of research on uncertainty and how it creates opportunities.\nOther taxonomies of uncertainties and decisions include more specific characterizations of uncertainty, specifying what is known, knowable, and unknowable about the phenomenon, as well as how it should be approached from an ethics perspective:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere are some things that you know to be true, and others that you know to be false; yet, despite this extensive knowledge that you have, there remain many things whose truth or falsity is not known to you. We say that you are uncertain about them. You are uncertain, to varying degrees, about everything in the future; much of the past is hidden from you; and there is a lot of the present about which you do not have full information. Uncertainty is everywhere and you cannot escape from it.\nDennis Lindley, \"Understanding Uncertainty\" (2006)\nRisk and uncertainty.\nFor example, if it is unknown whether or not it will rain tomorrow, then there is a state of uncertainty. If probabilities are applied to the possible outcomes using weather forecasts or even just a calibrated probability assessment, the risk has been quantified. Suppose it is quantified as a 90% chance of sunshine. If there is a major, costly, outdoor event planned for tomorrow then there is a risk since there is a 10% chance of rain, and rain would be undesirable. Furthermore, if this is a business event and $100,000 would be lost if it rains, then the risk has been quantified (a 10% chance of losing $100,000). These situations can be made even more realistic by quantifying light rain vs. heavy rain, the cost of delays vs. outright cancellation, etc.\nSome may represent the risk in this example as the \"expected opportunity loss\" (EOL) or the chance of the loss multiplied by the amount of the loss (10% \u00d7 $100,000 = $10,000). That is useful if the organizer of the event is \"risk neutral\", which most people are not. Most would be willing to pay a premium to avoid the loss. An insurance company, for example, would compute an EOL as a minimum for any insurance coverage, then add onto that other operating costs and profit. Since many people are willing to buy insurance for many reasons, then clearly the EOL alone is not the perceived value of avoiding the risk.\nQuantitative uses of the terms \"uncertainty\" and \"risk\" are fairly consistent among fields such as probability theory, actuarial science, and information theory. Some also create new terms without substantially changing the definitions of uncertainty or risk. For example, surprisal is a variation on uncertainty sometimes used in information theory. But outside of the more mathematical uses of the term, usage may vary widely. In cognitive psychology, uncertainty can be real, or just a matter of perception, such as expectations, threats, etc.\nVagueness is a form of uncertainty where the analyst is unable to clearly differentiate between two different classes, such as 'person of average height' and 'tall person'. This form of vagueness can be modelled by some variation on Zadeh's fuzzy logic or subjective logic.\nAmbiguity is a form of uncertainty where even the possible outcomes have unclear meanings and interpretations. The statement \"He returns from the bank\" is ambiguous because its interpretation depends on whether the word 'bank' is meant as \"the side of a river\" or \"a financial institution\". Ambiguity typically arises in situations where multiple analysts or observers have different interpretations of the same statements. Ambiguity can also refer to a type of uncertainty where the range of a distribution of possible outcomes is known, but not their probabilities. Daniel Ellsberg is famous for his urn experiments that illustrated ambiguity, its delineation from risk, and its separate avoidance. \nAt the subatomic level, uncertainty may be a fundamental and unavoidable property of the universe. In quantum mechanics, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle puts limits on how much an observer can ever know about the position and velocity of a particle. This may not just be ignorance of potentially obtainable facts but that there is no fact to be found. There is some controversy in physics as to whether such uncertainty is an irreducible property of nature or if there are \"hidden variables\" that would describe the state of a particle even more exactly than Heisenberg's uncertainty principle allows.\nRadical uncertainty.\nThe term 'radical uncertainty' was popularised by John Kay and Mervyn King in their book \"Radical Uncertainty: Decision-Making for an Unknowable Future,\" published in March 2020. It is distinct from Knightian uncertainty, by whether or not it is 'resolvable'. If uncertainty arises from a lack of knowledge, and that lack of knowledge is resolvable by acquiring knowledge (such as by primary or secondary research) then it is not radical uncertainty. Only when there are no means available to acquire the knowledge which would resolve the uncertainty, is it considered 'radical'.\nIn measurements.\nThe most commonly used procedure for calculating measurement uncertainty is described in the \"Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement\" (GUM) published by ISO. A derived work is for example the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Technical Note 1297, \"Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results\", and the Eurachem/Citac publication \"Quantifying Uncertainty in Analytical Measurement\". The uncertainty of the result of a measurement generally consists of several components. The components are regarded as random variables, and may be grouped into two categories according to the method used to estimate their numerical values:\nBy propagating the variances of the components through a function relating the components to the measurement result, the combined measurement uncertainty is given as the square root of the resulting variance. The simplest form is the standard deviation of a repeated observation.\nIn metrology, physics, and engineering, the uncertainty or margin of error of a measurement, when explicitly stated, is given by a range of values likely to enclose the true value. The uncertainty is often the standard uncertainty, which assumes an approximately Gaussian distribution, with the uncertainty expressing one standard deviation. This may be denoted by error bars on a graph, or by the following notations:\nIn the last notation, parentheses are the concise notation for the \u00b1 notation. For example, applying 10 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 meters in a scientific or engineering application, it could be written or , by convention meaning accurate to \"within\" one tenth of a meter, or one hundredth. The precision is symmetric around the last digit. In this case it's half a tenth up and half a tenth down, so 10.5 means between 10.45 and 10.55. Thus it is \"understood\" that 10.5 means , and 10.50 means , also written and respectively. But if the accuracy is within two tenths, the uncertainty is \u00b1 one tenth, and it is \"required\" to be explicit: and or and . The numbers in parentheses \"apply\" to the numeral left of themselves, and are not part of that number, but part of a notation of uncertainty. They apply to the least significant digits. For instance, stands for , while stands for . This concise notation is used for example by IUPAC in stating the atomic mass of elements.\nThe middle notation is used when the error is not symmetrical about the value \u2013 for example . This can occur when using a logarithmic scale, for example.\nUncertainty of a measurement can be determined by repeating a measurement to arrive at an estimate of the standard deviation of the values. Then, any single value has an uncertainty equal to the standard deviation. However, if the values are averaged, then the mean measurement value has a much smaller uncertainty, equal to the standard error of the mean, which is the standard deviation divided by the square root of the number of measurements. This procedure neglects systematic errors, however.\nWhen the uncertainty represents the standard error of the measurement, then about 68.3% of the time, the true value of the measured quantity falls within the stated uncertainty range. For example, it is likely that for 31.7% of the atomic mass values given on the list of elements by atomic mass, the true value lies outside of the stated range. If the width of the interval is doubled, then probably only 4.6% of the true values lie outside the doubled interval, and if the width is tripled, probably only 0.3% lie outside. These values follow from the properties of the normal distribution, and they apply only if the measurement process produces normally distributed errors. In that case, the quoted standard errors are easily converted to 68.3% (\"one sigma\"), 95.4% (\"two sigma\"), or 99.7% (\"three sigma\") confidence intervals.\nIn this context, uncertainty depends on both the accuracy and precision of the measurement instrument. The lower the accuracy and precision of an instrument, the larger the measurement uncertainty is. Precision is often determined as the standard deviation of the repeated measures of a given value, namely using the same method described above to assess measurement uncertainty. However, this method is correct only when the instrument is accurate. When it is inaccurate, the uncertainty is larger than the standard deviation of the repeated measures, and it appears evident that the uncertainty does not depend only on instrumental precision.\nIn the media.\nUncertainty in science, and science in general, may be interpreted differently in the public sphere than in the scientific community. This is due in part to the diversity of the public audience, and the tendency for scientists to misunderstand lay audiences and therefore not communicate ideas clearly and effectively. One example is explained by the information deficit model. Also, in the public realm, there are often many scientific voices giving input on a single topic. For example, depending on how an issue is reported in the public sphere, discrepancies between outcomes of multiple scientific studies due to methodological differences could be interpreted by the public as a lack of consensus in a situation where a consensus does in fact exist. This interpretation may have even been intentionally promoted, as scientific uncertainty may be managed to reach certain goals. For example, climate change deniers took the advice of Frank Luntz to frame global warming as an issue of scientific uncertainty, which was a precursor to the conflict frame used by journalists when reporting the issue.\n\"Indeterminacy can be loosely said to apply to situations in which not all the parameters of the system and their interactions are fully known, whereas ignorance refers to situations in which it is not known what is not known.\" These unknowns, indeterminacy and ignorance, that exist in science are often \"transformed\" into uncertainty when reported to the public in order to make issues more manageable, since scientific indeterminacy and ignorance are difficult concepts for scientists to convey without losing credibility. Conversely, uncertainty is often interpreted by the public as ignorance. The transformation of indeterminacy and ignorance into uncertainty may be related to the public's misinterpretation of uncertainty as ignorance.\nJournalists may inflate uncertainty (making the science seem more uncertain than it really is) or downplay uncertainty (making the science seem more certain than it really is). One way that journalists inflate uncertainty is by describing new research that contradicts past research without providing context for the change. Journalists may give scientists with minority views equal weight as scientists with majority views, without adequately describing or explaining the state of scientific consensus on the issue. In the same vein, journalists may give non-scientists the same amount of attention and importance as scientists.\nJournalists may downplay uncertainty by eliminating \"scientists' carefully chosen tentative wording, and by losing these caveats the information is skewed and presented as more certain and conclusive than it really is\". Also, stories with a single source or without any context of previous research mean that the subject at hand is presented as more definitive and certain than it is in reality. There is often a \"product over process\" approach to science journalism that aids, too, in the downplaying of uncertainty. Finally, and most notably for this investigation, when science is framed by journalists as a triumphant quest, uncertainty is erroneously framed as \"reducible and resolvable\".\nSome media routines and organizational factors affect the overstatement of uncertainty; other media routines and organizational factors help inflate the certainty of an issue. Because the general public (in the United States) generally trusts scientists, when science stories are covered without alarm-raising cues from special interest organizations (religious groups, environmental organizations, political factions, etc.) they are often covered in a business related sense, in an economic-development frame or a social progress frame. The nature of these frames is to downplay or eliminate uncertainty, so when economic and scientific promise are focused on early in the issue cycle, as has happened with coverage of plant biotechnology and nanotechnology in the United States, the matter in question seems more definitive and certain.\nSometimes, stockholders, owners, or advertising will pressure a media organization to promote the business aspects of a scientific issue, and therefore any uncertainty claims which may compromise the business interests are downplayed or eliminated.\nPhilosophy.\nIn Western philosophy the first philosopher to embrace uncertainty was Pyrrho resulting in the Hellenistic philosophies of Pyrrhonism and Academic Skepticism, the first schools of philosophical skepticism. Aporia and acatalepsy represent key concepts in ancient Greek philosophy regarding uncertainty.\nWilliam MacAskill, a philosopher at Oxford University, has also discussed the concept of Moral Uncertainty. Moral Uncertainty is \"uncertainty about how to act given lack of certainty in any one moral theory, as well as the study of how we ought to act given this uncertainty.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63779", "revid": "7609619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63779", "title": "Loyalist Volunteer Force", "text": "Former Ulster loyalist paramilitary group\nThe Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) was an Ulster loyalist paramilitary group in Northern Ireland. It was formed by Billy Wright in 1996 when he and his unit split from the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) after breaking its ceasefire. Most of its members came from the UVF's Mid-Ulster Brigade, which Wright had commanded. \nIn a two-year period from August 1996, the LVF waged a paramilitary campaign in opposition to Irish republicanism and the Northern Ireland peace process. During this time it killed at least 14 people in gun and bomb attacks, almost all of them Catholic civilians killed at random. The LVF called off its campaign in August 1998 and decommissioned some of its weapons, but in the early 2000s a loyalist feud led to several killings. \nSince then, the LVF has been largely inactive, but its members are believed to have been involved in rioting and organized crime. In 2015, the security forces stated that the LVF \"exists only as a criminal group\" in Mid-Ulster and Antrim.\nThe LVF is designated a terrorist group by the United Kingdom and United States.\nGoals.\nIn a document, the LVF outlined its goals as follows:\nThere is also a Christian fundamentalist element within the LVF. \nIts leader, Billy Wright, was a born again Christian and former preacher. Professor Peter Shirlow, of Queen's University Belfast, noted that many LVF members believed that Irish nationalism/republicanism and Catholicism were interlinked. They believed that Ulster Protestants were a persecuted people and Ulster was their \"God-given land\", which must be defended from these \"dark and satanic forces\".\nThe LVF published a magazine called \"Leading the Way\".\nHistory.\nEarly days.\nBilly Wright was the leader of the Mid-Ulster Brigade of the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF), having taken over the command from Robin \"the Jackal\" Jackson in the early 1990s upon the latter's retirement. In October 1994, the UVF and other loyalist paramilitary groups called a ceasefire. \nInternal differences between Wright and the UVF's Brigade Staff in Belfast came to a head in July 1996, during the Drumcree parade dispute. The Orange Order was being stopped from marching through the Catholic Garvaghy area of Portadown. There was a standoff at Drumcree Church between thousands of Orangemen and their supporters on one side, and the security forces on the other. Wright was angered that the march was being blocked, and was often seen at Drumcree with Harold Gracey, head of the Portadown Orange Lodge.\nWright's brigade smuggled homemade weaponry to Drumcree, apparently unhindered by the Orangemen. On 7 July, a day into the standoff, members of Wright's brigade shot dead Catholic taxi driver Michael McGoldrick near Aghagallon. The man who killed McGoldrick said he had also planned, along with Billy Wright and Mark Fulton, to kidnap three priests from a parochial house in County Armagh and shoot them unless the march was allowed to continue. Allegedly, the brigade also planned to drive petrol tankers into the Catholic area and blow them up. After four days of loyalist protests and violence throughout Northern Ireland, the police reversed their decision and allowed the march to continue.\nFor breaking the ceasefire, Wright and the Portadown unit of the Mid-Ulster Brigade were \"stood down\" by the UVF leadership on 2 August 1996. \nWright and his unit left the UVF and formed the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF). He personally chose its codename of \"Covenant\", which was used to claim LVF attacks.\nAlthough behind many attacks in the Mid-Ulster area, especially in Portadown and Lurgan, Wright was arrested in January 1997 on charges of issuing death threats and perverting the course of justice. He was convicted in March 1997 and sentenced to eight years in the Maze Prison. There he demanded a separate wing for LVF prisoners. The authorities agreed and the wing became a gathering point for loyalists opposed to the Northern Ireland peace process, including many men from Belfast and north Down.\nDeath of Billy Wright.\nOn 27 December 1997, Wright was assassinated by Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) prisoners inside the Maze Prison: Christopher \"Crip\" McWilliams, John Glennon and John Kennaway. The three were imprisoned in the same block as Wright. He was shot as he travelled in a prison van. After killing Wright, the three surrendered to prison guards. They also delivered a statement: \"Billy Wright was executed [...] for directing and waging his campaign of terror against the nationalist people from his prison cell\".\nThat night, LVF gunmen opened fire on the dance hall of the Glengannon Hotel, near Dungannon. The hotel was owned by Catholics and about 400 teenagers were attending a disco there. Three civilians were wounded and one, a former Provisional IRA volunteer, was killed. Police believed that the disco was the intended target, rather than the ex-volunteer. Witnesses said it was \"an attempt at mass-murder\".\nSome believed that prison authorities colluded with the INLA in Wright's killing. The INLA strongly denied these rumours. It published a detailed account of the assassination in the March/April 1999 issue of \"The Starry Plough\" newspaper.\nGood Friday Agreement and ceasefire.\nIn March 1998, during the negotiations for the Good Friday Agreement, the LVF issued a statement backing the anti-agreement Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), saying the party's leader, Ian Paisley, had got it \"absolutely right\". DUP Member of Parliament Willie McCrea appeared on public platforms with LVF leaders.\nIn May 1998 the LVF called a ceasefire and urged people to vote 'No' in the referendum on the Agreement. The Northern Ireland Office accepted its ceasefire in November, making LVF prisoners eligible for early release under the Agreement. Later, it handed over a small amount of weapons to the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning. The decommissioned weapons were as follows:\nThe destruction of some of the LVF arms were recorded by video. However, since the weapons were decommissioned in mid-1998, the LVF has killed four people. \nPost-ceasefire activities.\nIn early 2000, an LVF-UVF feud began, and there were several tit-for-tat killings. The Secretary of State declared on 12 October 2001 that the government no longer recognised their ceasefire.\nAfter its ceasefire, the LVF continued supporting the Orangemen in their protests at Drumcree. In July 2000, it was revealed that members of neo-Nazi group Combat 18 were travelling from England to join the protest. They were given shelter by LVF volunteers in Portadown and Tandragee. Combat 18 had opposed the LVF's ceasefire, but this trip was said to mark a \"healing of the rift\".\nIn 2002, Wright's successor as LVF leader, Mark Fulton, was found hanged in Maghaberry prison. It is believed that he committed suicide.\nIn July 2005 the IRA declared it had ended its armed campaign and would disarm. In September 2005 weapons inspectors declared that the IRA had fully disarmed. In response, on 30 October that year, the LVF stated that it was standing down.\nIn February 2006, the Independent Monitoring Commission confirmed that the LVF-UVF feud was over. But, it said that the LVF's involvement with organised crime and drug trafficking continued, describing it as a \"deeply criminal organisation\". The twentieth IMC report stated that the group was small and without political purpose. Most of its violence was \"more criminal than paramilitary\" in nature. LVF members who continued violent activity were said to do so \"for personal gain\" and associated with the organisation at large only when it was helpful to do so. The report added that simple aggressive police work could damage the group's continuance.\nTimeline of attacks.\nAccording to the Conflict Archive on the Internet's Sutton Database, the LVF have killed 19 people, who included:\nTwo further killings of Catholics were claimed by the LVF, but the RUC believed that UDA members were responsible.\nThe following is a timeline of attacks and attempted attacks that have been claimed by, or blamed on, the LVF.\nYoung Loyalist Volunteers.\nThe youth division of the LVF was known as the Young Loyalist Volunteers (YLV). They were founded in 1997 and officially ended their activities in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63780", "revid": "1750837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63780", "title": "Sporangium", "text": "Enclosure in which spores are formed\nA sporangium (from Late Latin, from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'seed' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'vessel'; pl.: sporangia) is an enclosure in which spores are formed. It can be composed of a single cell or can be multicellular. Virtually all plants, fungi, and many other groups form sporangia at some point in their life cycle. Sporangia can produce spores by mitosis, but in land plants and many fungi, sporangia produce genetically distinct haploid spores by meiosis.\nFungi.\nIn some phyla of fungi, the sporangium plays a role in asexual reproduction, and may play an indirect role in sexual reproduction. The sporangium forms on the sporangiophore and contains haploid nuclei and cytoplasm. Spores are formed in the sporangiophore by encasing each haploid nucleus and cytoplasm in a tough outer membrane. During asexual reproduction, these spores are dispersed via wind and germinate into haploid hyphae.\nAlthough sexual reproduction in fungi varies between phyla, for some fungi the sporangium plays an indirect role in sexual reproduction. For Zygomycota, sexual reproduction occurs when the haploid hyphae from two individuals join to form a zygosporangium in response to unfavorable conditions. The haploid nuclei within the zygosporangium then fuse into diploid nuclei. When conditions improve, the zygosporangium germinates, undergoes meiosis and produces a sporangium, which releases spores.\nLand plants.\nIn mosses, liverworts and hornworts, an unbranched sporophyte produces a single sporangium, which may be quite complex morphologically. Most non-vascular plants, as well as many lycophytes and most ferns, are homosporous (only one kind of spore is produced). Some lycophytes, such as the Selaginellaceae and Isoetaceae, the extinct Lepidodendrales, and ferns, such as the Marsileaceae and Salviniaceae are heterosporous (two kinds of spores are produced). These plants produce both microspores and megaspores, which give rise to gametophytes that are functionally male or female, respectively. Most heterosporous plants there are two kinds of sporangia, termed microsporangia and megasporangia.\nSporangia can be terminal (on the tips) or lateral (placed along the side) of stems or associated with leaves. In ferns, sporangia are typically found on the abaxial surface (underside) of the leaf and are densely aggregated into clusters called sori. Sori may be covered by a structure called an indusium. Some ferns have their sporangia scattered along reduced leaf segments or along (or just in from) the margin of the leaf. Lycophytes, in contrast, bear their sporangia on the adaxial surface (the upper side) of leaves or laterally on stems. Leaves that bear sporangia are called sporophylls. If the plant is heterosporous, the sporangia-bearing leaves are distinguished as either microsporophylls or megasporophylls. In seed plants, sporangia are typically located within strobili or flowers.\nCycads form their microsporangia on microsporophylls which are aggregated into strobili. Megasporangia are formed into ovules, which are borne on megasporophylls, which are aggregated into strobili on separate plants (all cycads are dioecious). Conifers typically bear their microsporangia on microsporophylls aggregated into papery pollen strobili, and the ovules, are located on modified stem axes forming compound ovuliferous cone scales. Flowering plants contain microsporangia in the anthers of stamens (typically four microsporangia per anther) and megasporangia inside ovules inside ovaries. In all seed plants, spores are produced by meiosis and develop into gametophytes while still inside the sporangium. The microspores become microgametophytes (pollen). The megaspores become megagametophytes (embryo sacs).\nEusporangia and leptosporangia.\nCategorized based on developmental sequence, eusporangia and leptosporangia are differentiated in the vascular plants.\nSynangium.\nA cluster of sporangia that have become fused in development is called a synangium (pl. synangia). This structure is most prominent in \"Psilotum\" and Marattiaceae such as \"Christensenia\", \"Danaea\" and \"Marattia\".\nInternal structures.\nA columella (pl. columellae) is a sterile (non-reproductive) structure that extends into and supports the sporangium of some species. In fungi, the columella, which may be branched or unbranched, may be of fungal or host origin. \"Secotium\" species have a simple, unbranched columella, while in \"Gymnoglossum\" species, the columella is branched. In some \"Geastrum\" species, the columella appears as an extension of the stalk into the spore mass (gleba).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63782", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63782", "title": "Sierra Hotel", "text": ""}
{"id": "63783", "revid": "49887303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63783", "title": "Owen Lars", "text": ""}
{"id": "63785", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63785", "title": "Atlantic League of Professional Baseball", "text": "American independent baseball league\nThe Atlantic League of Professional Baseball (ALPB) is a professional independent baseball league in the United States. It is an official MLB Partner League based in the Mid-Atlantic and Southeastern United States, and the headquarters are located at Penn Medicine Park in Lancaster, Pennsylvania.\nThe Atlantic League mostly operates in cities not served by Major League Baseball (MLB) or Minor League Baseball (MiLB) teams; most of its teams are within suburbs and exurbs too close to other teams in the organized baseball system to have minor league franchises of their own. The Atlantic League requires cities to have the market for a 4,000 to 7,500-seat ballpark and for the facility to be maintained at or above Triple-A standards. When Atlantic League professionals are signed by MLB clubs, they usually start in their Double-A or Triple-A affiliates.\nThe league uses a pitch clock and limits the time between innings in an effort to speed up the game. In 2019, the Atlantic League began a three-year partnership with Major League Baseball allowing MLB to implement changes to Atlantic League playing rules, in order to observe the effects of potential future rule changes and equipment. In 2020, the Atlantic League, together with the American Association, the Frontier League, and the Pioneer League, expanded this agreement to become an official MLB Partner League.\nThe Atlantic League is generally regarded as the most successful and highest level of baseball among independent leagues, and is comparable to the Double-A level. The Atlantic League has had more marquee players than any other independent league, including Jose Canseco, Mat Latos, Steve Lombardozzi Jr., Francisco Rodr\u00edguez, Chien-Ming Wang, Roger Clemens, Rich Hill, Scott Kazmir, Juan Gonz\u00e1lez, Pablo Sandoval and Dontrelle Willis. Two former Atlantic League players are in the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum, Tim Raines and Rickey Henderson. Gary Carter, another Hall of Famer, managed in the league. The Atlantic League has had many notable managers and coaches, including Wally Backman, Frank Viola, Tommy John, Sparky Lyle, and Bud Harrelson. The Atlantic League has consistently posted higher per game and per season attendance numbers than other independent circuits such the American Association, Frontier League and Pioneer League.\nHistory.\nIn 1998, the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball played its inaugural season, with teams in Bridgewater, Newark, and Atlantic City, New Jersey; Nashua, New Hampshire; Newburgh, New York; and Bridgeport, Connecticut. The creation of the league was the result of the New York Mets' objection to Frank Boulton's proposal to move the former Albany-Colonie Yankees because of its territorial rights to the region. Boulton, a Long Island, New York native, decided to create a new league that would have a higher salary cap for its players and a longer season than most of the other independent baseball organizations. He modeled the Atlantic League after the older Pacific Coast League, with facilities that exceed AAA-level standards. Boulton also emphasized signing players of Major League Baseball experience for all Atlantic League teams, raising the level of play above other independent leagues.\nIn 2010, the league announced that it would be expanding to Sugar Land, Texas and adding its first franchise not located in an Atlantic coast state. The Sugar Land Skeeters began play in 2012. In 2010, amid financial struggles, the Newark Bears moved from the Atlantic League to the Can-Am League, leaving the Bridgeport Bluefish and Somerset Patriots as the only teams remaining from the league's inaugural season. In the summer of 2013, then-ALPB President Frank Boulton announced that he would be resigning so that he could devote more time to operating the Long Island Ducks. He was replaced by longtime high-ranking Major League Baseball executive Rick White. On July 8, 2015, the Atlantic League began using Rawlings baseballs with red and blue seams, virtually unused in the sport since the American League swapped the blue in their seams for red in 1934.\nOn September 1, 2015, the Atlantic League announced conditional approval for an expansion team or a relocated team to play in New Britain, Connecticut for the 2016 season. On October 21, 2015, the Camden Riversharks announced they would cease operations immediately due to the inability to reach an agreement on lease terms with the owner of Campbell's Field, the Camden County Improvement Authority. The team was replaced by the New Britain Bees for the 2016 season. On May 29, 2016, Jennie Finch was the guest manager for the league's Bridgeport Bluefish, thus becoming the first woman to manage a professional baseball team.\nShortly before the conclusion of the 2017 season, the city of Bridgeport, Connecticut voted to not continue with professional baseball in the city and announced plans to convert The Ballpark at Harbor Yard into a music amphitheater; the Bridgeport Bluefish announced plans to relocate to High Point, North Carolina in 2019 when the construction of a new multipurpose facility in High Point is completed. League officials announced the return of the Pennsylvania Road Warriors, an all road game team, to keep the league at an even eight teams while the Bluefish go inactive for the 2018 season.\nIn 2015, the Atlantic League experienced a watershed moment for independent baseball when it signed a formal agreement with Major League Baseball which put into writing the rules which the ALPB would follow in selling its players' contracts to MLB clubs and their affiliates. This marked the first time that MLB, which has enjoyed a U.S. Supreme Court-granted antitrust exemption since 1922, had made any formal agreement with or acknowledgment of an independent baseball league.\n2020s.\nIn 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the league announced that it would be unable to operate for the 2020 season with the current 8-member ballclubs, thereby canceling its season. Several teams (Somerset, York, and Lancaster) did not gain the necessary approval from governmental and health officials to open their ballparks to the capacity level necessary for competition. They used their stadiums to host recreational and community-based events, as well as local baseball activities where allowed. Meanwhile, the Long Island Ducks, High Point Rockers, and Southern Maryland Blue Crabs initially attempted to partner with teams from other leagues to play a 70-game season from mid-July through the end of September. However, due to ongoing restrictions and capacity limitations, they ultimately decided to suspend all baseball activities for the 2020 season. The only team that played in 2020 was the Sugar Land Skeeters, who would create a new 4-team independent league in Texas, with all 60 games played at Constellation Field, and the Somerset Patriots, who played weekend games with a second squad called the New Jersey Blasters.\nIn July 2020, the league announced the addition of a new franchise in Gastonia, North Carolina beginning in 2021; it is the league's second team based in North Carolina.\nIn November 2020, the Atlantic League lost its last charter franchise and its westernmost franchise when both teams became official minor league affiliates. On November 7, the Somerset Patriots announced that they were leaving the league to join the MLB-affiliated Eastern League, where they will replace the Trenton Thunder as the Double-A affiliate of the New York Yankees. Approximately two weeks later, the Houston Astros announced that they had purchased a controlling stake in the Sugar Land Skeeters and, as a result, the Skeeters would become the Astros' Triple-A affiliate and join the Pacific Coast League.\nOn February 18, 2021, the league announced the addition of the Lexington Legends, previously the Class A South Atlantic League affiliate of the Kansas City Royals, for the 2021 season. The Charleston Dirty Birds, formerly the West Virginia Power of the South Atlantic League, announced their move to the league on February 24, 2021.\nOn September 1, 2021, the league announced the addition of a new Hagerstown, Maryland franchise with the intent to begin play in 2023 pending ballpark construction. In 2022 it was announced that the team wouldn't begin play until 2024 due to construction delays.\nIn 2022, Kelsie Whitmore signed with the Staten Island FerryHawks of the Atlantic League, and started a game for them in left field; this made her the first woman to start an Atlantic League game. Later that year she became the first woman to pitch in an Atlantic League game when she made her first pitching appearance for Staten Island; entering the game with the bases loaded and two outs, she retired Ryan Jackson, a former major leaguer, on a fly out to end the inning.\nOn July 20, 2023, the Hagerstown team announced that they would be named the Hagerstown Flying Boxcars. In September 2023 it was announced that Spire City Ghost Hounds would be on hiatus during the 2024 season due to the league now having an odd number of teams with the addition of the Hagerstown franchise. The team was set to return for the 2025 season; however, the Ghost Hounds were not listed on the 2025 season schedule and would later announce an intent to return in 2026 based on the Atlantic League's plans for expansion.\nOn November 22, 2023, the Atlantic League terminated the membership of the Gastonia Honey Hunters, citing significant unpaid debts to the league. Rick White, president of the Atlantic League, confirmed that the Honey Hunters were terminated, but said that the Atlantic League intended to field a team in Gastonia in 2024. In February 2024, the league named Zawyer Sports &amp; Entertainment as the new owners for the 2024 season with the team name, Gastonia Ghost Peppers, announced in October 2024. The Gastonia Ghost Peppers played their first game on April 25, 2024, a 3\u20132 loss to the Southern Maryland Blue Crabs.\nExperimental rules.\n2019.\nIn March 2019, the Atlantic League and Major League Baseball reached agreement to test multiple rule changes during the 2019 Atlantic League season:\nIn April 2019, implementation of two of the changes was delayed:\nThe tracking system for calling balls and strikes was introduced at the league's all-star game on July 10. In addition to rule changes noted above, additional changes being implemented for the second half of the league's 2019 season are:\n2021.\nThe Atlantic League and MLB jointly announced that the former would adopt several additional experimental rules for the 2021 season:\n2022.\nIn January 2022, the Atlantic League announced they would no longer be using the following rules for the 2022 season:\nIn March 2022, the MLB announced modifications to the \"double-hook\" rule and reintroduced the \"dropped pitch\" rule for the 2023 season:\n2023.\nIn April 2023, it was announced that the Atlantic League would be testing three rules for the 2023 season:\nTeams.\nLeague timeline.\nLeague members Moved to another league\nChampionship Series.\nThe ALPB Championship Series is played as a best-of-five. Numbers in parentheses denote the number of championships won by a team to that point, when more than one.\nAll-Star Games.\n\u2020 Freedom Division won the 2019 game in a \"homer-off\" after the teams were tied at the end of nine innings.\nMajor League Baseball players.\nSome Atlantic League players have come from, or advanced to, the higher ranks of Major League Baseball. Some have resurrected their careers and returned to the majors, while others played in the independent league during the start or end of their careers. The following is a list of some of those players:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63786", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63786", "title": "Morepork", "text": "Species of owl\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe morepork (Ninox novaeseelandiae), also known by numerous other onomatopoeic names (such as boobook, mopoke or ruru), is a smallish, brown owl species found in New Zealand, and to the northwest, on Norfolk Island, an Australian territory. It was also, formerly, found on Lord Howe Island. Three subspecies of the morepork are recognised, one of which is extinct and another that exists only as a hybrid population.\nFirst described by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1788, the morepork was thought to be the same species as the Australian boobook (\"N. boobook\"), native to Australia, Timor-Leste and New Guinea, something that endured for more than two hundred years, until 1999. Similarly, it was also considered the same as the Tasmanian boobook (\"N. leucopsis\") until 2022 .\nThe morepork has dark-brown plumage with prominent pale spots and golden-yellow eyes. Like most owls, the species is generally nocturnal, though may be crepuscular at times (or active at dawn and dusk), retiring to roost in secluded spots within the branches of trees. The morepork feeds on larger insects and small vertebrates, hunting by pouncing on them from tree perches. As with all owls, the morepork has supreme night vision and excellent hearing, able to locate a tiny lizard or rodent from many metres above and away. They then stealthily approach their targeted prey with near-silent flight, without flapping their wings, the prey often not even aware they are being pursued. \nThe International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has assessed the morepork's population and its potential for decline, and ranked the species as being of least concern (not currently at-risk), owing to its presently large range and apparently stable population.\nTaxonomy.\nThe morepork was formally described in 1788 by the German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in his revised and expanded edition of Carl Linnaeus's \"Systema Naturae\". He placed it with the other owls in the genus \"Strix\" and coined the binomial name \"Strix novaeseelandiae\". Gmelin based his description on the \"New Zeeland owl\" from Queen Charlotte Sound that had been described in 1781 by the English ornithologist John Latham in his multi-volume \"A General Synopsis of Birds\". Latham obtained his information from Johann Reinhold Forster who had accompanied James Cook on his second voyage to the Pacific Ocean. The morepork is now one of 37 owls placed in the genus \"Ninox\" that was introduced in 1837 by English naturalist Brian Houghton Hodgson. \"Morepork\" has been designated the official name by the International Ornithological Committee.\nThree subspecies are recognised:\nBoth Gerlof Fokko Mees and Ernst Mayr regarded the taxonomy of the boobook owl as extremely challenging, the latter remarking in 1943 that it was \"one of the most difficult problems I have ever encountered\". In his 1968 book \"Nightwatchmen of the Bush and Plain\", Australian naturalist David Fleay observed that the boobooks from Tasmania more closely resembled those of New Zealand than those from mainland Australia, though he followed Mees in treating them as a single species. \nJanette Norman and colleagues tested the cytochrome \"b\" DNA of three subspecies (as well as the powerful and rufous owls) to ascertain whether the closest relative was used in breeding with the last surviving female of the Norfolk boobook. They discovered that although the Norfolk boobook was similar in plumage to the Tasmanian boobook, it was genetically much closer to the New Zealand subspecies. In fact, the two were so close genetically that they considered whether the Norfolk boobook should be recognised as a separate taxon at all, although they conceded the two were easily distinguishable in appearance, so maintained the three as subspecies; the Tasmanian boobook only diverged by 2.7% from the other two, while the powerful and rufous owls diverged by 4.4% from each other. Leading from this, the Australian boobook was split from the Tasmanian boobook and morepork in volume 5 of the \"\"; however, several authors, including Les Christidis and Walter Boles, contested that the data had been misinterpreted from the Norman study, which had not sampled any Australian mainland boobooks at all. They treated the three taxa (southern, Tasmanian boobooks, and moreporks) as a single species.\nExamining both morphological and genetic (cytochrome \"b\") characters, Michael Wink and colleagues concluded that the Australian boobook was distinct from the morepork, as was the Tasmanian boobook, which was raised to species status as \"Ninox leucopsis\". In 2022, the International Ornithological Congress reclassified the Tasmanian boobook and morepork as distinct species.\nDescription.\nThe morepork is long, with the female slightly larger than the male. Females are slightly heavier at compared with the male's . The morepork has generally dark brown head and upperparts, with pale brown spots on head and neck and white markings on the rest of the upperparts, with a pale yellow-white supercilium (eyebrow), dark brown ear coverts, and buff cheeks. The eyes are yellow to golden-yellow. The feathers of the chin and throat are buff with dark brown shafts. The feathers of the underparts are mostly dark brown with buff and white spots and streaks, with the larger markings on the belly making it look paler overall. The upper tail is dark brown with lighter brown bars. The cere and bill is pale blue-grey with a black cutting edge. The feet are orange or yellow with blackish claws.\nYoung moreporks do not attain adult plumage properly until their third or fourth year. The tips of juvenile's feathers are white and fluffy, remnants of the nestlings' down. These are worn away over time, persisting longest on the head. The feathers of the head, neck, and underparts are fluffier overall. Their plumage is a darker and more greyish brown overall than that of adults.\nDistribution and habitat.\nIn New Zealand's North Island, it is common from Rangaunu Harbour south to southern Taranaki and west of Tauranga, Lake Taup\u014d, and Whanganui, as well as between Murupara and the Hangaroa River in the northeast, and southern Manawat\u016b, Wellington, and Wairarapa in the south, and uncommon outside these areas. In the South Island, it is more common west of the Southern Alps, around Marlborough and in Southland. It is common on Stewart Island and offshore islands.\nIn New Zealand, it primarily inhabits forests dominated by \"Podocarpus\", \"Nothofagus\", \"Metrosideros\", and other hardwoods, up to the alpine tree line. On Norfolk Island, it lives in forests of Norfolk Island pine (\"Araucaria heterophylla\").\nBehaviour.\nThey are usually seen singly, in pairs, or in small family groups of an adult pair and up to three young.\nSwamp harriers could feasibly prey on young moreporks.\nDuring the day, moreporks sleep in roosts. Although mainly nocturnal, they are sometimes active at dawn and dusk. The main hunting times are evenings and mornings, with brief bursts of activity through the night. On dark nights, they often perch through the middle hours, and particularly if the weather is bad, may hunt by daylight, instead.\nBreeding.\nMoreporks nest anywhere the trees are large enough to have hollows.\nFeeding.\nAlthough their main hunting technique is perch-and-pounce, they are agile birds with a swift, goshawk-like wing action and the ability to maneuver rapidly when pursuing prey or hawking for insects.\nThey hunt a variety of animals \u2013 mainly large invertebrates including scarab and huhu beetles, moths and caterpillars, spiders, grasshoppers, and in New Zealand, w\u0113t\u0101. They also take almost any suitably sized prey, particularly small birds, rats, and mice. They can find suitable food in pine forests as well as native forest.\nConservation status.\nA widespread and generally common species, morepork is listed as being a species of least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, on account of its large range and stable population, with no evidence of any significant decline. Like most species of owl, the morepork is protected under Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) meaning the international import and export of the species (including parts and derivatives) is regulated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63788", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63788", "title": "Troubadour", "text": "Composer and performer of lyric poetry during the High Middle Ages\nA troubadour (, ; ) was a composer and performer of Old Occitan lyric poetry during the High Middle Ages (1100\u20131350). Since the word \"troubadour\" is etymologically masculine, a female equivalent is usually called a \"trobairitz\".\nThe troubadour school or tradition began in the late 11th century in Occitania, but it subsequently spread to the Italian and Iberian Peninsulas. Under the influence of the troubadours, related movements sprang up throughout Europe: the Minnesang in Germany, \"trovadorismo\" in Galicia and Portugal, and that of the trouv\u00e8res in northern France. Dante Alighieri in his \"De vulgari eloquentia\" defined the troubadour lyric as \"fictio rethorica musicaque poita\": rhetorical, musical, and poetical fiction. After the \"classical\" period around the turn of the 13th century and a mid-century resurgence, the art of the troubadours declined in the 14th century and around the time of the Black Death (1348) and since died out.\nThe texts of troubadour songs deal mainly with themes of chivalry and courtly love. Most were metaphysical, intellectual, and formulaic. Many were humorous or vulgar satires. Works can be grouped into three styles: the \"trobar leu\" (light), \"trobar ric\" (rich), and \"trobar clus\" (closed). Likewise there were many genres, the most popular being the \"canso\", but \"sirventes\" and \"tensos\" were especially popular in the post-classical period.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"troubadour\" was borrowed from the French word first recorded in 1575 in a historical context to mean \"langue d'oc poet at the court in the 12th and 13th century\" (Jean de Nostredame, \"Les vies des plus c\u00e9l\u00e8bres et anciens Po\u00e8tes proven\u00e7aux\", p.\u00a014 in Gdf. Compl.). The first use and earliest form of \"troubador\" is \"trobadors\", found in a 12th-century Occitan text by Cercamon.\nThe French word itself is borrowed from the Occitan \"trobador\". It is the oblique case of the nominative \"trobaire\" \"composer\", related to \"trobar\" \"to compose, to discuss, to invent\" (Wace, \"Brut\", editions I. Arnold, 3342). \"Trobar\" may come, in turn, from the hypothetical Late Latin *\"trop\u0101re\" \"to compose, to invent a poem\" by regular phonetic change. This reconstructed form is based on the Latin root \"tropus\", meaning a trope. In turn, the Latin word derives ultimately from Greek (\"tr\u00f3pos\"), meaning \"turn, manner\". Intervocal Latin shifted regularly to in Occitan (cf. Latin \"sapere\" \u2192 Occitan \"saber\", French \"savoir\" \"to know\"). The Latin suffix \"-\u0101tor\", \"-\u0101t\u014dris\" explains the Occitan suffix, according to its declension and accentuation: Gallo-Romance *\"trop\u0101tor\" \u2192 Occitan \"trobaire\" (subject case) and *\"trop\u0101t\u014dre\" \u2192 Occitan \"trobador\" (oblique case).\nThere is an alternative theory to explain the meaning of \"trobar\" as \"to compose, to discuss, to invent\". It has the support of some historians, specialists of literature, and musicologists to justify the troubadours' origins in Arabic Andalusian musical practices. According to them, the Arabic word \"\u1e6daraba\" \"music\" (from the triliteral root \"\u1e6d\u2013r\u2013b\" \"provoke emotion, excitement, agitation; make music, entertain by singing\" as in , \"\u1e6darab \u02beandalus\u012b\") could partly be the etymon of the verb \"trobar\". Another Arabic root had already been proposed before: \"\u1e0d\u2013r\u2013b\" () \"strike\", by extension \"play a musical instrument\".\nIn archaic and classical troubadour poetry, the word is only used in a mocking sense, having more or less the meaning of \"somebody who makes things up\". Cercamon writes:\n\"Ist trobador, entre ver e mentir,\"\n\"Afollon drutz e molhers et espos,\"\n\"E van dizen qu'Amors vay en biays\"\n(These troubadours, between truth and lies/corrupt lovers, women and husbands, / and keep saying that Love proceeds obliquely).\nPeire d'Alvernha also begins his famous mockery of contemporary authors \"cantarai d'aquest trobadors\", after which he proceeds to explain why none of them is worth anything. When referring to themselves seriously, troubadours almost invariably use the word \"chantaire\" (\"singer\").\nOrigins.\nThe early study of the troubadours focused intensely on their origins. No academic consensus was ever achieved in the area. Today, one can distinguish at least eleven competing theories (the adjectives used below are a blend from the Grove Dictionary of Music and Roger Boase's \"The Origins and Meaning of Courtly Love\"):\nArabic.\nThe sixteenth century Italian historian Giammaria Barbieri was perhaps the first to suggest Arabian (also \"Arabist\" or \"Hispano-Arabic\") influences on the music of the troubadours. Later scholars like J.B. Trend have asserted that the poetry of troubadours is connected to Arabic poetry written in the Iberian Peninsula, while others have attempted to find direct evidence of this influence. In examining the works of William IX of Aquitaine, \u00c9variste L\u00e9vi-Proven\u00e7al and other scholars found three lines that they believed were in some form of Arabic, indicating a potential Andalusian origin for his works. The scholars attempted to translate the lines in question, though the medievalist Istvan Frank contended that the lines were not Arabic at all, but instead the result of the rewriting of the original by a later scribe.\nScholars like Ram\u00f3n Men\u00e9ndez Pidal stated that the troubadour tradition was created by William, who had been influenced by Moorish music and poetry while fighting with the Reconquista. However, George T. Beech states that there is only one documented battle that William fought in the Iberian Peninsula, and it occurred towards the end of his life. Beech adds that while the sources of William's inspirations are uncertain, he and his father did have individuals within their extended family with Iberian origins, and he may have been friendly with some Europeans who could speak the Arabic language. Regardless of William's personal involvement in the tradition's creation, Magda Bogin states that Arab poetry was likely one of several influences on European \"courtly love poetry\", citing Ibn Hazm's \"The Ring of the Dove\" as an example of a similar Arab tradition.\nMethods of transmission from Arab Iberia to the rest of Europe did exist, such as the Toledo School of Translators, though it only began translating major romances from Arabic into Latin in the second half of the thirteenth century, with objectionable sexual content removed in deference to the Catholic Church. \nBernardine-Marianist.\nAccording to the Bernardine-Marianist (or Christian) theory, it was the theology espoused by Bernard of Clairvaux and the increasingly important Mariology that most strongly influenced the development of the troubadour genre. Specifically, the emphasis on religious and spiritual love, disinterestedness, mysticism, and devotion to Mary explained \"courtly love\". The emphasis of the reforming Robert of Arbrissel on \"matronage\" to achieve his ends can explain the troubadour attitude towards women.\nChronologically, however, this hypothesis is hard to sustain, as the forces believed to have given rise to the phenomenon arrived later than it, but the influence of Bernardine and Marian theology can be retained without the origins theory. This theory was advanced early by Eduard Wechssler and further by Dmitri Scheludko (who emphasises the Cluniac Reform) and Guido Errante. Mario Casella and Leo Spitzer have added \"Augustinian\" influence to it.\nCeltic or chivalric-matriarchal.\nThe survival of pre-Christian sexual \"mores\" and warrior codes from matriarchal societies, be they Celtic, Germanic, or Pictish, among the aristocracy of Europe can account for the idea (fusion) of \"courtly love\". The existence of pre-Christian matriarchy has usually been treated with scepticism as has the persistence of underlying paganism in high medieval Europe, though the Celts and Germanic tribes were certainly less patriarchal than the Greco-Romans.\nClassical Latin.\nThe classical Latin theory emphasises parallels between Ovid, especially his \"Amores\" and \"Ars amatoria\", and the lyric of courtly love. The \"aetas ovidiana\" that predominated in the 11th century in and around Orl\u00e9ans, the quasi-Ciceronian ideology that held sway in the Imperial court, and the scraps of Plato then available to scholars have all been cited as classical influences on troubadour poetry.\nCrypto-Cathar.\nAccording to this thesis, troubadour poetry is a reflection of Cathar religious doctrine. While the theory is supported by the traditional and near-universal account of the decline of the troubadours coinciding with the suppression of Catharism during the Albigensian Crusade (first half of the 13th century), support for it has come in waves. The explicitly Catholic meaning of many early troubadour works also works against the theory.\nLiturgical.\nThe troubadour lyric may be a development of the Christian liturgy and hymnody. The influence of the Song of Songs has even been suggested. There is no preceding Latin poetry resembling that of the troubadours. On those grounds, no theory of the latter's origins in classical or post-classical Latin can be constructed, but that has not deterred some, who believe that a pre-existing Latin corpus must merely be lost to us. That many troubadours received their grammatical training in Latin through the Church (from \"clerici\", clerics) and that many were trained musically by the Church is well-attested. The musical school of Saint Martial's at Limoges has been singled out in this regard. \"Para-liturgical\" tropes were in use there in the era preceding the troubadours' appearance.\nFeudal-social.\nThis theory or set of related theories has gained ground in the 20th century. It is more a methodological approach to the question than a theory; it asks not from where the content or form of the lyric came but rather in what situation or circumstances did it arise. Under Marxist influence, Erich K\u00f6hler, Marc Bloch, and Georges Duby have suggested that the \"essential hegemony\" in the castle of the lord's wife during his absence was a driving force. The use of feudal terminology in troubadour poems is seen as evidence. This theory has been developed away from sociological towards psychological explanation.\nFolklore.\nThis theory may relate to spring folk rituals. According to Mar\u00eda Rosa Menocal, Alfred Jeanroy first suggested that folklore and oral tradition gave rise to troubadour poetry in 1883. According to F. M. Warren, it was Gaston Paris, Jeanroy's reviewer, in 1891 who first located troubadour origins in the festive dances of women hearkening the spring in the Loire Valley. This theory has since been widely discredited, but the discovery of the \"jarchas\" raises the question of the extent of literature (oral or written) in the 11th century and earlier.\nMedieval Latin or Goliardic.\nHans Spanke analysed the intertextual connexion between vernacular and medieval Latin (such as Goliardic) songs. This theory is supported by Reto Bezzola, Peter Dronke, and musicologist Jacques Chailley. According to them, \"trobar\" means \"inventing a trope\", the trope being a poem where the words are used with a meaning different from their common signification, i.e. metaphor and metonymy. This poem was originally inserted in a serial of modulations ending a liturgic song. Then the trope became an autonomous piece organized in stanza form. The influence of late 11th-century poets of the \"Loire school\", such as Marbod of Rennes and Hildebert of Lavardin, is stressed in this connexion by Brinkmann.\nNeoplatonic.\nThis theory is one of the more intellectualising. The \"ennobling effects of love\" in specific have been identified as neoplatonic. It is viewed either as a strength or weakness that this theory requires a second theory about how the neoplatonism was transmitted to the troubadours; perhaps it can be coupled with one of the other origins stories or perhaps it is just peripheral. K\u00e4te Axhausen has \"exploited\" this theory and A. J. Denomy has linked it with the Arabist (through Avicenna) and the Cathar (through John Scotus Eriugena).\nHistory.\nEarly period.\nThe earliest troubadour whose work survives is Guilh\u00e8m de Peitieus, better known as Duke William IX of Aquitaine (1071\u20131126). Peter Dronke, author of \"The Medieval Lyric\", however, believes that \"[his] songs represent not the beginnings of a tradition but summits of achievement in that tradition.\" His name has been preserved because he was the Duke of Aquitaine, but his work plays with already established structures; Eble II of Ventadorn is often credited as a predecessor, though none of his work survives. Orderic Vitalis referred to William composing songs about his experiences on his return from the Crusade of 1101 (c. 1102). This may be the earliest reference to troubadour lyrics. Orderic also provides us (1135) with what may be the first description of a troubadour performance: an eyewitness account of William of Aquitaine.\n\"Picauensis uero dux ... miserias captiuitatis suae ... coram regibus et magnatis atque Christianis coetibus multotiens retulit rythmicis uersibus cum facetis modulationibus\". (X.21)\n&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nThen the Poitevin duke ... the miseries of his captivity ... before kings, magnates, and Christian assemblies many times related with rhythmic verses and witty measures.\nSpread.\nThe first half of the 12th century saw relatively few recorded troubadours. Only in the last decades of the century did troubadour activity explode. Almost half of all troubadour works that survive are from the period 1180\u20131220. In total, moreover, there are over 2,500 troubadour lyrics available to be studied as linguistic artifacts (Akehurst, 23). The troubadour tradition seems to have begun in western Aquitaine (Poitou and Saintonge) and Gascony, from there spreading over into eastern Aquitaine (Limousin and Auvergne) and Provence. At its height it had become popular in Languedoc and the regions of Rouergue, Toulouse, and Quercy (c. 1200). Finally, in the early 13th century it began to spread into first Italy and then Catalonia, whence to the rest of modern Spain and then Portugal. This development has been called the \"rayonnement des troubadours\" ().\nClassical period.\nThe classical period of troubadour activity lasted from about 1170 until about 1213. The most famous names among the ranks of troubadours belong to this period. During this period the lyric art of the troubadours reached the height of its popularity and the number of surviving poems is greatest from this period. During this period the \"canso\", or love song, became distinguishable as a genre. The master of the \"canso\" and the troubadour who epitomises the classical period is Bernart de Ventadorn. He was highly regarded by his contemporaries, as were Giraut de Bornelh, reputed by his biographer to be the greatest composer of melodies to ever live, and Bertran de Born, the master of the \"sirventes\", or political song, which became increasingly popular in this period.\nThe classical period came to be seen by later generations, especially in the 14th and 15th centuries and outside of Occitania, as representing the high point of lyric poetry and models to be emulated. The language of the classic poets, its grammar and vocabulary, their style and themes, were the ideal to which poets of the troubadour revival in Toulouse (creation of the Consistori del Gay Saber in 1323) and their Catalan and Castilian contemporaries aspired. During the classical period the \"rules\" of poetic composition had first become standardised and written down, first by Raimon Vidal and then by Uc Faidit.\nLives.\nThe 450 or so troubadours known to historians came from a variety of backgrounds. They made their living in a variety of ways, lived, and travelled in many different places, and were actors in many types of social context. The troubadours were not wandering entertainers. Typically, they stayed in one place for a lengthy period of time under the patronage of a wealthy nobleman or woman. Many did travel extensively, however, sojourning at one court and then another.\nStatus.\nThe earliest known troubadour, the Duke of Aquitaine, came from the high nobility. He was followed immediately by two poets of unknown origins, known only by their sobriquets, Cercamon and Marcabru, and by a member of the princely class, Jaufre Rudel. Many troubadours are described in their \"vidas\" as poor knights. It was one of the most common descriptors of status. Berenguier de Palazol, Gausbert Amiel, Guilhem Ademar, Guiraudo lo Ros, Marcabru, Peire de Maensac, Peirol, Raimon de Miraval, Rigaut de Berbezilh, and Uc de Pena are all so described. Albertet de Sestaro is described as the son of a noble Jongleur, presumably a petty noble lineage.\nLater troubadours especially could belong to lower classes, ranging from the middle class of merchants and \"burgers\" (persons of urban standing) to tradesmen and others who worked with their hands. Salh d'Escola and Elias de Barjols were described as the sons of merchants and Elias Fonsalada was the son of a burger and jongleur. Perdigon was the son of a \"poor fisherman\" and Elias Cairel of a blacksmith. Arnaut de Mareuil is specified in his \"vida\" as coming from a poor family, but whether this family was poor by noble standards or materially is not apparent.\nMany troubadours also possessed a clerical education. For some this was their springboard to composition, since their clerical education equipped them with an understanding of musical and poetic forms as well as vocal training. The \"vidas\" of the following troubadours note their clerical status: Aimeric de Belenoi, Folquet de Marselha (who became a bishop), Gui d'Ussel, Guillem Ramon de Gironella, Jofre de Foix\u00e0 (who became an abbot), Peire de Bussignac, Peire Rogier, Raimon de Cornet, Uc Brunet, and Uc de Saint Circ.\n\"Trobadors\" and \"joglars\".\nThe Occitan words \"trobador\" and \"trobaire\" are relatively rare compared with the verb \"trobar\" (compose, invent), which was usually applied to the writing of poetry. It signified that a poem was original to an author (\"trobador\") and was not merely sung or played by one. The term was used mostly for poetry only and in more careful works, like the \"vidas\", is not generally applied to the composition of music or to singing, though the troubadour's poetry itself is not so careful. Sometime in the middle of the 12th century, however, a distinction was definitely being made between an inventor of original verse and the performers of others'. The latter were called \"joglars\" in both Occitan and Catalan, from the Latin \"ioculatores\", giving rise also to the French \"jongleur\", Castilian \"juglar\", and English juggler, which has come to refer to a more specific breed of performer. The medieval \"jongleur/joglar\" is really a minstrel.\nAt the height of troubadour poetry (the \"classical period\"), troubadours are often found attacking \"jongleurs\" and at least two small genres arose around the theme: the \"ensenhamen joglaresc\" and the \"sirventes joglaresc\". These terms are debated, however, since the adjective \"joglaresc\" seems to imply \"in the manner of the \"jongleurs\"\". Inevitably, however, pieces of these genres are verbal attacks at \"jongleurs\", in general and in specific, with named individuals being called out. It is clear, for example from the poetry of Bertran de Born, that \"jongleurs\" were performers who did not usually compose. They often performed the troubadours' songs: singing, playing instruments, dancing, and even doing acrobatics.\nIn the late 13th century Guiraut Riquier bemoaned the inexactness of his contemporaries and wrote a letter to Alfonso X of Castile, a noted patron of literature and learning of all kinds, for clarification on the proper reference of the terms \"trobador\" and \"joglar\". According to Riquier, every vocation deserved a name of its own and the sloppy usage of \"joglar\" assured that it covered a multitude of activities, some, no doubt, with which Riquier did not wish to be associated. In the end Riquier argued\u2014and Alfonso X seems to agree, though his \"response\" was probably penned by Riquier\u2014that a \"joglar\" was a courtly entertainer (as opposed to popular or low-class one) and a troubadour was a poet and composer.\nDespite the distinctions noted, many troubadours were also known as jongleurs, either before they began composing or alongside. Aimeric de Belenoi, Aimeric de Sarlat, Albertet Cailla, Arnaut de Mareuil, Elias de Barjols, Elias Fonsalada, Falquet de Romans, Guillem Magret, Guiraut de Calanso, Nicoletto da Torino, Peire Raimon de Tolosa, Peire Rogier, Peire de Valeira, Peirol, Pistoleta, Perdigon, Salh d'Escola, Uc de la Bacalaria, Uc Brunet, and Uc de Saint Circ were jongleur-troubadours.\n\"Vidas\" and \"razos\".\nA \"vida\" is a brief prose biography, written in Occitan, of a troubadour. The word \"vida\" means \"life\" in Occitan. In the chansonniers, the manuscript collections of medieval troubadour poetry, the works of a particular author are often accompanied by a short prose biography. The \"vidas\" are important early works of vernacular prose nonfiction. Nevertheless, it appears that many of them derive their facts from literal readings of their objects' poems, which leaves their historical reliability in doubt. Most of the \"vidas\" were composed in Italy in the 1220s, many by Uc de Saint Circ.\nA \"razo\" (from Occitan for \"reason\") was a similar short piece of Occitan prose detailing the circumstances of a particular composition. A \"razo\" normally introduced the poem it explained; it might, however, share some of the characteristics of a \"vida\". The \"razos\" suffer from the same problems as the \"vidas\" in terms of reliability. Many are likewise the work of Uc de Saint Circ.\n\"Podest\u00e0\"-troubadours.\nA phenomenon arose in Italy, recognised around the turn of the 20th century by Giulio Bertoni, of men serving in several cities as \"podest\u00e0s\" on behalf of either the Guelph or Ghibelline party and writing political verse in Occitan rhyme. These figures generally came from the urban middle class. They aspired to high culture and though, unlike the nobility, they were not patrons of literature, they were its disseminators and its readers.\nThe first \"podest\u00e0\"-troubadour was Rambertino Buvalelli, possibly the first troubadour native to the Italian Peninsula, who was \"podest\u00e0\" of Genoa between 1218 and 1221. Rambertino, a Guelph, served at one time or another as \"podest\u00e0\" of Brescia, Milan, Parma, Mantua, and Verona. It was probably during his three-year tenure there that he introduced Occitan lyric poetry to the city, which was later to develop a flourishing Occitan literary culture.\nAmong the \"podest\u00e0\"-troubadours to follow Rambertino, four were from Genoa: the Guelphs Luca Grimaldi, who also served in Florence, Milan, and Ventimiglia, and Luchetto Gattilusio, who served in Milan, Cremona, and Bologna, and the Ghibellines Perceval Doria, who served in Arles, Avignon, Asti, and Parma, and Simon Doria, sometime \"podest\u00e0\" of Savona and Albenga. Among the non-Genoese \"podest\u00e0\"-troubadours was Alberico da Romano, a nobleman of high rank who governed Vicenza and Treviso as variously a Ghibelline and a Guelph. He was a patron as well as a composer of Occitan lyric.\nMention should be made of the Proven\u00e7al troubadour Isnart d'Entrevenas, who was \"podest\u00e0\" of Arles in 1220, though he does not fit the phenomenon Giulio Bertoni first identified in Italy.\nTrobairitz.\nThe \"trobairitz\" were the female troubadours, the first female composers of secular music in the Western tradition. The word \"trobairitz\" was first used in the 13th-century \"Romance of Flamenca\" and its derivation is the same as that of \"trobaire\" but in feminine form. There were also female counterparts to the \"joglars\": the \"joglaresas\". The number of trobairitz varies between sources: there were twenty or twenty-one named trobairitz, plus an additional poet known only as Domna H. There are several anonymous texts ascribed to women; the total number of trobairitz texts varies from twenty-two (Schultz-Gora), twenty-five (Bec), thirty-six (Bruckner, Shepard, and White), and forty-six (Rieger). Only one melody composed by a trobairitz (the Comtessa de Dia) survives. Out of a total of about 450 troubadours and 2,500 troubadour works, the trobairitz and their corpus form a minor but interesting and informative portion. They are, therefore, quite well studied.\nThe trobairitz were in most respects as varied a lot as their male counterparts, with the general exceptions of their poetic style and their provenance. They wrote predominantly \"cansos\" and \"tensos\"; only one \"sirventes\" by a named woman, Gormonda de Monpeslier, survives (though two anonymous ones are attributed to women). One \"salut d'amor\", by a woman (Azalais d'Altier) to a woman (Clara d'Anduza) is also extant and one anonymous \"planh\" is usually assigned a female authorship. They wrote almost entirely within the \"trobar leu\" style; only two poems, one by Lombarda and another Alais, Yselda, and Carenza, are usually considered to belong to the more demanding \"trobar clus\". None of the trobairitz were prolific, or if they were their work has not survived. Only two have left us more than one piece: the Comtessa de Dia, with four, and Castelloza, with three or four. One of the known trobairitz, Gaudairen\u00e7a, wrote a song entitled \"Coblas e dansas\", which has not survived; no other piece of hers has either.\nThe trobairitz came almost to a woman from Occitania. There are representatives from the Auvergne, Provence, Languedoc, the Dauphin\u00e9, Toulousain, and the Limousin. One trobairitz, Ysabella, may have been born in P\u00e9rigord, Northern Italy, Greece, or Palestine. All the trobairitz whose families we know were high-born ladies; only one, Lombarda, was probably of the merchant class. All the trobairitz known by name lived around the same time: the late 12th and the early 13th century (c. 1170 \u2013 c. 1260). The earliest was probably Tibors de Sarenom, who was active in the 1150s (the date of her known composition is uncertain). The latest was either Garsenda of Forcalquier, who died in 1242, though her period of poetic patronage and composition probably occurred a quarter century earlier, or Guilleuma de Rosers, who composed a \"tenso\" with Lanfranc Cigala, known between 1235 and 1257. There exist brief prose biographies\u2014\"vidas\"\u2014for eight trobairitz: Almucs de Castelnau (actually a \"razo\"), Azalais de Porcairagues, the Comtessa de Dia, Castelloza, Iseut de Capio (also a \"razo\"), Lombarda, Maria de Ventadorn, and Tibors de Sarenom.\nWorks.\nSchools and styles.\nThree main styles of Occitan lyric poetry have been identified: the \"trobar leu\" (light), \"trobar ric\" (rich), and \"trobar clus\" (closed, hermetic). The first was by far the most common: the wording is straightforward and relatively simple compared to the \"ric\" and literary devices are less common than in the \"clus\". This style was the most accessible and it was immensely popular. The most famous poet of the \"trobar leu\" was Bernart de Ventadorn. The \"trobar clus\" regularly escapes modern scholarly interpretation. Words are commonly used metaphorically and symbolically and what a poem appears to be about on its surface is rarely what is intended by the poet or understood by audiences \"in the know\". The \"clus\" style was invented early by Marcabru but only favoured by a few masters thereafter. The \"trobar ric\" style is not as opaque as the \"clus\", rather it employs a rich vocabulary, using many words, rare words, invented words, and unusual, colourful wordings.\nModern scholars recognise several \"schools\" in the troubadour tradition. Among the earliest is a school of followers of Marcabru, sometimes called the \"Marcabrunian school\": Bernart Marti, Bernart de Venzac, Gavaudan, and Peire d'Alvernhe. These poets favoured the \"trobar clus\" or \"ric\" or a hybrid of the two. They were often moralising in tone and critical of contemporary courtly society. Another early school, whose style seems to have fallen out of favour, was the \"Gascon school\" of Cercamon, Peire de Valeira, and Guiraut de Calanso. Cercamon was said by his biographer to have composed in the \"old style\" (\"la uzansa antiga\") and Guiraut's songs were \"d'aquella saison\" (\"of that time\"). This style of poetry seems to be attached to early troubadours from Gascony and was characterised by references to nature: leaves, flowers, birds, and their songs. This Gascon \"literary fad\" was unpopular in Provence in the early 13th century, harming the reputation of the poets associated with it.\nIn the late 13th century a school arose at B\u00e9ziers, once the centre of pre-Albigensian Languedoc and of the Trencavel lordships, in the 1260s\u201380s. Four poets epitomise this \"school\": Bernart d'Auriac, Joan Esteve, Joan Miralhas, and Raimon Gaucelm. The latter three were natives of B\u00e9ziers and all four lived there. All were members of the urban middle class and no courtesans: Miralhas was possibly a potter and Bernart was a \"mayestre\" (teacher). All wrote in Occitan but were supporters of the French king Louis IX and the French aristocracy against the native Occitan nobility. They have been described as \"Gallicised\". Raimon Gaucelm supported the Eighth Crusade and even wrote a \"planh\", the only known one of its kind, to a burgher of B\u00e9ziers. Joan Esteve and Bernart both composed in support of the French in the Aragonese Crusade. The B\u00e9ziers poets are a shining example of the transformation of Occitania in the aftermath of the Albigensian Crusade, but also of the ability of troubadours to survive it.\nGenres.\nTroubadours, at least after their style became established, usually followed some set of \"rules\", like those of the \"Leys d'amors\" (compiled between 1328 and 1337). Initially all troubadour verses were called simply \"vers\", yet this soon came to be reserved for only love songs and was later replaced by \"canso\", though the term lived on as an antique expression for the troubadours' early works and was even employed with a more technically meaning by the last generation of troubadours (mid-14th century), when it was thought to derive from the Latin word \"verus\" (truth) and was thus used to describe moralising or didactic pieces. The early troubadours developed many genres and these only proliferated as rules of composition came to be put in writing. The known genres are:\nAll these genres were highly fluid. A cross between a \"sirventes\" and a \"canso\" was a \"meg-sirventes\" (half-\"sirventes\"). A \"tenso\" could be \"invented\" by a single poet; an \"alba\" or \"canso\" could be written with religious significance, addressed to God or the Virgin; and a \"sirventes\" may be nothing more than a political attack. The \"maldit\" and the \"comiat\" were often connected as a \"maldit-comiat\" and they could be used to attack and renounce a figure other than a lady or a lover, like a commanding officer (when combined, in a way, with the \"sirventes\").\nPeire Bremon Ricas Novas uses the term \"mieja chanso\" (half song) and Cerver\u00ed de Girona uses a similar phrase, \"miga can\u00e7o\", both to refer to a short \"canso\" and not a mixture of genres as sometimes supposed. Cerver\u00ed's \"mig\" (or \"meig\") \"vers e miga can\u00e7o\" was a \"vers\" in the new sense (a moralising song) that was also highly critical and thus combined the \"canso\" and the \"sirventes\". Among the more than one hundred works of Cerver\u00ed de Girona are many songs with unique labels, which may correspond more to \"titles\" than \"genres\", but that is debatable: \"peguesca\" (nonsense), \"espingadura\" (flageolet song), \"libel\" (legal petition), \"esdemessa\" (leap), \"somni\" (dream), \"acuyndamen\" (challenge), \"desiran\u00e7a\" (nostalgia), \"aniversari\" (anniversary), \"serena\" (serene).\nMost \"Crusading songs\" are classified either as \"cansos\" or \"sirventes\" but sometimes separately. Some styles became popular in other languages and in other literary or musical traditions. In French, the \"alba\" became the \"aubade\", the \"pastorela\" the \"pastourelle\", and the \"partimen\" the \"jeu parti\". The \"sestina\" became popular in Italian literature. The troubadours were not averse to borrowing either. The \"planh\" developed out of the Latin \"planctus\" and the sonnet was stolen from the Sicilian School. The basse danse (\"bassa dansa\") was first mentioned in the troubadour tradition (c. 1324), but only as being performed by jongleurs.\nPerformance.\nTroubadours performed their own songs. Jongleurs (performers) and \"cantaires\" (singers) also performed troubadours' songs. They could work from chansonniers, many of which have survived, or possibly from more rudimentary (and temporary) songbooks, none of which have survived, if they even existed. Some troubadours, like Arnaut de Maruelh, had their own jongleurs who were dedicated to singing their patron's work. Arnaut's \"joglar et cantaire\", probably both a singer and a messenger, who carried his love songs to his lady, was Pistoleta. The messenger was commonplace in troubadour poetry; many songs reference a messenger who will bring it to its intended ear. A troubadour often stayed with a noble patron of his own and entertained his court with his songs. Court songs could be used not only as entertainment but also as propaganda, praising the patron, mocking his enemies, encouraging his wars, teaching ethics and etiquette, and maintaining religious unity.\nThe court was not the only venue for troubadour performance. Competitions were held from an early date. According to the \"vida\" of the Monge de Montaudon, he received a sparrow hawk, a prized hunting bird, for his poetry from the \"cour du Puy\", some sort of poetry society associated with the court of Alfonso II of Aragon. The most famous contests were held in the twilight of the troubadours in the 14th and 15th centuries. The \"jocs florals\" held by the Consistori del Gay Saber at Toulouse, by Peter IV of Aragon at Lleida, and the Consistori de la Gaya Sci\u00e8ncia at Barcelona awarded floral prizes to the best poetry in various categories, judging it by its accordance with a code called the \"Leys d'amors\".\nTroubadour songs are still performed and recorded today, albeit rarely.\nMusic.\nTroubadour songs were usually monophonic. Fewer than 300 melodies out of an estimated 2500 survive. Most were composed by the troubadours themselves. Some were set to pre-existing pieces of music. Raimbaut de Vaqueyras wrote his \"Kalenda maya\" (\"The Calends of May\") to music composed by jongleurs at Montferrat.\nGrammars and dictionaries.\nBeginning in the early 13th century, the spread of Occitan verse demanded grammars and dictionaries, especially for those whose native tongue was not Occitan, such as the Catalan and Italian troubadours, and their imitators. The production of such works only increased with the academisation of the troubadour lyric in the 14th century.\nLegacy.\nTransmission.\nSome 2,600 poems or fragments of poems have survived from around 450 identifiable troubadours. They are largely preserved in songbooks called \"chansonniers\" made for wealthy patrons.\nTroubadour songs are generally referred to by their incipits, that is, their opening lines. If this is long, or after it has already been mentioned, an abbreviation of the incipit may be used for convenience. A few troubadour songs are known by \"nicknames\", thus \"D'un sirventes far\" by Guilhem Figueira is commonly called the \"Sirventes contra Roma\". When a writer seeks to avoid using unglossed Occitan, the incipit of the song may be given in translation instead or a title may even be invented to reflect the theme of the work. Especially in translations designed for a popular audience, such as Ezra Pound's, English titles are commonly invented by the translator/editor. There are examples, however, of troubadour songs given Occitan titles in the manuscripts, such as an anonymous \"pastorela\" that begins \"Mentre per una ribeira\", which is entitled \"Porquieira\".\nTable of chansonniers.\nThe number of Occitan parchment chansonniers given as extant varies between authors, depending on how they treat fragmentary and multilingual manuscripts. Conventionally, fragments are classified as fragments of the surviving chansonnier they most closely resemble and not as chansonniers in their own right. Some chansonniers have received both Occitan and French letters: troubadour D is trouv\u00e8re H, W is M and X is U. The lettering (\"siglas\") was introduced by Karl Bartsch, who placed sources he considered more reliable higher in the alphabet. This system is imperfect, however, since many of the chansonniers produced for an Italian audience are heavily edited and do not necessarily more closely resemble the original compositions. While parchment chansonniers are more durable, paper ones also exist and have received lower-case \"siglas\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Ashik\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63790", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63790", "title": "Bacteriocin", "text": "Class of bacterially produced peptide antibiotics\nBacteriocins are proteinaceous or peptidic toxins produced by bacteria to inhibit the growth of similar or closely related bacterial strain(s). They are similar to yeast and paramecium killing factors, and are structurally, functionally, and ecologically diverse. Applications of bacteriocins are being tested to assess their application as narrow-spectrum antibiotics.\nBacteriocins were first discovered by Andr\u00e9 Gratia in 1925. He was involved in the process of searching for ways to kill bacteria, which also resulted in the development of antibiotics and the discovery of bacteriophage, all within a span of a few years. He called his first discovery a \"colicine\" because it was made by \"E. coli.\"\nClassification.\nBacteriocins are categorized in several ways, including producing strain, common resistance mechanisms, and mechanism of killing. There are several large categories of bacteriocin which are only phenomenologically related. These include the bacteriocins from gram-positive bacteria, the colicins, the microcins, and the bacteriocins from Archaea. The bacteriocins from \"E. coli\" are called \"colicins\" (formerly called 'colicines', meaning 'coli killers'). These are the longest studied bacteriocins. They are a diverse group of bacteriocins and do not include all the bacteriocins produced by \"E. coli.\" In fact, one of the oldest known so-called colicins was called \"colicin V\" and is now known as \"microcin V\". It is much smaller and produced and secreted in a different manner than the classic colicins.\nThis naming system is problematic for a number of reasons. First, naming bacteriocins by what they putatively kill would be more accurate if their killing spectrum were contiguous with genus or species designations. The bacteriocins frequently possess spectra that exceed the bounds of their named taxa and almost never kill the majority of the taxa for which they are named. Further, the original naming is generally derived not from the sensitive strain the bacteriocin kills, but instead the organism that produces the bacteriocin. This makes the use of this naming system a problematic basis for theory; thus the alternative classification systems.\nBacteriocins that contain the modified amino acid lanthionine as part of their structure are called lantibiotics. However, efforts to reorganize the nomenclature of the family of ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptide (RiPP) natural products have led to the differentiation of lantipeptides from bacteriocins based on biosynthetic genes.\nMethods of classification.\nAlternative methods of classification include: method of killing (pore-forming, nuclease activity, peptidoglycan production inhibition, etc.), genetics (large plasmids, small plasmids, chromosomal), molecular weight and chemistry (large protein, peptide, with/without sugar moiety, containing atypical amino acids such as lanthionine), and method of production (ribosomal, post-ribosomal modifications, non-ribosomal).\nFrom Gram negative bacteria.\nGram negative bacteriocins are typically classified by size. Microcins are less than 20 kDa in size, colicin-like bacteriocins are 20 to 90 kDa in size and tailocins or so called high molecular weight bacteriocins which are multi subunit bacteriocins that resemble the tails of bacteriophages. This size classification also coincides with genetic, structural and functional similarities.\nMicrocins.\nSee main article on microcins.\nColicin-like bacteriocins.\nColicins are bacteriocins found in the Gram-negative \"E. coli\". Similar bacteriocins (CLBs, colicin-like bacteriocins) occur in other Gram-negative bacteria. CLBs typically target same species and have species-specific names: klebicins from \"Klebsiella\" and pesticins from \"Yersinia pestis\". \"Pseudomonas\" -genus produces bacteriocins called pyocins. S-type pyocins belong to CLBs, but R- and F-type pyocins belong to tailocins.\nCLBs are distinct from Gram-positive bacteriocins. They are modular proteins between 20 and 90 kDa in size. They often consist of a receptor binding domain, a translocation domain and a cytotoxic domain. Combinations of these domains between different CLBs occur frequently in nature and can be created in the laboratory. Due to these combinations further subclassification can be based on either import mechanism (group A and B) or on cytotoxic mechanism (nucleases, pore forming, M-type, L-type).\nTailocins.\nMost well studied are the tailocins of \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\". They can be further subdivided into R-type and F-type pyocins.\nSome research was made to identify the pyocins and show how they are involved in the \"cell-to-cell\" competition of the closely related Pseudomonas bacteria.\nThe two types of tailocins differ by their structure; they are both composed of a sheath and a hollow tube forming a long helicoidal hexameric structure attached to a baseplate. There are multiple tail fibers that allow the viral particle to bind to the target cell. However, the R-pyocins are a large, rigid contractile tail-like structure whereas the F-pyocins are a small flexible, non-contractile tail-like structure.\nThe tailocins are coded by prophage sequences in the bacteria genome, and the production will happen when kin bacteria are spotted in the environment of the producer. \nThe particles are synthesized in the center of the cells and after maturation they will migrate to the cell pole via tubulin structure. The tailocins will then be ejected in the medium with the cell lysis. They can be projected up to several tens of micrometers thanks to a very high turgor pressure of the cell. The tailocins released will then recognize and bind to the kin bacteria to kill them.\nFrom Gram positive bacteria.\nBacteriocins from Gram positive bacteria are typically classified into Class I, Class IIa/b/c, and Class III.\nClass I bacteriocins.\nThe class I bacteriocins are small peptide inhibitors and include nisin and other lantibiotics.\nClass II bacteriocins.\nThe class II bacteriocins are small (&lt;10 kDa) heat-stable proteins. This class is subdivided into five subclasses. The class IIa bacteriocins (pediocin-like bacteriocins) are the largest subgroup and contain an N-terminal consensus sequence -Tyr-Gly-Asn-Gly-Val-Xaa-Cys across this group. The C-terminal is responsible for species-specific activity, causing cell-leakage by permeabilizing the target cell wall.\nClass IIa bacteriocins have a large potential for use in food preservation as well medical applications due to their strong anti-\"Listeria\" activity and broad range of activity. One example of Class IIa bacteriocin is \"pediocin PA-1\".\nThe class IIb bacteriocins (two-peptide bacteriocins) require two different peptides for activity. One such an example is \"lactococcin G\", which permeabilizes cell membranes for monovalent sodium and potassium cations, but not for divalent cations. Almost all of these bacteriocins have a GxxxG motifs. This motif is also found in transmembrane proteins, where they are involved in helix-helix interactions. Accordingly, the bacteriocin GxxxG motifs can interact with the motifs in the membranes of the bacterial cells, killing the cells.\nClass IIc encompasses cyclic peptides, in which the N-terminal and C-terminal regions are covalentely linked. \"Enterocin AS-48\" is the prototype of this group.\nClass IId cover single-peptide bacteriocins, which are not post-translationally modified and do not show the pediocin-like signature. The best example of this group is the highly stable \"aureocin A53\". This bacteriocin is stable under highly acidic conditions, high temperatures, and is not affected by proteases.\nThe most recently proposed subclass is the Class IIe, which encompasses those bacteriocins composed of three or four non-pediocin like peptides. The best example is \"aureocin A70\", a four-peptide bacteriocin, highly active against \"Listeria monocytogenes\", with potential biotechnological applications. Recent work has identified that these bacteriocins are widespread across the bacterial domain and are present in the phylum Actinomycetota.\nClass III bacteriocins.\nClass III bacteriocins are large, heat-labile (&gt;10 kDa) protein bacteriocins. This class is subdivided in two subclasses: subclass IIIa (bacteriolysins) and subclass IIIb. \nSubclass IIIa comprises those peptides that kill bacterial cells by cell wall degradation, thus causing cell lysis. The best studied bacteriolysin is lysostaphin, a 27 kDa peptide that hydrolyzes the cell walls of several \"Staphylococcus\" species, principally \"S. aureus\". Subclass IIIb, in contrast, comprises those peptides that do not cause cell lysis, killing the target cells by disrupting plasma membrane potential.\nClass IV bacteriocins.\nClass IV bacteriocins are defined as complex bacteriocins containing lipid or carbohydrate moieties. \nConfirmation by experimental data was established with the characterisation of sublancin and glycocin F (GccF) by two independent groups.\nDatabases.\nTwo databases of bacteriocins are available: BAGEL and BACTIBASE.\nUses.\nAs of 2016, nisin was the only bacteriocin generally recognized as safe by the FDA and was used as a food preservative in several countries. Generally bacteriocins are not useful as food preservatives because they are expensive to make, are broken down in food products, they harm some proteins in food, and they target too narrow a range of microbes.\nFurthermore, bacteriocins active against \"E. coli\", \"Salmonella\" and \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\" have been produced in plants with the aim for them to be used as food additives. The use of bacteriocins in food has been generally regarded as safe by the FDA.\nMoreover, has been recently demonstrated that bacteriocins active against plant pathogenic bacteria can be expressed in plants to provide robust resistance against plant disease.\nRelevance to human health.\nBacteriocins are made by non-pathogenic \"Lactobacilli\" in the vagina and help maintain the stability of the vaginal microbiome.\nResearch.\nBacteriocins have been proposed as a replacement for antibiotics to which pathogenic bacteria have become resistant. Potentially, the bacteriocins could be produced by bacteria intentionally introduced into the patient to combat infection. There are several strategies by which new bacteriocins can be discovered. In the past, bacteriocins had to be identified by intensive culture-based screening for antimicrobial activity against suitable targets and subsequently purified using fastidious methods prior to testing. However, since the advent of the genomic era, the availability of the bacterial genome sequences has revolutionized the approach to identifying bacteriocins. Recently developed \"in silico\"-based methods can be applied to rapidly screen thousands of bacterial genomes in order to identify novel antimicrobial peptides.\nAs of 2014 some bacteriocins had been studied in \"in vitro\" studies to see if they can stop viruses from replicating, namely staphylococcin 188 against Newcastle disease virus, influenza virus, and coliphage HSA virus; each of enterocin AAR-71 class IIa, enterocin AAR-74 class IIa, and erwiniocin NA4 against coliphage HSA virus; each of enterocin ST5Ha, enterocin NKR-5-3C, and subtilosin against HSV-1; each of enterocin ST4V and enterocin CRL35 class IIa against HSV-1 and HSV-2; labyrinthopeptin A1 against HIV-1 and HSV-1; and bacteriocin from \"Lactobacillus delbrueckii\" against influenza virus.\nAs of 2009, some bacteriocins, cytolysin, pyocin S2, colicins A and E1, and the microcin MccE492 had been tested on eukaryotic cell lines and in a mouse model of cancer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63791", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63791", "title": "Peptic ulcer disease", "text": "Ulcer of an area of the gastrointestinal tract\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPeptic ulcer disease refers to damage of the inner part of the stomach's gastric mucosa (lining of the stomach), the first part of the small intestine, or sometimes the lower esophagus. An ulcer in the stomach is called a gastric ulcer, while one in the first part of the intestines is a duodenal ulcer. The most common symptoms of a duodenal ulcer are waking at night with upper abdominal pain, and upper abdominal pain that improves with eating. With a gastric ulcer, the pain may worsen with eating. The pain is often described as a burning or dull ache. Other symptoms include belching, vomiting, weight loss, or poor appetite. About a third of older people with peptic ulcers have no symptoms. Complications may include bleeding, perforation, and blockage of the stomach. Bleeding occurs in as many as 15% of cases.\nCommon causes include infection with \"Helicobacter pylori\" and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Other, less common causes include tobacco smoking, stress as a result of other serious health conditions, Beh\u00e7et's disease, Zollinger\u2013Ellison syndrome, Crohn's disease, and liver cirrhosis. Older people are more sensitive to the ulcer-causing effects of NSAIDs. The diagnosis is typically suspected due to the presenting symptoms with confirmation by either endoscopy or barium swallow. \"H. pylori\" can be diagnosed by testing the blood for antibodies, a urea breath test, testing the stool for signs of the bacteria, or a biopsy of the stomach. Other conditions that produce similar symptoms include stomach cancer, coronary heart disease, and inflammation of the stomach lining or gallbladder inflammation.\nDiet does not play an important role in either causing or preventing ulcers. Treatment includes stopping smoking, stopping use of NSAIDs, stopping alcohol, and taking medications to decrease stomach acid. The medication used to decrease acid is usually either a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) or an H2 blocker, with four weeks of treatment initially recommended. Ulcers due to \"H. pylori\" are treated with a combination of medications, such as amoxicillin, clarithromycin, and a PPI. Antibiotic resistance is increasing and thus treatment may not always be effective. Bleeding ulcers may be treated by endoscopy, with open surgery typically only used in cases in which it is not successful.\nPeptic ulcers are present in around 4% of the population. New ulcers were found in around 87.4 million people worldwide during 2015. About 10% of people develop a peptic ulcer at some point in their life. Peptic ulcers resulted in 267,500 deaths in 2015, down from 327,000 in 1990. The first description of a perforated peptic ulcer was in 1670, in Princess Henrietta of England. \"H. pylori\" was first identified as causing peptic ulcers by Barry Marshall and Robin Warren in the late 20th century, a discovery for which they received the Nobel Prize in 2005.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nSigns and symptoms of a peptic ulcer can include one or more of the following:\nA history of heartburn or gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and use of certain medications can raise the suspicion for peptic ulcer. Medicines associated with peptic ulcer include NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) that inhibit cyclooxygenase and most glucocorticoids (e.g., dexamethasone and prednisolone).\nIn people over the age of 45 with more than two weeks of the above symptoms, the odds for peptic ulceration are high enough to warrant rapid investigation by esophagogastroduodenoscopy.\nThe timing of symptoms in relation to the meal may differentiate between gastric and duodenal ulcers. A gastric ulcer would give epigastric pain during the meal, associated with nausea and vomiting, as gastric acid production is increased as food enters the stomach. Pain in duodenal ulcers would be aggravated by hunger and relieved by a meal and is associated with night pain.\nAlso, the symptoms of peptic ulcers may vary with the location of the ulcer and the person's age. Furthermore, typical ulcers tend to heal and recur, and as a result the pain may occur for few days and weeks and then wane or disappear. Usually, children and the elderly do not develop any symptoms unless complications have arisen.\nA burning or gnawing feeling in the stomach area lasting between 30\u00a0minutes and 3\u00a0hours commonly accompanies ulcers. This pain can be misinterpreted as hunger, indigestion, or heartburn. Pain is usually caused by the ulcer, but it may be aggravated by the stomach acid when it comes into contact with the ulcerated area. The pain caused by peptic ulcers can be felt anywhere from the navel up to the sternum, it may last from a few minutes to several hours, and it may be worse when the stomach is empty. Also, sometimes the pain may flare at night, and it can commonly be temporarily relieved by eating foods that buffer stomach acid or by taking anti-acid medication. However, peptic ulcer disease symptoms may be different for everyone.\nCause.\n\"H. pylori\".\n\"Helicobacter pylori\" is one of the major causative factors of peptic ulcer disease. It secretes urease to create an alkaline environment, which is suitable for its survival. It expresses blood group antigen-binding adhesin (BabA) and outer inflammatory protein adhesin (OipA), which enables it to attach to the gastric epithelium. The bacterium also expresses virulence factors such as \"CagA\" and \"PicB\", which cause stomach mucosal inflammation. The VacA gene encodes for vacuolating cytotoxin, but its mechanism of causing peptic ulcers is unclear. Such stomach mucosal inflammation can be associated with hyperchlorhydria (increased stomach acid secretion) or hypochlorhydria (reduced stomach acid secretion). Inflammatory cytokines inhibit the parietal cell acid secretion. \"H. pylori\" also secretes certain products that inhibit hydrogen potassium ATPase; activate calcitonin gene-related peptide sensory neurons, which increases somatostatin secretion to inhibit acid production by parietal cells; and inhibit gastrin secretion. This reduction in acid production causes gastric ulcers. On the other hand, increased acid production at the pyloric antrum is associated with duodenal ulcers in 10% to 15% of \"H. pylori\" infection cases. In this case, somatostatin production is reduced and gastrin production is increased, leading to increased histamine secretion from the enterochromaffin cells, thus increasing acid production. An acidic environment at the antrum causes metaplasia of the duodenal cells, causing duodenal ulcers.\nHuman immune response toward the bacteria also determines the emergence of peptic ulcer disease. The human IL1B gene encodes for Interleukin 1 beta, and other genes that encode for tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and Lymphotoxin alpha also play a role in gastric inflammation.\nNSAIDs.\nTaking nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as aspirin can increase the risk of peptic ulcer disease by four times compared to non-users. The risk of getting a peptic ulcer is two times for aspirin users. Risk of bleeding increases if NSAIDs are combined with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), corticosteroids, antimineralocorticoids, and anticoagulants. The gastric mucosa protects itself from gastric acid with a layer of mucus, the secretion of which is stimulated by certain prostaglandins. NSAIDs block the function of cyclooxygenase 1 (\"COX-1\"), which is essential for the production of these prostaglandins. Besides this, NSAIDs also inhibit stomach mucosa cells proliferation and mucosal blood flow, reducing bicarbonate and mucus secretion, which reduces the integrity of the mucosa. Another type of NSAIDs, called COX-2 selective anti-inflammatory drugs (such as celecoxib), preferentially inhibit \"COX-2\", which is less essential in the gastric mucosa. This reduces the probability of getting peptic ulcers; however, it can still delay ulcer healing for those who already have a peptic ulcer. Peptic ulcers caused by NSAIDs differ from those caused by \"H. pylori\" as the latter's appear as a consequence of inflammation of the mucosa (presence of neutrophil and submucosal edema), the former instead as a consequence of a direct damage of the NSAID molecule against COX enzymes, altering the hydrophobic state of the mucus, the permeability of the lining epithelium and mitochondrial machinery of the cell itself. In this way NSAID ulcers tend to complicate faster and dig deeper in the tissue, causing more complications \u2013 often asymptomatically \u2013 until a great portion of the tissue is involved.\nStress.\nPhysiological (not psychological) stress due to serious health problems, such as those requiring treatment in an intensive care unit, is well described as a cause of peptic ulcers, which are also known as stress ulcers.\nWhile chronic life stress was once believed to be the main cause of ulcers, this is no longer the case. It is, however, still occasionally believed to play a role. This may be due to the well-documented effects of stress on gastric physiology, increasing the risk in those with other causes, such as \"H. pylori\" or NSAID use.\nDiet.\nDietary factors, such as spice consumption, were hypothesized to cause ulcers until the late 20th century, but have been shown to be of relatively minor importance. Caffeine and coffee, also commonly thought to cause or exacerbate ulcers, appear to have little effect. Similarly, while studies have found that alcohol consumption increases risk when associated with \"H. pylori\" infection, it does not seem to independently increase risk. Even when coupled with \"H. pylori\" infection, the increase is modest in comparison to the primary risk factor.\nOther.\nOther causes of peptic ulcer disease include gastric ischaemia, drugs, metabolic disturbances, cytomegalovirus (CMV), upper abdominal radiotherapy, Crohn's disease, and vasculitis. Gastrinomas (Zollinger\u2013Ellison syndrome), or rare gastrin-secreting tumors, also cause multiple and difficult-to-heal ulcers.\nIt is still unclear whether smoking increases the risk of getting peptic ulcers.\nDiagnosis.\nThe diagnosis is mainly established based on the characteristic symptoms. Stomach pain is the most common sign of a peptic ulcer.\nMore specifically, peptic ulcers erode the muscularis mucosae, at minimum reaching to the level of the submucosa (contrast with erosions, which do not involve the muscularis mucosae).\nConfirmation of the diagnosis is made with the help of tests such as endoscopies or barium contrast x-rays. The tests are typically ordered if the symptoms do not resolve after a few weeks of treatment, or when they first appear in a person who is over age 45 or who has other symptoms such as weight loss, because stomach cancer can cause similar symptoms. Also, when severe ulcers resist treatment, particularly if a person has several ulcers or the ulcers are in unusual places, a doctor may suspect an underlying condition that causes the stomach to overproduce acid.\nAn esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), a form of endoscopy, also known as a gastroscopy, is carried out on people in whom a peptic ulcer is suspected. It is also the gold standard of diagnosis for peptic ulcer disease. By direct visual identification, the location and severity of an ulcer can be described. Moreover, if no ulcer is present, EGD can often provide an alternative diagnosis.\nOne of the reasons that blood tests are not reliable for accurate peptic ulcer diagnosis on their own is their inability to differentiate between past exposure to the bacteria and current infection. Additionally, a false negative result is possible with a blood test if the person has recently been taking certain drugs, such as antibiotics or proton-pump inhibitors.\nThe diagnosis of \"Helicobacter pylori\" can be made by:\nThe breath test uses radioactive carbon to detect \"H. pylori\". To perform this exam, the person is asked to drink a tasteless liquid that contains the carbon as part of the substance that the bacteria breaks down. After an hour, the person is asked to blow into a sealed bag. If the person is infected with \"H. pylori\", the breath sample will contain radioactive carbon dioxide. This test provides the advantage of being able to monitor the response to treatment used to kill the bacteria.\nThe possibility of other causes of ulcers, notably malignancy (gastric cancer), needs to be kept in mind. This is especially true in ulcers of the greater curvature of the stomach; most are also a consequence of chronic \"H. pylori\" infection.\nIf a peptic ulcer perforates, air will leak from inside the gastrointestinal tract (which always contains some air) to the peritoneal cavity (which normally never contains air). This leads to \"free gas\" within the peritoneal cavity. If the person stands, as when having a chest X-ray, the gas will float to a position underneath the diaphragm. Therefore, gas in the peritoneal cavity, shown on an erect chest X-ray or supine lateral abdominal X-ray, is an omen of perforated peptic ulcer disease.\nClassification.\nPeptic ulcers are a form of acid\u2013peptic disorder. Peptic ulcers can be classified according to their location and other factors.\nMacroscopic appearance.\nGastric ulcers are most often localized on the lesser curvature of the stomach. The ulcer is a round to oval parietal defect (\"hole\"), 2\u20134\u00a0cm diameter, with a smooth base and perpendicular borders. These borders are not elevated or irregular in the acute form of peptic ulcer, and regular but with elevated borders and inflammatory surrounding in the chronic form. In the ulcerative form of gastric cancer, the borders are irregular. Surrounding mucosa may present radial folds, as a consequence of the parietal scarring.\nMicroscopic appearance.\nA gastric peptic ulcer is a mucosal perforation that penetrates the muscularis mucosae and lamina propria, usually produced by acid-pepsin aggression. Ulcer margins are perpendicular and present chronic gastritis. During the active phase, the base of the ulcer shows four zones: fibrinoid necrosis, inflammatory exudate, granulation tissue and fibrous tissue. The fibrous base of the ulcer may contain vessels with thickened wall or with thrombosis.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nConditions that may appear similar include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrevention.\nPrevention of peptic ulcer disease for those who are taking NSAIDs (with low cardiovascular risk) can be achieved by adding a proton pump inhibitor (PPI), an H2 antagonist, or misoprostol. NSAIDs of the COX-2 inhibitor type may reduce the rate of ulcers when compared to non-selective NSAIDs. PPI is the most popular agent in peptic ulcer prevention. However, there is no evidence that H2 antagonists can prevent stomach bleeding for those taking NSAIDs. Although misoprostol is effective in preventing peptic ulcer, its properties of promoting abortion and causing gastrointestinal distress limit its use. For those with high cardiovascular risk, naproxen with PPI can be a useful choice. Otherwise, low-dose aspirin, celecoxib, and PPI can also be used.\nManagement.\nEradication therapy.\nOnce the diagnosis of \"H. pylori\" is confirmed, the first-line treatment would be a triple regimen in which pantoprazole and clarithromycin are combined with either amoxicillin or metronidazole. This treatment regimen can be given for 7\u201314 days. However, its effectiveness in eradicating \"H. pylori\" has been reducing from 90% to 70%. However, the rate of eradication can be increased by doubling the dosage of pantoprazole or increasing the duration of treatment to 14 days. Quadruple therapy (pantoprazole, clarithromycin, amoxicillin, and metronidazole) can also be used. The quadruple therapy can achieve an eradication rate of 90%. If the clarithromycin resistance rate is higher than 15% in an area, the usage of clarithromycin should be abandoned. Instead, bismuth-containing quadruple therapy can be used (pantoprazole, bismuth citrate, tetracycline, and metronidazole) for 14 days. The bismuth therapy can also achieve an eradication rate of 90% and can be used as second-line therapy when the first-line triple-regimen therapy has failed.\nNSAIDs-induced ulcers.\nNSAID-associated ulcers heal in six to eight weeks provided the NSAIDs are withdrawn with the introduction of proton pump inhibitors (PPI).\nBleeding.\nFor those with bleeding peptic ulcers, fluid replacement with crystalloids is sometimes given to maintain volume in the blood vessels. Maintaining haemoglobin at greater than 7 g/dL (70 g/L) through restrictive blood transfusion has been associated with reduced rate of death. Glasgow-Blatchford score is used to determine whether a person should be treated inside a hospital or as an outpatient. Intravenous PPIs can suppress stomach bleeding more quickly than oral ones. A neutral stomach pH is required to keep platelets in place and prevent clot lysis. Tranexamic acid and antifibrinolytic agents are not useful in treating peptic ulcer disease.\nEarly endoscopic therapy can help to stop bleeding by using cautery, endoclip, or epinephrine injection. Treatment is indicated if there is active bleeding in the stomach, visible vessels, or an adherent clot. Endoscopy is also helpful in identifying people who are suitable for hospital discharge. Prokinetic agents such as erythromycin and metoclopramide can be given before endoscopy to improve endoscopic view. Either high- or low-dose PPIs are equally effective in reducing bleeding after endoscopy. High-dose intravenous PPI is defined as a bolus dose of 80\u00a0mg followed by an infusion of 8\u00a0mg per hour for 72 hours\u2014in other words, the continuous infusion of PPI of greater than 192\u00a0mg per day. Intravenous PPI can be changed to oral once there is no high risk of rebleeding from peptic ulcer.\nFor those with hypovolemic shock and ulcer size of greater than 2\u00a0cm, there is a high chance that the endoscopic treatment would fail. Therefore, surgery and angiographic embolism are reserved for these complicated cases. However, there is a higher rate of complication for those who underwent surgery to patch the stomach bleeding site when compared to repeated endoscopy. Angiographic embolisation has a higher rebleeding rate but a similar rate of death to surgery.\nAnticoagulants.\nAccording to expert opinion, for those who are already on anticoagulants, the international normalized ratio (INR) should be kept at 1.5. For aspirin users who required endoscopic treatment for bleeding peptic ulcer, there is two times increased risk of rebleeding but with ten times reduced risk of death at eight weeks following the resumption of aspirin. For those who were on double antiplatelet agents for indwelling stent in blood vessels, both antiplatelet agents should not be stopped because there is a high risk of stent thrombosis. For those who were under warfarin treatment, fresh frozen plasma (FFP), vitamin K, prothrombin complex concentrates, or recombinant factor VIIa can be given to reverse the effect of warfarin. High doses of vitamin K should be avoided to reduce the time for rewarfarinisation once the stomach bleeding has stopped. Prothrombin complex concentrates are preferred for severe bleeding. Recombinant factor VIIa is reserved for life-threatening bleeding because of its high risk of thromboembolism. Direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC) are recommended instead of warfarin as they are more effective in preventing thromboembolism. In case of bleeding caused by DOAC, activated charcoal within four hours is the antidote of choice.\nEpidemiology.\nThe lifetime risk for developing a peptic ulcer is approximately 5% to 10% with the rate of 0.1% to 0.3% per year. Peptic ulcers resulted in 301,000 deaths in 2013, down from 327,000 in 1990.\nIn Western countries, the percentage of people with \"H. pylori\" infections roughly matches age (i.e., 20% at age 20, 30% at age 30, 80% at age 80, etc.). Prevalence is higher in third world countries, where it is estimated at 70% of the population, whereas developed countries show a maximum of a 40% ratio. Overall, \"H. pylori\" infections show a worldwide decrease, more so in developed countries. Transmission occurs via food, contaminated groundwater, or human saliva (such as from kissing or sharing food utensils).\nPeptic ulcer disease had a tremendous effect on morbidity and mortality until the last decades of the 20th century when epidemiological trends started to point to an impressive fall in its incidence. The reason that the rates of peptic ulcer disease decreased is thought to be the development of new effective medication and acid suppressants and the rational use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).\nHistory.\nJohn Lykoudis, a general practitioner in Greece, treated people for peptic ulcer disease with antibiotics beginning in 1958, long before it was commonly recognized that bacteria were a dominant cause for the disease.\n\"Helicobacter pylori\" was identified in 1982 by two Australian scientists, Robin Warren and Barry J. Marshall, as a causative factor for ulcers. In their original paper, Warren and Marshall contended that most gastric ulcers and gastritis were caused by colonization with this bacterium, not by stress or spicy food, as had been assumed before.\nThe \"H. pylori\" hypothesis was still poorly received, so in an act of self-experimentation Marshall drank a Petri dish containing a culture of organisms extracted from a person with an ulcer and five days later developed gastritis. His symptoms disappeared after two weeks, but he took antibiotics to kill the remaining bacteria at the urging of his wife, since halitosis is one of the symptoms of infection. This experiment was published in 1984 in the \"Australian Medical Journal\" and is among the most cited articles from the journal.\nIn 1997, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, with other government agencies, academic institutions, and industry, launched a national education campaign to inform health care providers and consumers about the link between \"H. pylori\" and ulcers. This campaign reinforced the news that ulcers are a curable infection and that health can be greatly improved and money saved by disseminating information about \"H. pylori\".\nIn 2005, the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to Marshall and his long-time collaborator Warren \"for their discovery of the bacterium \"Helicobacter pylori\" and its role in gastritis and peptic ulcer disease.\" Marshall continues research related to \"H. pylori\" and runs a molecular biology lab at UWA in Perth, Western Australia.\nA 1998 \"New England Medical Journal\" study found that mastic gum, a tree resin extract, actively eliminated the \"H. pylori\" bacteria. However, multiple subsequent studies (in mice and in vivo) have found no effect of using mastic gum on reducing \"H. pylori\" levels.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63792", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63792", "title": "Courtly love", "text": "Medieval European literary conception of love\nCourtly love ( ; ) was a medieval European literary conception of love that emphasized nobility and chivalry. Medieval literature is filled with examples of knights setting out on adventures and performing various deeds or services for ladies because of their \"courtly love\". This kind of love was originally a literary fiction created for the entertainment of the nobility, but as time passed, these ideas about love spread to popular culture and attracted a larger literate audience. In the High Middle Ages, a \"game of love\" developed around these ideas as a set of social practices. \"Loving nobly\" was considered to be an enriching and improving practice.\nCourtly love began in the ducal and princely courts of Aquitaine, Provence, Champagne, ducal Burgundy and the Norman Kingdom of Sicily at the end of the eleventh century. In essence, courtly love was an experience between erotic desire and spiritual attainment, \"a love at once illicit and morally elevating, passionate and disciplined, humiliating and exalting, human and transcendent\". The topic was prominent with both musicians and poets, being frequently used by troubadours, and . The topic was also popular with major writers, including Dante, Petrarch and Geoffrey Chaucer.\nOrigin of term.\nContemporary usage.\nThe term \"courtly love\" appears in only one extant source: Proven\u00e7al in a late 12th-century poem by Peire d'Alvernhe.\nIt is associated with the Proven\u00e7al term (\"fine love\") which appears frequently in poetry, as well as its German translation . Proven\u00e7al also uses the terms , .\nModern usage.\nThe modern use of the term \"courtly love\" comes from Gaston Paris. He used the term (\"courtly love\") in a 1883 article discussing the relationship between Lancelot and Guinevere in Chr\u00e9tien de Troyes's \"Lancelot, the Knight of the Cart\" (c. 1181). In his article, Paris outlined four principal characteristics of :\nParis used it as a descriptive phrase, not a technical term, and used it interchangeably with the phrase . Nonetheless, other scholars began using it as a technical term after him.\nIn 1896, Lewis Freeman Mott applied the term \"courtly love\" to Dante Alighieri's love for Beatrice in \"La Vita Nuova\" (1294). The two relationships are very different \u2014 Lancelot and Guinevere are secret adulterous lovers, while Dante and Beatrice had no actual romantic relationship and only met twice in their whole lives. Nonetheless, the manner in which the two men describe their devotion to and quasi-religious adoration of their ladies is similar.\nIn 1936, C. S. Lewis wrote \"The Allegory of Love\" which popularized the term \"courtly love\". He defined it as a \"love of a highly specialized sort, whose characteristics may be enumerated as Humility, Courtesy, Adultery, and the Religion of Love\".\nIn 1964, Moshe Lazar differentiated three separate categories within \"courtly love\".\nCriticism.\nScholars debate whether \"courtly love\" constitutes a coherent idea.\nD. W. Robertson Jr. said, \"the connotations of the term \"courtly love\" are so vague and flexible that its utility for purposes of definition has become questionable.\" John C. Moore called it \"a term used for a number of different, in some cases contradictory, conceptions\" and called it \"a mischievous term which should be abandoned\". Roger Boase admitted the term \"has been subjected to a bewildering variety of uses and definitions\", but nonetheless defended the concept of courtly love as real and useful.\nE. Talbot Donaldson criticized its usage as a technical term as an anachronism or neologism.\nRichard Trachsler says that \"the concept of courtly literature is linked to the idea of the existence of courtly texts, texts produced and read by men and women sharing some kind of elaborate culture they all have in common\". He argues that many of the texts that scholars claim to be courtly also include \"uncourtly\" texts, and argues that there is no clear way to determine \"where courtliness ends and uncourtliness starts\" because readers would enjoy texts which were supposed to be entirely courtly without realizing they were also enjoying texts which were uncourtly. This presents a clear problem in the understanding of courtliness.\nHistory.\nThe practice of courtly love developed in the castle life of four regions: Aquitaine, Provence, Champagne and ducal Burgundy, from around the time of the First Crusade (1099). Eleanor of Aquitaine (1124\u20131204) brought ideals of courtly love from Aquitaine first to the court of France, then to England (she became queen-consort in each of these two realms in succession). Her daughter Marie, Countess of Champagne (1145\u20131198) brought courtly behavior to the Count of Champagne's court. Courtly love found expression in the lyric poems written by troubadours, such as William IX, Duke of Aquitaine (1071\u20131126), one of the first troubadour poets.\nPoets adopted the terminology of feudalism, declaring themselves the vassal of the lady. The troubadour's model of the ideal lady was the wife of his employer or lord, a lady of higher status, usually the rich and powerful female head of the castle. When her husband was away on Crusade or elsewhere she dominated the household and cultural affairs; sometimes this was the case even when the husband was at home. The poet gave voice to the aspirations of the courtier class, for only those who were noble could engage in courtly love. This new kind of love saw nobility not based on wealth and family history, but on character and actions; such as devotion, piety, gallantry, thus appealing to poorer knights who saw an avenue for advancement.\nBy the late 12th century Andreas Capellanus' highly influential work \"De amore\" had codified the rules of courtly love. \"De amore\" lists such rules as:\nMuch of its structure and its sentiments derived from Ovid's \"Ars amatoria\".\nAndalusian and Islamic influence.\nOne theory holds that courtly love in Southern France was influenced by Arabic poetry in Al-Andalus.\nIn contemporary Andalusian writing, \"\u1e6cawq al-\u1e24am\u0101mah\" (\"The Ring of the Dove\") by Ibn Hazm is a treatise on love which emphasizes restraint and chastity. \"Tarjum\u0101n al-Ashw\u0101q\" (\"The Translator of Desires\") by Ibn Arabi is a collection of love poetry. Outside of Al-Andalus, \"Kitab al-Zahra\" (\"Book of the Flower\") by Ibn Dawud and \"Risala fi'l-Ishq\" (\"Treatise of Love\") by Ibn Sina are roughly contemporary treaties on love. Ibn Arabi and Ibn Sina both weave together themes of sensual love with divine love.\nAccording to Gustave E. von Grunebaum, notions of \"love for love's sake\" and \"exaltation of the beloved lady\" can be traced back to Arabic literature of the 9th and 10th centuries. The ennobling power of love is overtly discussed in \"Risala fi'l-Ishq\".\nAccording to an argument outlined by Mar\u00eda Rosa Menocal in \"The Arabic Role in Medieval Literary History\" (1987), in 11th-century Spain, a group of wandering poets appeared who would go from court to court, and sometimes travel to Christian courts in southern France, a situation closely mirroring what would happen in southern France about a century later. Contacts between these Spanish poets and the French troubadours were frequent. The metrical forms used by the Spanish poets resembled those later used by the troubadours.\nAnalysis.\nThe historic analysis of courtly love varies between different schools of historians. That sort of history which views the early Middle Ages dominated by a prudish and patriarchal theocracy views courtly love as a \"humanist\" reaction to the puritanical views of the Catholic Church. Scholars who endorse this view value courtly love for its exaltation of femininity as an ennobling, spiritual, and moral force, in contrast to the ironclad chauvinism of the first and second estates. The condemnation of courtly love in the beginning of the 13th century by the church as heretical, is seen by these scholars as the Church's attempt to put down this \"sexual rebellion\".\nHowever, other scholars note that courtly love was certainly tied to the Church's effort to civilize the crude Germanic feudal codes in the late 11th century. It has also been suggested that the prevalence of arranged marriages required other outlets for the expression of more personal occurrences of romantic love, and thus it was not in reaction to the prudery or patriarchy of the Church but to the nuptial customs of the era that courtly love arose. In the Germanic cultural world, a special form of courtly love can be found, namely .\nAt times, the lady could be a , a far-away princess, and some tales told of men who had fallen in love with women whom they had never seen, merely on hearing their perfection described, but normally she was not so distant. As the etiquette of courtly love became more complicated, the knight might wear the colors of his lady: where blue or black were sometimes the colors of faithfulness, green could be a sign of unfaithfulness. Salvation, previously found in the hands of the priesthood, now came from the hands of one's lady. In some cases, there were also women troubadours who expressed the same sentiment for men.\nLiterary convention.\nThe literary convention of courtly love can be found in most of the major authors of the Middle Ages, such as Geoffrey Chaucer, John Gower, Dante, Marie de France, Chretien de Troyes, Gottfried von Strassburg and Thomas Malory. The medieval genres in which courtly love conventions can be found include the lyric, the romance and the allegory.\nLyric.\nCourtly love was born in the lyric, first appearing with Proven\u00e7al poets in the 11th century, including itinerant and courtly minstrels such as the French troubadours and trouv\u00e8res, as well as the writers of lays. Texts about courtly love, including lays, were often set to music by troubadours or minstrels. According to scholar Ardis Butterfield, courtly love is \"the air which many genres of troubadour song breathe\". Not much is known about how, when, where, and for whom these pieces were performed, but we can infer that the pieces were performed at court by troubadours, trouv\u00e8res, or the courtiers themselves. This can be inferred because people at court were encouraged or expected to be \"courtly\" and be proficient in many different areas, including music.\nIt is difficult to know how and when these songs were performed because most of the information on these topics is provided in the music itself. One lay, the \"Lay of Lecheor\", says that after a lay was composed, \"Then the lay was preserved / Until it was known everywhere / For those who were skilled musicians / On viol, harp and rote / Carried it forth from that region\u2026\" Scholars have to then decide whether to take this description as truth or fiction.\nPeriod examples of performance practice, of which there are few, show a quiet scene with a household servant performing for the king or lord and a few other people, usually unaccompanied. According to scholar Christopher Page, whether or not a piece was accompanied depended on the availability of instruments and people to accompany\u2014in a courtly setting. For troubadours or minstrels, pieces were often accompanied by fiddle, also called a vielle, or a harp. Courtly musicians also played the vielle and the harp, as well as different types of viols and flutes.\nThis French tradition spread later to the German Minnes\u00e4nger, such as Walther von der Vogelweide and Wolfram von Eschenbach, and to the troubadours of the Iberian peninsula, see Galician-Portuguese lyric. It also influenced the Sicilian School of Italian vernacular poetry, as well as Petrarch and Dante.\nRomance.\nThe vernacular poetry of the , or courtly romances, included many examples of courtly love. Some of them are set within the cycle of poems celebrating King Arthur's court. This was a literature of leisure, directed to a largely female audience for the first time in European history.\nAllegory.\nAllegory is common in the romantic literature of the Middle Ages, and it was often used to interpret what was already written. There is a strong connection between religious imagery and human sexual love in medieval writings.\nThe tradition of medieval allegory began in part with the interpretation of the Song of Songs in the Bible. Some medieval writers thought that the book should be taken literally as an erotic text; others believed that the Song of Songs was a metaphor for the relationship between Christ and the church and that the book could not even exist without that as its metaphorical meaning. Still others claimed that the book was written literally about sex but that this meaning must be \"superseded by meanings related to Christ, to the church and to the individual Christian soul\".\nMarie de France's lai \"Eliduc\" toys with the idea that human romantic love is a symbol for God's love when two people love each other so fully and completely that they leave each other for God, separating and moving to different religious environments. Furthermore, the main character's first wife leaves her husband and becomes a nun so that he can marry his new lover.\nAllegorical treatment of courtly love is also found in the \"Roman de la Rose\" by Guillaume de Lorris and Jean de Meun. In it, a man becomes enamored with an individual rose on a rosebush, attempting to pick it and finally succeeding. The rose represents the female body, but the romance also contains lengthy digressive \"discussions on free will versus determinism as well as on optics and the influence of heavenly bodies on human behavior\".\nCourtly love in troubadour poetry is associated with the word . comes from the Latin phrase \"my lord\", . The part is alternatively interpreted as coming from or , though the meaning is unchanged regardless.\nTroubadours beginning with Guilhem de Poitou would address the lady as , flattering her by addressing her as his lord and also serving as an ambiguous code-name.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By refusing to disclose his lady's name, the troubadour permitted every woman in the audience, notably the patron's wife, to think that it was she; then, besides making her the object of a secret passion\u2014it was \"always\" covert romance\u2014by making her his lord he flashed her an aggrandized image of herself. She was more than \"just\" a woman: She was a man.\u2014\u200a\nThese points of multiple meaning and ambiguity facilitated a \"coquetry of class\", allowing the male troubadours to use the images of women as a means to gain social status with other men, but simultaneously, Bogin suggests, voiced deeper longings for the audience: \"In this way, the sexual expressed the social and the social the sexual; and in the poetry of courtly love the static hierarchy of feudalism was uprooted and transformed to express a world of motion and transformation.\"\nLater influence.\nThrough such routes as Capellanus's record of the Courts of Love and the later works of Petrarchism (as well as the continuing influence of Ovid), the themes of courtly love were not confined to the medieval, but appear both in serious and comic forms in early modern Europe. Shakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\", for example, shows Romeo attempting to love Rosaline in an almost contrived courtly fashion while Mercutio mocks him for it; and both in his plays and his sonnets the writer can be seen appropriating the conventions of courtly love for his own ends.\nPaul Gallico's 1939 novel \"The Adventures of Hiram Holliday\" depicts a Romantic modern American consciously seeking to model himself on the ideal medieval knight. Among other things, when finding himself in Austria in the aftermath of the Anschluss, he saves a Habsburg princess who is threatened by the Nazis, acts towards her in strict accordance with the maxims of courtly love and finally wins her after fighting a duel with her aristocratic betrothed.\nPoints of controversy.\nSexuality.\nA point of ongoing controversy about courtly love is to what extent it was sexual. All courtly love was erotic to some degree, and not purely platonic\u2014the troubadours speak of the physical beauty of their ladies and the feelings and desires the ladies arouse in them. However, it is unclear what a poet should do: live a life of perpetual desire channeling his energies to higher ends, or physically consummate. Scholars have seen it both ways.\nDenis de Rougemont said that the troubadours were influenced by Cathar doctrines which rejected the pleasures of the flesh and that they were metaphorically addressing the spirit and soul of their ladies. Rougemont also said that courtly love subscribed to the code of chivalry, and therefore a knight's loyalty was always to his king before his mistress. Edmund Reiss claimed it was also a spiritual love, but a love that had more in common with Christian love, or \"caritas\". On the other hand, scholars such as Mosch\u00e9 Lazar claim it was adulterous sexual love, with physical possession of the lady the desired end.\nMany scholars identify courtly love as the \"pure love\" described in 1184 by Capellanus in \"De amore\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the pure love which binds together the hearts of two lovers with every feeling of delight. This kind consists in the contemplation of the mind and the affection of the heart; it goes as far as the kiss and the embrace and the modest contact with the nude lover, omitting the final solace, for that is not permitted for those who wish to love purely... That is called mixed love which gets its effect from every delight of the flesh and culminates in the final act of Venus.\nOn the other hand, continual references to beds and sleeping in the lover's arms in medieval sources such as the troubadour and romances such as Chr\u00e9tien's \"Lancelot\" imply at least in some cases a context of actual sexual intercourse.\nWithin the corpus of troubadour poems there is a wide range of attitudes, even across the works of individual poets. Some poems are physically sensual, even bawdily imagining nude embraces, while others are highly spiritual and border on the platonic.\nReal-world practice.\nA continued point of controversy is whether courtly love was purely literary or was actually practiced in real life. There are no historical records that offer evidence of its presence in reality. Historian John F. Benton found no documentary evidence in law codes, court cases, chronicles or other historical documents. However, the existence of the non-fiction genre of courtesy books is perhaps evidence for its practice. For example, according to Christine de Pizan's courtesy book \"Book of the Three Virtues\" (c. 1405), which expresses disapproval of courtly love, the convention was being used to justify and cover up illicit love affairs. Philip le Bon, in his \"Feast of the Pheasant\" in 1454, relied on parables drawn from courtly love to incite his nobles to swear to participate in an anticipated crusade, while well into the 15th century numerous actual political and social conventions were largely based on the formulas dictated by the \"rules\" of courtly love.\nCourts of love.\nA point of controversy was the existence of \"courts of love\", first mentioned by Andreas Capellanus. These were supposed courts made up of tribunals staffed by 10 to 70 women who would hear a case of love and rule on it based on the rules of love. In the 19th century, historians took the existence of these courts as fact, but later historians such as Benton noted \"none of the abundant letters, chronicles, songs and pious dedications\" suggest they ever existed outside of the poetic literature. Likewise, feminist historian Emily James Putnam wrote in 1910 that, secrecy being \"among the lover's first duties\" in the ideology of courtly love, it is \"manifestly absurd to suppose that a sentiment which depended on concealment for its existence should be amenable to public inquiry\". According to Diane Bornstein, one way to reconcile the differences between the references to courts of love in the literature, and the lack of documentary evidence in real life, is that they were like literary salons or social gatherings, where people read poems, debated questions of love, and played word games of flirtation.\nCourtly love as a response to religion.\nTheologians of the time emphasized love as more of a spiritual rather than sexual connection. There is a possibility that writings about courtly love were made as a response to the theological ideas about love. Many scholars believe that Andreas Capellanus' work \"De amore\" was a satire poking fun at doctors and theologians. In that work, Capellanus is supposedly writing to a young man named Walter, and he spends the first two books telling him how to achieve love and setting forth the rules of love. However, in the third book he tells Walter that the only way to live his life correctly is to shun love in favor of God. This sudden change is what has sparked the interest of many scholars, leading some to regard the first two books as satirizing courtly love and only the third book as expressing Capellanus' actual beliefs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nScholarship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMedieval sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63793", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63793", "title": "Meteoroid", "text": "Sand- to boulder-sized particle of debris in the Solar System\nA meteoroid ( ) is a small body in outer space.\nMeteoroids are distinguished as objects significantly smaller than \"asteroids\", ranging in size from grains to objects up to wide. Objects smaller than meteoroids are classified as \"micrometeoroids\" or \"space dust\". Many are fragments from comets or asteroids, whereas others are collision impact debris ejected from bodies such as the Moon or Mars.\nThe visible passage of a meteoroid, comet, or asteroid entering Earth's atmosphere is called a meteor, and a series of many meteors appearing seconds or minutes apart and appearing to originate from the same fixed point in the sky is called a meteor shower.\nAn estimated 25 million meteoroids, micrometeoroids and other space debris enter Earth's atmosphere each day, which results in an estimated of that material entering the atmosphere each year.\nA \"meteorite\" is the remains of a meteoroid that has survived the ablation of its surface material during its passage through the atmosphere as a meteor and has impacted the ground.\nMeteoroids.\nIn 1961, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) defined a meteoroid as \"a solid object moving in interplanetary space, of a size considerably smaller than an asteroid and considerably larger than an atom\". In 1995, Beech and Steel, writing in the \"Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society\", proposed a new definition where a meteoroid would be between 100 \u03bcm and 10 meters across. In 2010, following the discovery of asteroids below 10 m in size, Rubin and Grossman proposed a revision of the previous definition of meteoroid to objects between 10 \u03bcm and one meter in diameter in order to maintain the distinction. According to Rubin and Grossman, the minimum size of an asteroid is given by what can be discovered from Earth-bound telescopes, so the distinction between meteoroid and asteroid is fuzzy. Some of the smallest asteroids discovered (based on absolute magnitude \"H\") are 2008 TS26 with \"H\" = 33.2 and with \"H\" = 32.1 both with an estimated size of one meter. In April 2017, the IAU adopted an official revision of its definition, limiting size to between and one meter in diameter, but allowing for a deviation for any object causing a meteor.\nObjects smaller than meteoroids are classified as micrometeoroids and interplanetary dust. The Minor Planet Center does not use the term \"meteoroid\".\nComposition.\nAlmost all meteoroids contain extraterrestrial nickel and iron. They have three main classifications: iron, stone, and stony-iron. Some stone meteoroids contain grain-like inclusions known as chondrules and are called chondrites. Stony meteoroids without these features are called \"achondrites\", which are typically formed from extraterrestrial igneous activity; they contain little or no extraterrestrial iron. The composition of meteoroids can be inferred as they pass through Earth's atmosphere from their trajectories and the light spectra of the resulting meteor. Their effects on radio signals also give information, especially useful for daytime meteors, which are otherwise very difficult to observe. From these trajectory measurements, meteoroids have been found to have many different orbits, some clustering in streams \"(see meteor showers)\" often associated with a parent comet, others apparently sporadic. Debris from meteoroid streams may eventually be scattered into other orbits. The light spectra, combined with trajectory and light curve measurements, have yielded various compositions and densities, ranging from fragile snowball-like objects with density about a quarter that of ice, to nickel-iron rich dense rocks. The study of meteorites also gives insights into the composition of non-ephemeral meteoroids.\nIn the Solar System.\nMost meteoroids come from the asteroid belt, having been perturbed by the gravitational influences of planets, but others are particles from comets, giving rise to meteor showers. Some meteoroids are fragments from bodies such as Mars or the Moon, that have been thrown into space by an impact.\nMeteoroids travel around the Sun in a variety of orbits and at various velocities. The fastest move at about 42 km/s through space in the vicinity of Earth's orbit. This is escape velocity from the Sun, equal to the square root of two times Earth's speed, and is the upper speed limit of objects in the vicinity of Earth, unless they come from interstellar space. Earth travels at about 29.6 km/s, so when meteoroids meet the atmosphere head-on (which only occurs when meteors are in a retrograde orbit such as the Leonids, which are associated with the retrograde comet 55P/Tempel\u2013Tuttle) the combined speed may reach about 71 km/s (see Specific energy#Astrodynamics). Meteoroids moving through Earth's orbital space average about 20 km/s, but due to Earth's gravity meteors such as the Phoenicids can make atmospheric entry at as slow as about 11\u00a0km/s.\nOn January 17, 2013, at 05:21 PST, a one meter comet from the Oort cloud entered Earth atmosphere over California and Nevada. The object had a retrograde orbit with perihelion at 0.98\u00a0\u00b1\u00a00.03\u00a0AU. It approached from the direction of the constellation Virgo (which was in the south about 50\u00b0 above the horizon at the time), and collided head-on with Earth's atmosphere at 72 \u00b1 6 km/s vaporising more than 100 km above ground over a period of several seconds.\nCollision with Earth's atmosphere.\nWhen meteoroids intersect with Earth's atmosphere at night, they are likely to become visible as meteors. If meteoroids survive the entry through the atmosphere and reach Earth's surface, they are called meteorites. Meteorites are transformed in structure and chemistry by the heat of entry and force of impact. A noted asteroid, , was observed in space on a collision course with Earth on 6\u00a0October 2008 and entered Earth's atmosphere the next day, striking a remote area of northern Sudan. It was the first time that a meteoroid had been observed in space and tracked prior to impacting Earth. NASA has produced a map showing the most notable asteroid collisions with Earth and its atmosphere from 1994 to 2013 from data gathered by U.S. government sensors.\nMeteorites.\nA meteorite is a portion of a meteoroid or asteroid that survives its passage through the atmosphere and hits the ground without being destroyed. Meteorites are sometimes, but not always, found in association with hypervelocity impact craters; during energetic collisions, the entire impactor may be vaporized, leaving no meteorites. Geologists use the term, \"bolide\", in a different sense from astronomers to indicate a very large impactor. For example, the USGS uses the term to mean a generic large crater-forming projectile in a manner \"to imply that we do not know the precise nature of the impacting body ... whether it is a rocky or metallic asteroid, or an icy comet for example\".\nMeteoroids also hit other bodies in the Solar System. On such stony bodies as the Moon or Mars that have little or no atmosphere, they leave enduring craters.\nImpact craters.\nMeteoroid collisions with solid Solar System objects, including the Moon, Mercury, Callisto, Ganymede, and most small moons and asteroids, create impact craters, which are the dominant geographic features of many of those objects. On other planets and moons with active surface geological processes, such as Earth, Venus, Mars, Europa, Io, and Titan, visible impact craters may become eroded, buried, or transformed by tectonics over time. In early literature, before the significance of impact cratering was widely recognised, the terms cryptoexplosion or cryptovolcanic structure were often used to describe what are now recognised as impact-related features on Earth. Molten terrestrial material ejected from a meteorite impact crater can cool and solidify into an object known as a tektite. These are often mistaken for meteorites. Terrestrial rock, sometimes with pieces of the original meteorite, created or modified by an impact of a meteorite is called impactite.\nSee also.\nRelating to meteoroids.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelating to meteorites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "63794", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63794", "title": "Impact event", "text": "Collision of two astronomical objects\nAn impact event is a collision between astronomical objects causing measurable effects. Impact events have been found to regularly occur in planetary systems, though the most frequent involve asteroids, comets or meteoroids and have minimal effect. When large objects impact terrestrial planets such as the Earth, there can be significant physical and biospheric consequences, as the impacting body is usually traveling at several kilometres per second (km/s), with a minimum impact speed of for bodies striking Earth. While planetary atmospheres can mitigate some of these impacts through the effects of atmospheric entry, many large bodies retain sufficient energy to reach the surface and cause substantial damage. This results in the formation of impact craters and structures, shaping the dominant landforms found across various types of solid objects found in the Solar System. Their prevalence and ubiquity present the strongest empirical evidence of the frequency and scale of these events.\nImpact events appear to have played a significant role in the evolution of the Solar System since its formation. Major impact events have significantly shaped Earth's history, and have been implicated in the formation of the Earth\u2013Moon system. Interplanetary impacts have also been proposed to explain the retrograde rotation of Uranus and Venus. Impact events also appear to have played a significant role in the evolutionary history of life. Impacts may have helped deliver the building blocks for life (the panspermia theory relies on this premise). Impacts have been suggested as the origin of water on Earth. They have also been implicated in several mass extinctions. The prehistoric Chicxulub impact, 66 million years ago, is believed to be the cause not only of the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event but acceleration of the evolution of mammals, leading to their dominance and, in turn, setting in place conditions for the eventual rise of humans.\nThroughout recorded history, hundreds of Earth impacts (and exploding bolides) have been reported, with some occurrences causing deaths, injuries, property damage, or other significant localised consequences. One of the best-known recorded events in modern times was the Tunguska event, which occurred in Siberia, Russia, in 1908. The 2013 Chelyabinsk meteor event is the only known such incident in modern times to result in numerous injuries. Its meteor is the largest recorded object to have encountered the Earth since the Tunguska event. The Comet Shoemaker\u2013Levy 9 impact provided the first direct observation of an extraterrestrial collision of Solar System objects, when the comet broke apart and collided with Jupiter in July 1994. An extrasolar impact was observed in 2013, when a massive terrestrial planet impact was detected around the star ID8 in the star cluster NGC 2547 by NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope and confirmed by ground observations. Impact events have been a plot and background element in science fiction.\nIn April 2018, the B612 Foundation reported: \"It's 100 percent certain we'll be hit [by a devastating asteroid], but we're not 100 percent certain when.\" Also in 2018, physicist Stephen Hawking considered in his final book \"Brief Answers to the Big Questions\" that an asteroid collision was the biggest threat to the planet. In June 2018, the US National Science and Technology Council warned that America is unprepared for an asteroid impact event, and has developed and released the \"National Near-Earth Object Preparedness Strategy Action Plan\" to better prepare. According to expert testimony in the United States Congress in 2013, NASA would require at least five years of preparation before a mission to intercept an asteroid could be launched. On 26 September 2022, the Double Asteroid Redirection Test demonstrated the deflection of an asteroid. It was the first such experiment to be carried out by humankind and was considered to be highly successful. The orbital period of the target body was changed by 32 minutes. The criterion for success was a change of more than 73 seconds.\nImpacts and the Earth.\nSeveral major impact events have significantly shaped Earth's history, having been implicated in the formation of the Earth\u2013Moon system, the evolutionary history of life, the origin of water on Earth, and several mass extinctions. Impact structures are the result of impact events on solid objects and, as the dominant landforms on many of the System's solid objects, present the most solid evidence of prehistoric events. Notable impact events include the hypothesized Late Heavy Bombardment, which would have occurred early in the history of the Earth\u2013Moon system, and the confirmed Chicxulub impact 66 million years ago, believed to be the cause of the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event.\nFrequency and risk.\nSmall objects frequently collide with Earth. There is an inverse relationship between the size of the object and the frequency of such events. The lunar cratering record shows that the frequency of impacts decreases as approximately the cube of the resulting crater's diameter, which is on average proportional to the diameter of the impactor. Asteroids with a diameter strike Earth every 500,000 years on average. Large collisions \u2013 with objects \u2013 happen approximately once every twenty million years. The last known impact of an object of or more in diameter was at the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.\nThe energy released by an impactor depends on diameter, density, velocity, and angle. The diameter of most near-Earth asteroids that have not been studied by radar or infrared can generally only be estimated within about a factor of two, by basing it on the asteroid's brightness. The density is generally assumed, because the diameter and mass, from which density can be calculated, are also generally estimated. Due to Earth's escape velocity, the minimum impact velocity is 11 km/s with asteroid impacts averaging around on the Earth. The most probable impact angle is 45 degrees.\nImpact conditions such as asteroid size and speed, but also density and impact angle determine the kinetic energy released in an impact event. The more energy is released, the more damage is likely to occur on the ground due to the environmental effects triggered by the impact. Such effects can be shock waves, heat radiation, the formation of craters with associated earthquakes, and tsunamis if bodies of water are hit. Human populations are vulnerable to these effects if they live within the affected zone. Large seiche waves arising from earthquakes and large-scale deposit of debris can also occur within minutes of impact, thousands of kilometres from impact.\nAirbursts.\nStony asteroids with a diameter of enter Earth's atmosphere about once a year. Asteroids with a diameter of enter the atmosphere about every 5 years with as much kinetic energy as the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima (approximately 16 kilotons of TNT), but the air burst is reduced to just 5 kilotons. These ordinarily explode in the upper atmosphere and most or all of the solids are vaporized. However, asteroids with a diameter of , and which strike Earth approximately twice every century, produce more powerful airbursts. The 2013 Chelyabinsk meteor was estimated to be about 20 m in diameter with an airburst of around 500 kilotons, an explosion 30 times the Hiroshima bomb impact. Much larger objects may impact the solid earth and create a crater.\nObjects with a diameter less than are called meteoroids and seldom make it to the ground to become meteorites. An estimated 500 meteorites reach the surface each year, but only 5 or 6 of these typically create a weather radar signature with a strewn field large enough to be recovered and be made known to scientists.\nThe late Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey estimated the rate of Earth impacts, concluding that an event about the size of the nuclear weapon that destroyed Hiroshima occurs about once a year. Such events would seem to be spectacularly obvious, but they generally go unnoticed for a number of reasons: the majority of the Earth's surface is covered by water; a good portion of the land surface is uninhabited; and the explosions generally occur at relatively high altitude, resulting in a huge flash and thunderclap but no real damage.\nAlthough no human is known to have been killed directly by an impact, over 1000 people were injured by the Chelyabinsk meteor airburst event over Russia in 2013. In 2005 it was estimated that the chance of a single person born today dying of an impact is around 1 in 200,000. The two to four-meter-sized asteroids , 2014 AA, 2018 LA, 2019 MO, 2022 EB5, and the suspected artificial satellite WT1190F are the only known objects to be detected before impacting the Earth.\nAir bursts have been recognized as a significant impact threat by the planetary defense community since at least 2010, when the National Academy of Sciences, citing Boslough and Crawford \n, recommended that \"Because recent studies of meteor airbursts have suggested that near-Earth objects as small as 30 to 50 meters in diameter could be highly destructive, surveys should attempt to detect as many 30- to 50-meter-diameter objects as possible.\"\nGeological significance.\nImpacts have had, during the history of the Earth, a significant geological and climatic influence.\nThe Moon's existence is widely attributed to a huge impact early in Earth's history. Impact events earlier in the history of Earth have been credited with creative as well as destructive events; it has been proposed that impacting comets delivered the Earth's water, and some have suggested that the origins of life may have been influenced by impacting objects by bringing organic chemicals or lifeforms to the Earth's surface, a theory known as exogenesis.\nThese modified views of Earth's history did not emerge until relatively recently, chiefly due to a lack of direct observations and the difficulty in recognizing the signs of an Earth impact because of erosion and weathering. Large-scale terrestrial impacts of the sort that produced the Barringer Crater, locally known as Meteor Crater, east of Flagstaff, Arizona, are rare. Instead, it was widely thought that cratering was the result of volcanism: the Barringer Crater, for example, was ascribed to a prehistoric volcanic explosion (not an unreasonable hypothesis, given that the volcanic San Francisco Peaks stand only to the west). Similarly, the craters on the surface of the Moon were ascribed to volcanism.\nIt was not until 1903\u20131905 that the Barringer Crater was correctly identified as an impact crater, and it was not until as recently as 1963 that research by Eugene Merle Shoemaker conclusively proved this hypothesis. The findings of late 20th-century space exploration and the work of scientists such as Shoemaker demonstrated that impact cratering was by far the most widespread geological process at work on the Solar System's solid bodies. Every surveyed solid body in the Solar System was found to be cratered, and there was no reason to believe that the Earth had somehow escaped bombardment from space. In the last few decades of the 20th century, a large number of highly modified impact craters began to be identified. The first direct observation of a major impact event occurred in 1994: the collision of the comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 with Jupiter.\nBased on crater formation rates determined from the Earth's closest celestial partner, the Moon, astrogeologists have determined that during the last 600 million years, the Earth has been struck by 60 objects of a diameter of or more. The smallest of these impactors would leave a crater almost across. Only three confirmed craters from that time period with that size or greater have been found: Chicxulub, Popigai, and Manicouagan, and all three have been suspected of being linked to extinction events though only Chicxulub, the largest of the three, has been consistently considered. The impact that caused Mistastin crater generated temperatures exceeding 2,370\u00a0\u00b0C, the highest known to have occurred on the surface of the Earth.\nBesides the direct effect of asteroid impacts on a planet's surface topography, global climate and life, recent studies have shown that several consecutive impacts might have an effect on the dynamo mechanism at a planet's core responsible for maintaining the magnetic field of the planet, and may have contributed to Mars' lack of current magnetic field. An impact event may cause a mantle plume (volcanism) at the antipodal point of the impact. The Chicxulub impact may have increased volcanism at mid-ocean ridges and has been proposed to have triggered flood basalt volcanism at the Deccan Traps.\nWhile numerous impact craters have been confirmed on land or in the shallow seas over continental shelves, no impact craters in the deep ocean have been widely accepted by the scientific community. Impacts of projectiles as large as one\u00a0km in diameter are generally thought to explode before reaching the sea floor, but it is unknown what would happen if a much larger impactor struck the deep ocean. The lack of a crater, however, does not mean that an ocean impact would not have dangerous implications for humanity. Some scholars have argued that an impact event in an ocean or sea may create a megatsunami, which can cause destruction both at sea and on land along the coast, but this is disputed. The Eltanin impact into the Pacific Ocean 2.5 Mya is thought to involve an object about across but remains craterless.\nBiospheric effects.\nThe effect of impact events on the biosphere has been the subject of scientific debate. Several theories of impact-related mass extinction have been developed. In the past 500 million years there have been five generally accepted major mass extinctions that on average extinguished half of all species. One of the largest mass extinctions to have affected life on Earth was the Permian-Triassic, which ended the Permian period 250 million years ago and killed off 90 percent of all species; life on Earth took 30 million years to recover. The cause of the Permian-Triassic extinction is still a matter of debate; the age and origin of proposed impact craters, i.e. the Bedout High structure, hypothesized to be associated with it are still controversial. The last such mass extinction led to the demise of the non-avian dinosaurs and coincided with a large meteorite impact; this is the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event (also known as the K\u2013T or K\u2013Pg extinction event), which occurred 66 million years ago. There is no definitive evidence of impacts leading to the three other major mass extinctions.\nIn 1980, physicist Luis Alvarez; his son, geologist Walter Alvarez; and nuclear chemists Frank Asaro and Helen V. Michael from the University of California, Berkeley discovered unusually high concentrations of iridium in a specific layer of rock strata in the Earth's crust. Iridium is an element that is rare on Earth but relatively abundant in many meteorites. From the amount and distribution of iridium present in the 65-million-year-old \"iridium layer\", the Alvarez team later estimated that an asteroid of must have collided with Earth. This iridium layer at the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene boundary has been found worldwide at 100 different sites. Multidirectionally shocked quartz (coesite), which is normally associated with large impact events or atomic bomb explosions, has also been found in the same layer at more than 30 sites. Soot and ash at levels tens of thousands times normal levels were found with the above.\nAnomalies in chromium isotopic ratios found within the K-T boundary layer strongly support the impact theory. Chromium isotopic ratios are homogeneous within the earth, and therefore these isotopic anomalies exclude a volcanic origin, which has also been proposed as a cause for the iridium enrichment. Further, the chromium isotopic ratios measured in the K-T boundary are similar to the chromium isotopic ratios found in carbonaceous chondrites. Thus a probable candidate for the impactor is a carbonaceous asteroid, but a comet is also possible because comets are assumed to consist of material similar to carbonaceous chondrites.\nProbably the most convincing evidence for a worldwide catastrophe was the discovery of the crater which has since been named Chicxulub Crater. This crater is centered on the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula of Mexico and was discovered by Tony Camargo and Glen Penfield while working as geophysicists for the Mexican oil company PEMEX. What they reported as a circular feature later turned out to be a crater estimated to be in diameter. This convinced the vast majority of scientists that this extinction resulted from a point event that is most probably an extraterrestrial impact and not from increased volcanism and climate change (which would spread its main effect over a much longer time period).\nAlthough there is now general agreement that there was a huge impact at the end of the Cretaceous that led to the iridium enrichment of the K-T boundary layer, remnants have been found of other, smaller impacts, some nearing half the size of the Chicxulub crater, which did not result in any mass extinctions, and there is no clear linkage between an impact and any other incident of mass extinction.\nPaleontologists David M. Raup and Jack Sepkoski have proposed that an excess of extinction events occurs roughly every 26 million years (though many are relatively minor). This led physicist Richard A. Muller to suggest that these extinctions could be due to a hypothetical companion star to the Sun called Nemesis periodically disrupting the orbits of comets in the Oort cloud, leading to a large increase in the number of comets reaching the inner Solar System where they might hit Earth. Physicist Adrian Melott and paleontologist Richard Bambach have more recently verified the Raup and Sepkoski finding, but argue that it is not consistent with the characteristics expected of a Nemesis-style periodicity.\nSociological and cultural effects.\nAn impact event is commonly seen as a scenario that would bring about the end of civilization. In 2000, \"Discover\" magazine published a list of 20 possible sudden doomsday scenarios with an impact event listed as the most likely to occur.\nA joint Pew Research Center/\"Smithsonian\" survey from April 21 to 26, 2010 found that 31 percent of Americans believed that an asteroid will collide with Earth by 2050. A majority (61 percent) disagreed.\nEarth impacts in history.\nIn the early history of the Earth (about four billion years ago), bolide impacts were almost certainly common since the Solar System contained far more discrete bodies than at present. Such impacts could have included strikes by asteroids hundreds of kilometers in diameter, with explosions so powerful that they vaporized all the Earth's oceans. It was not until this heavy bombardment slackened that life appears to have begun to evolve on Earth.\nPrecambrian.\nThe leading theory of the Moon's origin is the giant-impact hypothesis, which postulates that Earth was once hit by a planetoid the size of Mars; such a theory is able to explain the size and composition of the Moon, something not done by other theories of lunar formation.\nAccording to the theory of the Late Heavy Bombardment, there should have been 22,000 or more impact craters with diameters &gt;, about 40 impact basins with diameters about , and several impact basins with diameters about . However, hundreds of millions of years of deformation at the Earth's crust pose significant challenges to conclusively identifying impacts from this period. Only two pieces of pristine lithosphere are believed to remain from this era: Kaapvaal craton (in contemporary South Africa) and Pilbara Craton (in contemporary Western Australia) to search within which may potentially reveal evidence in the form of physical craters. Other methods may be used to identify impacts from this period, for example, indirect gravitational or magnetic analysis of the mantle, but may prove inconclusive.\nIn 2021, evidence for a probable impact 3.46 billion-years ago at Pilbara Craton has been found in the form of a crater created by the impact of a asteroid (named \"The Apex Asteroid\") into the sea at a depth of (near the site of Marble Bar, Western Australia). The event caused global tsunamis. It is also coincidental to some of the earliest evidence of life on Earth, fossilized Stromatolites.\nEvidence for at least 4 impact events have been found in spherule layers (dubbed S1 through S8) from the Barberton Greenstone Belt in South Africa, spanning around 3.5-3.2 billion years ago. The sites of the impacts are thought to have been distant from the location of the belt. The impactors that generated these events are thought to have been much larger than those that created the largest known still existing craters/impact structures on Earth, with the impactors having estimated diameters of ~, with the craters generated by these impacts having an estimated diameter of . The largest impacts like those represented by the S2 layer are likely to have had far-reaching effects, such as the boiling of the surface layer of the oceans.&lt;ref name=\"10.1073/pnas.2408721121PNAS\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe Maniitsoq structure, dated to around 3 billion years old (3 Ga), was once thought to be the result of an impact; however, follow-up studies have not confirmed its nature as an impact structure. The Maniitsoq structure is not recognised as an impact structure by the Earth Impact Database.\nIn 2020, scientists discovered the world's oldest confirmed impact crater, the Yarrabubba crater, caused by an impact that occurred in Yilgarn craton (what is now Western Australia), dated at more than 2.2 billion years ago with the impactor estimated to be around wide. It is believed that, at this time, the Earth was mostly or completely frozen, commonly called the Huronian glaciation.\nThe Vredefort impact event, which occurred around 2 billion years ago in Kaapvaal craton (what is now South Africa), caused the largest verified crater, a multi-ringed structure across, forming from an impactor approximately in diameter.\nThe Sudbury impact event occurred on the Nuna supercontinent (now Canada) from a bolide approximately in diameter approximately 1.849 billion years ago Debris from the event would have been scattered across the globe.\nPaleozoic and Mesozoic.\nTwo asteroids are now believed to have struck Australia between 360 and 300 million years ago at the Western Warburton and East Warburton Basins, creating a . According to evidence found in 2015, it is the largest ever recorded. A third, possible impact was also identified in 2015 to the north, on the upper Diamantina River, also believed to have been caused by an asteroid 10\u00a0km across about 300 million years ago, but further studies are needed to establish that this crustal anomaly was indeed the result of an impact event.\nThe prehistoric Chicxulub impact, 66 million years ago, believed to be the cause of the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, was caused by an asteroid estimated to be about wide.\nCenozoic.\nPaleogene.\nAnalysis of the Hiawatha Glacier reveals the presence of a 31\u00a0km wide impact crater dated at 58 million years of age, less than 10 million years after the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event, scientists believe that the impactor was a metallic asteroid with a diameter in the order of . The impact would have had global effects.\nPleistocene.\nArtifacts recovered with tektites from the 803,000-year-old Australasian strewnfield event in Asia link a \"Homo erectus\" population to a significant meteorite impact and its aftermath. Significant examples of Pleistocene impacts include the Lonar crater lake in India, approximately 52,000 years old (though a study published in 2010 gives a much greater age), which now has a flourishing semi-tropical jungle around it.\nHolocene.\nThe Rio Cuarto craters in Argentina were produced approximately 10,000 years ago, at the beginning of the Holocene. If proved to be impact craters, they would be the first impact of the Holocene.\nThe Campo del Cielo (\"Field of Heaven\") refers to an area bordering Argentina's Chaco Province where a group of iron meteorites were found, estimated as dating to 4,000\u20135,000 years ago. It first came to attention of Spanish authorities in 1576; in 2015, police arrested four alleged smugglers trying to steal more than a ton of protected meteorites. The Henbury craters in Australia (~5,000 years old) and Kaali craters in Estonia (~2,700 years old) were apparently produced by objects that broke up before impact.\nWhitecourt crater in Alberta, Canada is estimated to be between 1,080 and 1,130 years old. The crater is approximately in diameter and deep, is heavily forested and was discovered in 2007 when a metal detector revealed fragments of meteoric iron scattered around the area.\nA Chinese record states that 10,000 people were killed in the 1490 Qingyang event with the deaths caused by a hail of \"falling stones\"; some astronomers hypothesize that this may describe an actual meteorite fall, although they find the number of deaths implausible.\nKamil Crater, discovered from Google Earth image review in Egypt, in diameter and deep, is thought to have been formed less than 3,500 years ago in a then-unpopulated region of western Egypt. It was found February 19, 2009 by V. de Michelle on a Google Earth image of the East Uweinat Desert, Egypt.\n20th-century impacts.\nOne of the best-known recorded impacts in modern times was the Tunguska event, which occurred in Siberia, Russia, in 1908. This incident involved an explosion that was probably caused by the airburst of an asteroid or comet above the Earth's surface, felling an estimated 30 million trees over a area.\nIn February 1947, another large bolide impacted the Earth in the Sikhote-Alin Mountains, Primorye, Soviet Union. It was during daytime hours and was witnessed by many people, which allowed V. G. Fesenkov, then chairman of the meteorite committee of the USSR Academy of Science, to estimate the meteoroid's orbit before it encountered the Earth. Sikhote-Alin is a massive fall with the overall size of the meteoroid estimated at . A more recent estimate by Tsvetkov (and others) puts the mass at around . It was an iron meteorite belonging to the chemical group IIAB and with a coarse octahedrite structure. More than 70 tonnes (metric tons) of material survived the collision.\nA case of a human injured by a space rock occurred on November 30, 1954, in Sylacauga, Alabama. There a stone chondrite crashed through a roof and hit Ann Hodges in her living room after it bounced off her radio. She was badly bruised by the fragments. Several persons have since claimed to have been struck by \"meteorites\" but no verifiable meteorites have resulted.\nA small number of meteorite falls have been observed with automated cameras and recovered following calculation of the impact point. The first was the P\u0159\u00edbram meteorite, which fell in Czechoslovakia (now the Czech Republic) in 1959. In this case, two cameras used to photograph meteors captured images of the fireball. The images were used both to determine the location of the stones on the ground and, more significantly, to calculate for the first time an accurate orbit for a recovered meteorite.\nFollowing the P\u0159\u00edbram fall, other nations established automated observing programs aimed at studying infalling meteorites. One of these was the Prairie Meteorite Network, operated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory from 1963 to 1975 in the midwestern U.S. This program also observed a meteorite fall, the \"Lost City\" chondrite, allowing its recovery and a calculation of its orbit. Another program in Canada, the Meteorite Observation and Recovery Project, ran from 1971 to 1985. It too recovered a single meteorite, \"Innisfree\", in 1977. Finally, observations by the European Fireball Network, a descendant of the original Czech program that recorded P\u0159\u00edbram and Ischgl meteorite falls, led to the discovery and orbit calculations for the Neuschwanstein meteorite in 2002.\nOn August 10, 1972, a meteor which became known as the 1972 Great Daylight Fireball was witnessed by many people as it moved north over the Rocky Mountains from the U.S. Southwest to Canada. It was filmed by a tourist at the Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming with an 8-millimeter color movie camera. In size range the object was roughly between a car and a house, and while it could have ended its life in a Hiroshima-sized blast, there was never any explosion. Analysis of the trajectory indicated that it never came much lower than off the ground, and the conclusion was that it had grazed Earth's atmosphere for about 100 seconds, then skipped back out of the atmosphere and returned to its orbit around the Sun.\nMany impact events occur without being observed by anyone on the ground. Between 1975 and 1992, American missile early warning satellites picked up 136 major explosions in the upper atmosphere. In the November 21, 2002, edition of the journal \"Nature\", Peter Brown of the University of Western Ontario reported on his study of U.S. early warning satellite records for the preceding eight years. He identified 300 flashes caused by meteors in that time period and estimated the rate of Tunguska-sized events as once in 400 years. Eugene Shoemaker estimated that an event of such magnitude occurs about once every 300 years, though more recent analyses have suggested he may have overestimated by an order of magnitude.\nIn the dark morning hours of January 18, 2000, a fireball exploded over the city of Whitehorse, Yukon Territory at an altitude of about , lighting up the night like day. The meteor that produced the fireball was estimated to be about in diameter, with a weight of 180 tonnes. This blast was also featured on the Science Channel series \"Killer Asteroids\", with several witness reports from residents in Atlin, British Columbia.\n21st-century impacts.\nOn 7 June 2006, a meteor was observed striking a location in the Reisadalen valley in Nordreisa Municipality in Troms County, Norway. Although initial witness reports stated that the resultant fireball was equivalent to the Hiroshima nuclear explosion, scientific analysis places the force of the blast at anywhere from 100 to 500 tonnes TNT equivalent, around three percent of Hiroshima's yield.\nOn 15 September 2007, a chondritic meteor crashed near the village of Carancas in southeastern Peru near Lake Titicaca, leaving a water-filled hole and spewing gases across the surrounding area. Many residents became ill, apparently from the noxious gases shortly after the impact.\nOn 7 October 2008, an approximately 4 meter asteroid labeled was tracked for 20 hours as it approached Earth and as it fell through the atmosphere and impacted in Sudan. This was the first time an object was detected before it reached the atmosphere and hundreds of pieces of the meteorite were recovered from the Nubian Desert.\nOn 15 February 2013, an asteroid entered Earth's atmosphere over Russia as a fireball and exploded above the city of Chelyabinsk during its passage through the Ural Mountains region at 09:13 YEKT (03:13 UTC). The object's air burst occurred at an altitude between above the ground, and about 1,500 people were injured, mainly by broken window glass shattered by the shock wave. Two were reported in serious condition; however, there were no fatalities. Initially some 3,000 buildings in six cities across the region were reported damaged due to the explosion's shock wave, a figure which rose to over 7,200 in the following weeks. The Chelyabinsk meteor was estimated to have caused over $30 million in damage. It is the largest recorded object to have encountered the Earth since the 1908 Tunguska event. The meteor is estimated to have an initial diameter of 17\u201320 metres and a mass of roughly 10,000 tonnes. On 16 October 2013, a team from Ural Federal University led by Victor Grokhovsky recovered a large fragment of the meteor from the bottom of Russia's Lake Chebarkul, about 80\u00a0km west of the city.\nOn 1 January 2014, a asteroid, 2014 AA was discovered by the Mount Lemmon Survey and observed over the next hour, and was soon found to be on a collision course with Earth. The exact location was uncertain, constrained to a line between Panama, the central Atlantic Ocean, The Gambia, and Ethiopia. Around roughly the time expected (2 January 3:06 UTC) an infrasound burst was detected near the center of the impact range, in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. This marks the second time a natural object was identified prior to impacting earth after 2008 TC3.\nNearly two years later, on October 3, WT1190F was detected orbiting Earth on a highly eccentric orbit, taking it from well within the Geocentric satellite ring to nearly twice the orbit of the Moon. It was estimated to be perturbed by the Moon onto a collision course with Earth on November 13. With over a month of observations, as well as precovery observations found dating back to 2009, it was found to be far less dense than a natural asteroid should be, suggesting that it was most likely an unidentified artificial satellite. As predicted, it fell over Sri Lanka at 6:18 UTC (11:48 local time). The sky in the region was very overcast, so only an airborne observation team was able to successfully observe it falling above the clouds. It is now thought to be a remnant of the Lunar Prospector mission in 1998, and is the third time any previously unknown object \u2013 natural or artificial \u2013 was identified prior to impact.\nOn 22 January 2018, an object, A106fgF, was discovered by the Asteroid Terrestrial-impact Last Alert System (ATLAS) and identified as having a small chance of impacting Earth later that day. As it was very dim, and only identified hours before its approach, no more than the initial 4 observations covering a 39-minute period were made of the object. It is unknown if it impacted Earth or not, but no fireball was detected in either infrared or infrasound, so if it did, it would have been very small, and likely near the eastern end of its potential impact area \u2013 in the western Pacific Ocean.\nOn 2 June 2018, the Mount Lemmon Survey detected 2018 LA (ZLAF9B2), a small 2\u20135 meter asteroid which further observations soon found had an 85% chance of impacting Earth. Soon after the impact, a fireball report from Botswana arrived to the American Meteor Society. Further observations with ATLAS extended the observation arc from 1 hour to 4 hours and confirmed that the asteroid orbit indeed impacted Earth in southern Africa, fully closing the loop with the fireball report and making this the third natural object confirmed to impact Earth, and the second on land after 2008 TC3.\nOn 8 March 2019, NASA announced the detection of a large airburst that occurred on 18 December 2018 at 11:48 local time off the eastern coast of the Kamchatka Peninsula. The Kamchatka superbolide is estimated to have had a mass of roughly 1600 tons, and a diameter of 9 to 14 meters depending on its density, making it the third largest asteroid to impact Earth since 1900, after the Chelyabinsk meteor and the Tunguska event. The fireball exploded in an airburst above Earth's surface.\n2019 MO, an approximately 4m asteroid, was detected by ATLAS a few hours before it impacted the Caribbean Sea near Puerto Rico in June 2019.\nIn 2023, a small meteorite is believed to have crashed through the roof of a home in Trenton, New Jersey. The metallic rock was approximately 4 inches by 6 inches and weighed 4 pounds. The item was seized by police and tested for radioactivity. The object was later confirmed to be a meteorite by scientists at The College of New Jersey, as well as meteorite expert Jerry Delaney, who previously worked at Rutgers University and the American Museum of Natural History.\nAsteroid impact prediction.\nIn the late 20th and early 21st century scientists put in place measures to detect Near Earth objects, and predict the dates and times of asteroids impacting Earth, along with the locations at which they will impact. The International Astronomical Union Minor Planet Center (MPC) is the global clearing house for information on asteroid orbits. NASA's Sentry System continually scans the MPC catalog of known asteroids, analyzing their orbits for any possible future impacts. Currently none are predicted (the single highest probability impact currently listed is ~7 m asteroid , which is due to pass earth in September 2095 with only a 5% predicted chance of impacting).\nCurrently prediction is mainly based on cataloging asteroids years before they are due to impact. This works well for larger asteroids (&gt; 1 km across) as they are easily seen from a long distance. Over 95% of them are already known and their orbits have been measured, so any future impacts can be predicted long before they are on their final approach to Earth. Smaller objects are too faint to observe except when they come very close and so most cannot be observed before their final approach. Current mechanisms for detecting asteroids on final approach rely on wide-field ground based telescopes, such as the ATLAS system. However, current telescopes only cover part of the Earth and even more importantly cannot detect asteroids on the day-side of the planet, which is why so few of the smaller asteroids that commonly impact Earth are detected during the few hours that they would be visible.\nSo far only four impact events have been successfully predicted, all from innocuous 2\u20135 m diameter asteroids and detected a few hours in advance.\nCurrent response status.\nIn April 2018, the B612 Foundation reported \"It's 100 per cent certain we'll be hit [by a devastating asteroid], but we're not 100 per cent certain when.\" Also in 2018, physicist Stephen Hawking, in his final book \"Brief Answers to the Big Questions\", considered an asteroid collision to be the biggest threat to the planet. In June 2018, the US National Science and Technology Council warned that America is unprepared for an asteroid impact event, and has developed and released the \"https://\" to better prepare. According to expert testimony in the United States Congress in 2013, NASA would require at least five years of preparation to launch a mission to intercept an asteroid. The preferred method is to deflect rather than disrupt an asteroid.\nElsewhere in the Solar System.\nEvidence of massive past impact events.\nImpact craters provide evidence of past impacts on other planets in the Solar System, including possible interplanetary terrestrial impacts. Without carbon dating, other points of reference are used to estimate the timing of these impact events. Mars provides some significant evidence of possible interplanetary collisions. The North Polar Basin on Mars is speculated by some to be evidence for a planet-sized impact on the surface of Mars between 3.8 and 3.9 billion years ago, while Utopia Planitia is the largest confirmed impact and Hellas Planitia is the largest visible crater in the Solar System. The Moon provides similar evidence of massive impacts, with the South Pole\u2013Aitken basin being the biggest. Mercury's Caloris Basin is another example of a crater formed by a massive impact event. Rheasilvia on Vesta is an example of a crater formed by an impact capable of, based on ratio of impact to size, severely deforming a planetary-mass object. Impact craters on the moons of Saturn such as Engelier and Gerin on Iapetus, Mamaldi on Rhea and Odysseus on Tethys and Herschel on Mimas form significant surface features. Models developed in 2018 to explain the unusual spin of Uranus support a long-held hypothesis that this was caused by an oblique collision with a massive object twice the size of Earth.\nObserved events.\nJupiter.\nJupiter is the most massive planet in the Solar System, and because of its large mass it has a vast sphere of gravitational influence, the region of space where an asteroid capture can take place under favorable conditions.\nJupiter is able to capture comets in orbit around the Sun with a certain frequency. In general, these comets travel some revolutions around the planet following unstable orbits as highly elliptical and perturbable by solar gravity. While some of them eventually recover a heliocentric orbit, others crash on the planet or, more rarely, on its satellites.\nIn addition to the mass factor, its relative proximity to the inner solar system allows Jupiter to influence the distribution of minor bodies there. For a long time it was believed that these characteristics led the gas giant to expel from the system or to attract most of the wandering objects in its vicinity and, consequently, to determine a reduction in the number of potentially dangerous objects for the Earth. Subsequent dynamic studies have shown that in reality the situation is more complex: the presence of Jupiter, in fact, tends to reduce the frequency of impact on the Earth of objects coming from the Oort cloud, while it increases it in the case of asteroids and short period comets.\nFor this reason Jupiter is the planet of the Solar System characterized by the highest frequency of impacts, which justifies its reputation as the \"sweeper\" or \"cosmic vacuum cleaner\" of the Solar System. 2009 studies suggest an impact frequency of one every 50\u2013350 years, for an object of 0.5\u20131\u00a0km in diameter; impacts with smaller objects would occur more frequently. Another study estimated that comets in diameter impact the planet once in approximately 500 years and those in diameter do so just once in every 6,000 years.\nIn July 1994, Comet Shoemaker\u2013Levy 9 was a comet that broke apart and collided with Jupiter, providing the first direct observation of an extraterrestrial collision of Solar System objects. The event served as a \"wake-up call\", and astronomers responded by starting programs such as Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR), Near-Earth Asteroid Tracking (NEAT), Lowell Observatory Near-Earth Object Search (LONEOS) and several others which have drastically increased the rate of asteroid discovery.\nThe 2009 impact event happened on July 19 when a new black spot about the size of Earth was discovered in Jupiter's southern hemisphere by amateur astronomer Anthony Wesley. Thermal infrared analysis showed it was warm and spectroscopic methods detected ammonia. JPL scientists confirmed that there was another impact event on Jupiter, probably involving a small undiscovered comet or other icy body. The impactor is estimated to have been about 200\u2013500 meters in diameter.\nLater minor impacts were observed by amateur astronomers in 2010, 2012, 2016, and 2017; one impact was observed by \"Juno\" in 2020.\nOther impacts.\nIn 1998, two comets were observed plunging toward the Sun in close succession. The first of these was on June 1 and the second the next day. A video of this, followed by a dramatic ejection of solar gas (unrelated to the impacts), can be found at the NASA website. Both of these comets evaporated before coming into contact with the surface of the Sun. According to a theory by NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory scientist Zden\u011bk Sekanina, the latest impactor to actually make contact with the Sun was the \"supercomet\" Howard-Koomen-Michels, also known as Solwind 1, on August 30, 1979. (See also sungrazer.)\nIn 2010, between January and May, Hubble's Wide Field Camera 3 took images of an unusual X shape originated in the aftermath of the collision between asteroid P/2010 A2 with a smaller asteroid.\nAround March 27, 2012, based on evidence, there were signs of an impact on Mars. Images from the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter provide compelling evidence of the largest impact observed to date on Mars in the form of fresh craters, the largest measuring 48.5 by 43.5 meters. It is estimated to be caused by an impactor 3 to 5 meters long.\nOn March 19, 2013, an impact occurred on the Moon that was visible from Earth, when a boulder-sized 30\u00a0cm meteoroid slammed into the lunar surface at 90,000\u00a0km/h (25\u00a0km/s; 56,000\u00a0mph) creating a 20-meter crater. NASA has actively monitored lunar impacts since 2005, tracking hundreds of candidate events.\nOn 18 September 2021 an impact event on Mars formed a cluster of craters, the largest being 130m in diameter. On 24 December 2021 an impact created a 150m-wide crater. Debris was ejected up to from the impact site.\nHuman caused impacts.\nIn recent decades, human made probes have impacted either intentionally or unintentionally on several objects. Most of these probes were destroyed with little observable damage to their target. Some such probes on the Moon and Mars have left observable craters and debris. This includes landings such as the 1969 Apollo 11 Moon Landing Site. High velocity crashes such as the 1972 Apollo 16 S-IVB rocket, 2019 Schiaparelli EDM and 2023 Luna 25 have also made physical changes to the landscape in the form of impact craters.\nSpecific missions designed to study effects including ejecta on target objects included 2005 Deep Impact mission on Tempel 1 which caused an 100+ meter diameter crater, 2019 Hayabusa2 mission on 162173 Ryugu, 2020 OSIRIS-REx mission on 101955 Bennu and 2022 Double Asteroid Redirection Test on Dimorphos. Observations show that Dimorphos lost approximately 1 million kilograms of mass and had its orbit changed as a result of the deliberate impact with the human made probe.\nExtrasolar impacts.\nCollisions between galaxies, or galaxy mergers, have been observed directly by space telescopes such as Hubble and Spitzer. However, collisions in planetary systems including stellar collisions, while long speculated, have only recently begun to be observed directly.\nIn 2013, an impact between minor planets was detected around the star NGC 2547 ID 8 by Spitzer and confirmed by ground observations. Computer modelling suggests that the impact involved large asteroids or protoplanets similar to the events believed to have led to the formation of terrestrial planets like the Earth.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63795", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63795", "title": "Permian extinction", "text": ""}
{"id": "63796", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63796", "title": "University of California at Berkeley", "text": ""}
{"id": "63797", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63797", "title": "Mass extinction", "text": ""}
{"id": "63798", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63798", "title": "Yucatan Peninsula", "text": ""}
{"id": "63799", "revid": "1262812216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63799", "title": "Immunoperoxidase", "text": "Type of immunostain\nImmunoperoxidase is a type of immunostain used in molecular biology, medical research, and clinical diagnostics. In particular, immunoperoxidase reactions refer to a sub-class of immunohistochemical or immunocytochemical procedures in which the antibodies are visualized via a peroxidase-catalyzed reaction.\nImmunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry are methods used to determine in which cells or parts of cells, a particular protein or other macromolecule are located. These stains use \"antibodies\" to bind to specific \"antigens\", usually of protein or glycoprotein origin. Since antibodies are normally invisible, special strategies must be employed to detect these bound antibodies. In an immunoperoxidase procedure, an enzyme known as a peroxidase is used to catalyze a chemical reaction to produce a coloured product.\nSimply, a very thin slice of tissue is fixed onto glass, incubated with antibody or a series of antibodies, the last of which is chemically linked to peroxidase. After developing the stain by adding the chemical substrate, the distribution of the stain can be examined by microscopy.\nTypes of antibodies.\nOriginally all antibodies produced for immunostaining were \"polyclonal\", i.e. raised by normal antibody reactions in animals such as horses or rabbits. Now, many are \"monoclonal\", i.e. produced in tissue culture. Monoclonal antibodies that consist of only one type of antibody tend to provide greater antigen specificity, and also tend to be more consistent between batches.\nMethods for immunoperoxidase staining.\nThe first step in immunoperoxidase staining is the binding of the specific (primary) antibody to the cell or tissue sample. The detection of the primary antibody can be then accomplished \"directly\" (example 1) or \"indirectly\" (examples 2 &amp; 3).\nExample 1. The primary antibody can be directly tagged with the enzyme \"peroxidase\" which is then used to catalyse a chemical reaction to generate a coloured product.\nExample 2. The primary antibody can be tagged with a small molecule that can be recognised by a peroxidase-conjugated binding molecule with high affinity. The most common example of this is a biotin linked primary antibody that binds to an enzyme-bound streptavidin. This method can be used to amplify the signal.\nExample 3. An untagged primary antibody is detected using a general secondary antibody that recognises all antibodies originating from same animal species as the primary. The secondary antibody is tagged with peroxidase.\nOptimal staining depends on a number of factors including the antibody dilution, the staining chemicals, the preparation and/or fixation of the cells/tissue, and length of incubation with antibody/staining reagents. These are often determined by trial and error rather than any sort of systematic approach.\nAlternatives to peroxidase stains.\nOther catalytic enzymes such as alkaline phosphatase can be used instead of peroxidases for both direct and indirect staining methods. Alternatively, the primary antibody can be detected using fluorescent label \"(immunofluorescence)\", or be attached to colloidal gold particles for \"electron microscopy\".\nUses of immunoperoxidase staining.\nImmunoperoxidase staining is used in \"clinical diagnostics\" and in \"laboratory research\".\nIn clinical diagnostics, immunostaining can be used on tissue biopsies for more detailed histopathological study. In the case of cancer, it can aid in sub-classifying tumours. Immunostaining can also be used to help diagnose skin conditions, glomerulonephritis and to sub classify amyloid deposits. Related techniques are also useful in sub-typing lymphocytes which all look quite similar on light microscopy.\nIn laboratory research, antibodies against specific markers of cellular differentiation can be used to label individual cell types. This can enable a better understanding of mechanistic changes to specific cell lineages resulting from a particular experimental intervention."}
{"id": "63803", "revid": "50656250", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63803", "title": "USS Constellation", "text": "USS \"Constellation\" is a shipname. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nU.S. Navy.\nIt may refer to the following ships of the United States Navy: \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "63804", "revid": "1893265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63804", "title": "US Congress", "text": ""}
{"id": "63807", "revid": "50141516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63807", "title": "Shorten (codec)", "text": "Lossless audio codec\nShorten (SHN) is a file format used for compressing audio data. It is a form of data compression of files and is used to losslessly compress CD-quality audio files (44.1 kHz 16-bit stereo PCM). Shorten is no longer developed and other lossless audio codecs such as FLAC, Monkey's Audio (APE), TTA, and WavPack (WV) have become more popular. It is still in use to trade concert recordings that are already encoded as Shorten files. Shorten files use the .shn file extension.\nHandling Shorten files.\nAll libavcodec based players and converters support decoding the Shorten format; and since the LAVFilters are based on libavcodec, support can easily be added to Windows Media Player and other software that uses the standard filter / codec APIs. As far as less common programs, some Rockbox applications can play Shorten files without decompression, and third-party Shorten plug-ins exist for Nero Burning ROM, Foobar2000, and Winamp. VLC media player supports Shorten files natively, and ffplay from the ffmpeg package can be used if a command line utility is desired.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63811", "revid": "50547592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63811", "title": "Kitniyot", "text": "Category of food that some Ashkenazi Jews do not eat on Passover\nKitniyot (, ) is a Hebrew word meaning legumes. During the Passover holiday, however, the word \"kitniyot\" (or \"kitniyos\" in Ashkenazi dialects) takes on a broader meaning to include grains and seeds such as rice, corn, sunflower seeds, and sesame seeds, in addition to legumes such as beans, peas, and lentils.\nThe Torah prohibits Jews from eating \"chametz\" during Passover. \"Chametz\" is defined as leaven made from the \"five species of grain\" (wheat, barley, and three similar grains). Food made from any other species is not considered \"chametz\". However, among Ashkenazi and some Sephardic customs, the custom (\"minhag\") during Passover is to refrain from not only products of the five grains but also other grains and legumes, known as \"kitniyot\", even though they are not \"chametz\".\nDefinition.\nTraditions of what is considered kitniyot vary from community to community but generally include maize (American corn), as well as rice, peas, lentils, and beans. Many also include other legumes, such as peanuts and soy, in this prohibition. The Chayei Adam considers potatoes not to be kitniyot because they were unknown in the time when the prohibition was created, an opinion followed today by nearly all Ashkenazi authorities.\nSome Sephardic and Yemenite Jews have not traditionally observed a prohibition on eating kitniyot on Passover, although some groups do abstain from the use of dried pulses during Passover.\nSince wheat flour only becomes \"chametz\" after it is ground and then mixed with water, one might assume that the kitniyot custom does not forbid kitniyot that were never ground or never came in contact with water. By this logic, it might be permitted to eat fresh kitniyot (like whole beans), or processed kitniyot which never came in contact with water (like certain squeezed oils or toasted solids). In fact, Rabbi Mordechai Eliyahu stated that the \"first Ashkenazim in Jerusalem before the establishment of the state allowed fresh legumes and only prohibited dry legumes, but when the students of the Vilna Gaon and Baal Shem Tov came to Israel, they \u2018brought with them\u2019 from Europe the prohibition against fresh legumes\". Conservative rabbis have ruled to permit fresh kitniyot.\nIn the 1930s, Maxwell House coffee hired the Joseph Jacobs advertising firm to market to a Jewish demographic. The agency hired a rabbi to research coffee, resulting in a determination that the coffee bean is more like a berry than a bean, thus making it kosher for Passover.\nHistory.\nThe Halakhic argument (the argument according to Jewish law and tradition) against eating kitniyot during Passover originated in early medieval France and Provence and later flourished in high medieval Ashkenazi (Rhineland) Germany. Most rabbinic sources prior to the 13th century, including the writings of Rav Huna (3rd century), Rava (4th century), Rav Ashi (5th century), and Maimonides (11th century), explicitly allowed eating \"kitniyot\" during Passover.\nThe original reasons behind the custom of not eating kitniyot during Passover are not clear. Suggestions include:\nEven in the early days of the \"kitniyot\" prohibition, some poskim opposed it, among them Rabbenu Yerucham (14th century), who called it a \"foolish custom\", Jacob ben Asher (14th century), who called it \"an unnecessary stringency\", and Samuel ben Solomon of Falaise, one of the first to write about the custom the 13th century, who called it \"mistaken\".\nMore recently, rabbis including Rav Moshe Feinstein did not advocate abandoning the custom, but opposed expanding the list of forbidden kitniyot.\nIn non-Orthodox Judaism.\nAlthough Reform and Conservative Ashkenazi Judaism currently allow for the consumption of \"kitniyot\" during Passover, long-standing tradition in these and other communities has been to abstain from their consumption.\nReform Jewish authorities, such as the Responsa Committee of the Reform Jewish Movement, the principal organization of Reform rabbis in the United States and Canada, have ruled in favor of permitting kitniyot. Reform Judaism first formally permitted eating \"kitniyot\" during Passover in the 19th century.\nWhile many Conservative Jews observe the tradition of avoiding \"kitniyot\" during Passover, the Committee on Jewish Law and Standards, an authoritative body in Conservative Judaism, issued two responsa in December 2015 that said it was now permissible to eat these previously prohibited foods throughout the world. These responsa were based on a 1989 responsa by the Responsa Committee of the Israeli Conservative Movement that permitted Conservative Jews in Israel to eat \"kitniyot\". While eating kitniyot has become more common in Israel, due in large part to the influence of Sephardic Jewish food customs, it is not yet clear whether Conservative Jews in other parts of the world will embrace the new rulings or continue to refrain from kitniyot.\nSome rabbis, such as Orthodox rabbi David Bar-Hayim and Conservative rabbi David Golinkin, have argued that the prohibition of \"kitniyot\", while appropriate in Eastern Europe where the Ashkenazi tradition began, should not apply to the United States or Israel. According to \"The Forward\", some Israelis are choosing a more permissive rabbinical interpretation of kitniyot, which allows for the consumption of a wider range of formerly banned items, and some Ashkenazi Jews in Israel who are married to Sephardic Jews have adopted the Sephardic custom. While the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America and other Orthodox organizations still maintain that the prohibition is binding on all Ashkenazic Jews worldwide, Orthodox Union Kosher maintains a \"kitniyot\" hechsher intended for non-Ashkenazic Jews who consume \"kitniyot\" on Passover.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63813", "revid": "35522814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63813", "title": "Judenrat", "text": "\"Jewish councils\" in Nazi-occupied territories\nA Judenrat (, lit.\u2009'Jewish council') was an administrative body, established in any zone of German-occupied Europe during World War II, purporting to represent its Jewish community in dealings with the Nazi authorities. The Germans required Jews to form \"Judenr\u00e4te\" within occupied territories at local and sometimes national levels.\n\"Judenr\u00e4te\" were particularly common in Nazi ghettos in Eastern Europe where in some cases, such as the \u0141\u00f3d\u017a Ghetto, and in Theresienstadt, they were known as the \"Jewish Council of Elders\" (\"J\u00fcdischer \u00c4ltestenrat\" or \"\u00c4ltestenrat der Juden\"). Jewish communities themselves had established councils for self-government as early as the Middle Ages. The Jewish community used the Hebrew term \"Kahal\" (\u05e7\u05d4\u05dc) or \"Kehillah\" (\u05e7\u05d4\u05d9\u05dc\u05d4), whereas the German authorities generally used the term \"Judenr\u00e4te\".\nNazi considerations of Jewish legal status.\nThe structure and missions of the \"Judenr\u00e4te\" under the Nazi regime varied widely, often depending upon whether meant for a single ghetto, a city or a whole region. Jurisdiction over a whole country, as in Nazi Germany, was maintained by \"Reichsvereinigung der Juden in Deutschland\" (Reich's Association of the Jews in Germany) established on 4 July 1939.\nIn the beginning of April 1933, shortly after the National Socialist government took power, a report by a German governmental commission on fighting the Jews was presented. This report recommended the creation of a recognized 'Association of Jews in Germany' (\"Verband der Juden in Deutschland\"), to which all Jews in Germany would be forced to associate. Appointed by the Reichskanzler, a German People's Ward was then to assume responsibility of this group. As the leading Jewish organization, it was envisioned that this association would have a 25-member council called the \"Judenrat\". However, the report was not officially acted upon.\nThe Israeli historian Dan Michman found it likely that the commission, which considered the legal status and interactions of Jews and non-Jews before their emancipation, reached back to the Medieval Era for the term \"Judenr\u00e4te\". This illuminates the apparent intent to make the Jewish emancipation and assimilation invalid, and so return Jews to the status they held during the Medieval Era.\nOccupied territories.\nThe first actual \"Judenr\u00e4te\" were established in occupied Poland under Reinhard Heydrich's orders on 21 September 1939, during the German assault on Poland, and later in the occupied territories of the Soviet Union.\nThe \"Judenr\u00e4te\" were to serve as a means to enforce the occupation force's anti-Jewish regulations and laws in the western and central areas of Poland, and had no authority of their own. Ideally, a local \"Judenrat\" was to include rabbis and other influential people of their local Jewish community. Thus, enforcement of laws could be better facilitated by the German authorities by using established Jewish authority figures and personages, while undermining external influences.\nFurther \"Judenr\u00e4te\" were established on 18 November 1939, upon the orders of Hans Frank, head of the \"Generalgouvernment\". These councils were to have 12 members for Jewish communities of 10,000 or fewer, and up to 24 members for larger Jewish communities. Jewish communities were to elect their own councils, and by the end of 1939 were to have selected an executive and assistant executive as well. Results were to be presented to the German city or county controlling officer for recognition. While theoretically democratic, in reality the councils were often determined by the occupiers. While the German occupiers only minimally involved themselves in the voting, those whom the Germans first chose often refused participation to avoid becoming exploited by the occupiers. As a rule, therefore, the traditional speaker of the community was named and elected, preserving the community continuity.\nMissions and duties.\nThe Nazis systematically sought to weaken the resistance potential and opportunities of the Jews of Central and Eastern Europe. The early \"Judenr\u00e4te\" were foremost to report numbers of their Jewish populations, clear residences and turn them over, present workers for forced labour, confiscate valuables, and collect tribute and turn these over. Failure to comply would incur the risk of collective punishments or other measures. Later tasks of the \"Judenr\u00e4te\" included turning over community members for deportation. Ultimately, these policies and the cooperation of Jewish authorities led to massive Jewish deaths with few German casualties because of the minimal resistance. Once under Nazi control and checked for weapons, large numbers of Jews could ultimately be easily murdered or enslaved.\nThrough these occupation measures, and the simultaneous prevention of government services, the Jewish communities suffered serious shortages. For this reason, early \"Judenr\u00e4te\" attempted to establish replacement service institutions of their own. They tried to organize food distribution, aid stations, old age homes, orphanages and schools. At the same time, given their restricted circumstances and remaining options, they attempted to work against the occupier's forced measures and to win time. One way was to delay transfer and implementation of orders and to try playing conflicting demands of competing German interests against each other. They presented their efforts as indispensable for the Germans in managing the Jewish community, in order to improve the resources of the Jews and to move the Germans to repeal collective punishments.\nThis had, however, very limited positive results. The generally difficult situations presented often led to perceived unfair actions, such as personality preferences, sycophancy, and protectionism of a few over the rest of the community. Thus, the members of the community quickly became highly critical of, or even outright opposed their \"Judenrat\".\nTadeusz Piotrowski cites Jewish survivor Baruch Milch stating \"Judenrat became an instrument in the hand of the Gestapo for extermination of the Jews... I do not know of a single instance when the Judenrat would help some Jew in a disinterested manner,\" though Piotrowski cautions that \"Milch's is a particular account of a particular place and time... the behavior of Judenrat members was not uniform.\"\nThe question of whether participation in the Judenrat constituted collaboration with the Germans remains a controversial issue to this day. The view that Jewish councils collaborated in the Holocaust has been challenged by Holocaust historians including Isaiah Trunk in his 1972 book, \"Judenrat: The Jewish Councils in Eastern Europe Under Nazi Occupation\". Summarizing Trunk's research, Holocaust scholar Michael Berenbaum writes: \"In the final analysis, the Judenr\u00e4te had no influence on the frightful outcome of the Holocaust; the Nazi extermination machine was alone responsible for the tragedy, and the Jews in the occupied territories, most especially Poland, were far too powerless to prevent it.\" This remains a topic of considerable scholarly disagreement.\nThis controversial point i.e her criticism of the alleged role of Jewish authorities in the Holocaust is raised by Hannah Arendt in her book \"Eichmann in Jerusalem\". In her writings, Arendt expressed her objections to the prosecution's refusal to address the cooperation of the leaders of the Judenr\u00e4te with the Nazis. In the book, Arendt says that Jewish organizations and leaderships in Europe collaborated with the Nazis and were directly responsible for increasing the numbers of Jewish victims:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Wherever Jews lived, there were recognized Jewish leaders, and this leadership, almost without exception, cooperated in one way or another, for one reason or another, with the Nazis. The whole truth was that if the Jewish people had really been unorganized and leaderless, there would have been chaos and plenty of misery but the total number of victims would hardly have been between four and a half and six million people. According to Freudiger's calculations about half of them could have saved themselves if they had not followed the instructions of the Jewish Councils.\nShe adds that Pinchas Freudiger, a witness at the trial, had managed to survive the genocide because he was wealthy and able to buy the favors of the Nazi authorities, as did other leaders of Jewish Councils.\nOn several occasions, most notably in her interviews with Joachim Fest and G\u00fcnter Gaus, Arendt refuted this characterization of her writing, describing instead ways in which the Judenr\u00e4te were coerced and intimidated into their roles, and how the Nazis made examples of populations that resisted, saying in a response during an interview with G\u00fcnter Gaus, \"When people reproach me with accusing the Jewish people [of nonresistance], that is a malignant lie and propaganda and nothing else. The tone of voice, however, is an objection against me personally. And I cannot do anything about that.\"\nGhettos.\n\"Judenr\u00e4te\" were responsible for the internal administration of ghettos, standing between the Nazi occupiers and their Jewish communities. In general, the \"Judenr\u00e4te\" represented the elite from their Jewish communities. Often, a \"Judenrat\" had a group for internal security and control, a Jewish Ghetto Police (German: J\u00fcdische Ghetto-Polizei or J\u00fcdischer Ordnungsdienst). They also attempted to manage the government services normally found in a city, such as those named above. However, the Germans requiring them to deliver community members for forced labor or deportation to concentration camps, placed them in the position of cooperating with the German occupiers. To resist such orders was to risk summary execution, or quick replacement and inclusion in the next concentration-camp shipment.\nIn a number of cases, such as the Minsk ghetto and the \u0141achwa ghetto, \"Judenr\u00e4te\" cooperated with the resistance movement. In other cases, \"Judenr\u00e4te\" cooperated with the Germans (although, as discussed above, the extent of this collaboration remains debated).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63816", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63816", "title": "Huntington Beach, California", "text": "Huntington Beach is a city in Orange County, California, United States. The city was originally called Pacific City, but it was changed in 1903 to be named after American businessman Henry E. Huntington. The population was 198,711 as of the 2020 United States census, making it the fourth most populous city in Orange County, the most populous beach city in Orange County, and the seventh most populous city in the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA Metropolitan Statistical Area. Located southeast of Downtown Los Angeles, it is bordered by Bolsa Chica Basin State Marine Conservation Area on the west, the Pacific Ocean on the southwest, by Seal Beach on the northwest, by Westminster on the north, by Fountain Valley on the northeast, by Costa Mesa on the east, and by Newport Beach on the southeast.\nHuntington Beach has a long stretch of sandy beach, mild climate, conditions considered ideal for surfing, and a strong beach culture. Swells generated predominantly from the North Pacific in winter and from a combination of Southern Hemisphere storms and cyclones in the summer focus on Huntington Beach, creating consistent surf all year long, hence the nickname \"Surf City\".\nHistory.\nTongva Era.\nThe Tongva village of Lupukngna was located in what became Huntington Beach, with an approximate location near the Newland House Museum. Bolsa Chica was one of the areas where the Tongva would settle during the winter. The nearby village of Genga, shared with the Acjachemen, was located across the Santa Ana River in what became Newport Beach and Costa Mesa.\nAmerican era.\nThe main thoroughfare of Huntington Beach, Beach Boulevard, was originally a cattle route for the main industry of the Rancho. Since its time as a parcel of the enormous Spanish land grant, Huntington Beach has undergone many incarnations. Once it was known as Shell Beach, the town of Smeltzer, and then Gospel Swamp for the revival meetings that were held in the marshland where the community college Golden West College stands. Later it became known as Fairview and then Pacific City, as it developed into a tourist destination. In order to secure access to the Pacific Electric Red Car lines that used to criss-cross Los Angeles and ended in Long Beach, Pacific City ceded enormous power to railroad magnate Henry E. Huntington, and thus became a city whose name has been written into corporate sponsorship, and like much of the history of Southern California, boosterism.\n20th century.\nThe original Huntington Beach Pier was built in 1904 and was a 1,000-foot-long timber structure. Huntington Beach was incorporated on February 17, 1909, during the tenure of its first mayor, Ed Manning. Its first developer was Huntington Beach Company (formerly the West Coast Land and Water Company), a real-estate development firm owned by Henry Huntington. The Huntington Beach Company is still a major land-owner in the city, and owns most of the local mineral rights. The company is wholly owned by the Chevron Corporation.\nAt one time, an encyclopedia company gave away free parcels of land (with the purchase of a complete set for $126) in the Huntington Beach area. The lucky buyers got more than they had bargained for when oil was discovered in the area, and enormous development of the oil reserves followed. Though many of the old reserves are depleted, and the price of land for housing has pushed many of the rigs off the landscape, oil pumps still dot the city.\nHuntington Beach was primarily agricultural in its early years with crops such as lima beans, asparagus, peppers, celery and sugar beets. Holly Sugar was a major employer with a large processing plant in the city that was later converted into an oil refinery.\nThe city's first high school, Huntington Beach High School, located on Main Street, was built in 1906. The school's team, the Oilers, is named after the city's original natural resource.\nMeadowlark Airport, a small general-aviation airport, existed in Huntington Beach from the 1940s until 1989.\nHuntington Beach Speedway, a racetrack designed for midget car racing, existed from 1946 until 1958.\n21st century.\nIn 2023, Huntington Beach became involved in a lawsuit against California governor Gavin Newsom. In March 2023, the state sued Huntington Beach for failing to comply with state housing regulations. The suit brought by the state argued that the city\u2019s ban on the processing of Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU) applications violated state housing laws. The state law required Huntington Beach to zone for 13,368 units to be built inside the city limits from October 2021 to 2029. The state had submitted and amended a complaint as of April 10, 2023, arguing that the city is in violation of the Housing Element Law. The state was seeking both penalties and injunctive relief. In addition to relief, the state was seeking the suspension of the city\u2019s permitting authority and mandating the approval of certain projects. On September 12, 2025, the Fourth Circuit of the California Courts of Appeal ruled against Huntington Beach's claim of exemption from consequences, and ordered the trial court to impose a 120-day deadline for the city to update its plan as well as state preemption of city permitting and zoning laws until the city complies with the law.\nThe city responded to the state's lawsuit with a federal countersuit that argued it is not subject to state housing laws. Huntington Beach's lawsuit describes overturning the Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) which determines how housing needs are allocated, and challenged RHNA on federal constitutional grounds. Huntington Beach council members have argued that local zoning should be left in control of the city. The state filed a motion on June 22, 2023, to dismiss the city\u2019s federal lawsuit. As of November 15, 2023, a federal judge has dismissed Huntington Beach\u2019s lawsuit against the state over housing mandates, and a petition by the city for an en banc rehearing of the case was denied by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit on April 21, 2025.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of . of it is land and of it (4.71%) is water.\nThe entire city of Huntington Beach lies in area codes 714 and 657, except for small parts of Huntington Harbour (along with Sunset Beach, the community adjacent to Huntington Harbour), which is in the 562 area code.\nClimate.\nHuntington Beach has a borderline semi-arid/Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSk/Csb\"), gradually changing for the second to the west and south due to its low precipitation. Although areas such as Huntington Central Park and northern Bolsa Chica usually fall into the first climate type, thus being the boundary of the cool summer Mediterranean climate on the west coast of North America, except for elevated portions in the southern end of the state. The climate is generally sunny, dry and cool, although evenings can be excessively damp. In the morning and evening, strong breezes often reach . Ocean water temperatures average . In the summer, temperatures rarely exceed . In the winter, temperatures rarely fall below , even on clear nights. There are about of rain, almost all in mid-winter. Frost occurs only rarely, on the coldest winter nights. The area is annually affected by a marine layer caused by the cool air of the Pacific Ocean meeting the warm air over the land. This results in overcast and foggy conditions in May and June.\nNatural resources.\nBetween Downtown Huntington Beach and Huntington Harbour lies a large marshy wetland, much of which is protected within the Bolsa Chica Ecological Reserve. A $110 million restoration of the wetlands was completed in 2006. The reserve is popular with bird watchers and photographers.\nSouth of Downtown, the Talbert, Brookhurst and Magnolia Marshes, which lie across the street from Huntington State Beach, had restoration completed in 2010.\nThe northern and southern beaches (Bolsa Chica State Beach and Huntington State Beach, respectively) are state parks. Only the city maintains the central beach (Huntington City Beach). Camping and RVs are permitted here, and popular campsites for the Fourth of July and the Surfing Championships must be reserved many months in advance. Bolsa Chica State Beach is actually a sand bar fronting the Bolsa Bay and Bolsa Chica State Ecological Reserve.\nThe Orange County run Sunset Marina Park next to Huntington Harbour is part of Anaheim Bay. It is suitable for light craft, and includes a marina, launching ramp, basic services, a picnic area and a few restaurants. The park is in Seal Beach, but is only reachable from Huntington Harbour. The Sunset/Huntington Harbour area is patrolled by the Orange County Sheriff's Harbor Patrol.\nThe harbor entrance for Anaheim Bay is sometimes restricted by the United States Navy, which loads ships with munitions at the Seal Beach Naval Weapons Station to the north of the main channel.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHuntington Beach first appeared as a city in the 1910 United States census.\n2020.\nThe 2020 United States census reported that Huntington Beach had a population of 198,711. The population density was . The racial makeup of Huntington Beach was 126,591 (63.7%) White (59.2% Non-Hispanic white), 2,291 (1.2%) African American, 1,293 (0.7%) Native American, 26,346 (13.2%) Asian, 603 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 15,689 (7.9%) from other races, and 25,898 (13.0%) from two or more races. There were 39,457 Hispanic or Latino residents of any race (19.9%).\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States census reported that Huntington Beach had a population of 189,992. The population density was . The racial makeup of Huntington Beach was 145,661 (76.7%) White, 1,813 (1.0%) African American, 992 (0.5%) Native American, 21,070 (11.1%) Asian, 635 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 11,193 (5.9%) from other races, and 8,628 (4.5%) from two or more races. There were 32,411 Hispanic or Latino residents of any race (17.1%). Non-Hispanic Whites were 67.2% of the population.\nThe Census reported that 189,102 people (99.5% of the population) lived in households, 487 (0.3%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 403 (0.2%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 74,285 households, out of which 21,922 (29.5%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 36,729 (49.4%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 7,685 (10.3%) had a female householder with no husband present, 3,804 (5.1%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 4,386 (5.9%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 504 (0.7%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 18,489 households (24.9%) were made up of individuals, and 6,527 (8.8%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55. There were 48,218 families (64.9% of all households); the average family size was 3.07.\nThere were 39,128 people (20.6%) under the age of 18, 15,906 people (8.4%) aged 18 to 24, 54,024 people (28.4%) aged 25 to 44, 53,978 people (28.4%) aged 45 to 64, and 26,956 people (14.2%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 96.6 males.\nThere were 78,003 housing units at an average density of , of which 44,914 (60.5%) were owner-occupied, and 29,371 (39.5%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.1%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.4%. 115,470 people (60.8% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 73,632 people (38.8%) lived in rental housing units.\nDuring 2009\u20132013, Huntington Beach had a median household income of $81,389, with 8.9% of the population living below the federal poverty line.\n2000.\nAt the 2000 census, the population density was . There were 75,662 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 79.2% White, 0.8% Black or African American, 0.7% Native American, 9.3% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 5.8% from other races, and 3.9% from two or more races. 14.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 73,657 households, out of which 29.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.7% were married couples living together, 9.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 35.2% were non-families. 24.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.56 and the average family size was 3.08.\nIn the city, 22.2% of the population was under the age of 18, 8.4% was from 18 to 24, 34.9% from 25 to 44, 24.0% from 45 to 64, and 10.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.6 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $76,527, and the median income for a family was $94,597. Adult males had a median income of $50,021 versus $33,041 for adult females. The per capita income for the city was $40,183. About 5.1% of families and 7.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 11.2% of those under age 18 and 4.4% of those age 65 or over.\nCrime.\nThe Uniform Crime Report (UCR), collected annually by the FBI, compiles police statistics from local and state law enforcement agencies across the nation. The UCR records Part I and Part II crimes. Part I crimes become known to law enforcement and are considered the most serious crimes including homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, motor vehicle theft, and arson. Part II crimes only include arrest data. The 2023 UCR Data for Huntington Beach is listed below:\nEconomy.\nHuntington Beach sits above the Huntington Beach Oil Field, and has an off-shore oil terminus for the tankers that support the Alaska Pipeline. The terminus pipes run inland to a refinery in Santa Fe Springs. Huntington Beach also has the Gothard\u2013Talbert terminus for the Orange County portion of the pipeline running from the Chevron El Segundo refinery. During the 2021 Orange County oil spill, more than of oil leaked from an offshore rig and began washing up on beaches in Southern California, causing ecological damage.\nShopping centers include Bella Terra, and Old World Village, a German-themed center.\nHuntington Beach contains a major installation of Boeing. A number of installations on the Boeing campus were originally constructed to service the Apollo Program, and the S-IVB upper stage for the Saturn IB and Saturn V rockets.\nHuntington Beach has registered \"Surf City, USA\", as a trademark for marketing purposes. Disputes have occurred with other municipalities who also claim the \"surf city\" designation.\nTourist sites include:\nGolden Bear, a nightclub, was located downtown from 1929 to 1986.\nTop employers.\nAccording to Huntington Beach's 2024 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top ten private employers in the city are:\nArts and culture.\nSpecial events.\nSpecial events include:\nPublic libraries.\nThere are five branches of the Huntington Beach Public Library. The Central Park branch is located in a building designed by Richard Neutra and Dion Neutra.\nSports.\nSurfing.\nHuntington Beach is the site of the world surfing championships, held annually in the summer. The city is often referred to as \"Surf City\" and the \"Surfing Capital of the World\". In 1914, George Freeth was the first person to surf in Huntington Beach. Duke Kahanamoku started surfing in Huntington Beach in 1925 and helped popularize the sport. The first surfboard shop, located underneath the Huntington Beach Pier, opened in 1956.\nParks and recreation.\nBeaches include Huntington State Beach, Bolsa Chica State Beach, and \"The Cliffs\" or \"Huntington Dog Beach\", a popular surfing location where dogs are permitted. Events include Surf City Surf Dog, and So Cal Corgi Nation Beach Days.\nThe Huntington Beach bicycle path stretches for alongside the beach.\nKayaking and standup paddleboarding occurs in Huntington Harbour, where there is watercraft rentals.\nGolf courses include Meadowlark Golf Club, opened in 1922, Huntington Beach Disc Golf Course, opened in 1977, and The Huntington Club, a private country club.\nCentral Park.\nCentral Park opened in 1974, and is the largest city-owned park in Orange County, with nearly . The park is vegetated with xeric (low water use) plants, and inhabited by native wildlife. Thick forests encircling the park are supplemented with Australian trees, particularly Blue Gum Eucalyptus, a high water use plant. The Huntington Central Park Equestrian Center, a facility boarding over 400 horses, and operates a riding school and riding facility in the park. The world's second oldest disc golf course is available in the park, as is the Shipley Nature Center.\nBolsa Chica Ecological Reserve.\nBolsa Chica State Ecological Reserve is a natural wetland of over featuring walking trails, and watching birds migrating along the Pacific Flyway.\nGovernment.\nLocal government.\nThe following table shows the current and former mayors of Huntington Beach:\nPolitics.\nIn the Orange County Board of Supervisors, Huntington Beach is in the First District, and is represented by Republican Janet Nguyen.\nIn the California State Senate, Huntington Beach is in the senatorial district, represented by Republican Tony Strickland. In the California State Assembly, it is split between the Assembly district, represented by Republican Tri Ta, and the Assembly district, represented by Republican Diane Dixon.\nIn the United States House of Representatives, Huntington Beach is in California's congressional district, represented by Democrat Dave Min.\nAt the local level, Huntington Beach elects its city council at-large, the largest city in Orange County to do so. Huntington Beach is considered highly conservative at the local level, and in 2022 passed several conservative resolutions including banning the Pride flag on city property and requiring voter ID at the polls. In 2024, conservatives gained complete control of the city council by ousting the remaining left-leaning city councilors, giving conservatives a 7\u20130 majority.\nAccording to the California Secretary of State, as of October 21, 2024, Huntington Beach has 135,216 registered voters. Of those, 55,565 (42%) are registered Republicans, 41,606 (32%) are registered Democrats, and 34,458 (26%) have declined to state a political party/are American Independents/Libertarian/Green. Huntington Beach has the highest number of registered Libertarians in the county, owing perhaps to its conservative nature.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nHuntington Beach is the home of Golden West College, which offers two-year associates of arts degrees and transfer programs to four-year universities.\nHuntington Beach is in the Huntington Beach Union High School District, which includes:\nThe district also has an independent study school, Coast High School.\nThe city has four elementary school districts: Huntington Beach City School District with 9 schools and Ocean View School District with 15. A small part of the city is also served by the Fountain Valley School District and Westminster School District.\nMedia.\nThe public television station KOCE-TV operates from the Golden West College campus.\nThe Wave Section of the \"Orange County Register\" covers Huntington Beach.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nHuntington Beach has 1,121 lane miles of public streets.\nHighways include Interstate 405, and Beach Boulevard (SR 39).\nThe Orange County Transportation Authority operates 14 bus routes in Huntington Beach.\nMost Huntington Beach households have at least one car. In 2016, 2.2 percent of Huntington Beach households lacked a car; the national average was 8.7 percent. Huntington Beach averaged two cars per household in 2016; the national average was 1.8.\nHealth Care.\nHuntington Beach is served by Huntington Beach Hospital.\nPublic safety.\nLaw enforcement is provided by the Huntington Beach Police Department.\nThe Huntington Beach Fire Department was founded in 1909 with 20 volunteers. The department provides fire protection, emergency medical services, medical transport, marine safety, and lifeguards.\nThe local oil has such extreme mercury contamination that metallic mercury is regularly drained from oil pipelines and equipment. Oil operations increase when the price of oil rises. Some oil fields have been approved for development. The worst-polluted areas have been reclaimed as parks. At least one Superfund site, too contaminated to be a park, is here. On October 2, 2021, an oil spill occurred after a pipe burst, sending oil into the ocean and on the beach.\nWater Services.\nWater in Huntington Beach is supplied by the City of Huntington Beach Public Works Utilities Division, which sources its water from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California via Municipal Water District of Orange County. This water is imported from Northern California and the Colorado River. Additionally, groundwater is sourced from 9 city wells tapped into an underground aquifer managed by Orange County Water District.\nIn popular culture.\nHuntington Beach has been used as a location or setting for many films, television programs, fashion shoots and music videos.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63824", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63824", "title": "Spicule", "text": "Spicules are any of various small needle-like anatomical structures occurring in organisms\nSpicule may also refer to: \nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63827", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63827", "title": "Kidneys", "text": ""}
{"id": "63829", "revid": "262666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63829", "title": "SRAM", "text": "SRAM may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63831", "revid": "917223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63831", "title": "Benalla", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBenalla \nis a small city in the Hume region of Victoria, Australia. The town sits on the Broken River, about north east of the state capital Melbourne. As of the 2021 census, the population was 9,316. It is the administrative centre for the Rural City of Benalla local government area.\nHistory.\nPrior to the European settlement of Australia, the Benalla region was populated by the Taungurung people, an Indigenous Australian people. A 1906 history recounts that prior to white settlement \"as many as 400 blacks would meet together in the vicinity of Benalla to hold a corrobboree\". The area was first explored in 1824 by Hamilton Hume and William Hovell, who recorded an agricultural settlement called \"Swampy\". The expedition was followed by that of Major Thomas Mitchell in 1834.\nAn attack by indigenous people on the camp of shepherds working for George and William Faithful became known as the Faithful Massacre; eight settlers were killed in the incident. Following the massacre, in 1839 a police station was established to provide protection of over-landers, and the name of the settlement became Broken River.\nThe post office opened on 1 December 1844 originally named Broken River. A bridge was built over the Broken River in 1847 and the following year the town was surveyed. In 1849, it was proclaimed a town. It was proclaimed a city in 1965.\nIn 1936, the Benalla Centenary Race was held.\nGeography.\nBenalla is situated on a mostly flat floodplain of the Broken River catchment situated directly to the north and west of the Great Dividing Range. Lake Benalla is an artificial lake created in 1973 from the Broken River as an ornamental feature for the centre of the city. Broken river forms a green belt along the north\u2013south spine of the city. There are three major crossings of the river at Benalla. The main street in the Central Business District is Bridge Street East.\nAnother large artificial lake, Lake Mokoan, 7 kilometres to the north east, was decommissioned beginning in 2009, with a wetlands area being developed for visitors. To the south of the freeway is the heavily forested Reef Hills State Park.\nClimate.\nBenalla has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") bordering on an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"). Summers are mostly warm to hot, sunny and dry with a very low relative humidity (a mean 3 pm reading of just 32% in January), while winters are cool and cloudy with modest rainfall. A heavy fall of snow was observed in Benalla on 31 May 1913.\nCulture.\nBenalla's cultural facilities include the Benalla Performing Arts and Convention Centre which includes a cinema and theatre. The city also has a major art gallery which forms a landmark perched over Lake Benalla on the site of the original police station.\nBenalla has more than 50 murals on the CBD Benalla Street Art trail, and beyond including local villages such as Goorambat and Winton Wetlands. The annual Wall to Wall Street Art Festival has been held since 2015, curated by Juddy Roller Studios, usually the week before Easter. Over one long-weekend dozens of world class artists create one giant outdoor gallery in the town. The Wall to Wall Festival also includes workshops, artist talks, live music, markets, street art tours and more.\nBenalla is also home to a former artist's hub known as North East Artisans \u2013 an entirely self funded, not for profit community art gallery run by volunteers established in 2014, shutting down in 2022. It featured a shop gallery with the works of local artists, an exhibition space, artist studios and a cafe, with regular exhibitions and live music events featuring local, national and international musicians. On 31 August 2022, the Gallery Shop at 28C Carrier street closed for business. They planned to keep the website as a \"'virtual archive' celebrating the 'life and times' of NEA until the subscription ceases\". The website was last heard from on 12th December 2022.\nThe Benalla Festival is another annual local garden festival dating from 1967, then known as the \"Rose Festival. It is held over the first two weekends in November with dozens of free and low cost events including the community Street Parade, Music by the Lake and fireworks, and A Day in the Gardens Market held in the Benalla Botanical Gardens. Events in the festival are described as a \"collaboration of community efforts that encompass art, music, dance, history, sport, family attractions, exhibitions and much more.\"\nSport and recreation.\nThe town has an Australian rules football team (Benalla Saints) competing in the Goulburn Valley Football League and a team (Benalla All Blacks) competing in the Ovens &amp; King Football League.\nBenalla has a horse racing club, the Benalla Racing Club, which schedules around eleven race meetings a year including the Benalla Cup meeting in early October.\nBenalla Wolfpack play rugby league in NRL Victoria's Murray Cup.\nGolfers play at the Benalla Golf Club on Mansfield Road, which celebrated its centenary in 2003 or at the course of the Golden Vale Golf Club on Golden Vale Road, Benalla.\nBenalla is also the closest major centre to Winton Motor Raceway, a privately owned motor racing circuit which holds motor racing event at all levels of domestic competition, including V8 Supercar.\nBenalla Gardens Oval is the home of the Benalla &amp; District Cricket Association. The ground has hosted touring teams since the 19th century. In the Rural City of Benalla there are numerous cricket grounds.\nBenalla is also home to the Benalla Bandits Baseball Club who compete in the North East Baseball Association. The team plays out of Racecourse Reserve, Benalla.https://\nBenalla is home to the Gliding Club of Victoria at the State Gliding Centre located on the Benalla airfield.\nThere is a park and walking track that circumnavigates Lake Benalla, featuring a ceramic sculpture mural community that was created as part of an employment project for local artists.\nHeritage.\nThe following sites are National Trust sites.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2021 census of Population, there were 9,316 people in Benalla.\nGovernance.\nBenalla is the seat of local government and administrative headquarters for the Rural City of Benalla.\nIn the Victorian Legislative Assembly, it is represented by the Electoral district of Euroa.\nIn the Parliament of Australia, it is represented by the Division of Indi in the Australian House of Representatives.\nEconomy.\nIndustries include agricultural support services, tourism, a medium density fibreboard factory, Thales Australia ammunition factory and aviation.\nAs a service economy for the region, Benalla has many large retailers, including a Coles, Woolworths, Aldi and a Mitre 10 Home &amp; Trade. Target Country on Bridge Street closed in April 2021.\nEducation.\nBenalla has two secondary schools, Benalla P\u201312 College (which has four campuses comprising Prep\u2013yr 2; yr 3\u20136; yrs 7\u20139 and 10\u201312), FCJ College and three primary schools: Benalla P\u201312, St Joseph's Primary School and Australian Christian College \u2013 Hume. McCristal's College was a private grammar school that used to exist in Benalla.\nThe Benalla Flexible Learning Centre offers an alternative education model for students up to 22 years old also.\nThe Goulburn Ovens Institute of TAFE has a campus in Benalla which includes the \"Benalla Performing Arts and Convention Centre\" opened in 2004 by Lynne Kosky MP, the then Minister of Education and Training. The campus included GRADA, a regional academy of dramatic art offering courses in Acting, Dance and Production and now specializes in Nursing and Engineering courses with direct links to local businesses for work placements. The other GoTafe campuses in the region include at Shepparton, Wangaratta and Seymour.\nThe Centre for Continuing Education also offers pre-employment programs in Benalla plus Aged Care programs with practical work experience at Cooinda Village.\nMedia.\nBenalla has a local newspaper, the Benalla Ensign, which is published weekly.\nHealthcare.\nHealth services are provided by Benalla Health, which operates a 42-bed hospital, plus a variety of Allied Health and maternal and Child Health Services.\nTransport.\nBenalla is a little over two hours from Melbourne by road or train. The Hume Freeway (National Highway M31) now by-passes Benalla to the south, while the Midland Highway (A300) runs through the city centre. Rail transport includes both passenger rail and freight. Benalla railway station is on the North East railway line, and three Albury V/Line rail services stop at Benalla daily, as does the twice-daily NSW TrainLink XPT service between Melbourne and Sydney.\nBenalla Bus Lines runs a local service every hour on two routes, serving the west and east sides of the city. The main bus terminal is outside the ANZ Bank in Nunn Street.\nBenalla Airport YBLA (BLN) began life as a major RAAF training base during World War II. It now also serves as the home of the Gliding Club of Victoria, as well as a ballooning and ultralight centre, and is the home of the Benalla Aviation Museum.\nUtilities.\nWater is supplied by North East Water. The main water supply is Loombah Weir and McCall Say Reservoir in the Ryan's Creek Catchment approximately 13 kilometres south of the city with a total 1800 megalitre capacity.\nEnvironmental issues.\nMore than a hundred complaints were received by EPA Victoria from 2019 for the dust and particulates coming from Monsbent Pty Ltd, also known as D&amp;R Henderson, situated in Yarrawonga road. The company was charged a fine of $80,000 in court in 2021 for failing to follow the requirements of its licence. In September 2022, EPA laid 39 new charges for breaching their licence conditions by emitting an excess in dust, odours and other nuisible substances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63832", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63832", "title": "History of California before 1900", "text": "Human history in California began when indigenous Americans first arrived some 13,000 years ago. Coastal exploration by the Spanish began in the 16th century, with further European settlement along the coast and in the inland valleys following in the 18th century. California was part of New Spain until that kingdom dissolved in 1821, becoming part of Mexico.\nDuring the Mexican\u2013American War (1846\u20131848), California was ceded to the United States under the terms of the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The same year, the California gold rush began, triggering intensified U.S. westward expansion. California joined the Union as a free state via the Compromise of 1850. By the end of the 19th century, California was still largely rural and agricultural, with a population of about 1.4 million.\nPre-Columbian history (c. 13,000 BC \u2013 1530 AD).\nThe most commonly accepted model of migration to the New World is that people from Asia crossed the Bering land bridge to the Americas some 16,500 years ago. The remains of Arlington Springs Man on Santa Rosa Island are among the traces of a very early habitation, dated to the Wisconsin glaciation (the most recent ice age) about 13,000 years ago.\nSome 30 tribes or culture groups lived in what is now California, gathered into perhaps six different language family groups. These groups included the early-arriving Hokan family (winding up in the mountainous far north and the Colorado River basin in the south) and the later-arriving Uto-Aztecan of the desert southeast. This cultural diversity was among the densest in North America and was likely the result of a series of migrations and invasions during the previous 13,000 years (and perhaps even earlier).\nAt the time of the first European contact, Native American tribes in California included the Chumash, Kumeyaay, Nisenan, Maidu, Miwok, Modoc, Mohave, Ohlone, Pomo, Serrano, Shasta, Tataviam, Tongva, Wintu, Yurok, and Yokuts. The relative strength of the tribes was dynamic, as the more successful expanded their territories and less successful tribes contracted. Slave-trading and war among tribes alternated with periods of relative peace. The total population of Native California is estimated, by the time of extensive European contact in the 18th century, to have been perhaps 300,000. Before Europeans landed in North America, about one-third of all natives in what is now the United States were living in modern-day California. California indigenous language diversity numbered 80 to 90 languages and dialects, some surviving to the present (although are endangered).\nTribes adapted to California's many climates. Coastal tribes were a major source of trading beads, which were produced from mussel shells and made using stone tools. Tribes in California's broad Central Valley and the surrounding foothills developed early agriculture, while tribes living in the mountains of the north and east relied heavily on salmon and game hunting, also collecting and shaping obsidian for themselves and trade. The harsh deserts of the southeast were home to tribes who learned to thrive by making careful use of local plants and by living in oases or along water courses. Local trade between indigenous populations enabled them to acquire seasonings such as salt or foodstuffs and other goods that might be rare in certain locales, such as flint or obsidian for making spear and arrow points.\nThe Native Americans had no domesticated animals except dogs and no pottery; their tools were made out of wood, leather, woven baskets and netting, stone, and antler. Some shelters were made of branches and mud; some dwellings were built by digging into the ground and then constructing a brush shelter on top covered with animal skins, tules and/or mud. On the coast and somewhat inland, traditional architecture consists of rectangular redwood or cedar plank semi-subterranean houses. Traditional clothing was minimal in the summer, with tanned deerhide and other animal leathers and furs and coarse woven articles of grass clothing used in winter. Feathers were sewn into prayer pieces worn for ceremonies. Basket weaving was a high form of art and utility, as were canoe making and other carving. Some tribes around Santa Barbara and the Channel Islands were using large plank canoes to fish and trade, while tribes in the California delta and San Francisco Bay Area were using tule canoes and some tribes on the Northwest coast carved redwood dugout canoes.\nA dietary staple for most indigenous populations in interior California was acorns, which were dried, shelled, ground to flour, soaked in water to leach out their tannin, and cooked. The grinding holes worn into large rocks over centuries of use are still visible in many rocks today. The ground and leached acorn flour was usually cooked into a nutritious mush, eaten daily with other traditional foods. Acorn preparation was a very labor-intensive process nearly always done by women. There are estimates that some indigenous populations might have eaten as much as one ton of acorns in one year. Families tended productive oak and tanoak groves for generations. Acorns were gathered in large quantities and could be stored as a reliable winter food source.\nThe staple foods then used by other indigenous American tribes, corn and/or potatoes, would not grow without irrigation in California's typically short three- to five-month wet season and nine-to seven-month dry season. Despite this, the natural abundance of California and the environmental management techniques developed by its tribes over millennia allowed for the highest population density in the Americas north of Mexico. The indigenous people practiced various forms of forest gardening in the forests, grasslands, mixed woodlands, and wetlands, ensuring that desired food and medicine plants continued to be available. The Native Americans controlled fire on a regional scale to create a low-intensity fire ecology which prevented larger, catastrophic fires and sustained a low-density \"wild\" agriculture in loose rotation. By burning underbrush and grass, the Native Americans revitalized patches of land whose regrowth provided fresh shoots to attract food animals. In a primitive example of permaculture, a form of fire-stick farming was used to periodically clear areas of old growth, which in turn encouraged new growth.\nThe high and rugged Sierra Nevada mountains located behind the Great Basin Desert east of California, extensive forests and mountains in the north, the rugged and harsh Sonoran Desert and Mojave Desert in the south and the Pacific Ocean to the west effectively isolated California from easy trade or tribal interactions with indigenous populations on the rest of the continent, delaying the damages of colonial-settler arrival until the Spanish missions, the Gold Rush, and Euro-American invasion. The few trade connections that were made outside of the Californias were between Yuman language speaking tribes and other Yuman groups along the Colorado and Gila Rivers in Arizona and south to modern-day Baja California and northwest Sonora, between Athabaskan language\u2013speaking groups and indigenous peoples along the Coast of the Pacific Northwest. It has also been proposed by some that contact was made by the Chumash and the Tongva with Polynesians, such as the Central Polynesian groups in the 8th century and the Native Hawaiians in the 14th century, who could have provided the shipbuilding knowledge to create Tomol canoes.\nEuropean exploration (1530\u20131765).\nThe first European explorers, flying the flags of Spain and of England, sailed along the coast of California from the early 16th century to the mid-18th century, but no European settlements were established. The most important colonial power, Spain, focused attention on its imperial centers in Mexico and Peru. Confident of Spanish claims to all lands touching the Pacific Ocean, Spain sent an exploring party sailing along the California coastline. The California seen by these ship-bound explorers was one of hilly grasslands and wooded canyons, with few apparent resources or natural ports to attract colonists. The other European nations, with their attentions focused elsewhere, paid little attention to California. In the mid-18th century, both Russian and British explorers and fur traders began establishing trading stations on the coast.\nHern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s.\nAround 1530, Nu\u00f1o Beltr\u00e1n de Guzm\u00e1n (president of New Spain) was told by a Native American slave of the legendary Seven Cities of Gold. About the same time, Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s was attracted by stories of a country far to the northwest populated by Amazonish women and abounding with treasure.\nAn expedition in 1533 discovered a bay, most likely that of La Paz, before experiencing difficulties and returning. Cort\u00e9s accompanied expeditions in 1534 and 1535 without finding the sought-after land.\nOn May 3, 1535, Cort\u00e9s claimed \"Santa Cruz Island\" (now known as the Baja California peninsula) and subsequently laid out and founded the city that was to become La Paz.\nFrancisco de Ulloa.\nIn July 1539, Cort\u00e9s sent Francisco de Ulloa to sail the Gulf of California with three small vessels. He made it to the mouth of the Colorado River, then sailed around the peninsula as far as Cedros Island. This proved that Baja California is a peninsula. The next year, an expedition under Hernando de Alarc\u00f3n ascended the lower Colorado River to confirm Ulloa's finding. Alarc\u00f3n may thus have become the first to reach Alta California. European maps published subsequently during the 16th century, including those by Gerardus Mercator and Abraham Ortelius, correctly depict Baja California as a peninsula, although it was sometimes mapped as an island over the next two centuries.\nThe account of Ulloa's voyage marks the first-recorded application of the name \"California\". It can be traced to the fifth volume of a chivalric romance, \"Amadis de Gallia\", arranged by Garci Rodr\u00edguez de Montalvo and first printed around 1510, in which a character travels through an island called \"California\".\nJuan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo.\nJuan Rodr\u00edguez Cabrillo was the first European to explore the California coast, with either a Portuguese or Spanish background. He was a soldier, crossbowman, and navigator who sailed for the Spanish Crown. He led an expedition in two ships of his own design and construction from the west coast of what is now Mexico, setting out in late June 1542. He landed on September 28 at San Diego Bay, claiming what he thought was the Island of California for Spain. As he passed them, Cabrillo named and claimed each of Californias' channel islands, which lie offshore from Baja California to northern California.\nCabrillo and his crew continued north and came ashore October 8 at San Pedro Bay (later the site of the Port of Los Angeles). The expedition then continued north in an attempt to discover a supposed coastal route to the mainland of Asia. They sailed at least as far north as San Miguel Island and Cape Mendocino (north of San Francisco). Cabrillo died as the result of an accident during the voyage; Bartolom\u00e9 Ferrer led the remainder of the expedition, which may have reached as far north as the Rogue River in today's southern Oregon.\nThe expedition found that there was essentially nothing for the Spanish to easily exploit in California, located at the extreme limits of exploration and trade from Spain. The indigenous populations were depicted as living at a subsistence level, typically located in small rancherias of extended family groups of 100 to 150 people. \nOpening of Spanish\u2013Philippine trading route (1565).\nIn 1565, the Spanish developed a trading route in which they took gold and silver from the Americas and traded it for goods and spices from China and other Asian areas. The Spanish set up their main base in Manila in the Philippines. The trade with Mexico involved an annual passage of galleons. The eastbound galleons first went north to about 40 degrees latitude and then turned east to use the westerly trade winds and currents. These galleons, after crossing most of the Pacific Ocean, would arrive off the California coast 60 to over 120 days later, near Cape Mendocino, about north of San Francisco, at about 40\u00b0N. They could then sail south down the California coast, utilizing the available winds and the south-flowing California Current, about 1\u00a0mi/hr (1.6\u00a0km/h). After sailing about south, they reached Mexico. By 1700, the galleons' route turned south farther offshore and reached the California coast south of Point Conception. Often they did not land because the rugged, foggy coast threatened the security of their treasure.\nSpain wanted a safe harbor for galleons en route from Manila to Acapulco. They did not find San Francisco Bay, perhaps because of fog hiding the entrance. In 1585, Francisco Gali charted the coast just south of San Francisco Bay and in 1587 Unamuno explored Monterey Bay or Morro Bay, marking the first time in modern history when Asians (Filipino crewmen) set foot on what would become the U.S. In 1594 Sebasti\u00e3o Rodrigues Soromenho explored and was shipwrecked in Drake's Bay just north of San Francisco Bay, then went south in a small boat past Half Moon Bay and Monterey Bay.\nSir Francis Drake.\nAfter successfully sacking Spanish colonial settlements and plundering Spanish treasure ships along their Pacific coast colonies in the Americas, English privateer and explorer Francis Drake sailed into Oregon before exploring and claiming an undefined portion of the California coast in 1579, landing at Drake's Cove near Point Reyes. He had friendly relations with the Coast Miwok and claimed the area for England as New Albion, after an archaic name for Great Britain.\nSebasti\u00e1n Vizca\u00edno.\nIn 1602, the Spaniard Sebasti\u00e1n Vizca\u00edno explored California's coastline on behalf of New Spain. He named San Diego Bay and also put ashore in Monterey. He ventured inland south along the coast and recorded a visit to what is likely Carmel Bay. His major contributions to the state's history were the glowing reports of the Monterey area as an anchorage and as land suitable for settlement and growing crops, as well as the detailed charts he made of the coastal waters (which were used for nearly 200 years).\nFurther European ventures (1765\u20131821).\nBetween 1680 and 1740, Spanish merchants out of Mexico City financed thriving trade between Manila, Acapulco and Callao. In Manila, they picked up cotton from India and silks from China. The Spanish Crown restricted the tonnage permitted on the ships from Manila to Acapulco, viewing imported Asian cloth to Mexico and Lima as lowering the demand for cloth from Spain. In retaliation, Mexico City merchants overstuffed ships bound from Manila, even using space intended for water to carry additional contraband.\nThe sea currents would take ships sailing from Manila to Acapulco north, so that they first touched land at San Francisco or Monterey. In the mid-18th century, tensions were brewing between Great Britain and Spain. In 1762, while the two nations were at war, Britain captured Manila in the Pacific and Havana in the Atlantic. This was probably a stimulus for Spain to build presidios at San Francisco and Monterey in 1769. The British, too, stepped up their activities in the Pacific. British seafaring Captain James Cook, midway through his third and final voyage of exploration in 1778, sailed along the West Coast of North America aboard , mapping the coast from California all the way to the Bering Strait. In 1786 Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse, led a group of scientists and artists on a voyage of exploration ordered by Louis XVI and were welcomed in Monterey. They compiled an account of the Californian mission system, the land and the people. Traders, whalers and scientific missions followed in the next decades.\nSpanish colonization and governance (1697\u20131821).\nIn 1697, the Viceroy Duque de Linares, along with the Conde de Miravalle and the treasurer of Acapulco (Pedro Gil de la Sierpe), financed Jesuit expansion into California. The Duque de Linares lobbied the Spanish Crown in 1711 to increase trade between Asia, Acapulco, and Lima. It is possible that Baja California Sur was used as a stopping point for unloading contraband on the way back from Manila to Acapulco. The contraband might then have been shipped across the Gulf of California to enter mainland Mexico by way of Sonora, where the Jesuits also had missions.\nIn 1697, the Jesuit missionary Juan Mar\u00eda de Salvatierra established Misi\u00f3n de Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de Loreto Conch\u00f3, the first permanent mission on the Baja California Peninsula. Spanish control over the peninsula, including missions, was gradually extended, first in the region around Loreto, then to the south in the Cape region, and finally to the north across the northern boundary of present-day Baja California Sur. A total of 30 Spanish missions in Baja California were established.\nDuring the last quarter of the 18th century, the first Spanish settlements were established in the future Las Californias province of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. Reacting to interest by the Russians (and later the British) in the fur-bearing animals of the Pacific north coast, Spain further extended the series of Catholic missions, accompanied by troops and establishing ranches, along California's southern and central coast. These missions were intended to demonstrate the Spanish Empire's claim to California. By 1823, 21 Spanish missions had been established in Alta California. Operations were based out of the naval base at San Blas and included the establishment and supply of California missions, as well as a series of exploration expeditions to the Pacific Northwest and Alaska.\nThe first quarter of the 19th century showed the continuation of the slow colonization of the southern and central California coast by Spanish missionaries, ranchers and troops. By 1820 Spanish influence was marked by the chain of missions reaching from Loreto, north to San Diego, to just north of today's San Francisco Bay Area, and extended inland approximately from the missions. Outside of this zone, perhaps 200,000 to 250,000 Native Americans were continuing to lead traditional lives. The Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, signed in 1819, set the northern boundary of the Spanish claims at the 42nd parallel, effectively creating today's northern boundary between California and Oregon.\nFirst Spanish colonies.\nSpain had maintained a number of missions and presidios in New Spain since 1519. The Crown laid claim to the north coastal provinces of California in 1542. Excluding Santa Fe in New Mexico, settlement of northern New Spain was slow for the next 155 years. Settlements in Loreto, Baja California Sur, were established in 1697, but it was not until the threat of incursion by Russian fur traders and potentially settlers, coming south from Alaska in 1765, that Spain, under King Charles III, felt development of more northern installations was necessary.\nBy then, the Spanish Empire was engaged in the political aftermath of the Seven Years' War (1756\u20131763) and colonial priorities in California afforded only a minimal effort. Alta California was to be settled by Franciscan Friars, protected by troops in the California missions. Between 1774 and 1791, the Crown sent forth expeditions to further explore and settle Alta California and the Pacific Northwest.\nSpanish colonization, including the missions, resulted in brutal violence against the Native Americans, including their enslavement and depopulation (which disease also contributed to). In the first century of colonization, European soldiers persecuted indigenous groups that recognized a third gender, including by unleashing specially bred mastiff and greyhound dogs to kill them.\nPortol\u00e1 expedition.\nIn May 1768, the Spanish Inspector General Jos\u00e9 de G\u00e1lvez planned a four-prong expedition to settle Alta California, two by sea and two by land, which Gaspar de Portol\u00e1 volunteered to command.\nThe Portol\u00e1 land expedition arrived at the site of present-day San Diego on June 29, 1769, where it established the Presidio of San Diego and annexed the adjacent Kumeyaay village of Kosa'aay, making San Diego the first European settlement in the present state of California. Eager to press on to Monterey Bay, de Portol\u00e1 and his group, consisting of Father Juan Cresp\u00ed, 63 leather-jacket soldiers and a hundred mules, headed north on July 14. They reached the present-day site of Los Angeles on August 2, Santa Monica on August 3, Santa Barbara on August 19, San Simeon on September 13, and the mouth of the Salinas River on October\u00a01. Although they were looking for Monterey Bay, the group failed to recognize it when they reached it.\nOn October 31, de Portol\u00e1's explorers became the first Europeans known to view San Francisco Bay. Ironically, the Manila galleons had sailed along this coast for almost 200 years by then, without noticing the bay. The group returned to San Diego in 1770.\nDe Portol\u00e1 was the first governor of Las Californias.\nJun\u00edpero Serra.\nJun\u00edpero Serra was a Majorcan Franciscan who founded the first Alta California Spanish missions. After King Carlos III ordered the Jesuits expelled from New Spain on February 3, 1768, Serra was named \"Father Presidente\".\nSerra founded San Diego de Alcal\u00e1 in 1769. Later that year, Serra, Governor de Portol\u00e1 and a small group of men moved north along the Pacific Coast. They reached Monterey in 1770, where Serra founded the second Alta California mission, San Carlos Borromeo.\nAlta California missions.\nThe California missions comprise a series of religious outposts established by Spanish Catholic Dominicans, Jesuits, and Franciscans, to spread the Christian doctrine among the local Native Americans. Eighty percent of the financing of Spain's California program went not to missions but rather to the military garrisons established to keep the three great Pacific Ports of San Diego, Monterey and San Francisco under Spanish control; the Santa Barbara presidio on the Channel was constructed later. The missions introduced European livestock, fruits, vegetables, agricultural industry, along with invasive species of plants into the California regions. It is widely believed in California that the labor supply for the missions was supplied by the forcible relocation of the Native Americans and keeping them in peonage. More recent scholarship suggests that the tiny number of Spaniards at each mission relied more upon negotiation, enticement and the threat of force to control the estimated 5,000 Native Americans typically surrounding what would become a mission. The missionaries and military were often at cross purposes in their vision of what California could become and the missionaries preferred to rely upon Native American allies to maintain control.\nMost missions became enormous in terms of land area (approximately the size of modern counties in California) and yet the Spanish and Mexican staff was small, with normally two Franciscans and six to eight soldiers in residence. The size of the Native American congregations would grow from a handful at the founding to perhaps two thousand by the end of the Spanish period (1810). All of these buildings were built largely by the native people, under Franciscan supervision. There is controversy as to whether the labor was forced. Production on missions between 1769 and 1810 was distributed primarily among the Native American congregation. In 1810, the California missions and presidios lost their financing as the Spanish Empire collapsed from Buenos Aires to San Francisco, as a result of the imprisonment of King Fernando VII in 1808 by the French. In this context, Native Americans came under increased pressure to produce and the missions exported the produce of Native American labor via Anglo-American and Mexican merchants. Whether the proceeds were distributed to Native Americans or to local military men came increasingly to depend on the political skill and dedication of the individual missionaries. In 1825, independent Mexico finally send a governor to take control of California, but he arrived without adequate payroll for the military. In 1825, the use of uncompensated Native American labor at missions to finance Mexican presidios in California became normalized.\nIn addition to the \"presidio\" (royal fort) and \"pueblo\" (town), the \"misi\u00f3n\" was one of the three major agencies employed by the Spanish crown in an attempt to consolidate its colonial territories. None of these missions were completely self-supporting, requiring continued (albeit modest) financial support.\nStarting with the onset of the Mexican War of Independence in 1810, this support largely disappeared, and the missions and their converts were left on their own. By 1827, the Mexican government passed the General Law of Expulsion, which exiled Spanish-born people, decimating the clergy in California. Some of the missions were then nationalized by the Mexican government and sold off. It was not until after statehood that the U.S. Supreme Court restored some missions to the orders that owned them.\nIn order to facilitate overland travel, the mission settlements were situated approximately apart, so that they were separated by one day's long ride on horseback along the El Camino Real, Spanish for \"the Royal Road\", though often referred to today as the \"King's Highway\", and also known as the \"California Mission Trail\". Tradition has it that the \"padres\" sprinkled mustard seeds along the trail in order to mark it with bright yellow flowers. Later El Camino Viejo, another more direct route from Los Angeles to Mission San Jos\u00e9 and San Francisco Bay, developed along the western edge of the San Joaquin Valley. Heavy freight movement over long distances was practical only via water, but soldiers, settlers and other travelers and merchandise on horses, mules, or ox carts, and herds of animals used these routes.\nFour \"presidios\", strategically placed along the California coast and organized into separate military districts, served to protect the missions and other Spanish settlements in Upper California.\nA number of mission structures survive today or have been rebuilt, and many have congregations established since the beginning of the 20th century. The highway and missions became for many a romantic symbol of an idyllic and peaceful past. The Mission Revival style was an architectural movement that drew its inspiration from this idealized view of California's past.\nRanchos.\nThe Spanish encouraged settlement with large land grants called \"ranchos\", where cattle and sheep were raised. Following Mexican independence, the missions were secularized via the passing of the Mexican Secularization Act of 1833 and the former mission lands were divided into more ranchos. Cow hides (at roughly $1 each) and fat (known as tallow, used to make candles as well as soaps) were the primary exports of California until the mid-19th century. This California hide trade involved large quantities of hides shipped nationally and internationally.\nThe ranch workers were primarily Native Americans, many of them former residents of the missions who had learned to speak Spanish and ride horses. Some ranchos, such as Rancho El Escorpi\u00f3n and Rancho Little Temecula, were land grants directly to Native Americans.\nAdministrative divisions.\nIn 1773, Francisco Pal\u00f3u set a boundary between the Baja California missions (whose control had been passed to the Dominicans) and the Franciscan missions of Alta California. In 1804, due to the growth of the Hispanic population in Alta California, Pal\u00f3u's boundary marker was defined as the latitude immediately north of the Misi\u00f3n San Miguel Arc\u00e1ngel de la Frontera and used to divide the province of Las Californias (then a part of the Commandancy General of the Internal Provinces) into two separate territorial administrations. Because the eastern boundaries of Alta California Province were not defined, it included Nevada, Utah and parts of Arizona, New Mexico, western Colorado, southwestern Wyoming, and a northern strip of Baja California. The province bordered on the east with the Spanish settlements in Arizona and the province of Nuevo M\u00e9xico, with the Sierra Nevada or Colorado River serving as the de facto border.\nRussian colonization (1812\u20131841).\nPart of Spain's motivation to settle upper Las Californias was to forestall Russian colonization of the region. In the early 19th century, fur trappers with the Russian-American Company of Imperial Russia explored down the West Coast from trading settlements in Alaska, hunting for sea otter pelts as far south as San Diego. In August 1812, the Russian-American Company set up a fortified trading post at Fort Ross, near present-day Bodega Bay on the Sonoma Coast of Northern California, north of San Francisco on land claimed, but not occupied, by the British Empire. This colony was active until the Russians departed in 1839.\nIn 1836 El Presidio de Sonoma, or \"Sonoma Barracks\", was established by General Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo, the Comandante of the northern frontier of Alta California. It was established as a part of Mexico's strategy to halt Russian incursions into the region, as the Mission San Francisco de Solano (Sonoma Mission) was for the Spanish.\nMexican Alta California (1821\u20131846).\nFirst Mexican Empire and the First Mexican Republic.\nBy 1809, Spain no longer governed California because the Spanish king was imprisoned by the French. For the next decade and a half, the colony came to rely upon trade with Anglo-Americans and Spanish-Americans from Lima and San Blas for economic survival and political news. The victory in the Mexican War of Independence from Spain in 1821 marked the beginning of Mexican rule in California, in theory, though in practice the First Mexican Empire did during its reign. The Native American congregations at missions and the missionaries provided the critical source of products that underlay export revenues for the entire colony between 1810 and 1825. Converting new Native Americans faded, while ranching and trade increased.\nAs the successor state to the Viceroyalty of New Spain, Mexico automatically included the provinces of Alta California and Baja California as territories. With the establishment of a republican government in 1823, Alta California, like many northern territories, was not recognized as one of the constituent states of Mexico because of its small population. The 1824 Constitution of Mexico refers to Alta California as a \"territory\". Independent Mexico came into existence in 1821, yet did not send a governor to California until 1825, during the First Mexican Republic, when Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda de Echeand\u00eda brought the spirit of republican government and mestizo liberation to the frontier. Echeandia began the moves to emancipate Native Americans from missions and to also liberate the profit motive among soldiers who were granted ranches where they utilized Native American labor. Pressure grew to abolish missions, which prevented private soldiers from extending their control over the most fertile land which was tilled by the Native American congregations. By 1829, the most powerful missionaries had been removed from the scene: Luis Martinez of San Luis Obispo, and Peyri of Mission San Luis Rey. The Mexican Congress had passed the General Law of Expulsion in 1827. This law declared all persons born in Spain to be \"illegal immigrants\" and ordered them to leave the new country of Mexico. Many of the missionary clergy were Spanish and aging, and gave in to the pressure to leave.\nIn 1831 a small group made up of the more wealthy citizens of Alta California got together and petitioned Governor Manuel Victoria asking for democratic reforms. The previous governor, Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda de Echeand\u00eda, was more popular, so the leading wealthy citizens suggested to Echeand\u00eda that Victoria's stay as governor would be coming to an abrupt end soon. They built up a small army, marched into Los Angeles, and \"captured\" the town. Victoria gathered a small army and went to fight the upstart army, leading it himself. He met the opposing army on December 5, 1831, at Cahuenga Pass. Victoria was wounded in the Battle of Cahuenga Pass and resigned the governorship. The previous governor, Echeand\u00eda, took the job, which he did until Jos\u00e9 Figueroa took over in 1833.\nLas Californias under the Centralist Republic of Mexico.\nIn 1836, Mexico repealed the 1824 federalist constitution and adopted a more centralist political organization (under the \"Siete Leyes\") that reunited Alta and Baja California in a single California Department (\"Departamento de las Californias\"). The change had little practical effect in far-off Alta California. The capital of Alta California remained Monterey, as it had been since the 1769 Portol\u00e1 expedition first established an Alta California government, and the local political structures were unchanged.\nIn September 1835, Nicol\u00e1s Guti\u00e9rrez was appointed as interim governor of California in January 1836, to be replaced by Mariano Chico in April, but he was very unpopular. Thinking a revolt was coming, Chico returned to Mexico to gather troops, but was reprimanded for leaving his post. Gutierrez, the military commandant, re-assumed the governorship, but he too was unpopular. Senior members of Alta California's legislature Juan Bautista Alvarado and Jos\u00e9 Castro, with support from Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo, Comandante of the Fourth Military District and Director of Colonization of the Northern Frontier, and assistance from a group of Americans led by Isaac Graham, staged a revolt in November 1836 and forced Gutierrez to relinquish power. The Americans wanted Californian independence, but Alvarado instead preferred staying part of Mexico, albeit with greater autonomy.\nIn 1840, Graham allegedly began agitating for a Texas-style revolution in California, in March issuing a notice for a planned horse race that was loosely construed into being a plot for revolt. Alvarado notified Vallejo of the situation, and in April the Californian military began arresting American and English immigrants, eventually detaining about 100 in the Presidio of Monterey. At the time, there were fewer than 400 foreigners from all nations in the department. Vallejo returned to Monterey and ordered Castro to take 47 of the prisoners to San Blas by ship, to be deported to their home countries. Under pressure from American and British diplomats, President Anastasio Bustamante released the remaining prisoners and began a court-martial against Castro. Also assisting in the release of those caught up in the Graham Affair was American traveler Thomas J. Farnham. In 1841, Graham and 18 of his associates returned to Monterey, with new passports issued by the Mexican federal government.\nAlso in 1841, political leaders in the U.S. were declaring their doctrine of Manifest Destiny, and Californios grew increasingly concerned over their intentions. Vallejo conferred with Castro and Alvarado recommending that Mexico send military reinforcements to enforce their military control of California.\nIn response to increased military skirmishes and souring relations, indigenous Quechan and Kumeyaay bands responded by raiding ranchos, an attack on San Diego in June 1842, and cutting off all overland lines of trade and communication between the former Alta California and the rest of Mexico through a blockade from the Colorado River to the Pacific Ocean along what is today the California-Baja California border, which would come to fuel miscommunication in Northern California.\nMicheltorena administration and Californio revolt.\nIn response, Mexican president Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna sent Brigadier General Manuel Micheltorena and 300 men to California in January 1842. Micheltorena was to assume the governorship and the position of commandant general. In October, before Micheltorena reached Monterey, American Commodore Thomas ap Catesby Jones mistakenly thought that war had broken out between the U.S. and Mexico. He sailed into Monterey Bay and demanded the surrender of the Presidio of Monterey. Micheltorena's force was still in the south, and the Monterey presidio was undermanned. As such, Alvarado reluctantly surrendered, and retired to Rancho El Alisal. The next day Commodore Jones learned of his mistake, but Alvarado declined to return and instead referred the commodore to Micheltorena.\nMicheltorena eventually made it to Monterey, but was unable to control his troops, a number of whom were convicts. This fomented rumors of a revolt, and by 1844, Alvarado himself became associated with the malcontents and an order was given by Micheltorena for his arrest. His detention was short-lived as Micheltorena was under orders to organize a large contingent in preparation for war against the U.S. All hands would be required for the task at hand.\nThis turned out to backfire on him, as on November 14, 1844, a group of Californios led by Manuel Castro revolted against Mexican authority. Jos\u00e9 Castro and Alvarado commanded the troops. There was no actual fighting, a truce was negotiated and Micheltorena agreed to dismiss his convict troops. Micheltorena reneged on the deal and fighting broke out this time. The rebels won the Battle of Providencia in February 1845 at the Los Angeles River and Micheltorena and his troops left California.\nP\u00edo Pico administration.\nP\u00edo Pico was installed as governor in Los Angeles, and Jos\u00e9 Castro became commandant general. Later, Alvarado was elected to the Mexican Congress. He prepared to move to Mexico City, but Pico declined funding for the transfer, and relations between the northern part of Alta California, with the increased presence of Americans, and the southern part, where the Spanish-speaking Californios dominated, became more tense.\nJohn C. Fr\u00e9mont arrived in Monterey at the beginning of 1846. Afraid of foreign aggression, Castro assembled his militia, with Alvarado second in command, but Fr\u00e9mont went north to Oregon instead. An unstable political situation in Mexico strained relations among the Californios, and it seemed that civil war would break out between north and south.\nBy 1846, Alta California had a Spanish-speaking population of under 10,000, tiny even compared to the sparse population of states in the rest of northern Mexico. The Californios consisted of about 800 families, mostly concentrated on large ranchos. About 1,300 American citizens and a very mixed group of about 500 Europeans, scattered mostly from Monterey to Sacramento, dominated trading as the Californios dominated ranching. In terms of adult males, the two groups were about equal, but the American citizens were more recent arrivals.\nRussian-American Company and Fort Ross.\nThe Russian-American Company established Fort Ross in 1812 as its southernmost colony in North America, intended to provide Russian posts farther north with agricultural goods. When this need was filled by a deal between the RAC and the Hudson's Bay Company for produce from Fort Vancouver on the Columbia River and other installations, the fort's intent was derailed, although it remained in Russian hands until 1841, and for the duration had a small population of Russians and other nationalities from the Russian Empire.\nIn 1814, Aleuts and Russian fur traders from Russian Alaska sailed to San Nicolas Island in search of sea otter and seal. After receiving complaints over excessive poaching in the waters around the island, the Aleuts and Russians killed most of the Native Nicole\u00f1o men as well as raping most of the women on the island, making the incident one of the earliest genocides of Native Californian tribes to come.\nOutside influences.\nIn this period, American and European traders began entering California in search of beaver. Using the Siskiyou Trail, Old Spanish Trail, and later, the California Trail, these trading parties arrived in California, often without the knowledge or approval of the Mexican authorities, and laid the foundation for the arrival of later California gold rush-era Forty-Niners, farmers and ranchers.\nIn 1840, the American adventurer, writer and lawyer Richard Henry Dana Jr., wrote of his experiences aboard ship off California in the 1830s in \"Two Years Before the Mast\".\nThe leader of a French scientific expedition to California, Eug\u00e8ne Duflot de Mofras, wrote in 1840 that \"it is evident that California will belong to whatever nation chooses to send there a man-of-war and two hundred men.\" In 1841, General Vallejo wrote Governor Alvarado that \"there is no doubt that France is intriguing to become mistress of California\", but a series of troubled French governments did not uphold French interests in the area. During disagreements with Mexicans, the German-Swiss francophile John Sutter threatened to raise the French flag over California and place himself and his settlement, New Helvetia, under French protection.\nAmerican interest and immigrants.\nAlthough a small number of American traders and trappers had lived in California since the early 1830s, the first organized overland party of American immigrants was the Bartleson\u2013Bidwell Party of 1841. With mules and on foot, the party crossed the continent using the still untested California Trail. Also in 1841, an overland exploratory party of the U.S. Exploring Expedition came down the Siskiyou Trail from the Pacific Northwest. In 1844, Caleb Greenwood guided the Stephens\u2013Townsend\u2013Murphy Party, the first settlers to take wagons over the Sierra Nevada. In 1846, the misfortunes of the Donner Party earned notoriety as they struggled to enter California.\nCalifornia Republic and the Mexican\u2013American War (1846\u20131848).\nBear Flag Revolt and the California Republic.\nAfter the U.S. declared war on Mexico on May 13, 1846, it took three months (August 12, 1846) for definitive word of war to get to California. Upon hearing rumors of war, U.S. consul Thomas O. Larkin, stationed in Monterey, tried to keep peace between the Americans and the small Mexican military garrison commanded by Jos\u00e9 Castro. American army captain John C. Fr\u00e9mont, with about 60 well-armed men, had entered California in December 1845 and was making a slow march to Oregon when they received word that war between Mexico and the U.S. was imminent.\nOn June 15, 1846, some 30 non-Mexican settlers, mostly Americans, staged a revolt, seized the small Mexican garrison in Sonoma, and captured Mexican general Mariano Vallejo. They raised the \"Bear Flag\" of the California Republic over Sonoma. The so-called California Republic lasted 25 days, with William B. Ide as its commander, until Lt. Joseph Warren Revere from the \"Portsmouth\" arrived on July 9 with a U.S. flag that was raised over Sonoma, after the Bear Flag was lowered. The California state flag today is based on the original Bear Flag and continues to contain the words \"California Republic\".\nAmerican Conquest.\nCommodore John Drake Sloat had orders that, upon learning \"beyond a doubt\" that war between the U.S. and Mexico had been declared, he was to seize San Francisco Bay and blockade the other California ports. When he reached Monterey, he learned of the revolt in Sonoma and Fremont's military activities. Believing Fr\u00e9mont to be acting on orders from Washington, Sloat began to carry out his orders on July 6, 1846. The next day Sloat landed and occupied Monterey. He then ordered his naval forces to occupy Yerba Buena (present San Francisco) and raise the American flag.\nFr\u00e9mont's \"California Battalion\" swelled to about 160 men with the addition of volunteers recruited from American settlements, and on July 19 he entered Monterey with a party of Stockton's sailors and marines. When Fr\u00e9mont met with Sloat on board the \"Savannah\", Sloat learned \"to his horror\" that Fr\u00e9mont had acted on his own authority without orders or knowledge of war and abruptly ended the meeting. Official notice of the U.S. declaration of war did not reach the Alta California capital until August 12, 1846, aboard the Pacific Squadron ship \"Warren\" on arrival in Monterey Bay.\nOn July 23, Sloat transferred his command of all U.S. land forces in California to Commodore Robert F. Stockton. Commodore Stockton put Fr\u00e9mont's forces under his command. The U.S. naval forces (which included U.S. Marines) easily took over the north of California; within days, they controlled Monterey, Yerba Buena, Sonoma, Santa Clara, and Sutter's Fort.\nIn Southern California, Mexican General Jos\u00e9 Castro and Governor P\u00edo Pico abandoned Los Angeles. When Stockton's forces entered Los Angeles unresisted on August 13, 1846, the nearly bloodless conquest of California seemed complete. Stockton left too small a force (36 men) in Los Angeles, and the Californians, acting on their own and without help from Mexico, led by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Flores, forced the small American garrison to retire in late September.\nTwo hundred reinforcements were sent by Stockton, led by US Navy Captain William Mervine, but were repulsed in the Battle of Dominguez Rancho, October 7\u20139, 1846, near San Pedro, where 14 U.S. Marines were killed. Meanwhile, General Kearny with a much-reduced squadron of 100 dragoons finally reached California after a grueling march from Santa Fe, New Mexico across the Sonoran Desert. On December 6, 1846, they fought the Battle of San Pasqual near San Diego, where 18 of Kearny's troops were killed\u00a0\u2013 the largest number of American casualties lost in any battle in California.\nStockton rescued Kearny's surrounded troops and, with their combined force, they moved northward from San Diego. Entering the present-day Orange County area on January 8, they linked up with Fr\u00e9mont's northern force. With the combined American forces totaling 660 troops, they fought the Californians in the Battle of Rio San Gabriel. The next day, January 9, 1847, they fought the Battle of La Mesa. Three days later, on January 12, 1847, the last significant body of Californians surrendered to American forces. That marked the end of the war in California. On January 13, 1847, the Treaty of Cahuenga was signed.\nOn January 26, 1847, Army lieutenant William Tecumseh Sherman and his unit arrived in Monterey. On March 15, 1847, Col. Jonathan D. Stevenson's Seventh Regiment of New York Volunteers of about 900 men began to arrive. All of these troops were still in California when gold was discovered in January 1848.\nThe Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, signed on February 2, 1848, marked the end of the Mexican\u2013American War. In that treaty, the U.S. agreed to pay Mexico $18,250,000; Mexico formally ceded California (and other northern territories) to the U.S.; and the first international boundary was drawn between the U.S. and Mexico by treaty. The previous boundary had been negotiated in 1819 between Spain and the U.S. in the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty, which established the present border between California and Oregon. San Diego Bay is one of the few natural harbors in California south of San Francisco, and to claim this strategic asset the southern border was adjusted to include the entire bay in California.\nCalifornia in the United States (beginning 1848).\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe non-Native American population of California in 1840 was about 8,000, as confirmed by the California 1850 U.S. census, which asked everyone their place of birth. The Native American population is unknown but has been variously estimated at 30,000 to 150,000 in 1840. The population in 1850, the first U.S. census, does not count the Native American population and omits San Francisco, the largest city, as well as the counties of Santa Clara and Contra Costa, all of whose tabulations were lost before they could be included in the totals. Some estimates can be obtained from the \"Alta Californian\" newspapers published in San Francisco in 1850. A corrected California 1850 census would go from 92,597 (the uncorrected \"official number\") to over 120,000. The 1850 U.S. census, the first census that included the names and sex of everyone in a family, showed only 7,019 females, with 4,165 non-Native American females older than 15 in the state. To this should be added about 1,300 women older than 15 from San Francisco, Santa Clara, and Contra Costa counties whose censuses were lost and not included in the totals. There were less than 10,000 females in a total California population (not including Native Americans who were not counted) of about 120,000 residents in 1850. About 3.0% of the Gold Rush \"Argonauts\" before 1850 were female or about 3,500 female gold rushers, compared to about 115,000 male California gold rushers.\nBy California's 1852 \"special\" state census, the population had already increased to 236,000. This did not include 24,000 Native Americans. Only 10% or 20,000 were female. By 1852 the steamship fare via Panama was about $200. Many of the new and successful California residents now sent off for their wives, sweethearts and families to join them in California. After 1850 the Panama Railroad (completed 1855) was already working its way across the Isthmus of Panama, making it ever easier to get to and from California in about 40 days. Additional thousands came via the California Trail, but this took four to six months on foot. The \"normal\" male to female ratio of about one to one would not arrive until the 1950 census. California for over a century was short on females.\nGold Rush.\nIn January 1848, gold was discovered at Sutter's Mill in the Sierra Nevada foothills about 40 miles east of Sacramento \u2013 beginning the California gold rush, which had the most extensive impact on population growth of the state of any era.\nThe miners settled in towns along what is now California State Highway 49, and settlements sprang up along the Siskiyou Trail as gold was discovered elsewhere in California (notably in Siskiyou County). The nearest deep-water seaport was San Francisco Bay, and the rapidly growing town of San Francisco became the home for bankers who financed exploration for gold.\nThe Gold Rush brought the world to California. By 1855, some 300,000 \"Forty-Niners\" had arrived from every continent; many soon left, of course\u00a0\u2013 some rich, most not so fortunate. A precipitous drop in the Native American population occurred in the decade after the discovery of gold.\nInterim government: 1846\u20131850.\nFrom mid-1846 to December 1849, California was run by the U.S. military; local government continued to be run by \"alcaldes\" (mayors) in most places, but now some were Americans. Bennett C. Riley, the last military governor, called a constitutional convention to meet in Monterey in September 1849. Its 48 delegates were mostly pre-1846 American settlers; eight were Californians. They unanimously outlawed slavery and set up a state government that operated for nearly 8 months before California was given official statehood by Congress on September 9, 1850, as part of the Compromise of 1850.\nAfter Monterey, the state capital was variously San Jose (1850\u20131851), Vallejo (1852\u20131853) and Benicia (1853\u20131854), until Sacramento was finally selected in 1854.\nEarly separatist movements.\nCalifornians (dissatisfied with inequitable taxes and land laws) and pro-slavery Southerners in lightly populated rural areas of Southern California attempted three times in the 1850s to achieve a separate statehood or territorial status separate from Northern California. The last attempt, the Pico Act of 1859, was passed by the California State Legislature, signed by the state governor, approved overwhelmingly by voters in the proposed \"Territory of Colorado\" and sent to Washington, D.C., with a strong advocate in Senator Milton Latham. The secession crisis in 1860 led to the proposal never coming to a vote.\nLaw and the legal profession.\nFor the most part, the American frontier spread West slowly, with the first stage a long territorial apprenticeship under the control of a federal judge and federal officials. After few decades, the transition was made to statehood, usually by adapting constitutional and legal procedures from previous states of residence, and using the lawyers who practiced during the territorial. California was entirely different. Its hurried transition from Mexican possession to U.S. statehood by 1850, brought a very large new population from across the world, bringing many different legal traditions with them. Legal conditions were chaotic at first. The new state lacked judicial precedents, prisons, competent lawyers, and a coherent system of laws. Alarmed citizens formed vigilante tribunals, most famously in the San Francisco Committee of Vigilance in the 1850s. Absent an established system of law and order, they dispensed raw justice quickly through drum-head trials, whipping, banishment, or hanging. As a body of law developed, the courts set precedents on such issues as women's contractual rights, real estate and mortgages, tort law, and review of flawed statutes. An elaborate new body of law was quickly constructed to deal with gold mining claims and water rights. There was vicious mistreatment of Native Americans, the Chinese, and (to a lesser extent) Mexicans. By the 1860s, San Francisco had developed a professional police force so it could dispense with the use of vigilante actions. Statewide by 1865, the courts, legislators, and legal profession had established a legal system that operated smoothly.\nCalifornia Genocide (1846\u20131871).\nThe California genocide consisted of actions taken by the U.S. in the 19th century, following the American Conquest of California from Mexico, that resulted in the dramatic decrease of the indigenous population of California. Between 1849 and 1870 it is estimated that American colonists murdered some 9,500 California Natives, and acts of enslavement, kidnapping, rape, child separation and displacement were widespread, encouraged, carried out by and tolerated by state authorities and militias.\nMariposa War (1850\u20131851).\nThe gold rush increased pressure on the Native Americans of California, because miners forced Native Americans off their gold-rich lands. Many were pressed into service in the mines; others had their villages raided by the army and volunteer militia. Some Native American tribes fought back, beginning with the Ahwahnechees and the Chowchilla in the Sierra Nevada and San Joaquin Valley leading a raid on the Fresno River post of James D. Savage, in December 1850. In retaliation Mariposa County Sheriff James Burney led local militia in an indecisive clash with the natives on January 11, 1851, on a mountainside near present-day Oakhurst.\nMendocino War (1859\u20131860).\nFollowing the Round Valley Settler Massacres from 1856 to 1859, the Mendocino War was the genocide of the Yuki (mainly Yuki tribes) between July 1859 to January 18, 1860, by white settlers in Mendocino County. It was caused by settler intrusion and slave raids on native lands and subsequent native retaliation, resulting in the deaths of hundreds of natives. In 1859, a band of locally sponsored rangers led by Walter S. Jarboe, called the Eel River Rangers, raided the countryside in an effort to remove natives from settler territory and move them onto the Nome Cult Farm, an area near the Mendocino Indian Reservation. The genocide killed at least 283 indigenous men and countless women and children in 23 engagements over the course of six months. They were reimbursed by the U.S. government for their campaign.\nThe Civil War.\nBecause of the distance factor, California played a minor role in the American Civil War. Although some settlers sympathized with the Confederacy, they were not allowed to organize, and their newspapers were closed down. Former Senator William M. Gwin, a Confederate sympathizer, was arrested and fled to Europe. Powerful capitalists dominated Californian politics through their control of mines, shipping, and finance. They controlled the state through the new Republican Party. Nearly all the men who volunteered as soldiers stayed in the West to guard facilities, suppress secessionists, or fight the Native Americans. Some 2,350 men in the California Column marched east across Arizona in 1862 to expel the Confederates from Arizona and New Mexico. The California Column then spent most of the remainder of the war fighting Native Americans in the area.\nLabor.\nIn his maiden speech before the U.S. Senate, California Senator David C. Broderick stated, \"There is no place in the Union, no place on earth, where labor is so honored and so well rewarded\" as in California. Early immigrants to California came with skills in many trades, and some had come from places where workers were being organized. California's labor movements began in San Francisco, the only large city in California for decades and once the center of trade-unionism west of the Rockies. Los Angeles remained an open-shop stronghold for half a century until unions from the north collaborated to make California a union state. Because of San Francisco's relative isolation, skilled workers could make demands that their counterparts on the East Coast could not. Printers first attempted to organize in 1850, teamsters, draymen, lightermen, riggers and stevedores in 1851, bakers and bricklayers in 1852, caulkers, carpenters, plasterers, brickmasons, blacksmiths and shipwrights in 1853 and musicians in 1856. Although these efforts required several starts to become stabilized, they did earn better pay and working conditions and began the long efforts of state labor legislation. Between 1850 and 1870, legislation made provisions for payment of wages, the mechanic's lien and the eight-hour workday.\nDuring the last half of the 19th century more of San Francisco's workers enjoyed an eight-hour workday than any other American city. The molders' and boilermakers' strike of 1864 was called in opposition to a newly formed iron-works employers association which threatened a one thousand dollar a day fine on any employer who granted the strikers' demands and had wired for strikebreakers across the country. The San Francisco Trades Union, the city's first central labor body, sent a delegation to meet a boatload of strikebreakers at Panama and educated them. They arrived in San Francisco as enrolled union members.\nAfter the Civil War ended in 1865, California continued to grow rapidly. Independent miners were largely displaced by large corporate mining operations. Railroads began to be built, and both the railroad companies and the mining companies began to hire large numbers of laborers. The decisive event was the opening of the transcontinental railroad in 1869; six days by train brought a traveler from Chicago to San Francisco, compared to six months by ship. The era of comparative protection for California labor ended with the arrival of the railroad. For decades after, labor opposed Chinese immigrant workers and politicians pushed anti-Chinese legislation.\nThe first statewide federated labor body was the Mechanics' State Council that championed the eight-hour day against the employers' 1867 \"Ten Hour League\". The Council affiliated with the National Labor Union, America's first national union effort. By 1872 Chinese workers comprised half of all factory workers in San Francisco and were paid wages far below white workers. \"The Chinese Must Go!\" was the slogan of Denis Kearney, a prominent labor leader in San Francisco. He appeared on the scene in 1877 and led sandlot vigilantes that roamed the city beating Chinese and wrecking their businesses.\nTwice the seamen of the West Coast had tried to organize a union, but were defeated. In 1875, the Seaman's Protective Association was established and began the struggle for higher wages and better conditions on ships. The effort was joined by Henry George, editor of the \"San Francisco Post\". The legislative struggle to enforce laws against brutal ship's captains and the requirement that two-thirds of sailors be Americans was proposed, and the effort was carried for thirty years by Andrew Furuseth and the Sailors' Union of the Pacific after 1908, and the International Seamen's Union of America. The \"Coast's Seamen's Journal\" was founded in 1887, for years the most important labor journal in California.\nConcurrently, waterfront organizing led to the Maritime Federation of the Pacific.\nAnti-Asian Nativism.\nTens of thousands of Chinese men arrived in California to work as laborers, recruited by industry as low-wage workers. Some came as independent gold miners. Over time, conflicts in the gold fields and cities created resentment toward the Chinese laborers. During the decade-long depression after the transcontinental railroad was completed, white workers began to lay blame on the Chinese laborers. Most Chinese were expelled from the mine fields. Some returned to China after the Central Pacific was built. Those who stayed moved to the Chinatowns in San Francisco and other cities, where they were relatively safe from violent attacks. From 1850 through 1900, anti-Chinese nativist sentiment resulted in the passage of still laws, many of which remained in effect into the middle of the 20th century. The most flagrant episode came in a clause in the new state constitution in 1879. Thanks to vigorous lobbying by the anti-Chinese Workingmen's Party of California, led by Denis Kearney, Article XIX, Section 4 forbade corporations from hiring Chinese \"coolies\", and empowered all California cities and counties to completely expel Chinese persons or to limit where they could reside. The clause was repealed in 1952.\nThe 1879 constitutional convention also dispatched a message to Congress pleading for strong immigration restrictions, which led to the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. The act was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1889, and it would not be repealed by Congress until 1943. Similar sentiments led to the development of the Gentlemen's Agreement with Japan, by which Japan voluntarily agreed to restrict emigration to the U.S. California also passed an Alien Land Act which barred aliens, especially Asians, from holding title to land. Because it was difficult for people born in Asia to obtain U.S. citizenship until the 1960s, land ownership titles were held by their American-born children, who were full citizens. The law was overturned by the California Supreme Court as unconstitutional in 1952.\nIn 1886, when a Chinese laundry owner challenged the constitutionality of a San Francisco ordinance clearly designed to drive Chinese laundries out of business, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in his favor, and in doing so, laid the theoretical foundation for modern equal protection constitutional law. See \"Yick Wo v. Hopkins\", 118 U.S. 356 (1886).\nRise of the railroads.\nThe arrival and expansion of railroads in California fundamentally transformed the state's economy, society, and physical landscape in the latter half of the 19th century. Before the completion of the first transcontinental railroad in 1869, California was geographically isolated from the rest of the U.S., accessible only by arduous overland journeys or long sea voyages via Panama or around Cape Horn. The completion of the transcontinental railroad provided a direct, efficient, and relatively affordable link between California and the eastern U.S., revolutionizing the movement of people and goods.\nThe railroads enabled California's agricultural and mineral products to reach national and international markets, encouraging large-scale farming, mining, and the growth of related industries. Railroads made it feasible to transport perishable goods, such as citrus fruits, to distant markets, transforming California into an agricultural powerhouse.\nThe ease and affordability of rail travel spurred mass migration to California, with cities like Los Angeles and San Francisco experiencing explosive growth. For example, Los Angeles's population quadrupled in the 1880s after the arrival of the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe railways. They promoted the founding and expansion of towns, as access to rail lines became a critical factor in urban development. Real estate speculation boomed, with new communities springing up along rail routes.\nThe completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869 integrated California into the national economy, making the movement of people and goods between the East and West fast, reliable, and affordable. This connectivity attracted investment, encouraged migration, and allowed California\u2019s industries to thrive on a national scale. Railroads made California accessible to tourists, promoting the state\u2019s climate and scenery. The resulting influx of visitors further boosted local economies.\nThe Big Four.\nThe dominance of railroad companies in land ownership and local economies drew criticism, with some viewing them as monopolistic \"octopuses\" controlling California\u2019s destiny. The wealth generated by the railroads enabled prominent railroad owners to become major philanthropists. For example, Leland and Jane Stanford founded Stanford University with their railroad fortune.\nThe Big Four were the famous 19th-century railroad tycoons who built the Central Pacific Railroad, which formed the western portion of the first transcontinental railroad in the U.S. They were Leland Stanford, Collis Potter Huntington, Mark Hopkins, and Charles Crocker. The establishment of America's transcontinental rail lines permanently linked California to the rest of the country, and the far-reaching transportation systems that grew out of them during the century that followed contributed immeasurably to the state's unrivaled social, political, and economic development. The Big Four dominated California's economy and politics in the 1880s and 1890s, and Collis P. Huntington became one of the most hated men in California. One California textbook argues:\nHuntington came to symbolize the greed and corruption of late-nineteenth-century business. Business rivals and political reformers accused him of every conceivable evil. Journalists and cartoonists made their reputations by pillorying him. ... Historians have cast Huntington as the state's most despicable villain.\nHuntington defended himself:\nThe motives back of my actions have been honest ones and results have redounded far more to the benefit of California that have to my own.\nLater developments.\n1898 saw the founding of the League of California Cities, an association intended to fight city government corruption, coordinate strategies for cities facing issues such as electrification, and to lobby the state government on behalf of cities.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSurveys.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo 1846.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1846\u20131900.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63833", "revid": "47773670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63833", "title": "Government of California", "text": "U.S. state government\nThe government of California is the governmental structure of the U.S. state of California as established by the California Constitution. California uses the separation of powers system to structure its government. It is composed of three branches: the executive, consisting of the governor of California and the other constitutionally elected and appointed officers and offices; the legislative, consisting of the California State Legislature, which includes the Assembly and the Senate; and the judicial, consisting of the Supreme Court of California and lower courts. There is also local government, consisting of counties, cities, special districts, and school districts, as well as government entities and offices that operate independently on a constitutional, statutory, or common law basis. The state also allows direct participation of the electorate by initiative, referendum, recall and ratification.\nExecutive branch.\nCalifornia's elected executive officers are:\nAll offices are elected separately to concurrent four-year terms, and each officer may be elected to an office a maximum of two times. The governor has the powers and responsibilities to: sign or veto laws passed by the Legislature, including a line item veto; appoint judges, subject to ratification by the electorate; propose a state budget; give the annual State of the State address; command the state militia; and grant pardons for any crime, except cases involving impeachment by the Legislature. The lieutenant governor is the president of the California Senate and acts as the governor when the governor is unable to execute the office, including whenever the governor leaves the state. The governor and lieutenant governor also serve as \"ex officio\" members of the University of California Board of Regents and of the California State University Board of Trustees. Regulatory activity is published in the \"California Regulatory Notice Register\" and the general and permanent rules and regulations are codified in the \"California Code of Regulations\".\nState agencies.\nState government is organized into many departments, of which most have been grouped together into several huge Cabinet-level agencies since the administration of Governor Pat Brown. These agencies are sometimes informally referred to as \"superagencies\", especially by government officials, to distinguish them from the general usage of the term \"government agency\". When Brown took office, he was dismayed to discover that under California law, approximately 360 boards, commissions, and agencies all reported directly to the governor, and proposed his \"super-agency\" plan (then spelled with a hyphen) in February 1961 to impose order on such chaos. Brown appointed the secretaries of the first four superagencies (of eight then planned) in September 1961. \nThe superagencies operate as \"umbrella organizations\" or \"semiautonomous fiefdoms,\" but their Cabinet-level secretaries are not quite as powerful as they may appear at first glance. The governor continues to directly appoint the leaders of superagency components. The appointments are announced by the governor rather than by the secretaries, who are merely a layer of management installed to ensure that the components of their respective superagencies can stay outside of the governor's \"routine attention span\" (unless something goes wrong). Today, the Cabinet-level agencies (superagencies) are the:\nThe independently elected officers run separate departments not grouped within the superagencies, and there are other Cabinet-level departments:\nIndependent entities.\nMost (but not all) of the leaders of these entities are normally appointed by the governor and confirmed by the state Senate. Despite their independence, the governor can exert influence on them over time by waiting for incumbent leaders to reach the ends of their terms and appointing new ones who support the governor's current agenda.\nExamples include the:\nLegislative branch.\nThe California State Legislature is the state legislature. It is a bicameral body consisting of the California State Assembly, the lower house with 80 members, and the California State Senate, the upper house with 40 members. Members of the Assembly serve two-year terms; members of the Senate serve four-year terms, with half of the seats up for election on alternate (two year) election cycles.\nThe speaker of the California State Assembly presides over the State Assembly. The lieutenant governor is the \"ex officio\" president of the Senate and may break a tied vote, and the president pro tempore of the California State Senate is elected by the majority party caucus. \nThe Legislature meets in the California State Capitol in Sacramento. Its session laws are published in the California Statutes and codified into the 29 California Codes.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary of California interprets and applies the law, and is defined under the Constitution, law, and regulations. The judiciary has a hierarchical structure with the Supreme Court at the apex. The superior courts are the primary trial courts, and the courts of appeal are the primary appellate courts. \nThe Judicial Council is the rule-making arm of the judiciary.\nThe California Supreme Court consists of the chief justice of California and six associate justices. The court has original jurisdiction in a variety of cases, including habeas corpus proceedings, and has discretionary authority to review all the decisions of the California courts of appeal, as well as mandatory review responsibility for cases where the death penalty has been imposed. The courts of appeal are the intermediate appellate courts. The state is geographically divided into six appellate districts. Notably, all published California appellate decisions are binding on all superior courts, regardless of appellate district.\nThe California superior courts are the courts of general jurisdiction that hear and decide any civil or criminal action which is not specially designated to be heard before some other court or governmental agency. As mandated by the Constitution, each of the 58 counties has a superior court. The superior courts also have appellate divisions (superior court judges sitting as appellate judges) which hear appeals from decisions of other superior court judges (or commissioners, or judges pro tem) in cases previously heard by inferior courts, such as infractions, misdemeanors, and \"limited civil\" actions (actions where the amount in controversy is below $25,000).\nDirect democracy.\nThe state constitution allows direct participation of the electorate by initiative, referendum, and recall.\nWatchdog evaluations.\nIn a 2015 review by the nonprofit Center for Public Integrity of how effectively states promote transparency and procedures to reduce corruption, California received a C\u2212, the second-highest grade in the country. It ranked particularly low in public access to information and judicial transparency.\nIn 2005, Pew Research Center's Government Performance Project gave California a grade C\u2212, tied for last with Alabama. By 2008, when the last report was issued, California had a C, which placed it near the bottom of the states. In discussing the results, the report noted that the personnel system is known to be dysfunctional, and that the Human Resources Modernization Project was underway to address the issue.\nLocal government.\nCalifornia is divided into counties which are legal subdivisions of the state. There are 58 counties, 482 California cities, about 1,102 school districts, and about 3,400 special districts. Counties and incorporated cities may promulgate local ordinances, which are usually codified in county or city codes, respectively, and are misdemeanor crimes unless otherwise specified as infractions. School districts, which are independent of cities and counties, handle public education. Special Districts deliver specific public programs and public facilities to constituents, and are defined as \"any agency of the state for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries\".\nForeign relations.\nCalifornia is a member of the Commission of the Californias, a tri-lateral forum for cooperation between the U.S. state of California and the Mexican states of Baja California and Baja California Sur.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63834", "revid": "50620137", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63834", "title": "Echuca", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEchuca ( ) is a town on the banks of the Murray River and Campaspe River in Victoria, Australia. The border town of Moama is adjacent on the northern side of the Murray River in New South Wales. Echuca is the administrative centre and largest settlement in the Shire of Campaspe. As of the 2021 census, Echuca had a population of 15,056, and the population of the combined Echuca and Moama townships was 22,568.\nEchuca lies within traditional Yorta Yorta country. The town's name is a Yorta Yorta word meaning \"meeting of the waters\". Echuca is close to the junction of the Goulburn, Campaspe, and Murray Rivers. Its position at the closest point of the Murray to Melbourne contributed to its development as a thriving river port city during the 19th century.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe riverine plains of the Goulburn Broken catchment are the traditional lands of the Yorta Yorta nation. Their population before European contact is estimated to have been approximately 2400. The Yorta Yorta were dispossessed of their traditional lands and left to eke out an existence on the edges of European settlements as remnant tribal groups.\nPresent-day Echuca was founded by one of the most enterprising figures of the early colonial period, an ex-convict named Henry Hopwood. In 1850 he purchased a small punt to ferry people and goods across the Murray River near the Campaspe junction. The small settlement known as Hopwood's Ferry grew to become the town of Echuca. The Hopwood's Punt Post Office opened around 1854 and was renamed Echuca Post Office on 1 January 1855.\nAustralia's inland port.\nBy the 1870s, Echuca had risen to prominence as Australia's largest inland port. Being the point of shortest distance between the Murray River and the major city of Melbourne, Echuca was both a key river port and railway junction. Paddle steamers would arrive at the 332-metre long redgum Echuca Wharf, were unloaded by hydraulic crane, and the goods then transported by rail to Melbourne. Wool, wheat, other grains, livestock, and timber were the most common commodities transported to Echuca. The wharf has been listed as a Heritage Place on the Australian National Heritage List.\nThis industrial boom led to a rapidly expanding population, from 26 inhabitants in 1854 to 4789 during the peak year of 1871. More than 80 pubs/hotels serviced the needs of the town, but it is rumoured that many more sly-grog shops, wine shanties, and beer houses, circumventing licensing laws existed in the area. An iron bridge was constructed over the Murray River in 1878 by the NSW Railways Department.\nDecline.\nThe expansion of the railways from Melbourne to most parts of Victoria, as well as improvements to roads and fickle river conditions all combined to lessen Echuca's importance, and by the 1890s the paddle steamer fleet was in decline. An economic depression and the collapse of several banks virtually ended Echuca's role as a major economic centre, and its population began to disperse.\nPopulation.\nAs of the 2021 census, there were 15,056 people in Echuca.\nGovernance.\nEchuca is the administrative centre for the Campaspe Shire Council.\nAt the state level, Echuca is represented by the Electoral district of Murray Plains.\nAt the federal level, Echuca is represented by the Division of Nicholls.\nEconomy, landmarks and retail.\nThe main industry in Echuca is tourism; it earns about $250 million a year for the Echuca economy. Visitors are attracted to the town by its climate, the Murray River and its paddle steamers, recreational attractions, several festivals and historical features, some of which have come to public awareness by the Nancy Cato novel \"All the Rivers Run\", which was made into a TV miniseries.\nEchuca is also a major regional service economy.\nAgriculture is very important to the region. Dairy, wheat, sheep, pig, and cattle farms are all within close proximity.\nCulture.\nPaddle steamers.\nThe port is home to the largest paddle steamer fleet in the world, which includes the world's oldest operating wooden hulled paddle steamer, built in 1866. There are several historic vessels operating out of Echuca on a daily commercial basis, such as PS \"Pevensey\" (built 1911), PS \"Alexander Arbuthnot\" (built 1923), PS \"Adelaide\" (built 1866) operating from Echuca Wharf itself, (built 1980 with a steam engine in use from 1906), PS \"Canberra\" (built 1913) and PV \"Pride of the Murray\" (built 1924 as a logging barge \"C24\") operating from Riverboat Dock, a short distance downstream from the main wharf. These vessels conduct four to six 1-hour cruises daily, while \"Emmylou\" offers lunch, dinner, and scenic cruises. There are also a number of privately owned paddle steamers in Echuca, including PS Hero, PS Henry Charles, and the former Church of England mission steamer, PS Etona. As well as the paddle steamers there are numerous houseboats, many of which can be hired. MV \"Mary Ann\" (built 1981) operates as a cruising restaurant all year round.\nThe Port of Echuca is also restoring to full working order. When operational, it will be added to the fleet of paddle steamers at Echuca Wharf.\nEvents and festivals.\nAnnual events held in Echuca include the Southern 80 waterski race, the largest waterski race in the world, (February), the Riverboats Music Festival (February), the Echuca-Moama Weddings Expo (May), the Echuca Rotary Steam, Horse and Vintage Rally (Queens Birthday weekend in June) and WinterBlues Festival (July).\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1983, the Australian television mini-series, \"All the Rivers Run\", based on a novel by Nancy Cato and starring Sigrid Thornton and John Waters, was filmed in and around Echuca. The local paddle steamers \"Pevensey\" and \"Emmylou\" featured in the mini-series as PS \"Philadelphia\" and PS \"Providence\", respectively. The airing of this series around Australia and internationally revitalised Echuca's tourism economy.\nIn 1985, parts of the Australian telemovie \"My Brother Tom\" (based on the book by James Aldridge) were filmed in Echuca.\nIn the TV series \"Glitch\", Vic, the district supervisor for the police forces of Echuca, the fictional Yoorana, and surrounding communities, is based in Echuca.\nThe ABC aired an episode of \"Get Krack!n\" on 6 February 2019 satirising morning television segments about regional food and wine tourism. There was some concern locally about how the episode depicted the town and its effect on tourism, although the intent of the segment was to \"[poke] fun at commercial morning breakfast shows and their often-condescending portrayal of rural and regional areas\".\nTransport.\nEchuca is connected over the Murray River to Moama by the Echuca-Moama Road Rail Bridge, completed in 1878. This historically significant bridge has riveted iron spans supported on cast iron pillars. Trains no longer run on this bridge; a dedicated rail bridge has been constructed next to the old bridge, which now only carries road vehicles.\nA second Murray River crossing, named Dhungala Bridge, was completed in July 2022.\nEchuca-Moama Transit runs three bus services hourly to Echuca East, Echuca South and Moama. The terminus is the Old Echuca Post Office on Hare Street. V/Line operates the Echuca line rail service from the local station to Melbourne via Bendigo. Echuca Airport is also located nearby.\nGeography.\nSituated at the junction of the Murray and Campaspe Rivers, Echuca lies on the Northern Plains Grassland. It is flood prone. In Yorta Yorta, the name Echuca translates as \u201cmeeting of the waters\u201d.\nClimate.\nEchuca has a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") with Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\") tendencies, with warm to hot, dry summers and cool to cold winters that are quite cloudy. \nMedia.\nThe local newspaper, The \"Riverine Herald\" is published by McPherson Media Group three days a week.\nFM Radio stations that broadcast to the town are ABC Central Victoria, Hit91.9, 3BO FM, and community radio based station, EMFM. AM Radio stations that broadcast to the town as well as Deniliquin, is 1521 2QN.\nNetwork television is broadcast in the Echuca region by the Seven Network, WIN Television (affiliated with the Nine Network), Network 10, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) and the Special Broadcasting Service (SBS).\nOf the three commercial networks, WIN Television airs a half-hour \"WIN News\" bulletin each weeknight at 5.30 pm, produced from a newsroom in the city and broadcast from studios in Wollongong.\nShort local news updates and weather updates are broadcast by Network 10 throughout the day, produced and broadcast from its Hobart studios. The Seven Network airs short local news and weather updates throughout the day, produced and broadcast from its Canberra studios.\nEducation.\nEchuca is served by several primary schools: 208 Primary School, Echuca East Primary School, Echuca Specialist School, St. Mary's Primary School and the newly constructed Twin Rivers Primary School (opened in 2018). Twin Rivers was formed by merging the former Echuca West and Echuca South Primary schools, and shares a place with Echuca Twin River Specialist School (formerly Echuca Specialist School)\nEchuca has two high schools. Echuca College, a state secondary college, was formed in 2006 by the amalgamation of Echuca Technical College and Echuca High School. St. Joseph's College, a Catholic co-ed secondary school, occupies the site of a former Brigidine convent that opened in 1886. Moama Anglican Grammar School, just over the border in New South Wales, also attracts students from Echuca.\nBendigo TAFE has a campus in Echuca, offering education up to diploma level in various fields.\nSport.\nThe town has two Australian rules football clubs. The Murray Bombers competes in the Goulburn Valley Football League, while Echuca United competes in the Murray Football League.\nThe town is also home to the Echuca Rockets, an inclusive all ability football team competing in the Victorian FIDA Football League - Northern Conference.\nEchuca has numerous other teams competing in regional and state sporting leagues, including netball, soccer, and field hockey. Echuca formerly fielded a baseball team, the Rich River Mariners, who played in the Goulburn Valley Baseball League. The team disbanded in 2006.\nEchuca has a horse racing club, the Echuca Racing Club, which schedules around twelve race meetings a year including the Echuca Cup meeting in March.\nEchuca Harness Racing Club conducts regular meetings at its racetrack in the town.\nGolfers play at the Echuca Back Nine Golf Course on Eyre and McKenzie Streets.\nWater sports.\nIn 2006, the Barry Beehag water ski race was established in honour of Barry Beehag, a founding and life member of the Moama Water Sports Club.\nSister city.\nEchuca's sister city was Whitehorse, Yukon, Canada. However, Whitehorse terminated the special relationship in 2008 due to the relationship being \"strictly ceremonial in nature\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "63835", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63835", "title": "Tyers, Victoria", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTyers is a town in Victoria, Australia. It is east of Melbourne, north-west of Traralgon and located in the City of Latrobe. It was known until 1852 as \"Boola Boola\", after which it was named after the surveyor and explorer Charles Tyers. At the 2016 census, Tyers had a population of 824.\nTyers Post Office opened on 11 September 1882 .\nThe town in conjunction with neighbouring Traralgon has an Australian Rules football team Traralgon-Tyers United competing in the North Gippsland Football League.\nSince 1982, Tyers Lightning Soccer Club have competed in the Latrobe Valley Soccer League, and won back-to-back women's league titles in 2014 and 2015.\nThe Tyers Arts Festival is an annual event, held since 1979, is an initiative of the Tyers Primary school and supported by the Tyers community.\nA notable resident was Jean Galbraith.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63837", "revid": "1306128358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63837", "title": "Diplura", "text": "Order of two-pronged bristletails\nThe order Diplura (\"two-pronged bristletails\") is one of three orders of non-insect hexapods within the class Entognatha (alongside Collembola (springtails) and Protura). The name \"diplura\", or \"double tail\", refers to the characteristic pair of caudal appendages or filaments at the terminal end of the body.\nAround 800 species of diplurans have been described.\nAnatomy.\nDiplurans are typically long, with most falling between . However, some species of \"Japyx\" may reach . They have no eyes and, apart from the darkened cerci in some species, they are unpigmented. Diplurans have long antennae with 10 or more bead-like segments projecting forward from the head. The abdomens of diplurans bear eversible vesicles, which seem to absorb moisture from the environment and help with the animal's water balance. The body segments themselves may display several types of setae, or scales and setae.\nDiplurans possess a characteristic pair of cerci projecting backwards from the last of the 11 abdominal somites. These cerci may be long and filamentous or short and pincer-like, leading to occasional confusion with earwigs. Some diplurans have the ability to shed their cerci if necessary (autotomy). Moulting occurs up to 30 times throughout the life of a dipluran, which is estimated to last up to one year.\nAs entognaths, the mouthparts are concealed within a small pouch by the lateral margins of the head capsule. The mandibles usually have several apical teeth. Diplurans do not possess any eyes or wings.\nIn males, glandular setae or disculi may be visible along the first abdominal sternite. External genital organs are present on the eighth abdominal segment.\nEcology.\nDiplurans are common in moist soil, leaf litter or humus, but are rarely seen because of their size and subterranean lifestyles. They have biting mouthparts and feed on a variety of live prey and dead organic matter. Those species with long cerci are herbivorous.\nDiplurans are found on nearly all land masses, except Antarctica and several oceanic islands. Their role as soil-dwelling organisms may play a key role in indicating soil quality, and as a measure of anthropogenic impact (e.g. soil nutrient depletion as a result of farming).\nReproduction.\nLike other non-insect hexapods, diplurans practice external fertilisation. Males lay up to 200 spermatophores a week, which are held off the ground by short stalks and probably only remain viable for about two days. The female collects the spermatophore with her genital opening, and later lays eggs in a cavity in the ground. The hatchlings (or nymphs) do not undergo metamorphosis, but resemble the adults, apart from their smaller size, lesser number of setae and their lack of reproductive organs.\nLineages.\nSeveral major lineages within \"Diplura\" are readily recognizable by the structure of their cerci.\nRelatives.\nThe relationships among the four groups of hexapods are not resolved, but most recent studies argue against a monophyletic Entognatha. The fossil record of the Diplura is sparse, but one apparent dipluran dates from the Carboniferous. This early dipluran, \"Testajapyx\", had compound eyes, and mouthparts that more closely resembled those of true insects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63838", "revid": "50985180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63838", "title": "Traralgon", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTraralgon ( , ) is a city located in the east of the Latrobe Valley in the Gippsland region of Victoria, Australia and the most populous city in the City of Latrobe and the region. The urban population of Traralgon at the 2021 census was 26,907. It is the largest and fastest growing city in the greater Latrobe Valley area, which has a population of 77,168 at the 2021 Census and is administered by the City of Latrobe.\nNaming.\nThe origin of the name Traralgon is unconfirmed. The name was used for the pastoral lease of the Hobson brothers in 1844, centred on Traralgon Creek, and was alternatively rendered 'Tralgon' by Dr Edumund Hobson. The town was also spelt \"Taralgon\" in the earliest records of the Gippsland Times available in 1861. \nThe Gippsland Farmers' Journal wrote in 1889 that the town name was originally spelt 'Tarralgon' and that it was the Indigenous name for 'the river of little fish'. However, these words are not reflected in modern linguists' knowledge of Gunai/Kurnai language. Records of the language show that the words or mean 'river', the words or mean 'little', while the words or mean 'fish'. It might be possible to combine words into , which sounds similar to 'Traralgon', but no such compound word was recorded. \nIn 1989, Don Macreadie wrote that Pawe\u0142 Strzelecki named Traralgon after Taralga, the hometown of Charlie Tarra, but the statement lacks evidence.\nHistory.\nTraralgon is situated on the traditional lands of the Indigenous Gunai/Kurnai nation, which includes the lands of the Braiakaulung clan of Bunjil Kraura, who lived to the north of Latrobe River (called \"Durt'yowan\" in Gunai language), as well as the clan of Woollum-Woollum, who lived on the hills to the south of the river and were more affiliated with the Brataualung people.\nGunai/Kurnai people manufactured stone tools, as long as 5,000 years ago, from silcrete quarries in the Haunted Hills, west of Morwell. Scarred trees and rock sites with axe-grinding grooves are also found in the local area. The Gippsland region was inhabited by the Gunai/Kurnai people for a period in excess of 20,000 years, according to evidence of occupation found at the New Guinea II cave near Buchan, Victoria. In other parts of Victoria evidence of Indigenous occupation has been found for many more thousands of years.\nExpeditions.\nThe first non-Indigenous visitors to the area of Traralgon included the party of Count Pawe\u0142 Strzelecki on their journey from the Snowy Mountains in April 1840, after Strzelecki had named Australia's highest peak as Mount Kosciuszko. Charley Tarra, a Burra Burra man from the NSW town of Taralga, was the Indigenous guide for the party, which included Strzelecki; the New South Wales men James MacArthur and James Riley; and their servants, Irish convict James Nolan and African convict John Rent.\nThe party crossed Latrobe River and travelled along Traralgon Creek to a heavily forested area, where the party was forced to abandon their horses and equipment. The location was commemorated by monument at Traralgon Creek, Koornalla, erected in 1927. The team's rations were reduced to a slice of bacon and a biscuit per day, but Tarra hunted for animals to end their hunger. They traversed the headwaters of Morwell River, before making a difficult journey across the heavily forested mountain range. They reached Anderson's run in Western Port in May 1840, then walked to Melbourne.\nTo honour the men, the mountain range was named the Strzelecki Ranges, part of the forest was named Tarra Valley, later merged into Tarra-Bulga National Park, and the river running from the valley to Port Albert was named Tarra River. Strzelecki named the region as Gipps' Land, later becoming Gippsland, in honour of his sponsor NSW Governor George Gipps.\nIn June 1840, a party consisting of Tarra, Riley, John Rutledge and Shoalhaven Indigenous man John Pigeon went on a second expedition to retrieve the lost horses and managed to retrieve one, by travelling through the mountains of West Gippsland, across a path that would roughly trace the present-day Princes Highway. A third expedition was made from Port Albert to Latrobe Valley in March 1841 that included William Brodribb, Alexander Kinghorne, Norman McLeod and Kirsopp with Tarra as their guide. In June 1841, a fourth expedition was made along the same route by William's brother Albert Brodribb, pastoralist Edward Hobson, Dr Edward Barker and four Boon wurrung men.\nPastoral leases.\nThe area around Traralgon was first settled by Europeans in the 1840s. Due to the Latrobe Valley having relatively high rainfall, the land is very fertile, and farming was quickly established. As with much of central and western Gippsland, this was mainly dairy farming. In the Gippsland region between 1840 and 1860, the population of settlers grew from a few to 2,000 and the recorded Gunai population fell from 2,000 to a handful.\nThe first Europeans to take land in Traralgon were the brothers Dr Edmund Hobson and Edward Hobson who purchased a 19,000 acre pastoral lease in 1844, which they called Traralgon. In April 1844, Edward to a large mob of cattle out from their station near Arthur's Seat to Traralgon arriving two months later. Albert Brodribb and William Bennett started Hazelwood Station in 1844 and the following year James Rintoul had taken a run in Loy Yang and Thomas Gorringe had taken up a run at Maryvale.\nTownship established.\nThe township was established in the early 1860s, the first Post Office opening on 1 January 1861. In 1877 the Gippsland railway line from Melbourne was completed with a railway station at Traralgon giving the town a major economic boost.\nTraralgon was part of the area administered by the Rosedale Roads Board, before the Shire of Traralgon was established in 1879. In the latter part of the 19th century the Shire grew strongly.\nIt was not until the 1930s however that Traralgon began to move away from a farming based economy. In 1939, Australian Paper Manufacturers established a paper mill at Maryvale, around from Traralgon.\nQueen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh visited on 3 March 1954. The president of the Shire of Traralgon, Cr Clem Little met and welcomed the Queen, who was flown by the Royal Australian Air Force from Sale. She returned to Melbourne by train.\nIn 1961, Traralgon formed its own borough, the Borough of Traralgon following a decade of lobbying to separate the urban areas of Traralgon from the Shire. Traralgon was proclaimed a city in 1964.\nThe old town hall and mechanics institute were demolished in 1973.\nFurther development resulted from the expansion of the power generation industry following World War II, particularly through the now defunct State Electricity Commission of Victoria. This included large expansions at Yallourn and Hazelwood Power Stations and the construction of the massive Loy Yang Power Station in the 1970s and 1980s.\nAn Australian Securities &amp; Investments Commission information processing centre was established in the early 1990s, at the time employing around 400 people.\nThe City of Traralgon and Shire of Traralgon continued a separate existence until they were amalgamated into the Shire of Latrobe in 1994.\nCompletion of the Loy Yang power stations, extensive voluntary departures from the electricity industry and privatisation of the Victorian electricity industry in the early 1990s had devastating effects on the economy of the Latrobe Valley. Traralgon, with a more diversified economy, suffered to a lesser extent than the neighbouring towns of Morwell and Moe both of which relied almost exclusively on the power stations for their livelihood.\nTraralgon grew strongly in the mid 2000s, with a figure of 2.7% making it the largest and fastest growing city in the Latrobe Valley.\nHeritage listings.\nTraralgon contains a number of heritage-listed sites, including:\nGeography.\nTraralgon is situated on expansive flat land in the Traralgon Creek valley catchment between the Great Dividing Range in the north and the Strzelecki Ranges in the south. The Traralgon Creek runs through the city's centre and its green belt separates its eastern and western suburban areas. The urban area is hemmed to the south east by the Loy Yang Open Cut.\nUrban Structure.\nTraralgon is part of the Latrobe Valley tri-city urban area, a small area of industry and agricultural land separates it from neighbouring Morwell. Traralgon together with adjacent Morwell forms an urban area with an estimated population of 41,984 as at June 2018. In the five years prior, the urban area had experienced a modest average annual growth in population of 0.5%. The Traralgon portion the combined Morwell area had a population of 27,958, also at June 2018. Greater Traralgon includes localities such as Traralgon, the suburb of Traralgon East and the relatively sparsely populated satellite localities of Hazelwood and Traralgon South to the south, and Tyers and Glengarry to the north.\nThe Traralgon central business district is centred around Seymour and Franklin Streets. An indoor shopping mall called Traralgon Centre Plaza was opened in 1985. Commercial and light industry sprawl along most of the eastern stretch of the Princes Highway. Notable heritage buildings include the Post Office and Courthouse erected in 1886 and Ryans Hotel erected in 1914, both in Franklin Street.\nClimate.\nTraralgon experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\"). Nights in Traralgon are about 2\u00a0\u00b0C colder than in Melbourne\nFrom 9 June 2021 Traralgon was one of the hardest-hit towns with 200 homes evacuated when an east coast low weather system caused widespread flash flooding across Gippsland.\nEconomy.\nThe economy is primarily driven by the primary sector, natural resources and the secondary sector including coal mining, processing and fossil-fuel power generation for the National Electricity Market. Along with electricity production, Traralgon benefits from the mining for oil and natural gas in the nearby Bass Strait fields.\nA significant forestry industry operates including logging of both plantation and natural forest timber, The largest paper mill in Australia is located nearby in Maryvale and provides local employment for over 2,000 people.\nThe local agriculture industry is involved in the production of wool and dairy products, as well as vegetable growing.\nThe tertiary sector of the economy is also important for employment with major government administration offices for the Australian Securities &amp; Investments Commission, Department of Health &amp; Human Services, Department of Environment, Land, Water &amp; Planning and Environment Protection Authority.\nGeothermal energy.\nThe Gippsland Regional Aquatic Centre in Traralgon is the first public aquatic facility in Victoria to incorporate a deep-bore geothermal heating system. The system taps in to the aquifer below ground in Traralgon at a depth of more than 600 metres where the ground water is about 65 degrees Celsius.\nEducation.\nTraralgon features a number of primary and secondary schools, including state, catholic and independent schools.\nThe local primary schools include Grey Street Primary School (formerly Traralgon Primary School), Kosciuszko Street Primary School, Liddiard Road Primary School, Stockdale Road Primary School, St Michaels Primary School, St Gabriels Primary School, Chairo Christian School (formerly Flinders Christian Community College]) and St Pauls Anglican Grammar School. St Paul's Anglican Grammar School and Chairo Christian School are also secondary schools. In addition Traralgon has the Latrobe Special Developmental School catering for students from 4.5 to 18 years of age with an intellectual and physical disability.\nThe local government secondary school, Traralgon College, has two campuses, the junior campus (years 7 &amp; 8) located on Liddiard Rd in Traralgon's east, with the senior campus (years 9\u201312) on Grey St in Traralgon's west. There is also a Catholic secondary school, Lavalla Catholic College. Lavalla has two campuses in Traralgon's West end, and a third campus in Newborough. The junior campus, St Paul's, neighbours Traralgon College's senior campus on Grey St. The senior campus, Kildare, is located in Kosciuszko St. Chairo Christian School on Liddiard Rd is a P\u2013 8 school.\nA number of Traralgon families also send their children to the three independent Anglican grammar schools in the region, two of which are about 40 minutes drive from Traralgon: St. Paul's Anglican Grammar School, which has a campus in Traralgon as well as Warragul, or Gippsland Grammar School in Sale.\nTAFE and University education is also available within the region. Traralgon is a 15-minute drive from Federation University Australia's Gippsland Campus, located in the neighbouring town of Churchill. Traralgon is also home to one of a number of campuses for the region's TAFE provider, TAFE Gippsland.\nSport.\nAustralian rules football is popular. There are two senior clubs, the Traralgon Maroons (which briefly competed in the Victorian Football League between 1996\u20131997) currently competing in the Gippsland Football League and Traralgon-Tyers United competing in the North Gippsland Football League. There is also a junior league, Traralgon and District Junior Football League, with most games played from the West End Sporting Complex.\nCricket is also popular, with a local league, the Traralgon and District Cricket Association (TDCA) operating.\nSoccer is represented by two clubs \u2013 Traralgon City and Traralgon Olympians \u2013 who both play in the Latrobe Valley Soccer League. The home grounds are Harold Preston Reserve and Harold Preston Park respectively.\nThere is a local basketball league, the Traralgon Basketball Association with a stadium at the Traralgon Sports Complex. The Traralgon Sports Stadium played host to preliminary round games of the Basketball competition during the 2006 Commonwealth Games which were held in Melbourne.\nThe local baseball team is the Traralgon Redsox.\nTraralgon has a horse racing club, the Latrobe Valley Racing Club, which schedules two race meetings a year including the Cup meeting in December.\nThe Traralgon Greyhound Racing Club holds regular greyhound racing meetings at Glenview Park. The first meeting was held on 28 June 1973.\nGolfers play at the course of the Traralgon Golf Club on the Princes Highway.\nThe Traralgon Harriers are a running club that runs 5 or 6\u00a0km races every Thursday night and also organise Victoria's oldest marathon, the Traralgon Marathon, held every June.\nThe Latrobe Valley Cycling club hold road and track racing events on most weeks throughout the year.\nTraralgon Pistol Club and Traralgon small bore rifle Club also located in the town.\nEntertainment.\nThe entertainment precinct which spans Kay, Grey and Franklin Streets attracts people from surrounding towns to several nightclubs, bars and restaurants located there.\nLocal media.\nNewspapers.\nThe weekly \"Latrobe Valley Express\" newspaper is delivered to all homes on Wednesday nights, in Traralgon, Morwell and Moe. The \"Traralgon Record\" newspaper has been digitised from 1886 to 1932 as part of the Australian Newspapers Digitisation Program.\nMelbourne Newspapers such as \"The Weekly Times\", \"The Age\" and the \"Herald Sun\" and national newspapers like \"The Australian\", \"The Saturday Paper\", and the \"Australian Financial Review\" are also available.\nTelevision.\nThe area was the first in Australia to receive its own regional television station, GLV-10 Gippsland (now Network 10), when it launched on 9 December 1961.\nPrograms from the three main commercial television networks (Seven, Nine and 10) are all re-broadcast into Latrobe Valley by their regional affiliates \u2013 Seven (AMV), WIN (VTV) and Network 10 (GLV). All broadcast from the Latrobe Valley transmitter at Mount Tassie. All the commercial stations are based in Traralgon and have local commercials placed on their broadcasts.\nLocal news is available on all three commercial networks:\nNine previously produced a local news bulletin branded \"Nine News Gippsland\" and later \"Nine News Local\" for a brief period between 2017 and 2021 that aired on the Southern Cross Austereo primary channel when it was previously affiliated with Nine.\nBoth national public broadcasters, ABC (ABC TV) and SBS (SBS TV) are broadcast into the Latrobe Valley as well, via Mount Tassie, as well as from the Dandenong Ranges transmitters located east of Melbourne.\nAdditional digital multi-channels broadcast by all the networks in addition to the ones listed above are available on the digital service called Freeview to viewers in Traralgon and the Gippsland/Latrobe Valley region. These channels include HD simulcasts of the primary channel (available on channels 20, 30, 50, 60 and 80). As well as ABC Family, ABC Entertains, ABC News, SBS Viceland, SBS World Movies, 10 Drama, 10 Comedy, Nickelodeon, 7two, 7mate, 7flix, 7bravo, 9Gem, 9Go!, 9Life and Sky News Regional.\nTelevision transmissions from Mount Dandenong for the Melbourne market (Seven, Nine and Ten) can also be received in digital in Traralgon with a suitable roof-top antenna.\nSubscription television service Foxtel (previously Austar until 2014) is available via satellite.\nRadio.\nThere are two radio stations with studios located in Traralgon \u2013 TRFM (99.5\u00a0MHz) and Gold 1242, both owned by Ace Radio. The FM station is broadcast along with the television channels from Mount Tassie while Gold 1242 is broadcast from an AM transmitter near Sale. Warragul radio stations Triple M (97.9\u00a0MHz) and 3GG (531\u00a0kHz) also service this region.\nMost ABC stations are rebroadcast locally and available in Traralgon, along with 774 ABC Melbourne which is able to be received directly from Melbourne and the local ABC Gippsland station (100.7\u00a0MHz). Some Melbourne stations both on the AM band and the FM band can be heard in the more elevated parts of Traralgon, however DAB+ is not available without a vertically polarized roof-top antenna.\nCommunity radio stations Gippsland FM (104.7\u00a0MHz) based in Morwell and Life FM (103.9\u00a0MHz) based in Sale are also broadcast into the Latrobe Valley and can be heard in Traralgon.\nTransport.\nRoad transport and the motor vehicle is the main form of transport. The Princes Highway runs through the city and close to the CBD which received heavy regional traffic (although a Traralgon Bypass road is undergoing planning). The Hyland Highway also originates at Traralgon.\nRail transport includes both passenger rail and freight rail. The city's only station is Traralgon railway station which is on the Gippsland railway line served by V/Line services from Melbourne to Bairnsdale. Victoria's electronic ticketing system, Myki, was implemented on rail services between Traralgon and Melbourne on 8 July 2013.\nLatrobe Valley Buslines provides local services around Traralgon and other cities in the Latrobe Valley.\nLatrobe Valley Airport is located close to Traralgon in nearby Morwell and provides general aviation.\nTraralgon has a minimal bicycle infrastructure, with few segregated cycle facilities. An exception is the 63-kilometre-long Gippsland Plains Rail Trail which connects Traralgon to Stratford via Cowwarr, Heyfield, Tinamba and Maffra. A new cycling and walking path was opened in 2020 between Traralgon and Morwell and with a connection to the Latrobe Regional Hospital (LRH).\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63844", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63844", "title": "Protura", "text": "Order of arthropods\nThe Protura, or proturans, and sometimes nicknamed coneheads, are very small (0.6\u20131.5mm long), soil-dwelling animals, so inconspicuous they were not noticed until the 20th century. The Protura constitute an order of hexapods that were previously regarded as insects, and sometimes treated as a class in their own right.\nSome evidence indicates the Protura are basal to all other hexapods, although not all researchers consider them Hexapoda, rendering the monophyly of Hexapoda unsettled. Uniquely among hexapods, proturans show anamorphic development, whereby body segments are added during moults.\nThere are close to 800 species, described in seven families. Nearly 300 species are contained in a single genus, \"Eosentomon\".\nMorphology.\nProturans have no eyes, wings, or antennae, and, lacking pigmentation, are usually whitish or pale brown. The sensory function of the absent antennae is fulfilled by the first pair of the three pairs of five-segmented legs, which are held up, pointing forward, and bearing numerous tarsal sensilla and sensory hairs. They ambulate using the four rear legs. The head is conical, and bears two pseudoculi with unknown function. The body is elongated and cylindrical, with a post-anal telson at the end. The mouthparts are entognathous (enclosed within the head capsule) and consist of narrow mandibles and maxillae. There are no cerci at the end of the abdomen, which gives the group their name, from the Greek \"proto-\" (meaning \"first\", in this case implying primitive), and \"ura\", meaning \"tail\". The first three abdominal segments bear short limb-like appendages, called \"styli\". The first pair of styli is two-segmented, while the second and third pair are either two-segmented or unsegmented. The genitalia are internal and the genital opening lies between the eleventh segment and the telson of the adult. During mating, the genitalia of both sexes are everted from an abdominal chamber. Only the two families Eosentomidae and Sinentomidae possess a simple tracheal system with a pair of spiracles on both the mesothorax and the metathorax, while proturans in the remaining families lack these structures and perform gas exchange by diffusion.\nEcology.\nProturans live chiefly in soil, mosses, and leaf litter of moist temperate forests that are not too acidic. They have also been found beneath rocks or under the bark of trees, as well as in animal burrows. They are generally restricted to the uppermost , but have been found as deep as . Although they are sometimes regarded as uncommon, proturans are most likely overlooked because of their small size, as densities of over 90,000 individuals per square metre have been recorded.\nThe diet of proturans has not yet been sufficiently observed to be characterised. In laboratory culture, they may be fed mycorrhizal fungi, dead mites and pulverized, dried mushrooms; they are believed to feed on decaying vegetable matter and fungi in the wild. The styliform mouthparts suggest the Protura may be fluid feeders, based on evidence that some species suck out the liquid contents of fungal hyphae.\nProturan species which spend their lives near the soil surface generally produce one new generation of offspring each year; they also possess longer legs. Species living at deeper soil levels have shorter legs and tend to reproduce less seasonally. Some migratory proturan species move to deeper soil layers for the winter and ascend to shallower soil layers for the summer.\nProturans play a role in soil formation and composition by speeding decomposition, helping in the breakdown of leaf litter and recycling nutrients into the soil.\nDevelopment.\nThe nymph has 8 abdominal segments plus the telson; the number of abdominal segments increases through moulting until the full adult complement of 12 abdominal segments is achieved. Further moults may occur, but do not add additional body segments; it is still not known whether the adults continue to moult throughout their lives. Eggs have been observed in only a few species.\nIn most proturan families, five developmental stages follow the egg stage: the prenymph hatches from the egg and has only weakly developed mouthparts and 8 abdominal segments; nymph I follows and has fully developed mouthparts; nymph II has 9 abdominal segments; \"maturus junior\" has 11 abdominal segments, and moults into the sexually mature adult. Male individuals of the family Acerentomidae differ from this five-stage scheme, having an additional developmental stage, the preimago, which has partially developed genitalia and appears between the \"maturus junior\" and the adult stage.\nHistory.\nProturans were first discovered in the early 20th century, when Filippo Silvestri and Antonio Berlese independently described the animals. The first species to be described was \"Acerentomon doderoi\", published in 1907 by Silvestri, based on material found near Syracuse, New York.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63847", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63847", "title": "Formaldehyde", "text": "Organic compound (H\u2013CHO); simplest aldehyde\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nFormaldehyde ( , ) (systematic name methanal) is an organic compound with the chemical formula and structure . The compound is a pungent, colourless gas that polymerises spontaneously into paraformaldehyde. It is stored as aqueous solutions (formalin), which consists mainly of the hydrate CH2(OH)2. It is the simplest of the aldehydes (). As a precursor to many other materials and chemical compounds, in 2006 the global production of formaldehyde was estimated at 12\u00a0million tons per year. It is mainly used in the production of industrial resins, e.g., for particle board and coatings. \nFormaldehyde also occurs naturally. It is derived from the degradation of serine, dimethylglycine, and lipids. Demethylases act by converting \"N\"-methyl groups to formaldehyde.\nFormaldehyde is classified as a group 1 carcinogen and can cause respiratory and skin irritation upon exposure.\nForms.\nFormaldehyde is more complicated than many simple carbon compounds in that it adopts several diverse forms. These compounds can often be used interchangeably and can be interconverted.\nA small amount of stabilizer, such as methanol, is usually added to suppress oxidation and polymerization. A typical commercial-grade formalin may contain 10\u201312% methanol in addition to various metallic impurities.\n\"Formaldehyde\" was first used as a generic trademark in 1893 following a previous trade name, \"formalin\".\nStructure and bonding.\nThe formaldehyde molecule is Y-shaped and its molecular symmetry belongs to the \"C\"2v point group. The precise molecular geometry of gaseous formaldehyde has been determined by gas electron diffraction and microwave spectroscopy. The bond lengths are 1.21 \u00c5 for the carbon\u2013oxygen bond and around 1.11 \u00c5 for the carbon\u2013hydrogen bond, while the H\u2013C\u2013H bond angle is 117\u00b0, close to the 120\u00b0 angle found in an ideal trigonal planar molecule. Some excited electronic states of formaldehyde are pyramidal rather than planar as in the ground state.\nOccurrence.\nAtmospheric.\nSources.\nFormaldehyde (HCHO) is introduced into the atmosphere via primary emission and secondary formation. Primary sources of atmospheric HCHO include direct biogenic emissions from vegetation and biomass burning, as well as anthropogenic emissions from vehicles, industrial activities, and coal combustion. The large majority of atmospheric HCHO is secondary, produced by radical-driven oxidation of methane (CH4) and non-methane volatile organic compounds (VOCs) rather than direct emissions. \u00a0Secondary production from CH4 oxidation dominates in remote and marine environments. \u00a0In contrast, oxidation of biogenic and anthropogenic VOCs is the main source of HCHO in continental regions. Vegetation emits large amounts of isoprene, which is an important natural precursor of tropospheric formaldehyde over many land regions.\nRole in atmospheric chemistry.\nAs a short-lived but very reactive carbonyl compound, HCHO plays an important role in the oxidation chemistry of the troposphere. It is a key source of odd-hydrogen radicals (HOx = OH + HO2) that help to sustain the atmosphere\u2019s oxidative capacity. HCHO is also considered an important ozone precursor. \nHCHO removal in the troposphere occurs primarily through photodissociation. This occurs through two main pathways: molecular and radical forming channels, the threshold wavelengths for which are given in parentheses. \n Molecular: &lt;chem&gt;HCHO + hv -&gt; H2 + CO (\\lambda &lt; 360 nm)&lt;/chem&gt;\n Radical: &lt;chem&gt;HCHO + hv -&gt; H + HCO (\\lambda &lt; 330 nm)&lt;/chem&gt;\nThe &lt;chem&gt;H&lt;/chem&gt; and &lt;chem&gt;HCO&lt;/chem&gt; radicals react with the atmospheric &lt;chem&gt;O2&lt;/chem&gt; to form hydroperoxyl (&lt;chem&gt;HO2&lt;/chem&gt;) radicals, giving a net radical channel of:\n &lt;chem&gt;HCHO + hv + 2O2 -&gt; 2 HO2 + CO&lt;/chem&gt;\nIn addition, in the presence of NOx and sunlight, HCHO contributes to tropospheric ozone formation, a key component of photochemical smog. \n &lt;chem&gt;HCHO + hv + 2O2 -&gt; H2O + CO + O3&lt;/chem&gt;\nRemote monitoring.\nSpectrometers on earth observation satellites allow monitoring of formaldehyde in the troposphere. Using ultraviolet\u2013visible spectroscopy, instruments detect the absorption features in sunlight reflected by the Earth and use differential optical absorption spectroscopy to calculate vertical column densities. Near-global maps of tropospheric HCHO with daily coverage and kilometer-scale spatial resolution are provided by the OMI instrument on Aura, the GOME-2 instrument on MetOp, and the newer TROPOMI sensor on Sentinel-5P. Regional maps with hourly coverage over North America are available from the TEMPO instrument on Intelsat 40e. \nThe close coupling between isoprene and formaldehyde has been widely used in top-down approaches that derive regional and global isoprene emissions from satellite measurements of tropospheric formaldehyde columns. These studies provide important constraints on the magnitude and spatial pattern of biogenic isoprene emissions. \nProcesses in the upper atmosphere contribute more than 80% of the total formaldehyde in the environment. Formaldehyde is an intermediate in the oxidation (or combustion) of methane, as well as of other carbon compounds, e.g. in forest fires, automobile exhaust, and tobacco smoke. When produced in the atmosphere by the action of sunlight and oxygen on atmospheric methane and other hydrocarbons, it becomes part of smog. Formaldehyde has also been detected in outer space.\nEnvironmental exposure.\nFormaldehyde and its adducts are ubiquitous in nature. Food may contain formaldehyde at levels 1\u2013100\u00a0mg/kg. Formaldehyde, formed in the metabolism of the amino acids serine and threonine, is found in the bloodstream of humans and other primates at concentrations of approximately 50\u00a0micromolar. Experiments in which animals are exposed to an atmosphere containing isotopically labeled formaldehyde have demonstrated that even in deliberately exposed animals, the majority of formaldehyde-DNA adducts found in non-respiratory tissues are derived from endogenously produced formaldehyde.\nFormaldehyde does not accumulate in the environment, because it is broken down within a few hours by sunlight or by bacteria present in soil or water. Humans metabolize formaldehyde quickly, converting it to formic acid. It nonetheless presents significant health concerns, as a contaminant.\nInterstellar formaldehyde.\nFormaldehyde appears to be a useful probe in astrochemistry due to prominence of the 110\u2190111 and 211\u2190212 \"K\"-doublet transitions. It was the first polyatomic organic molecule detected in the interstellar medium. Since its initial detection in 1969, it has been observed in many regions of the galaxy. Because of the widespread interest in interstellar formaldehyde, it has been extensively studied, yielding new extragalactic sources. A proposed mechanism for the formation is the hydrogenation of CO ice:\n H + CO \u2192 HCO\n HCO + H \u2192 CH2O\nHCN, HNC, H2CO, and dust have also been observed inside the comae of comets C/2012 F6 (Lemmon) and C/2012 S1 (ISON).\nSynthesis and industrial production.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nFormaldehyde was discovered in 1859 by the Russian chemist Aleksandr Butlerov (1828\u20131886) when he attempted to synthesize methanediol (\"methylene glycol\") from iodomethane and silver oxalate. In his paper, Butlerov referred to formaldehyde as \"dioxymethylen\" (methylene dioxide) because his empirical formula for it was incorrect, as atomic weights were not precisely determined until the Karlsruhe Congress.\nThe compound was identified as an aldehyde by August Wilhelm von Hofmann, who first announced its production by passing methanol vapor in air over hot platinum wire. With modifications, Hofmann's method remains the basis of the present day industrial route.\nSolution routes to formaldehyde also entail oxidation of methanol or iodomethane.\nIndustry.\nFormaldehyde is produced industrially by the catalytic oxidation of methanol. The most common catalysts are silver metal (i.e. the FASIL process), iron(III) oxide, iron molybdenum oxides (e.g. iron(III) molybdate) with a molybdenum-enriched surface, or vanadium oxides. In the commonly used formox process, methanol and oxygen react at c.\u00a0250\u2013400\u00a0\u00b0C in presence of iron oxide in combination with molybdenum and/or vanadium to produce formaldehyde according to the chemical equation:\n2CH3OH + O2 \u2192 2CH2O + 2H2O\nThe silver-based catalyst usually operates at a higher temperature, about 650\u00a0\u00b0C. Two chemical reactions on it simultaneously produce formaldehyde: that shown above and the dehydrogenation reaction:\nCH3OH \u2192 CH2O + H2\nIn principle, formaldehyde could be generated by oxidation of methane, but this route is not industrially viable because the methanol is more easily oxidized than methane.\nBiochemistry.\nFormaldehyde is produced via several enzyme-catalyzed routes. Living beings, including humans, produce formaldehyde as part of their metabolism. Formaldehyde is key to several bodily functions (e.g. epigenetics), but its amount must also be tightly controlled to avoid self-poisoning.\nFormaldehyde is catabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase ADH5 and aldehyde dehydrogenase ALDH2.\nOrganic chemistry.\nFormaldehyde is a building block in the synthesis of many other compounds of specialised and industrial significance. It exhibits most of the chemical properties of other aldehydes but is more reactive.\nPolymerization and hydration.\nMonomeric CH2O is a gas and is rarely encountered in the laboratory. Aqueous formaldehyde, unlike some other small aldehydes (which need specific conditions to oligomerize through aldol condensation) oligomerizes spontaneously at a common state. The trimer 1,3,5-trioxane, , is a typical oligomer. Many cyclic oligomers of other sizes have been isolated. Similarly, formaldehyde hydrates to give the geminal diol methanediol, which condenses further to form hydroxy-terminated oligomers HO(CH2O)\"n\"H. The polymer is called paraformaldehyde. The higher concentration of formaldehyde\u2014the more equilibrium shifts towards polymerization. Diluting with water or increasing the solution temperature, as well as adding alcohols (such as methanol or ethanol) lowers that tendency.\nGaseous formaldehyde polymerizes at active sites on vessel walls, but the mechanism of the reaction is unknown. Small amounts of hydrogen chloride, boron trifluoride, or stannic chloride present in gaseous formaldehyde provide the catalytic effect and make the polymerization rapid.\nCross-linking reactions.\nFormaldehyde forms cross-links by first combining with a protein to form methylol, which loses a water molecule to form a Schiff base. The Schiff base can then react with DNA or protein to create a cross-linked product. This reaction is the basis for the most common process of chemical fixation.\nOxidation and reduction.\nFormaldehyde is readily oxidized by atmospheric oxygen into formic acid. For this reason, commercial formaldehyde is typically contaminated with formic acid. Formaldehyde can be hydrogenated into methanol.\nIn the Cannizzaro reaction, formaldehyde and base react to produce formic acid and methanol, a disproportionation reaction.\nHydroxymethylation and chloromethylation.\nFormaldehyde reacts with many compounds, resulting in hydroxymethylation:\nX-H + CH2O \u2192 X-CH2OH(X = R2N, RC(O)NR', SH).\nThe resulting hydroxymethyl derivatives typically react further. Thus, amines give hexahydro-1,3,5-triazines:\n3RNH2 + 3CH2O \u2192 (RNCH2)3 + 3H2O\nSimilarly, when combined with hydrogen sulfide, it forms trithiane:\n3CH2O + 3H2S \u2192 (CH2S)3 + 3H2O\nIn the presence of acids, it participates in electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions with aromatic compounds resulting in hydroxymethylated derivatives:\nArH + CH2O \u2192 ArCH2OH\nWhen conducted in the presence of hydrogen chloride, the product is the chloromethyl compound, as described in the Blanc chloromethylation. If the arene is electron-rich, as in phenols, elaborate condensations ensue. With 4-substituted phenols one obtains calixarenes. Phenol results in polymers.\nOther reactions.\nMany amino acids react with formaldehyde. Cysteine converts to thioproline.\nUses.\nIndustrial applications.\nFormaldehyde is a common precursor to more complex compounds and materials. In approximate order of decreasing consumption, products generated from formaldehyde include urea formaldehyde resin, melamine resin, phenol formaldehyde resin, polyoxymethylene plastics, 1,4-butanediol, and methylene diphenyl diisocyanate. The textile industry uses formaldehyde-based resins as finishers to make fabrics crease-resistant.\nWhen condensed with phenol, urea, or melamine, formaldehyde produces, respectively, hard thermoset phenol formaldehyde resin, urea formaldehyde resin, and melamine resin. These polymers are permanent adhesives used in plywood and carpeting. They are also foamed to make insulation, or cast into moulded products. Production of formaldehyde resins accounts for more than half of formaldehyde consumption.\nFormaldehyde is also a precursor to polyfunctional alcohols such as pentaerythritol, which is used to make paints and explosives. Other formaldehyde derivatives include methylene diphenyl diisocyanate, an important component in polyurethane paints and foams, and hexamine, which is used in phenol-formaldehyde resins as well as the explosive RDX.\nCondensation with acetaldehyde affords pentaerythritol, a chemical necessary in synthesizing PETN, a high explosive:\nNiche uses.\nDisinfectant and biocide.\nAn aqueous solution of formaldehyde can be useful as a disinfectant as it kills most bacteria and fungi (including their spores). It is used as an additive in vaccine manufacturing to inactivate toxins and pathogens. Formaldehyde releasers are used as biocides in personal care products such as cosmetics. Although present at levels not normally considered harmful, they are known to cause allergic contact dermatitis in certain sensitised individuals.\nAquarists use formaldehyde as a treatment for the parasites \"Ichthyophthirius multifiliis\" and \"Cryptocaryon irritans\". Formaldehyde is one of the main disinfectants recommended for destroying anthrax.\nFormaldehyde is also approved for use in the manufacture of animal feeds in the US. It is an antimicrobial agent used to maintain complete animal feeds or feed ingredients \"Salmonella\" negative for up to 21 days.\nTissue fixative and embalming agent.\nFormaldehyde preserves or fixes tissue or cells. The process involves cross-linking of primary amino groups. The European Union has banned the use of formaldehyde as a biocide (including embalming) under the Biocidal Products Directive (98/8/EC) due to its carcinogenic properties. Countries with a strong tradition of embalming corpses, such as Ireland and other colder-weather countries, have raised concerns. Despite reports to the contrary, no decision on the inclusion of formaldehyde on Annex\u00a0I of the Biocidal Products Directive for product-type\u00a022 (embalming and taxidermist fluids) had been made as of \u00a02009[ [update]].\nFormaldehyde-based crosslinking is exploited in ChIP-on-chip or ChIP-sequencing genomics experiments, where DNA-binding proteins are cross-linked to their cognate binding sites on the chromosome and analyzed to determine what genes are regulated by the proteins. Formaldehyde is also used as a denaturing agent in RNA gel electrophoresis, preventing RNA from forming secondary structures. A solution of 4% formaldehyde fixes pathology tissue specimens at about one mm per hour at room temperature.\nDrug testing.\nFormaldehyde and 18\u00a0M (concentrated) sulfuric acid makes Marquis reagent\u2014which can identify alkaloids and other compounds.\nPhotography.\nIn photography, formaldehyde is used in low concentrations for the process C-41 (color negative film) stabilizer in the final wash step, as well as in the process E-6 pre-bleach step, to make it unnecessary in the final wash. Due to improvements in dye coupler chemistry, more modern (2006 or later) E-6 and C-41 films do not need formaldehyde, as their dyes are already stable.\nSafety.\nIn view of its widespread use, toxicity, and volatility, formaldehyde poses a significant danger to human health. In 2011, the US National Toxicology Program described formaldehyde as \"known to be a human carcinogen\".\nChronic inhalation.\nConcerns are associated with chronic (long-term) exposure by inhalation as may happen from thermal or chemical decomposition of formaldehyde-based resins and the production of formaldehyde resulting from the combustion of a variety of organic compounds (for example, exhaust gases). As formaldehyde resins are used in many construction materials, it is one of the more common indoor air pollutants. At concentrations above 0.1\u00a0ppm in air, formaldehyde can irritate the eyes and mucous membranes. Formaldehyde inhaled at this concentration may cause headaches, a burning sensation in the throat, and difficulty breathing, and can trigger or aggravate asthma symptoms.\nThe CDC considers formaldehyde as a systemic poison. Formaldehyde poisoning can cause permanent changes in the nervous system's functions.\nA 1988 Canadian study of houses with urea-formaldehyde foam insulation found that formaldehyde levels as low as 0.046\u00a0ppm were positively correlated with eye and nasal irritation.\nA 2009 review of studies has shown a strong association between exposure to formaldehyde and the development of childhood asthma.\nA theory was proposed for the carcinogenesis of formaldehyde in 1978. In 1987 the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) classified it as a \"probable human carcinogen\", and after more studies the WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in 1995 also classified it as a \"probable human carcinogen\". Further information and evaluation of all known data led the IARC to reclassify formaldehyde as a \"known human carcinogen\" associated with nasal sinus cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer. Studies in 2009 and 2010 have also shown a positive correlation between exposure to formaldehyde and the development of leukemia, particularly myeloid leukemia. Nasopharyngeal and sinonasal cancers are relatively rare, with a combined annual incidence in the United States of &lt; 4,000 cases. About 30,000 cases of myeloid leukemia occur in the United States each year. Some evidence suggests that workplace exposure to formaldehyde contributes to sinonasal cancers. Professionals exposed to formaldehyde in their occupation, such as funeral industry workers and embalmers, showed an increased risk of leukemia and brain cancer compared with the general population. Other factors are important in determining individual risk for the development of leukemia or nasopharyngeal cancer. In yeast, formaldehyde is found to perturb pathways for DNA repair and cell cycle.\nIn the residential environment, formaldehyde exposure comes from a number of routes; formaldehyde can be emitted by treated wood products, such as plywood or particle board, but it is produced by paints, varnishes, floor finishes, and cigarette smoking as well. In July 2016, the U.S. EPA released a prepublication version of its final rule on Formaldehyde Emission Standards for Composite Wood Products. These new rules impact manufacturers, importers, distributors, and retailers of products containing composite wood, including fiberboard, particleboard, and various laminated products, who must comply with more stringent record-keeping and labeling requirements.\nThe U.S. EPA allows no more than 0.016\u00a0ppm formaldehyde in the air in new buildings constructed for that agency. A U.S. EPA study found a new home measured 0.076\u00a0ppm when brand new and 0.045\u00a0ppm after 30 days. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has also announced limits on the formaldehyde levels in trailers purchased by that agency. The EPA recommends the use of \"exterior-grade\" pressed-wood products with phenol instead of urea resin to limit formaldehyde exposure, since pressed-wood products containing formaldehyde resins are often a significant source of formaldehyde in homes.\nThe eyes are most sensitive to formaldehyde exposure: The lowest level at which many people can begin to smell formaldehyde ranges between 0.05 and 1\u00a0ppm. The maximum concentration value at the workplace is 0.3\u00a0ppm. In controlled chamber studies, individuals begin to sense eye irritation at about 0.5\u00a0ppm; 5 to 20 percent report eye irritation at 0.5 to 1\u00a0ppm; and greater certainty for sensory irritation occurred at 1\u00a0ppm and above. While some agencies have used a level as low as 0.1\u00a0ppm as a threshold for irritation, the expert panel found that a level of 0.3\u00a0ppm would protect against nearly all irritation. In fact, the expert panel found that a level of 1.0\u00a0ppm would avoid eye irritation\u2014the most sensitive endpoint\u2014in 75\u201395% of all people exposed.\nFormaldehyde levels in building environments are affected by a number of factors. These include the potency of formaldehyde-emitting products present, the ratio of the surface area of emitting materials to volume of space, environmental factors, product age, interactions with other materials, and ventilation conditions. Formaldehyde emits from a variety of construction materials, furnishings, and consumer products. The three products that emit the highest concentrations are medium density fiberboard, hardwood plywood, and particle board. Environmental factors such as temperature and relative humidity can elevate levels because formaldehyde has a high vapor pressure. Formaldehyde levels from building materials are the highest when a building first opens because materials would have less time to off-gas. Formaldehyde levels decrease over time as the sources suppress.\nIn operating rooms, formaldehyde is produced as a byproduct of electrosurgery and is present in surgical smoke, exposing surgeons and healthcare workers to potentially unsafe concentrations.\nFormaldehyde levels in air can be sampled and tested in several ways, including impinger, treated sorbent, and passive monitors. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has measurement methods numbered 2016, 2541, 3500, and 3800.\nIn June 2011, the twelfth edition of the National Toxicology Program (NTP) Report on Carcinogens (RoC) changed the listing status of formaldehyde from \"reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen\" to \"known to be a human carcinogen.\" Concurrently, a National Academy of Sciences (NAS) committee was convened and issued an independent review of the draft U.S. EPA IRIS assessment of formaldehyde, providing a comprehensive health effects assessment and quantitative estimates of human risks of adverse effects.\nAcute irritation and allergic reaction.\nFor most people, irritation from formaldehyde is temporary and reversible, although formaldehyde can cause allergies and is part of the standard patch test series. In 2005\u201306, it was the seventh-most-prevalent allergen in patch tests (9.0%). People with formaldehyde allergy are advised to avoid formaldehyde releasers as well (e.g., Quaternium-15, imidazolidinyl urea, and diazolidinyl urea). People who suffer allergic reactions to formaldehyde tend to display lesions on the skin in the areas that have had direct contact with the substance, such as the neck or thighs (often due to formaldehyde released from permanent press finished clothing) or dermatitis on the face (typically from cosmetics). Formaldehyde has been banned in cosmetics in both Sweden and Japan.\nOther routes.\nIn humans, ingestion of as little as of 37% formaldehyde solution can cause death. Other symptoms associated with ingesting such a solution include gastrointestinal damage (vomiting, abdominal pain), and systematic damage (dizziness). Testing for formaldehyde is by blood and/or urine by gas chromatography\u2013mass spectrometry. Other methods to detect formaldehyde include infrared detection, gas detector tubes, gas detectors using electrochemical sensors, and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). HPLC is the most sensitive.\nThe fifteenth edition (2021) of the U.S. National Toxicology Program Report on Carcinogens notes that currently in the U.S. \"The general population can be exposed to formaldehyde primarily from breathing indoor or outdoor air, from tobacco smoke, from use of cosmetic products containing formaldehyde, and, to a more limited extent, from ingestion of food and water.\" Affected water includes groundwater, surface water, and bottled water. It also notes that occupational exposure can be significant.\nContaminant in food.\nFormaldehyde in food can be present naturally, added as an inadvertent contaminant, or intentionally added as a preservative, disinfectant, or bacteriostatic agent. Cooking and smoking food can also result in formaldehyde being produced in food. Foods that the U.S. National Toxicology Program has reported to have higher levels compared to other foods are fish, seafood, and smoked ham. It also notes formaldehyde in food generally occurs in a bound form and that formaldehyde is unstable in an aqueous solution.\nScandals have broken in both the 2005 Indonesia food scare and 2007 Vietnam food scare regarding the addition of formaldehyde to foods to extend shelf life. In 2011, after a four-year absence, Indonesian authorities found foods with formaldehyde being sold in markets in a number of regions across the country. In August 2011, at least at two Carrefour supermarkets, the Central Jakarta Livestock and Fishery Sub-Department found cendol containing 10 parts per million of formaldehyde. In 2014, the owner of two noodle factories in Bogor, Indonesia, was arrested for using formaldehyde in noodles. Foods known to be contaminated included noodles, salted fish, and tofu. Chicken and beer were also rumored to be contaminated. In some places, such as China, manufacturers still use formaldehyde illegally as a preservative in foods, which exposes people to formaldehyde ingestion.\nIn 2011 in Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand, truckloads of rotten chicken were treated with formaldehyde for sale in which \"a large network\", including 11 slaughterhouses run by a criminal gang, were implicated. In 2012, 1\u00a0billion rupiah (almost US$100,000) of fish imported from Pakistan to Batam, Indonesia, were found laced with formaldehyde.\nFormalin contamination of foods has been reported in Bangladesh, with stores and supermarkets selling fruits, fishes, and vegetables that have been treated with formalin to keep them fresh. However, in 2015, a \"Formalin Control Bill\" was passed in the Parliament of Bangladesh with a provision of life-term imprisonment as the maximum punishment as well as a maximum fine of 2,000,000 BDT but not less than 500,000 BDT for importing, producing, or hoarding formalin without a license.\nIn the early 1900s, formaldehyde was frequently added by US milk plants to milk bottles as a method of pasteurization due to the lack of knowledge and concern regarding formaldehyde's toxicity.\nFormaldehyde was one of the chemicals used in 19th century industrialised food production that was investigated by Dr. Harvey W. Wiley with his famous 'Poison Squad' as part of the US Department of Agriculture. This led to the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act, a landmark event in the early history of food regulation in the United States.\nRegulation.\nFormaldehyde is banned from use in certain applications (preservatives for liquid-cooling and processing systems, slimicides, metalworking-fluid preservatives, and antifouling products) under the Biocidal Products Directive. In the EU, the maximum allowed concentration of formaldehyde in finished products is 0.2%, and any product that exceeds 0.05% has to include a warning that the product contains formaldehyde.\nIn the United States, Congress passed a bill July 7, 2010, regarding the use of formaldehyde in hardwood plywood, particle board, and medium density fiberboard. The bill limited the allowable amount of formaldehyde emissions from these wood products to 0.09\u00a0ppm, and required companies to meet this standard by January 2013. The final U.S. EPA rule specified maximum emissions of \"0.05\u00a0ppm formaldehyde for hardwood plywood, 0.09\u00a0ppm formaldehyde for particleboard, 0.11\u00a0ppm formaldehyde for medium-density fiberboard, and 0.13\u00a0ppm formaldehyde for thin medium-density fiberboard.\"\nFormaldehyde was declared a toxic substance by the 1999 Canadian Environmental Protection Act.\nThe FDA is proposing a ban on hair relaxers with formaldehyde due to cancer concerns.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63848", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63848", "title": "Methanal", "text": ""}
{"id": "63849", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63849", "title": "Synodic month", "text": ""}
{"id": "63850", "revid": "88116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63850", "title": "Draconic month", "text": ""}
{"id": "63851", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63851", "title": "Anomalistic month", "text": ""}
{"id": "63852", "revid": "173030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63852", "title": "Chosen-plaintext attack", "text": "Attack model for cryptanalysis with presumed access to ciphertexts for chosen plaintexts\nA chosen-plaintext attack (CPA) is an attack model for cryptanalysis which presumes that the attacker can obtain the ciphertexts for arbitrary plaintexts. The goal of the attack is to gain information that reduces the security of the encryption scheme.\nModern ciphers aim to provide semantic security, also known as \"ciphertext indistinguishability under chosen-plaintext attack\", and they are therefore, by design, generally immune to chosen-plaintext attacks if correctly implemented.\nIntroduction.\nIn a chosen-plaintext attack the adversary can (possibly adaptively) ask for the ciphertexts of arbitrary plaintext messages. This is formalized by allowing the adversary to interact with an encryption oracle, viewed as a black box. The attacker\u2019s goal is to reveal all or a part of the secret encryption key.\nIt may seem infeasible in practice that an attacker could obtain ciphertexts for given plaintexts. However, modern cryptography is implemented in software or hardware and is used for a diverse range of applications; for many cases, a chosen-plaintext attack is often very feasible (see also In practice). Chosen-plaintext attacks become extremely important in the context of public key cryptography where the encryption key is public and so attackers can encrypt any plaintext they choose.\nDifferent forms.\nThere are two forms of chosen-plaintext attacks:\nGeneral method of an attack.\nA general batch chosen-plaintext attack is carried out as follows :\nConsider the following extension of the above situation. After the last step, \nA cipher has indistinguishable encryptions under a chosen-plaintext attack if after running the above experiment the adversary can't guess correctly (b=b') with probability non-negligibly better than 1/2.\nExamples.\nThe following examples demonstrate how some ciphers that meet other security definitions may be broken with a chosen-plaintext attack.\nCaesar cipher.\nThe following attack on the Caesar cipher allows full recovery of the secret key:\nWith more intricate or complex encryption methodologies the decryption method becomes more resource-intensive, however, the core concept is still relatively the same.\nOne-time pads.\nThe following attack on a one-time pad allows full recovery of the secret key. Suppose the message length and key length are equal to n.\nWhile the one-time pad is used as an example of an information-theoretically secure cryptosystem, this security only holds under security definitions weaker than CPA security. This is because under the formal definition of CPA security the encryption oracle has no state. This vulnerability may not be applicable to all practical implementations \u2013 the one-time pad can still be made secure if key reuse is avoided (hence the name \"one-time\" pad).\nIn practice.\nIn World War II US Navy cryptanalysts discovered that Japan was planning to attack a location referred to as \"AF\". They believed that \"AF\" might be Midway Island, because other locations in the Hawaiian Islands had codewords that began with \"A\". To prove their hypothesis that \"AF\" corresponded to \"Midway Island\" they asked the US forces at Midway to send a plaintext message about low supplies. The Japanese intercepted the message and immediately reported to their superiors that \"AF\" was low on water, confirming the Navy's hypothesis and allowing them to position their force to win the battle.\nAlso during World War II, Allied codebreakers at Bletchley Park would sometimes ask the Royal Air Force to lay mines at a position that didn't have any abbreviations or alternatives in the German naval system's grid reference. The hope was that the Germans, seeing the mines, would use an Enigma machine to encrypt a warning message about the mines and an \"all clear\" message after they were removed, giving the allies enough information about the message to break the German naval Enigma. This process of \"planting\" a known-plaintext was called \"gardening\". Allied codebreakers also helped craft messages sent by double agent Juan Pujol Garc\u00eda, whose encrypted radio reports were received in Madrid, manually decrypted, and then re-encrypted with an Enigma machine for transmission to Berlin. This helped the codebreakers decrypt the code used on the second leg, having supplied the original text.\nIn modern day, chosen-plaintext attacks (CPAs) are often used to break symmetric ciphers. To be considered CPA-secure, the symmetric cipher must not be vulnerable to chosen-plaintext attacks. Thus, it is important for symmetric cipher implementors to understand how an attacker would attempt to break their cipher and make relevant improvements.\nFor some chosen-plaintext attacks, only a small part of the plaintext may need to be chosen by the attacker; such attacks are known as plaintext injection attacks.\nRelation to other attacks.\nA chosen-plaintext attack is more powerful than known-plaintext attack, because the attacker can directly target specific terms or patterns without having to wait for these to appear naturally, allowing faster gathering of data relevant to cryptanalysis. Therefore, any cipher that prevents chosen-plaintext attacks is also secure against known-plaintext and ciphertext-only attacks.\nHowever, a chosen-plaintext attack is less powerful than a chosen-ciphertext attack, where the attacker can obtain the plaintexts of arbitrary ciphertexts. A CCA-attacker can sometimes break a CPA-secure system. For example, the El Gamal cipher is secure against chosen plaintext attacks, but vulnerable to chosen ciphertext attacks because it is unconditionally malleable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63853", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63853", "title": "Tomsk", "text": "City in Russia, administrative center of Tomsk Oblast\nTomsk (, ) is a city and the administrative center of Tomsk Oblast in Russia, on the Tom River. Population: 544,566 (2025); \u2009(2021 census); \u2009(2010 census); \u2009(2002 census); \u2009(1989 Soviet census)\nFounded in 1604, Tomsk is one of the oldest cities in Siberia. It has six universities, with over 100,000 students, including Tomsk State University, the oldest university in Siberia.\nEtymology.\nThe city is named after the Tom River, whose name may derive either from the Ket word \"toom\" (\"river\") or from the Russian word \"tyomny\" (\"dark\").\nHistory.\nTomsk originated with a decree by Tsar Boris Godunov in 1604 after Toian, the Tatar duke of Eushta, asked for the Tsar's protection against Kyrgyz. The Tsar sent 200 Cossacks under the command of Vasily Fomich Tyrkov and Gavriil Ivanovich Pisemsky to construct a fortress on the bank of the Tom River, overlooking what would become the city of Tomsk. Toian ceded the land for the fortress to the Tsar.\nIn 1804, the Imperial Russian government selected Tomsk as the seat of the new Tomsk Governorate, which would include the modern cities of Novosibirsk, Kemerovo, and Krasnoyarsk, as well as the territories now in Eastern Kazakhstan. The new status brought development and the city grew quickly.\nThe discovery of gold in 1830 brought further development to Tomsk in the 19th century; however, when in the 1890s the Trans-Siberian Railway bypassed the city in favor of the village of Novonikolayevsk (Novosibirsk), development began to move south to connect with the railway. In time, Novosibirsk would surpass Tomsk in importance.\nIn the mid-19th century one fifth of the city's residents were exiles. However, within a few years, the city reinvented itself as the educational center of Siberia with the establishment of Tomsk State University, founded in 1880, and Tomsk Polytechnic University, founded in 1896. By World War II, every twelfth resident of the city was a student, giving rise to the city's nickname, the \"Siberian Athens\".\nAfter the October Revolution of 1917, the city became a notable center of the White movement, led by Anatoly Pepelyayev and Maria Bochkareva, among others. After the victory of the Red Army in the 1920s, Soviet authorities incorporated Tomsk into the West Siberian Krai and later into Novosibirsk Oblast.\nLike many Siberian cities, Tomsk became the new home for many factories relocated out of the war zone from 1941. The resulting growth of the city led the Soviet government to establish the new Tomsk Oblast, with Tomsk serving as the administrative center.\nDuring the Cold War, Tomsk became one of many designated closed cities, which outsiders and, in particular, foreigners, could not visit. In 1949 matters went a stage further with the establishment of a secret city, known as \"Tomsk-7\" (or sometimes simply as \"Postbox 5\") north-west of Tomsk; the new settlement became the home of the Tomsk Nuclear Plant (subsequently renamed the Sibirskaya Nuclear Power Plant), the Soviet Union's first industrial-scale nuclear-power station. Tomsk-7 received municipal status in 1956 and was renamed Seversk in 1992.\nAdministrative and municipal status.\nTomsk serves as the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Tomsky District, even though it is not a part of it. As an administrative division, it is, together with seven rural localities, incorporated separately as Tomsk City Under Oblast Jurisdiction\u2014an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, Tomsk City Under Oblast Jurisdiction is incorporated as Tomsk Urban Okrug.\nCity divisions.\nTomsk is divided into four city districts: Kirovsky, Leninsky, Oktyabrsky, and Sovetsky.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nTomsk has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfb\") barely escaping a subarctic classification. The annual average temperature is . Winters are severe and lengthy, and the lowest recorded temperature was in January 1931. However, the average temperature in January is between and . Summers are somewhat short and quite warm; the average temperature in July is . The total annual rainfall is . In 2006, Tomsk experienced what might have been its first recorded winds of hurricane force, which toppled trees and damaged houses.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics.\nTomsk is governed by a mayor and a 33-member Duma. The current mayor, appointed in 2013, is Ivan Klyayn, a member of The United Russia party.\nOf the 33 members, 16 are elected from the eight double mandate districts while 17 are chosen from party lists.\nIn the October 2005 local elections, United Russia was expected to cruise to a solid victory; however, the Pensioners Party put up a strong showing. The final count was (proportional representation):\nVote.\nIn 2020, supporters of Alexei Navalny won at least 16 seats in Tomsk's 37-seat city council while the pro-Putin United Russia party secured no more than 11 seats.\nEconomy.\nEnergy generation.\nTomsk has the oldest electrical grid in Siberia. There are three power stations in the city:\nTomsk consumes more electric energy than it produces. The bulk of the city's electric and thermal energy is produced by the GRES-2 (281 MWt) and TEC-3 (140 MWt) powerplants, belonging to Tomskenergo Inc. Tomsk supplements its energy needs with electricity generated at Seversk.\nEducation.\nA large number of educational institutions in the city have contributed to making Tomsk a major center for Russia's IT industry. Tomsk was one of the first cities in Russia to gain access to the Internet, which became available in the early 1990s owing to grants received by universities and scientific cooperation. Tomsk has a number of prominent institutions of higher education, including:\nTransportation.\nRailways.\nTomsk is a small railway center that is situated on the Tayga\u2014Bely Yar line (Tomsk branch) of the Trans-Siberian Railway.\nThe main line of the Trans-Siberian railway, built in 1896, bypasses the city to the south. Access from Tomsk to the Trans-Siberian railway is available via the town of Tayga. A regional rail line links Tomsk with Tayga.\nThe Tomsk Railway existed as an independent entity until 1961. At the present time, the Tomsk line belongs to the West-Siberian Railway, branch of Russian Railways Corp. Trains link Tomsk to Anapa, Asino, Barnaul, Bely Yar, Moscow, Novokuznetsk, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tayga.\nPublic transportation.\nThe majority of inner-city and suburban transportation is provided by \"marshrutkas\" (routed taxis) and minibuses (mostly manufactured by PAZ, and serving about forty routes).\nAdditionally, the city has eleven proper bus routes, eight trolleybus lines (built in 1967), and five tram lines (constructed in 1949). Private taxis are also readily available.\nAir transportation.\nThe city is served by Bogashevo Airport, which offers both domestic and international flights. Located 20 kilometers from the city center, the airport was renovated in 2013. The airport is home to offices for S7 Airlines, Aeroflot, Ural Airlines, Turukhan Airlines, NordStar Airlines, RusLine, Red Wings Airlines, ALROSA, and UTair Aviation.\nWater transportation.\nThere is a commercial and passenger port on the Tom River.\nCulture.\nTomsk has many local cultural institutions including several drama theaters, as well as a children's theater and a puppet theater. Major concert venues in the city include the Conservatory Concert hall and the Tomsk Palace of Sport. The city also boasts cultural centers dedicated to German, Polish and Tatar languages and culture.\nOne of the city's prominent theaters was destroyed in an act of terrorism in 1905. The Korolevsky Theater (built in 1884\u201385) was being used by a group of communist revolutionaries when the theater was attacked and set on fire by members of the Black Hundred, a hard-line nationalist organization. Those who escaped the flames were gunned down by Black Hundred members waiting outside the theater. Estimates put the number of casualties between 200 and 1000.\nThere are a number of museums in Tomsk devoted to various subjects, most notably art, local history and wood carving. There is also a Museum of Oppression, housed in a former KGB dungeon. Tomsk State University has a number of small museums with exhibits on archaeology, paleontology, zoology, as well as a herbarium and a botanical garden\nAs in many other cities in the former Soviet Union, the revolutionary government destroyed a number of old churches in the city including two that had existed since the 17th century. However, Tomsk managed to save some of its churches by transforming them into machine shops, warehouses, archives, and even residential buildings. Since the end of the communist era some of the churches have been renovated and returned to their congregations.\nTomsk is well known for its intricate \"gingerbread\" decoration of traditional wooden houses in the area. However, the number of old homes in this style is decreasing due to redevelopment or some of them catching fire, as the structures have little to no fire protection.\nTrud (Labor) Stadium, in central Tomsk was the base for matches with the FC Tom Tomsk, the city's professional football club, before dissolving in 2022. The team's 2004 promotion to the Russian Premier League gave local fans a chance to see some of the nation's best teams play at the city's own stadium.\nTomsk has many local media outlets including the \"TV2 (Tomsk)\" television station, shut down by the authorities and turned into an internet TV medium, the radio stations \"Radio Siberia\" and \"Echo of Moscow in Tomsk\" along with several newspapers (\"Tomskaya Nedelya, Krasnoye Znamya\" and \"Vechernii Tomsk\").\nIn April 2006 Tomsk received international media attention as the venue of a major summit on economic cooperation, held in the city between Russian President Vladimir Putin and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTomsk is the only non-capital member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nTomsk is twinned with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63855", "revid": "10412272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63855", "title": "Generalitat", "text": "Form of devolved government in the Kingdom of Spain\nGeneralitat (, literally in English 'Generality') is the name of two major medieval and early modern political institutions and their modern-day analogues in Kingdom of Spain. The ancient Principality of Catalonia and the Kingdom of Valencia were ruled by Generalitats. Today, Catalonia and The Valencian Community have systems of self-government called Generalitats, and are two of 17 autonomous communities of Spain.\nThe institution of the \"Generalitat\" dates back to the 13th century when the medieval courts of the ancient Principality of Catalonia and the Kingdom of Valencia respectively were created. The term originally referred to a delegation of members of the \"Corts\", who oversaw the implementation of the decisions of the \"Corts\" between sessions, and is derived from the Catalan \"Diputaci\u00f3 del General (de Catalunya)\". The Catalan and Valencian \"Generalitats\" were both abolished by the Nueva Planta decrees, signed by Philip V of Spain at the start of the eighteenth century, and only reinstated after the death of Franco in 1975, although in Catalonia it also had a few-years existence during the Second Spanish Republic (1931-1939).\nToday, \"Generalitat\" refers to the branches of government, not simply the executive. For example, the Catalan executive is, officially, the \"Government of the Generality of Catalonia\" (\"Govern de la Generalitat de Catalunya\": cf. Government of the Kingdom of Spain, \"Gobierno del Reino de Espa\u00f1a\"), while those of the community of the Valencian Country and the Val d'Aran are known as the \"Council of the Valencian Generality\" (\"Consell de la Generalitat Valenciana\"). The only exception is the judiciary, as the courts of justice of Catalonia and Valencia belong to the Spanish judiciary, structured as unitary throughout Spain."}
{"id": "63857", "revid": "51014594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63857", "title": "Philip V of Spain", "text": "King of Spain (r. 1700\u20131724; 1724\u20131746)\nPhilip V (; 19 December 1683 \u2013 9 July 1746) was king of Spain from 1 November 1700 to 14 January 1724 and again from 6 September 1724 to his death in 1746. His total reign (45 years, 9 months and 8 days) is the longest in the history of the Spanish monarchy, surpassing Philip IV. Although his ascent to the throne precipitated the War of the Spanish Succession, Philip V instigated many important reforms in Spain, most especially the centralization of power of the monarchy and the suppression of regional privileges, via the Nueva Planta decrees, and restructuring of the administration of the Spanish Empire on the Iberian Peninsula and its overseas regions.\nPhilip was born into the French House of Bourbon during the reign of his grandfather King Louis XIV. He was the second son of Louis, Grand Dauphin, and was third in line to the French throne after his father and his elder brother, Louis, Duke of Burgundy. Philip was not expected to become a monarch, but his great-uncle King Charles II of Spain was childless. Philip's father had a strong claim to the Spanish throne, but since Philip's father and elder brother were expected to inherit the French throne, Charles named Philip as his heir in his will. Philip succeeded in 1700 as the first Spanish monarch of the House of Bourbon.\nPhilip's accession in Spain provoked the 13-year War of the Spanish Succession, which continued until the Treaty of Utrecht forbade any future possibility of unifying the French and Spanish crowns while confirming his accession to the throne of Spain. While Spain maintained its New World empire and in East Asia, it removed the Spanish Netherlands and Spanish-controlled territories in Italy from the Spanish monarchy, even if the latter were reconquered as additional Bourbon kingdoms during his reign. In 1724, Philip abdicated in favor of his eldest son, Louis I. Louis died later that year, and Philip took the throne again. As a result of his proneness to depression, his second wife, Elisabeth Farnese, held control over the Spanish government. When Philip died in 1746, he was succeeded by his second son, Ferdinand VI.\nEarly years.\nBirth and family.\nPhilip was born on 19 December 1683 at the Palace of Versailles in France, the second son of Louis, Grand Dauphin, the heir apparent to the throne of France, and his wife Maria Anna Victoria of Bavaria.\nPhilip was a younger brother of Louis, Duke of Burgundy, the father of Louis XV of France. At birth, Philip was created Duke of Anjou, a traditional title for younger sons in the French royal family. He would be known by this name until he became the King of Spain. Since Philip's older brother, Louis, Duke of Burgundy, was second in line to the French throne after his father, there was little expectation that either he or his younger brother Charles, Duke of Berry, would ever rule over France.\nUpbringing and education.\nPhilip lived his first years under the supervision of the royal governess Louise de Prie and after that was tutored with his brothers by Fran\u00e7ois F\u00e9nelon, Archbishop of Cambrai. The three siblings were also educated by Paul de Beauvilliers.\nClaims to the Spanish throne.\nIn 1700, King Charles II, the last Habsburg to rule Spain, died childless. His will named as successor Philip, grandson of Charles' half-sister Maria Theresa, the first wife of Louis XIV. Upon any possible refusal, the crown of Spain would be offered next to Philip's younger brother, the Duke of Berry, then to the Archduke Charles of Austria, later Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI. Philip had the better genealogical claim to the Spanish throne, because his Spanish grandmother and great-grandmother were older than the ancestors of the Archduke Charles of Austria. However, the Austrians maintained that Philip's grandmother had renounced the Spanish throne for herself and her descendants as part of her marriage contract. That renunciation was contingent on her dowry being paid. The French claim to Spain was due to the dowry having never been paid. In addition to this, while Philip did have a remote claim to the throne of France, Archduke Charles had an even more proximate claim to be Holy Roman Emperor, and his ascension to the throne would have also destabilized the European balance of power.\nAfter a long Royal Council meeting in France at which the Dauphin spoke up in favor of his son's rights, it was agreed that Philip would ascend the throne, and in doing so, forfeit his and his heirs' claim to the throne of France. The Royal Council decided to accept the provisions of the will of Charles II naming Philip king of Spain.\nFirst marriage.\n On 2 November 1701, the almost 18-year-old Philip married the 13-year-old Maria Luisa of Savoy, as chosen by his grandfather King Louis XIV. She was the daughter of Victor Amadeus II, Duke of Savoy, and his wife Anne Marie d'Orl\u00e9ans, Philip's first cousin once removed. The Duke and Duchess of Savoy were also the parents of Princess Marie Ad\u00e9la\u00efde of Savoy, Duchess of Burgundy, Philip's sister-in-law. There was a proxy ceremony at Turin, the capital of the Duchy of Savoy, and another one at Versailles on 11 September.\nMaria Luisa proved very popular as Queen of Spain. She served as regent for her husband on several occasions. Her most successful term was when Philip was away touring his Italian domains for nine months in 1702, when she was just 14 years old. On entering Naples that year he was presented with Gian Lorenzo Bernini's \"Boy with a Dragon\". In 1714, Maria Luisa died at the age of 26 from tuberculosis, a devastating emotional blow to her husband.\nWar of the Spanish Succession.\nThe actions of Louis XIV heightened the fears of the English, the Dutch and the Austrians, among others. In December 1700, Louis XIV issued letters patent to Philip, prior to Philip leaving France, preserving his status as a r\u00e9gnicole (a natural Frenchman), and by extension his claim to the French throne, despite his permanent departure from France. The documents further granted Philip's male heirs status as r\u00e9gnicoles, and therefore as French dynasts, despite their births abroad.\nAlmost immediately the War of the Spanish Succession began. Concern among other European powers that Spain and France united under a single Bourbon monarch would upset the balance of power pitted France and Spain against the Grand Alliance of England, the Dutch Republic and Austria.\nInside Spain, the Crown of Castile supported Philip of France. On the other hand, anti-French sentiment was strong in Aragon and some members of the nobility of the Crown of Aragon rallied behind Charles of Austria, son of Leopold I, Holy Roman Emperor and claimant to the Spanish throne by right of his grandmother Maria Anna of Spain. Their support swayed a significant portion of the population to support the Archduke.\nThe war was centred in Spain and west-central Europe (especially the Low Countries), with other important fighting in Germany and Italy. Prince Eugene of Savoy and John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough distinguished themselves as military commanders in those theatres. In colonial North America, the conflict became known to the English colonists who fought against French and Spanish forces as Queen Anne's War. Over the course of the fighting, some 400,000 people were killed.\nIt was with this war as a backdrop that, beginning in 1707, Philip issued the Nueva Planta decrees, which centralized Spanish rule under the Castilian political and administrative model and in the process abolished the charters of all independently administered kingdoms within Spain\u2014most notably the Crown of Aragon, which was supporting Charles VI in the conflict\u2014except for the Kingdom of Navarre and the rest of the Basque region, who had supported Philip in the war for the Spanish throne, and retained their semi-autonomous self-government. The policy of centralization had as model the French State under Louis XIV and was strongly supported by politicians such as Joseph de Sol\u00eds and the Sardinian political philosopher Vicente Bacallar.\nPhilip agreed to relinquish his right of succession to France under one condition: the introduction of semi-Salic law in Spain. Under this law, the succession to the Spanish crown was limited to his entire male line before it could pass to any female, a requirement made clear to the allies during the preliminary peace negotiations. The purpose of this may have been to ensure that Philip and his male heirs, who under normal circumstances would inherit the French throne should the male line of Louis, Duke of Burgundy be extinguished, would always have a throne to occupy in its place. It was not until this was successfully accomplished (10 May 1713) that Spain and Great Britain made their own peace terms at the second Treaty of Utrecht (annexing the new law to the Treaty). By the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht that concluded the war, Philip was recognized as king of Spain but was forced to cede Menorca and Gibraltar to Great Britain; the Spanish Netherlands, Naples, Milan, and Sardinia to the Austrian Habsburgs; and Sicily and parts of Milan to Savoy. To further ensure the removal of Philip and his heirs from the French succession, the letters patent issued to preserve their claim to the throne despite their absence from the country, were repealed by the Parlement of Paris.\nThese losses greatly diminished the Spanish Empire in Europe, which had already been in decline. Throughout his reign, Philip sought to reverse the decline of Spanish power. Trying to overturn the terms of the Treaty of Utrecht, he attempted to re-establish Spanish claims in Italy, triggering the War of the Quadruple Alliance (1718\u20131720) in which Spain fought a coalition of four major powers. France, under the regency of Philippe II, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans later joined this coalition, as the House of Orl\u00e9ans had a strong interest in keeping Philip and his descendants out of the line of succession. Lacking allies, Phillip V was forced to sue for peace.\nSecond marriage.\nShortly after the death of Queen Maria Luisa in 1714, the King decided to marry again. His second wife was Elisabeth of Parma, daughter of Odoardo Farnese, Hereditary Prince of Parma, and Dorothea Sophie of the Palatinate. At the age of 22, on 24 December 1714, she was married to the 31-year-old Philip by proxy in Parma. The marriage was arranged by Cardinal Giulio Alberoni, with the concurrence of the Princesse des Ursins, the \"Camarera mayor de Palacio\" (\"chief of the household\") of the king of Spain. They had sons, including another successor, Charles III of Spain.\nAbdication.\nOn 14 January 1724, Philip abdicated the Spanish throne to his eldest son, the seventeen-year-old Louis. As the abdication occurred just over a month after the death of the Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, who had been regent for Louis XV of France, many at the time believed it was an attempt by Philip to circumvent the Treaty of Utrecht, which forbade a union of the French and Spanish crowns, therefore allowing him to claim the former should his young nephew perish without sons of his own. However, the actual reason for the abdication was that Philip, who exhibited many elements of mental instability during his reign, no longer wished to rule due to his increasing mental decline. However, Louis died on 31 August in Madrid of smallpox, having reigned only seven months and leaving no issue. Six days later, after much convincing, Philip was restored to the Spanish throne, so as to avoid a regency for his second son, Ferdinand, who was only 10 at the time.\nLater reign.\nPhilip helped his Bourbon relatives to make territorial gains in the War of the Spanish Succession and the War of the Austrian Succession by reconquering Naples and Sicily from Austria and Oran from the Ottomans. Finally, at the end of his reign Spanish forces defended their American territories from a large British invasion during the War of Jenkins' Ear (1739\u20131748).\nDuring Philip's reign, Spain began to recover from the stagnation it had suffered during the twilight of the Spanish Habsburg dynasty. Although the population of Spain grew, the financial and taxation systems were archaic and the treasury ran deficits. The King employed thousands of highly paid retainers at his palaces\u2014not to assist with ruling the country but to look after the royal family. Meanwhile, the army and bureaucracy went months without pay. It was only the shipments of silver from the New World which kept the system going. Spain suspended payments on its debt in 1739 \u2013 effectively declaring bankruptcy.\nDeath.\nIn the last decade of his reign, Philip experienced bouts of manic depression and increasingly fell victim to a deep melancholia. During this period his second wife, Elizabeth Farnese, seems to have dedicated herself exclusively to caring for his health. Beginning in August 1737 his mental illness was eased by the castrato singer Farinelli, who became the \"\"Musico de Camara\" of Their Majesties.\" Farinelli would sing eight or nine arias for the King and Queen every night, usually with a trio of musicians.\nPhilip was struck by a stroke and died on 9 July 1746 in El Escorial, in Madrid, but was buried in his favorite Royal Palace of La Granja de San Ildefonso, near Segovia. Ferdinand VI of Spain, his son by his first queen Maria Luisa of Savoy, succeeded him.\nLegacy.\nHistorians have generally been unkind to the King. Lynch says Philip V advanced the government only marginally over that of his predecessors and was more of a liability than Charles II. When a conflict came up between the interests of Spain and France, he usually favored France. However, Philip made some reforms in government, and strengthened the central authorities relative to the provinces. Merit became more important, although most senior positions still went to the landed aristocracy. Below the elite level, the inefficiency and corruption that had existed under Charles II was as widespread as ever. The reforms started by Philip V culminated in much more important reforms of Charles III. The economy, on the whole, improved over the previous half-century, with greater productivity, and fewer famines and epidemics. The government promoted industry, agriculture and shipbuilding. After the destruction of the main silver fleet at Vigo in 1702, the navy was rebuilt. Nevertheless, the new fleet was still too small to support the vast worldwide empire.\nTo commemorate the indignities the city of X\u00e0tiva suffered after Philip's victory in the Battle of Almansa in the War of the Spanish Succession, in which he ordered the city to be burned and renamed \"San Felipe\", the portrait of the monarch hangs upside down in the local museum of L'Almod\u00ed.\nThe province of the New Philippines, which occupied parts of what is now Texas in the United States, was named in 1716 in honor of Philip.\nPhilip V favored and promoted the Atlantic trade of Spain with its American possessions, ending the monopoly of Seville on colonial trade. During this Atlantic trade emerged important figures of the naval history of Spain, among which stands out the privateers Amaro Pargo and Miguel Enr\u00edquez. Philip V frequently supported Pargo in his commercial incursions: he granted a royal order given at the Royal Palace of El Pardo in Madrid in September 1714, in which he appointed him captain of a commercial ship bound for Caracas. The Monarch also interceded in his liberation during his detention by the Casa de Contrataci\u00f3n of C\u00e1diz and authorized him to build a ship bound for Campeche, which was armed like a corsair ship.\nIssue.\nPhilip married his double-second cousin Maria Luisa of Savoy (17 September 1688 \u2013 14 February 1714) on 3 November 1701 and they had 4 sons, two of which reached adulthood and became kings of Spain, but they all died with no children:\nPhilip married Elisabeth Farnese (25 October 1692 \u2013 11 July 1766) on 24 December 1714, they had 7 children, of whom all but one reached adulthood:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63860", "revid": "4788526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63860", "title": "Picture archiving and communication system", "text": "Medical imaging technology\nA picture archiving and communication system (PACS) is a medical imaging technology which provides economical storage and convenient access to images from multiple modalities (source machine types). Electronic images and reports are transmitted digitally via PACS; this eliminates the need to manually file, retrieve, or transport film jackets, the folders used to store and protect X-ray film. The universal format for PACS image storage and transfer is DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine). Non-image data, such as scanned documents, may be incorporated using consumer industry standard formats like PDF (Portable Document Format), once encapsulated in DICOM. A PACS consists of four major components: The imaging modalities such as X-ray plain film (PF), computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a secured network for the transmission of patient information, workstations for interpreting and reviewing images, and archives for the storage and retrieval of images and reports. Combined with available and emerging web technology, PACS has the ability to deliver timely and efficient access to images, interpretations, and related data. PACS reduces the physical and time barriers associated with traditional film-based image retrieval, distribution, and display.\nTypes of images.\nMost PACS handle images from various medical imaging instruments, including ultrasound (US), magnetic resonance (MR), Nuclear Medicine imaging, positron emission tomography (PET), computed tomography (CT), endoscopy (ES), mammograms (MG), digital radiography (DR), phosphor plate radiography, Visible Light Photography (VL), Histopathology, ophthalmology, etc. Additional types of image formats are always being added. Clinical areas beyond radiology; cardiology, oncology, gastroenterology, and even the laboratory are creating medical images that can be incorporated into PACS. (see DICOM Application areas).\nUses.\nPACS has four main uses:\nPACS is offered by virtually all the major medical imaging equipment manufacturers, medical IT companies and many independent software companies. Basic PACS software can be found free on the Internet.\nArchitecture.\nThe architecture is the physical implementation of required functionality, or what one sees from the outside. There are different views, depending on the user. A radiologist typically sees a viewing station, a technologist a QA workstation, while a PACS administrator might spend most of their time in the climate-controlled computer room. The composite view is rather different for the various vendors.\nTypically a PACS consists of a multitude of devices. The first step in typical PACS systems is the modality. Modalities are typically computed tomography (CT), ultrasound, nuclear medicine, positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Depending on the facility's workflow most modalities send to a quality assurance (QA) workstation, sometimes called a PACS gateway. The QA workstation is a checkpoint to make sure patient demographics are correct as well as other important attributes of a study. If the study information is correct the images are passed to the archive for storage. The central storage device (archive) stores images and in some cases reports, measurements and other information that resides with the images. The next step in the PACS workflow is the reading workstations. The reading workstation is where the radiologist reviews the patient's study and formulates their diagnosis. Normally tied to the reading workstation is a reporting package that assists the radiologist with dictating the final report. Reporting software is optional and there are various ways in which doctors prefer to dictate their report. Ancillary to the workflow mentioned, there is normally CD/DVD authoring software used to burn patient studies for distribution to patients or referring physicians. The diagram above shows a typical workflow in most imaging centers and hospitals. Note that this section does not cover integration to a Radiology Information System, Hospital Information System and other such front-end system that relates to the PACS workflow.\nMore and more PACS include web-based interfaces to utilize the internet or a wide area network (WAN) as their means of communication, usually via VPN (Virtual Private Network) or SSL (Secure Sockets Layer). The clients side software may use ActiveX, JavaScript and/or a Java Applet. More robust PACS clients are full applications which can utilize the full resources of the computer they are executing on and are unaffected by the frequent unattended Web Browser and Java updates. As the need for distribution of images and reports becomes more widespread there is a push for PACS systems to support DICOM part 18 of the DICOM standard. Web Access to DICOM Objects (WADO) creates the necessary standard to expose images and reports over the web through truly portable medium. Without stepping outside the focus of the PACS architecture, WADO becomes the solution to cross platform capability and can increase the distribution of images and reports to referring physicians and patients.\nPACS image backup is a critical, but sometimes overlooked, part of the PACS Architecture (see below). Within the United States, HIPAA requires that backup copies of patient images be made in case of image loss from the PACS. There are several methods of backing up the images, but they typically involve automatically sending copies of the images to a separate computer for storage, preferably off-site.\nQuerying (C-FIND) and Image (Instance) Retrieval (C-MOVE and C-GET).\nThe communication with the PACS server is done through DICOM messages that are similar to DICOM image \"headers\", but with different attributes. A query (C-FIND) is performed as follows:\nImages (and other composite instances like Presentation States and Structured Reports) are then retrieved from a PACS server through either a C-MOVE or C-GET request, using the DICOM network protocol. Retrieval can be performed at the Study, Series or Image (instance) level. The C-MOVE request specifies where the retrieved instances should be sent (using separate C-STORE messages on one or more separate connections) with an identifier known as the destination Application Entity Title (AE Title). For a C-MOVE to work, the server must be configured with mapping of the AE Title to a TCP/IP address and port, and as a consequence the server must know in advance all the AE Titles that it will ever be requested to send images to. A C-GET, on the other hand, performs the C-STORE operations on the same connection as the request, and hence does not require that the \"server\" know the \"client\" TCP/IP address and port. This allows C-GET to work more easily through firewalls and with network address translation, environments in which the incoming TCP C-STORE connections required for C-MOVE may not get through. The difference between C-MOVE and C-GET is somewhat analogous to the difference between active and passive FTP. C-MOVE is most commonly used within enterprises and facilities, whereas C-GET is more practical between enterprises.\nIn addition to the traditional DICOM network services, particularly for cross-enterprise use, DICOM (and IHE) define other retrieval mechanisms, including WADO, WADO-WS and most recently WADO-RS.\nImage archival and backup.\nDigital medical images are typically stored locally on a PACS for retrieval. It is important (and required in the United States by the Security Rule's Administrative Safeguards section of HIPAA) that facilities have a means of recovering images in the event of an error or disaster.\nWhile each facility is different, the goal in image back-up is to make it automatic and as easy to administer as possible. The hope is that the copies won't be needed; however, disaster recovery and business continuity planning dictates that plans should include maintaining copies of data even when an entire site is temporarily or permanently lost.\nIdeally, copies of images should be maintained in several locations, including off-site to provide disaster recovery capabilities. In general, PACS data are no different than other business critical data and should be protected with multiple copies at multiple locations. As PACS data can be considered protected health information (PHI), regulations may apply, most notably HIPAA and HIPAA Hi-Tech requirements.\nImages may be stored both locally and remotely on off-line media such as disk, tape or optical media. The use of storage systems, using modern data protection technologies has become increasingly common, particularly for larger organizations with greater capacity and performance requirements. Storage systems may be configured and attached to the PACS server in various ways, either as Direct-Attached Storage (DAS), Network-attached storage (NAS), or via a Storage Area Network (SAN). However the storage is attached, enterprise storage systems commonly utilize RAID and other technologies to provide high availability and fault tolerance to protect against failures. In the event that it is necessary to reconstruct a PACS partially or completely, some means of rapidly transferring data back to the PACS is required, preferably while the PACS continues to operate.\nModern data storage replication technologies may be applied to PACS information, including the creation of local copies via point-in-time copy for locally protected copies, along with complete copies of data on separate repositories including disk and tape based systems. Remote copies of data should be created, either by physically moving tapes off-site, or copying data to remote storage systems. Whenever HIPAA protected data are moved, it should be encrypted, which includes sending via physical tape or replication technologies over WAN to a secondary location.\nOther options for creating copies of PACS data include removable media (hard drives, DVDs or other media that can hold many patients' images) that is physically transferred off-site. HIPAA HITECH mandates encryption of stored data in many instances or other security mechanisms to avoid penalties for failure to comply.\nThe back-up infrastructure may also be capable of supporting the migration of images to a new PACS. Due to the high volume of images that need to be archived many rad centers are migrating their systems to a https://.\nIntegration.\nA full PACS should provide a single point of access for images and their associated data. That is, it should support all digital modalities, in all departments, throughout the organisation.\nHowever, until PACS penetration is complete, individual islands of digital imaging not yet connected to a central PACS may exist. These may take the form of a localized, modality-specific network of modalities, workstations and storage (a so-called \"mini-PACS\"), or may consist of a small cluster of modalities directly connected to reading workstations without long-term storage or management. Such systems are also often not connected to the departmental information system. Historically, Ultrasound, Nuclear Medicine and Cardiology Cath Labs are often departments that adopt such an approach.\nMore recently, Full Field digital mammography (FFDM) has taken a similar approach, largely because of the large image size, highly specialized reading workflow and display requirements, and intervention by regulators. The rapid deployment of FFDM in the US following the DMIST study has led to the integration of Digital Mammography and PACS becoming more commonplace.\nAll PACS, whether they span the entire enterprise or are localized within a department, should also interface with existing hospital information systems: Hospital information system (HIS) and Radiology Information System (RIS).\nThere are several kinds of data flowing into PACS as inputs for next procedures and back to HIS as results corresponding inputs:\nIn: Patient Identification and Orders for examination. These data are sent from HIS to RIS via integration interface, in most hospitals, via the HL7 protocol. Patient ID and Orders will be sent to Modality (CT, MR, etc.) via the DICOM protocol (Worklist). Images will be created after images scanning and then forwarded to PACS Server. Diagnosis Report is created based on the images retrieved for presenting from PACS Server by physician/radiologist and then saved to RIS System.&lt;br&gt;\nOut: Diagnosis Report and Images created accordingly. Diagnosis Report is sent back to HIS via HL7 usually and Images are sent back to HIS via DICOM usually if there is a DICOM Viewer integrated with HIS in hospitals (In most of cases, Clinical Physician gets reminder of Diagnosis Report coming and then queries images from PACS Server).\nInterfacing between multiple systems provides a more consistent and more reliable dataset:\nAn interface can also improve workflow patterns:\nRecognition of the importance of integration has led a number of suppliers to develop fully integrated RIS/PACS. These may offer a number of advanced features:\nAcceptance testing.\nThe PACS installation process is complicated requiring time, resources, planning, and testing. Installation is not complete until the acceptance test is passed. Acceptance testing of a new installation is a vital step to assure user compliance, functionality, and especially clinical safety. Take for example the Therac-25, a radiation medical device involved in accidents in which patients were given massive overdoses of radiation, due to unverified software control.\nThe acceptance test determines whether the PACS is ready for clinical use and marks the warranty timeline while serving as a payment milestone. The test process varies in time requirements depending on facility size but contract condition of 30-day time limit is not unusual. It requires detailed planning and development of testing criteria prior to writing the contract. It is a joint process requiring defined test protocols and benchmarks.\nTesting uncovers deficiencies. A study determined that the most frequently cited deficiencies were the most costly components. Failures ranked from most-to-least common are: Workstation; HIS/RIS/ACS broker interfaces; RIS; Computer Monitors; Web-based image distribution system; Modality interfaces; Archive devices; Maintenance; Training; Network; DICOM; Teleradiology; Security; Film digitizer.\nHistory.\nOne of the first basic PACS was created in 1972 by Dr Richard J. Steckel.6\nThe principles of PACS were first discussed at meetings of radiologists in 1982. Various people are credited with the coinage of the term \"PACS\". Cardiovascular radiologist Dr Andre Duerinckx reported in 1983 that he had first used the term in 1981. Dr Samuel Dwyer, though, credits Dr Judith M. Prewitt for introducing the term.\nDr Harold Glass, a medical physicist working in London in the early 1990s secured UK Government funding and managed the project over many years which transformed Hammersmith Hospital in London as the first filmless hospital in the United Kingdom. Dr Glass died a few months after the project came live but is credited with being one of the pioneers of PACS.\nThe first large-scale PACS installation was in 1982 at the University of Kansas, Kansas City.\nRegulatory concerns.\nIn the US PACS are classified as Medical Devices, and hence if for sale are regulated by the USFDA. In general they are subject to Class 2 controls and hence require a 510(k), though individual PACS components may be subject to less stringent general controls. Some specific applications, such as the use for primary mammography interpretation, are additionally regulated within the scope of the Mammography Quality Standards Act.\nThe Society for Imaging Informatics in Medicine (SIIM) is the worldwide professional and trade organization that provides an annual meeting and a peer-reviewed journal to promote research and education about PACS and related digital topics.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63861", "revid": "31088038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63861", "title": "Valencia", "text": "Municipality in Spain\nValencia ( or , ), officially Val\u00e8ncia (), is the capital of the province and autonomous community of the same name in Spain. It is located on the banks of the Turia, on the east coast of the Iberian Peninsula on the Mediterranean Sea. With a population of 824,340, it is the third-largest city in Spain. The urban area of Valencia has 1.6 million people while the metropolitan region has 2.5 million.\nValencia was founded as a Roman colony in 138\u00a0BC as \"Valentia Edetanorum\". As an autonomous city in late antiquity, its militarization followed the onset of the threat posed by the Byzantine presence to the South, together with effective integration to the Visigothic Kingdom of Toledo in the late 6th century. Islamic rule and acculturation ensued in the 8th century, together with the introduction of new irrigation systems and crops. With the Aragonese Christian conquest in 1238, the city became the capital of the Kingdom of Valencia. \nDue to trade with the rest of the Iberian Peninsula, Italian ports, and other Mediterranean locations, the city thrived in the 15th century and Valencia had become one of the largest European cities by the end of the century. The emergence of the Atlantic World affected Mediterranean trade in the global trade networks and, along with insecurity created by Barbary piracy throughout the 16th century. Although the 16th century had been notable for the large number of religious foundations which, according to one estimate, suggested that one third of its area had been occupied by religious buildings. The city's economic activity suffered a crisis following the expulsion of the Moriscos in 1609.\nThe city became a major silk manufacturing centre in the 18th century. During the Spanish Civil War, the city served as the provisional seat of the Spanish Government from 1936 to 1937.\nThe Port of Valencia is one of the busiest container ports in Europe and the Mediterranean. The city is ranked as a Gamma-level global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. Valencia has numerous celebrations and traditions, such as the \"Falles\" (or \"Fallas\"), which were declared a Fiesta of National Tourist Interest of Spain in 1965 and an intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO in November 2016. The city was selected as the European Capital of Sport 2011, the World Design Capital 2022 and the European Green Capital 2024.\nName.\nThe Latin name of the city was Val\u0113ntia (), meaning \"strength\" or \"valour\", due to the Roman practice of recognising the valour of former Roman soldiers after a war. The Roman historian Livy explains that the founding of Valentia in the 2nd\u00a0century\u00a0BC was due to the settling of the Roman soldiers who fought against a Lusitanian rebel, Viriatus, during the Third Raid of the Lusitanian War.\nDuring the period of Islamic rule, the city was called \"Medina at-Tarab\" ('City of Joy') according to one transliteration, or \"Medina at-Turab\" ('City of Sands') according to another, since it was located on the banks of the River Turia. It is not clear if an Arabised variant of the Latin name (\"Balansiyya\") referred to the greater Taifa of Valencia, or just the city itself.\nVia gradual phonetic changes, \"Valentia\" became \"Valencia\" in Spanish and \"Val\u00e8ncia\" in Valencian. In Valencian, an \"e\" with a grave accent (\"\u00e8\") indicates in contrast to , but the word \"Val\u00e8ncia\" is an exception to this rule, since \"\u00e8\" is pronounced . The spelling \"Val\u00e8ncia\" was approved by the Acad\u00e8mia Valenciana de la Llengua (AVL) based on tradition after a debate on the matter. The name \"Val\u00e8ncia\" has been the only official name of the city since 2017. In 2023, the Commission of Culture of the municipal corporation agreed in principle on a dual official denomination /, with the far right managing to impose a non-standard acute accent in the \"e\" of the Valencian-language name.\nHistory.\nRoman colony.\nValencia is one of the oldest cities in Spain, founded in the Roman period c.\u2009138 BC as \"Valentia Edetanorum\". A few centuries later, with the power vacuum left by the demise of the Roman imperial administration, the Catholic Church assumed power in the city, coinciding with the first waves of the invading Germanic peoples (Suebi, Vandals, Alans, and later Visigoths).\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Valencia became part of the Visigothic Kingdom from 546 to 711 AD. The city surrendered to the invading Moors about 714 AD. Abd al-Rahman I laid waste to old Valencia by 788\u2013789. From then on, the name of Valencia (Arabised as \"Balansiya\") appears more related to the wider area than to the city, which is primarily cited as \"Mad\u00eenat al-Tur\u00e2b\" ('city of earth' or 'sand') and presumably had diminished importance throughout the period. During the emiral period, the surrounding territory, under the ascendancy of Berber chieftains, was prone to unruliness. In the wake of the start of the fitna of al-Andalus, Valencia became the head of an independent emirate, the Taifa of Valencia. It was initially controlled by eunuchs, and then, after 1021, by Abd al-Az\u00eez (a grandson of Almanzor). Valencia experienced notable urban development in this period. Many Jews lived in Valencia, including the accomplished Jewish poet and philosopher Solomon ibn Gabirol, who spent his last years in the city. After a damaging offensive by Castilian\u2013Leonese forces towards 1065, the territory became a satellite of the Taifa of Toledo, and following the fall of the latter in 1085, a protectorate of \"El Cid\". A revolt erupted in 1092, handing the city to the Almoravids and forcing El Cid to take the city by force in 1094, henceforth establishing his own principality.\nFollowing the evacuation of the city in 1102, the Almoravids took control. As the Almoravid empire crumbled in the mid 12th-century, ibn Mardan\u012bsh took control of eastern al-Andalus, creating a Murcia-centred independent emirate to which Valencia belonged, resisting the Almohads until 1172. During the Almohad rule, the city perhaps had a population of about 20,000. When the city fell to James I of Aragon, the Jewish population constituted about 7 per cent of the total population.\nIn 1238, King James I of Aragon, with an army composed of Aragonese, Catalans, Navarrese, and crusaders from the Order of Calatrava, laid siege to Valencia and on 28 September obtained a surrender. Fifty thousand Moors were forced to leave. The Jews of Valencia were afforded a quarter for residence in 1239, which was surrounded by a high wall in 1390. The quarter had three gates, all of which were closed at night; the Jewish cemetery was permitted just beyond 'the Jew's Gate', the \"Portal dels Jueues\".\nValencia endured serious troubles in the mid-14th century, including the decimation of the population by the Black Death of 1348 and subsequent years of epidemics\u2014as well as the series of wars and riots that followed.\nIn 1391, a pogrom struck the Jewish quarter of Valencia, part of a wave of anti-Jewish attacks that began earlier that year in Seville and spread across Castile and into the Crown of Aragon. The assault in Valencia was sparked when a procession of youths marched on the Jewish quarter, shouting that \"the Archdeacon of Castile is coming with his cross, and that all the Jews should be baptized or die.\" Despite efforts by royal guards to intervene, thousands of Jews were murdered, and the survivors were forced to convert. The Jewish quarter was destroyed.\nBy the late 14th century, Genoese traders promoted the expansion of the cultivation of white mulberry in the area and later introduced innovative silk manufacturing techniques. Valencia became a centre of mulberry production and was, for a time, a major silk-producing centre. The Genoese community in Valencia\u2014merchants, artisans and workers\u2014became, along with Seville's, one of the most important in the Iberian Peninsula.\nIn 1407, following the model of the Barcelona institution created some years before, a \"Taula de canvi\" (a municipal public bank) was created in Valencia, although its first iteration yielded limited success.\nThe 15th century was a time of economic expansion, known as the Valencian Golden Age, during which culture and the arts flourished. Concurrent population growth made Valencia the most populous city in the Crown of Aragon. Some of the city's landmark buildings were built during the Late Middle Ages, including the Serranos Towers, the Silk Exchange, the Miguelete Tower, and the Chapel of the Kings of the Convent of Sant Dom\u00e8nec. In painting and sculpture, Flemish and Italian trends had an influence on Valencian artists.\nValencia became a major slave trade centre in the 15th century, second only to Lisbon in the West, prompting a Lisbon\u2013Seville\u2013Valencia axis by the second half of the century powered by the incipient Portuguese slave trade originating in West Africa. By the end of the 15th century Valencia was one of the largest European cities, being the most populated city in the Hispanic Monarchy and second to Lisbon in the Iberian Peninsula.\nValencia also became one of the major ports of embarkation for Jews who left after the expulsion from Spain in 1492, Isaac ben Yehudah Abrabanel and his family among them, by special permission granted to him by King Ferdinand.\nModern history.\nFollowing the death of Ferdinand II in 1516, the nobiliary estate challenged the Crown amid the relative void of power. In 1519, the \"Taula de Canvis\" was recreated again, known as \"Nova Taula\". The nobles earned the rejection from the people of Valencia, and the whole kingdom was plunged into the Revolt of the Brotherhoods and full-blown civil war between 1521 and 1522. Muslim vassals were forced to convert in 1526 at the behest of Charles V.\nUrban and rural delinquency\u2014linked to phenomena such as vagrancy, gambling, larceny, pimping and false begging\u2014as well as the nobiliary banditry consisting of the revenges and rivalries between the aristocratic families flourished in Valencia during the 16th century. Furthermore, North African piracy targeted the whole coastline of the kingdom of Valencia, forcing the fortification of sites. By the late 1520s, the intensification of Barbary corsair activity along with domestic conflicts and the emergence of the Atlantic Ocean in detriment of the Mediterranean in global trade networks put an end to the economic splendor of the city. This piracy also paved the way for the ensuing development of Christian piracy, that had Valencia as one of its main bases in the Iberian Mediterranean. The Berber threat\u2014initially with Ottoman support\u2014generated great insecurity on the coast, and it would not be substantially reduced until the 1580s.\nThe crisis deepened during the 17th century with the 1609 expulsion of the Moriscos, descendants of the Muslim population that had converted to Christianity. The Spanish government systematically forced Moriscos to leave the kingdom for Muslim North Africa. They were concentrated in the former Crown of Aragon, and in the Kingdom of Valencia specifically, and constituted roughly a third of the total population. The expulsion caused the financial ruin of some of the Valencian nobility and the bankruptcy of the \"Taula de canvi\" in 1613.\nThe decline of the city reached its nadir with the War of the Spanish Succession (1702\u20131709), marking the end of the political and legal independence of the Kingdom of Valencia. During the War of the Spanish Succession, Valencia sided with the Habsburg ruler of the Holy Roman Empire, Charles of Austria. King Charles vowed to protect the laws (\"Furs\") of the Kingdom of Valencia, which gained him the sympathy of a wide sector of the Valencian population. On 24 January 1706, after having ridden south from Barcelona, Charles Mordaunt, 3rd Earl of Peterborough, led a handful of English cavalrymen into the city and captured the nearby fortress at Sagunt, bluffing the Spanish Bourbon army into withdrawal.\nThe English held the city for 16 months, defeating several attempts to expel them. After the victory of the Bourbons at the Battle of Almansa on 25 April 1707, the English army evacuated Valencia and Philip V ordered the repeal of the Furs of Valencia as punishment for the kingdom's support of Charles of Austria. By the Nueva Planta decrees, the ancient Charters of Valencia were abolished and the city was governed by the Castilian Charter, similarly to other places in the Crown of Aragon.\nThe Valencian economy recovered during the 18th century with the rising manufacture of woven silk and ceramic tiles. The silk industry boomed during this century, with Valencia replacing Toledo as the centre of silk-manufacturing in Spain. The Palau de Just\u00edcia is an example of the affluence manifested in the most prosperous times of Bourbon rule (1758\u20131802) during the rule of Charles III. The 18th century was the Age of Enlightenment in Europe and, in Valencia, its humanistic ideals influenced men such as Gregorio Mayans and Francisco P\u00e9rez Bayer, who maintained correspondence with the leading French and German thinkers of the time.\nPeninsular War.\nThe 19th century began with Spain embroiled in wars with France, Portugal, and England\u2014but the Peninsular War (also known as the Spanish War of Independence) affected the Valencian territories and the capital city. The repercussions of the French Revolution were still being felt when Napoleon's armies invaded the Iberian Peninsula. The Valencian people rose up in arms against them on 23 May 1808, inspired by leaders such as Vicent Dom\u00e9nech el Palleter.\nThe mutineers seized the Citadel, the Supreme Junta government took over, and on 26\u201328 June, Napoleon's Marshal Moncey attacked the city with a column of 9,000 French Grande Arm\u00e9e troops at the first Battle of Valencia. He failed to take the city in two assaults and retreated to Madrid. Marshal Suchet began a long siege of the city in October 1811, and after intense bombardment forced it to surrender on 8 January 1812. After the capitulation, the French instituted reforms in Valencia, which became the capital of Spain when the Bonapartist king, Jos\u00e9 I (Napoleon's elder brother), moved the Court there in the middle of 1812. The disaster of the Battle of Vitoria on 21 June 1813 obliged Suchet to quit Valencia, and the French troops withdrew in July.\nPost-war.\nFerdinand VII returned to the throne at end of the Peninsular War, which freed Spain from Napoleonic domination. On his return, on 24 March 1814 from exile in France, the Cortes requested that he respect the liberal Constitution of 1812, which significantly limited royal powers. Ferdinand refused and went to Valencia instead of Madrid. Here, on 17 April, General Elio invited the King to reclaim his absolute rights and put his troops at the King's disposition. The king abolished the Constitution of 1812 and dissolved the two chambers of the Spanish Parliament on 10 May. Thus began six years (1814\u20131820) of absolutist rule, but the constitution was reinstated during the Trienio Liberal, a period of three years of liberal government in Spain from 1820 to 1823.\nOn King Ferdinand VII's death in 1833, Baldomero Espartero became one of the most ardent defenders of the hereditary rights of the king's daughter, the future Isabella II. During the regency of Maria Cristina, Espartero ruled Spain for two years as its 18th prime minister from 16 September 1840 to 21 May 1841. City life in Valencia carried on in a revolutionary climate, with frequent clashes between liberals and republicans.\nThe reign of Isabella II as an adult (1843\u20131868) was a period of relative stability and growth for Valencia. During the second half of the 19th century the bourgeoisie encouraged the development of the city and its environs; landowners were enriched by the introduction of the orange crop and the expansion of vineyards and other crops. This economic boom corresponded with a revival of local traditions and of the Valencian language, which had been ruthlessly suppressed from the time of Philip V.\nWork to demolish the walls of the old city started on 20 February 1865. The demolition of the citadel ended after the 1868 Glorious Revolution.\nDuring the Cantonal rebellion in 1873, Valencia was the capital of the short-lived Valencian Canton.\nFollowing the introduction of universal manhood suffrage in the late 19th century, the political landscape in Valencia\u2014until then consisting of the bipartisanship characteristic of the early Restoration period\u2014experienced a change, leading to a growth of republican forces, gathered around the emerging figure of Vicente Blasco Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez. Not unlike the equally republican Lerrouxism, the Populist Blasquism came to mobilize the Valencian masses by promoting anticlericalism. Meanwhile, in reaction, the right-wing coalesced around several initiatives such as the Catholic League or the reformulation of Valencian Carlism, and Valencianism did similarly with organizations such as Valencia Nova or the Uni\u00f3 Valencianista.\n20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, Valencia was an industrialised city. Although the silk industry had disappeared, there was a large production of hides and skins, wood, metals, and foodstuffs, the latter with substantial exports, particularly of wine and citrus. Small businesses predominated, but with the rapid mechanisation of the industry, larger companies were being formed. The best expression of this dynamic was in regional exhibitions, including that of 1909 held next to the \"L'Albereda\" (\"Paseo de la Alameda\"), which depicted the progress of agriculture and industry. Among the most architecturally successful buildings of the era were those designed in the Art Nouveau style, such as the Estaci\u00f3 del Nord and the Central and Columbus markets.\nWorld War I (1914\u20131918) greatly affected the Valencian economy, causing the collapse of its citrus exports. The Second Spanish Republic (1931\u20131939) opened the way for democratic participation and the increased politicisation of citizens, especially in response to the rise of Conservative Front power in 1933. The inevitable march toward civil war and combat in Madrid resulted in the relocation of the capital of the Republic to Valencia.\nAfter the continuous unsuccessful Francoist offensive on besieged Madrid during the Spanish Civil War, Valencia temporarily became the capital of Republican Spain on 6 November 1936. It hosted the government until 31 October 1937.\nFrancoist Spain.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, Valencia was heavily bombarded by air and sea, mainly by the Fascist Italian air force, as well as the Francoist air force with Nazi German support. By the end of the war, the city had survived 442 bombardments, leaving 2,831 dead and 847 wounded, although it is estimated that the death toll was higher. The Republican government moved to Barcelona on 31 October of that year. On 30 March 1939, Valencia surrendered and Nationalist Spanish troops entered the city.\nThe postwar years were a time of hardship for Valencians. During Franco's regime, speaking or teaching Valencian was prohibited; in a significant reversal, it is now compulsory for every schoolchild in Valencia. Franco's dictatorship forbade political parties and began a harsh ideological and cultural repression countenanced and sometimes led by the Catholic Church. During Franco's regime some leading Valencian intellectuals, such as Juan Peset, rector of University of Valencia, were executed and many of them, including Josep Renau and Max Aub, went into exile.\nIn 1943, Franco decreed the exclusivity of Valencia and Barcelona for the celebration of international fairs in Spain. These two cities would hold the monopoly on international fairs for more than three decades, until the rule's abolishment in 1979 by the government of Adolfo Su\u00e1rez. In October 1957, a flood from the Turia river resulted in 81 casualties and extensive property damage. The disaster led to the remodelling of the city and the creation of a new river bed for the Turia, with the old one becoming one of the city's \"green lungs\". The economy began to recover in the early 1960s, and the city experienced explosive population growth through immigration spurred by jobs created with the implementation of major urban projects and infrastructure improvements.\nPost-Franco.\nWith the advent of democracy in Spain, the ancient kingdom of Valencia was established as a new autonomous entity, the Valencian Community, the Statute of Autonomy of 1982 designating Valencia as its capital. Valencia has since then experienced a surge in its cultural development, exemplified by exhibitions and performances at such iconic institutions as the \"Palau de la M\u00fasica\", the \"Palacio de Congresos\", the Metro, the City of Arts and Sciences \"(Ciutat de les Arts i les Ci\u00e8ncies)\", the Valencian Museum of Enlightenment and Modernity \"(Museo Valenciano de la Ilustraci\u00f3n y la Modernidad)\", and the Institute of Modern Art \"(Institut Valenci\u00e0 d'Art Modern)\". The various productions of Santiago Calatrava, a renowned structural engineer, architect, and sculptor and of the architect F\u00e9lix Candela have contributed to Valencia's international reputation. In 1983 the statue of Francisco Franco in \"Plaza del Caudillo\" was torn down and the plaza renamed \"Plaza del Ayuntamiento\". Some time after, the bronze statue \"La Paz y la Concordancia\" by Jos\u00e9 Puche was erected in \"Plaza de la Reina\" and dedicated to victims of terrorism. These public works and the ongoing rehabilitation of the \"Old City\" \"(Ciutat Vella)\" have helped improve the city's livability, and tourism is continually increasing.\n21st century.\nOn 3 July 2006, a major mass transit disaster, the Valencia Metro derailment, left 43 dead and 47 wounded. Days later, on 9 July, the World Day of Families, during Mass at Valencia's Cathedral, Our Lady of the Forsaken Basilica, Pope Benedict XVI used the \"Sant Calze\", a 1st-century Middle-Eastern artifact that some Catholics believe is the Holy Grail.\nValencia was selected in 2003 to host the historic America's Cup yacht race, the first European city ever to do so. The 2007 America's Cup matches took place from April to July. On 3 July 2007, Alinghi defeated Team New Zealand to retain the America's Cup. Twenty-two days later, on 25 July 2007, the leaders of the Alinghi syndicate, holder of the America's Cup, officially announced that Valencia would be the host city for the 33rd America's Cup, held in June 2009.\nThe results of the Valencia municipal elections from 1991 to 2011 delivered a 24-year uninterrupted rule (1991\u20132015) by the People's Party (PP) and Mayor Rita Barber\u00e1, with support from the Valencian Union. Barber\u00e1's rule was ousted by left-leaning forces after the 2015 municipal election, with Joan Rib\u00f3 of Comprom\u00eds becoming the new mayor.\nGeography.\nLocated on the eastern coast of the Iberian Peninsula and the western part of the Mediterranean Sea, fronting the Gulf of Valencia, Valencia lies on the highly fertile alluvial silts accumulated on the floodplain formed in the lower course of the Turia River. At its founding by the Romans in 138 BC, it stood on an alluvial plain of the Turia River several kilometers from the sea.\nThe Albufera lagoon, located about south of the city proper (and part of the municipality), was originally a saltwater lagoon, but since the severing of links to the sea, it has eventually become a freshwater lagoon, progressively decreasing in size. The lagoon and its environment are used for the cultivation of rice in paddy fields, and for hunting and fishing purposes.\nThe Valencia City Council bought the lake from the Crown of Spain for 1,072,980 pesetas in 1911, and today it forms the main portion of the \"Parc Natural de l'Albufera\" (Albufera Nature Reserve), with a surface area of . Because of its cultural, historical, and ecological value, it was declared a natural park in 1976.\nClimate.\nValencia and its metropolitan area have a semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\") bordering on a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\") with mild winters and hot, dry summers. According to the Siegmund/Frankenberg climate classification, Valencia has a subtropical climate.\nThe average annual temperature of Valencia is ; during the day and at night. In the coldest month, January, the maximum daily temperature typically ranges from , the minimum temperature typically at night ranges from . December, January and February are the coldest months, with average temperatures around during the day and at night. March is transitional, the temperature often exceeds , with an average temperature of during the day and at night. During the warmest months \u2013 July and August, the maximum temperature during the day typically ranges from , about at night. The highest and lowest temperatures recorded in the city since 1937 were on 10 August 2023 and on 11 February 1956, respectively. Valencia has one of the mildest winters in Europe, owing to its southern location on the Mediterranean Sea and the Foehn phenomenon, locally known as \"ponent\u00e0\". The January average is comparable to temperatures expected for May and September in the major cities of northern Europe.\nThe maximum of precipitation occurs in autumn, coinciding with the time of the year when cold drop (\"gota fr\u00eda\") episodes of heavy rainfall\u2014associated to cut-off low pressure systems at high altitude\u2014 are common along the Western mediterranean coast. The year-on-year variability in precipitation may be, however, considerable, as exemplified by large floods in 1957 and 2024, which both occurred in the month of October. Snowfall almost does not occur at all; the most recent occasion snow accumulated on the ground was on 11 January 1960.\nValencia, on average, has around 2,733 sunshine hours per year, from 158 in December (average of 5 hours of sunshine duration a day) to 313 in July (average around 10 hours of sunshine duration a day). The average temperature of the sea is in winter and in summer. Average annual relative humidity is around 66%.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe third largest city in Spain and the 21st most populous municipality in the European Union, Valencia has a population of 824,304 within its administrative limits on a land area of as of 2025. The urban area of Valencia extending beyond the administrative city limits has a population of between 1,564,145 and 1,595,000.\nAccording to the Ayuntamiento of Valencia and Spanish Ministry of Development, the metropolis within the Horta of Valencia has a population of 1,567,118 in an area of . From 2001 to 2011, there was a population increase of 14.1%, amounting to 191,842 people.\nThe metropolitan area had a population of 1,770,742 in 2010 according to citypopulation.de, 2,300,000 in 2015 according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2,513,965 in 2017 according to the World Gazetteer, and 2,522,383 in 2017 according to Eurostat.\nBetween 2007 and 2008, there was a 14% increase in the foreign-born population, with the largest numeric increases by country being from Bolivia, Romania, and Italy. This growth in the foreign born population, which rose from 1.5% in 2000 to 9.1% in 2009, has also occurred in the two larger cities of Madrid and Barcelona. The main countries of origin in those cases were Romania, the United Kingdom, and Bulgaria.\nEconomy.\nValencia enjoyed strong economic growth before the Great Recession of 2008, much of it spurred by tourism and construction, with concurrent development and expansion of telecommunications and transport. The city's economy is service-oriented, as nearly 84% of the working population is employed in service sector occupations. However, the city still maintains an important industrial base, with 8.5% of the population employed in this sector. Growth has recently improved in the manufacturing sector, mainly automobile assembly; Ford Valencia Body and Assembly lies in the municipality of Almussafes. Agricultural activity still occurs but is of relatively minor importance, with only 1.9% of the working population working in agriculture and of farmland (mostly orchards and citrus groves).\nSince the onset of the Great Recession, Valencia had experienced a growing unemployment rate, increased government debt, and other issues, and severe spending cuts were introduced by the city government. However, in 2009, Valencia was designated \"the 29th fastest-improving European city\". Its influence in commerce, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science and the arts contributes to its status as one of the world's \"Gamma\" rank global cities. According to \"Forbes\", Valencia is among the most livable cities in the world.\nThe city is the seat of one of the four stock exchanges in Spain, the Bolsa de Valencia, part of Bolsas y Mercados Espa\u00f1oles (BME), owned by SIX Group.\nThe Valencia metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $52.7\u00a0billion, and $28,141 per capita.\nIn 2021, the European Investment Bank (EIB) provided a \u20ac27 million loan to Sociedad An\u00f3nima Municipal Actuaciones Urbanas de Valencia (AUMSA) to support affordable public rental housing projects, which included building 323 new units and renovating four existing ones, expanding AUMSA's housing stock by more than 50%.\nIn 2022, the city was voted the world's top destination for expatriates, based on criteria such as quality of life and affordability.\nPort.\nValencia's port is the biggest on the Mediterranean western coast, the first in Spain in container traffic as of 2008[ [update]] and the second in Spain in total traffic, handling 20% of Spain's exports. The main exports are foodstuffs and beverages. Other exports include oranges, furniture, ceramic tiles, fans, textiles and iron products. Valencia's manufacturing sector focuses on metallurgy, chemicals, textiles, shipbuilding and brewing. Small and medium-sized industries are an important part of the local economy, and before the current crisis, unemployment was lower than the Spanish average.\nValencia's port underwent radical changes to accommodate the 32nd America's Cup in 2007. It was divided into two parts\u2014one was unchanged while the other section was modified for America's Cup festivities. The two sections remain divided by a wall that projects far into the water to maintain clean water for America's Cup events.\nTransport.\nPublic transport is provided by Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat Valenciana (FGV), which operates the Metrovalencia (rapid transit, tram) and other rail and bus services. The Estaci\u00f3 del Nord (North Station) is the major railway terminus in Valencia. A second station, the Estaci\u00f3 de Val\u00e8ncia-Joaqu\u00edn Sorolla, has been built on land adjacent to this terminus to accommodate high speed AVE trains to and from Madrid, Barcelona, Seville and Alicante. Valencia Airport is situated west of the city centre, and Alicante\u2013Elche Airport is approximately south of the city centre.\nA bicycle-sharing system named Valenbisi is available to both visitors and residents. As of 13 October 2012, the system had 2750 bikes distributed over 250 stations throughout the city.\nThe average amount of time people spend on public transit in Valencia on a weekday is 44 minutes. 6% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 10 minutes, while 9% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is , while 8% travel for over in a single direction.\nTourism.\nStarting in the mid-1990s, Valencia, formerly an industrial centre, saw rapid development that expanded its cultural and tourism possibilities, and transformed it into a newly vibrant city. Many local landmarks were restored, including the medieval Torres de Serranos and Quart Towers and the Monasterio de San Miguel de los Reyes, which now holds a conservation library. Whole sections of the old city, for example the Carmen Quarter, have been extensively renovated. The \"Passeig Mar\u00edtim\", a \u00a0long palm tree-lined beach promenade, was constructed along the beaches of the north side of the port \"(Platja de Les Arenes, Platja del Cabanyal and Platja de la Malva-rosa\").\nValencia boasts a highly active and diverse nightlife, with bars, dance bars, beach bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight. The city has numerous convention centres and venues for trade events, among them the Instituci\u00f3n Ferial de Valencia and the Palau de Congressos (Conference Palace), and several five-star hotels to accommodate business travelers.\nIn its long history, Valencia has acquired many local traditions and festivals, among them the \"Falles\", which was declared a Celebration of International Tourist Interest \"(Festes d'Inter\u00e9s Tur\u00edstic Internacional)\" on 25 January 1965 and an intangible cultural heritage by UNESCO on 30 November 2016, and the Water Tribunal of Valencia \"(Tribunal de les Aig\u00fces de Val\u00e8ncia)\", which was declared an intangible cultural heritage in 2009. In addition to these, Valencia has hosted world-class events that helped shape the city's reputation and put it in the international spotlight, such as the Regional Exhibition of 1909, the 32nd and the 33rd America's Cup competitions, the European Grand Prix of Formula One auto racing, the former Valencia Open tennis tournament, and the Global Champions Tour of equestrian sports. The final round of the MotoGP Championship is held annually at the Circuit de la Comunitat Valenciana.\nThe 2007 America's Cup yachting races were held at Valencia in June and July 2007 and attracted huge crowds. The Louis Vuitton stage drew 1,044,373 visitors and the America's Cup match drew 466,010 visitors to the event.\nIn October 2021, Valencia was shortlisted for the European Commission's 2022 European Capital of Smart Tourism award, along with Bordeaux, Copenhagen, Dublin, Florence, Ljubljana, and Palma de Mallorca.\nValencia boasts a https://, as a walking tour.\nGovernment and administration.\nValencia is a municipality, the basic local administrative division in Spain. The \"ayuntamiento\" (\"Ajuntament\" in Valencian language) is formally known as the \"Consell Municipal de Val\u00e8ncia\", and it is the body charged with the municipal government and administration, and is formed by 33 elected municipal councillors. In 2015, Joan Rib\u00f3 became the first mayor who did not belong to the People's Party (PP) since 1991, renewing his term for a second mandate following the 2019 election. The last municipal election took place on 28 May 2023. Mar\u00eda Jos\u00e9 Catal\u00e1 of the PP replaced Rib\u00f3.\nCulture.\nValencia is known internationally for the Falles (\"Les Falles\"), a local festival held in March, as well as for \"paella valenciana\", traditional Valencian ceramics, craftsmanship in traditional dress, and the architecture of the City of Arts and Sciences, designed by Santiago Calatrava and F\u00e9lix Candela.\nThere are also a number of well-preserved traditional Catholic festivities throughout the year, like those of the Holy Week, which are considered some of the most colourful in Spain.\nValencia used to be the place of the Formula One European Grand Prix, first hosting the event on 24 August 2008, but was dropped later at the beginning of the 2013 Formula 1 season. However, Valencia still holds the annual Moto GP race at the Circuit Ricardo Tormo, usually the last race of the season, in November.\nThe University of Valencia (officially \"Universitat de Val\u00e8ncia Estudi General\"), founded in 1499, is one of the oldest surviving universities in Spain and the oldest in the Valencian Community. It was listed as one of the four leading Spanish universities in the 2011 Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities.\nIn 2012, Boston's Berklee College of Music opened a satellite campus at the Palau de les Arts Reina Sofia, their first and only international campus outside the U.S. Since 2003, Valencia has also hosted the music courses of Musikeon, the leading musical institution in the Spanish-speaking world.\nSince 1886, the City of Valencia International Band Contest (), a music contest for wind orchestras and concert bands, is held each year in the town.\nFood.\nValencia is known for its gastronomic culture. The \"paella\", a simmered rice dish with meat (usually chicken or rabbit) or seafood, was born in Valencia. Other traditional dishes of Valencian gastronomy include fideu\u00e0, arr\u00f2s a banda, arr\u00f2s negre (black rice), fartons, bunyols, Spanish omelette, pinchos or tapas and calamares (squid).\nValencia was also the birthplace of the cold \"xufa\" beverage known as \"orxata\", popular in many parts of the world, including the Americas.\nLanguages.\nValencian and Spanish are the official languages. Spanish is currently the predominant language in the city proper. Valencia proper and its surrounding metropolitan area are\u2014along with the Alicante area\u2014the traditionally Valencian-speaking territories of the Valencian Community where the Valencian language is less spoken and read. According to a 2019 survey commissioned by the local government, 76% of the population use only Spanish in their daily life, 1.3% use only the Valencian language, while 17.6% of the population use both languages. However, vis-\u00e0-vis the education system and according to the 1983 regional Law on the Use and Teaching of the Valencian Language, the municipality of Valencia is included within the territory of Valencian linguistic predominance. In 1993, the municipal government agreed to use exclusively Valencian for the plaques that serve as street signs. The variety of Valencian spoken in and around the city of Valencia is known as \"apitxat\".\nFestivals.\nEvery year, the five days and nights from 15 to 19 March, called Falles, are a continual festival in Valencia; beginning on 1 March, the popular pyrotechnic events called \"masclet\u00e0es\" start every day at 2:00 pm. The Falles (\"Fallas\" in Spanish) is an enduring tradition in Valencia and other towns in the Valencian Community, where it has become an important tourist attraction. The festival started being celebrated in the 18th century, and came to be celebrated on the night of the feast day of Saint Joseph, the patron saint of carpenters, with the burning of waste planks of wood from their workshops, as well as worn-out wooden objects brought by people in the neighborhood.\nThis tradition continued to evolve, and eventually the \"parots\" were dressed with clothing to look like people\u2014these were the first \"ninots\", with features identifiable as being those of a well-known person from the neighborhood often added as well. In 1901 the city inaugurated the awarding of prizes for the best Falles monuments, and neighborhood groups still rival with each other to make the most impressive creations. Their intricate assemblages, on top of pedestals for better visibility, depict famous personalities and topical subjects of the past year, presenting humorous and often satirical commentary on them.\nOn the night of 19 March, Valencians burn all the Falles in an event called \"La Crem\u00e0\".\nThe \"Setmana\" or \"Semana Santa Marinera\", as the Holy Week is known in the city, was declared \"Festival of National Tourist Interest\" by 2012.\nMain sights.\nIts historic centre is one of the largest in Spain, spanning approximately . Major monuments include Valencia Cathedral, the \"Torres de Serrans\", the \"Torres de Quart\", the \"Lonja de la Seda\" (declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1996), and the \"Ciutat de les Arts i les Ci\u00e8ncies\" (City of Arts and Sciences), an entertainment, cultural and architectural complex designed by Santiago Calatrava and F\u00e9lix Candela. The \"Museu de Belles Arts de Val\u00e8ncia\" houses a large collection of paintings from the 14th to the 18th centuries, including works by Vel\u00e1zquez, El Greco, and Goya, as well as an important series of engravings by Piranesi. The \"Institut Valenci\u00e0 d'Art Modern\" (Valencian Institute of Modern Art) houses both permanent collections and temporary exhibitions of contemporary art and photography.\nArchitecture.\nThe ancient winding streets of the Barrio del Carmen contain buildings dating to Roman and Arab times. The Cathedral and its bell tower El Miguelete, built between the 13th and 15th centuries, are primarily of Valencian Gothic style but contains elements of Baroque and Romanesque architecture. Beside the cathedral is the Basilica of Our Lady of the Forsaken \"(Bas\u00edlica De La Mare de D\u00e9u dels Desamparats)\". The 15th-century \"Serrans\" and \"Quart\" towers are part of what was once the wall surrounding the city.\nUNESCO has recognised the Silk Exchange market \"(La Llotja de la Seda)\", erected in early Valencian Gothic style, as a World Heritage Site. The Central Market (\"Mercat Central\") in Valencian Art Nouveau style, is one of the largest in Europe. The main railway station \"Estaci\u00f3 Del Nord\" is built in Valencian Art Nouveau (a Spanish version of Art Nouveau) style.\nWorld-renowned Valencia-born architect Santiago Calatrava produced the futuristic City of Arts and Sciences \"(Ciutat de les Arts i les Ci\u00e8ncies)\", which contains an opera house/performing arts centre, a science museum, an IMAX cinema/planetarium, an oceanographic park and other structures such as a long covered walkway and restaurants. Calatrava is also responsible for the bridge named after him in the centre of the city. The Palau de la M\u00fasica de Val\u00e8ncia (Music Palace) is another noteworthy example of modern architecture in Valencia.\nCathedral.\nThe Valencia Cathedral was called \"Iglesia Major\" in the early days of the \"Reconquista\", then \"Iglesia de la Seu\" (\"Seu\" is from the Latin \"sedes\", i.e., (archiepiscopal) See), and by virtue of the papal concession of 16 October 1866, it was called the \"Bas\u00edlica Metropolitana\". It is situated in the centre of the ancient Roman city where some believe the temple of Diana stood. In Gothic times, it seems to have been dedicated to the Holy Saviour; the Cid dedicated it to the Blessed Virgin; King James I of Aragon did likewise, leaving in the main chapel the image of the Blessed Virgin, which he carried with him and is reputed to be the one now preserved in the sacristy. The Moorish mosque, which had been converted into a Christian Church by the conqueror, was deemed unworthy of the title of the cathedral of Valencia, and in 1262 Bishop Andr\u00e9s de Albalat laid the cornerstone of the new Gothic building, with three naves; these reach only to the choir of the present building. Bishop Vidal de Blanes built the chapter hall, and James I added the tower, called El Miguelete in Castilian Spanish or Torre del Micalet in the Valencian language because it was blessed on St. Michael's day in 1418. The tower is about high and is topped with a belfry (1660\u20131736).\nIn the 15th century the dome was added and the naves extended back of the choir, uniting the building to the tower and forming a main entrance. Archbishop Luis Alfonso de los Cameros began the building of the main chapel in 1674; the walls were decorated with marbles and bronzes in the Baroque style of that period. At the beginning of the 18th century, the German Conrad Rudolphus built the fa\u00e7ade of the main entrance. The other two doors lead into the transept; one, that of the Apostles in pure pointed Gothic, dates from the 14th century, the other is that of the Palau. The additions made to the back of the cathedral detract from its height. The 18th-century restoration rounded the pointed arches, covered the Gothic columns with Corinthian pillars, and redecorated the walls.\nThe dome has no lantern, its plain ceiling being pierced by two large side windows. There are four chapels on either side, besides that at the end and those that open into the choir, the transept, and the sanctuary. It contains many paintings by eminent artists. A silver reredos, which was behind the altar, was carried away in the war of 1808, and converted into coin to meet the expenses of the campaign. There are two paintings by Francisco de Goya in the San Francesco chapel. Behind the Chapel of the Blessed Sacrament is a small Renaissance chapel built by Calixtus III. Beside the cathedral is the chapel dedicated to the Our Lady of the Forsaken \"(Mare de D\u00e9u dels Desemparats)\".\nThe \"Tribunal de les Aig\u00fces\" (Water Court), a court dating from Moorish times that hears and mediates in matters relating to irrigation water, sits at noon every Thursday outside the \"Porta dels Apostols\" (Portal of the Apostles).\nHospital.\nIn 1409, a hospital was founded and placed under the patronage of Santa Maria dels Innocents; to this was attached a confraternity devoted to recovering the bodies of the unfriended dead in the city and within a radius of around it. At the end of the 15th century this confraternity separated from the hospital, and continued its work under the name of \"Cofradia para el \u00e1mparo de los desamparados\". King Philip IV of Spain and the Duke of Arcos suggested the building of the new chapel, and in 1647 the Viceroy, Conde de Oropesa, who had been preserved from the bubonic plague, insisted on carrying out their project. The Blessed Virgin was proclaimed patroness of the city under the title of \"Virgen de los desamparados\" (Virgin of the Forsaken), and Archbishop Pedro de Urbina, on 31 June 1652, laid the cornerstone of the new chapel of this name. The archiepiscopal palace, a grain market in the time of the Moors, is simple in design, with an inside cloister and achapel. In 1357, the arch that connects it with the cathedral was built. Inside the council chamber are preserved the portraits of all the prelates of Valencia.\nMedieval churches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"El Temple\" (the Temple), the ancient church of the Knights Templar, which passed into the hands of the Order of Montesa and was rebuilt in the reigns of Ferdinand VI and Charles III; the former convent of the Dominicans, at one time the headquarters of the \"Capitan General\", the cloister of which has a Gothic wing and chapter room, large columns imitating palm trees; the \"Colegio del Corpus Christi\", which is devoted to the Blessed Sacrament, and in which perpetual adoration is carried on; the Jesuit college, which was destroyed in 1868 by the revolutionary Committee of the Popular Front, but later rebuilt; and the \"Colegio de San Juan\" (also of the Society), the former college of the nobles, now a provincial institute for secondary instruction.\nSquares and gardens.\nThe largest plaza in Valencia is the \"Pla\u00e7a del Ajuntament\"; it is home to the City Hall \"(Ajuntament)\" on its western side and the central post office \"(Edifici de Correus)\" on its eastern side, a cinema that shows classic movies, and many restaurants and bars. The plaza is triangular in shape, with a large cement lot at the southern end, normally surrounded by flower vendors. It serves as ground zero during the Les Falles when the fireworks of the \"Masclet\u00e0\" can be heard every afternoon. There is a large fountain at the northern end.\nThe \"Pla\u00e7a de la Mare de D\u00e9u\" contains the Basilica of the Virgin and the Turia fountain, and is a popular spot for locals and tourists. Around the corner is the Plaza de la Reina, with the cathedral, orange trees, and many bars and restaurants.\nThe Turia River was diverted in the 1960s, after severe flooding, and the old riverbed is now the Turia Gardens, which contain a children's playground, a fountain, and sports fields. The \"Palau de la M\u00fasica\" is adjacent to the Turia gardens and the City of Arts and Sciences lies at one end. The Valencia Bioparc is a zoo, also located in the Turia riverbed.\nOther gardens in Valencia include:\nSport.\nFootball.\nValencia is also internationally famous for its football club, Valencia CF, one of the most successful clubs in Europe and La Liga, winning the Spanish league a total of six times including in 2002 and 2004 (the year it also won the UEFA Cup), and was a UEFA Champions League runner-up in 2000 and 2001. The club is currently owned by Peter Lim, a Singaporean businessman who bought the club in 2014. The team's stadium is the Mestalla, which can host up to 49,000 fans. The club's city rival, Levante UD, plays its home games at Estadi Ciutat de Val\u00e8ncia.\nAmerican football.\nValencia is the only city in Spain with two American football teams in LNFA Serie A, the national first division: Valencia Firebats and Valencia Giants. The Firebats have been national champions four times and have represented Valencia and Spain in the European playoffs since 2005. Both teams share the Jard\u00edn del Turia stadium.\nMotor sports.\nOnce a year between 2008 and 2012 the European Formula One Grand Prix took place in the Valencia Street Circuit. Valencia is among (with Barcelona, Porto and Monte Carlo) the only European cities ever to host Formula One World Championship Grands Prix on public roads in the middle of cities. The final race in 2012 European Grand Prix saw home driver Fernando Alonso win for Ferrari, in spite of starting halfway down the field. The Valencian Community motorcycle Grand Prix \"(Gran Premi de la Comunitat Valenciana de motociclisme)\" is part of the Grand Prix motorcycle racing season at the Circuit Ricardo Tormo (also known as \"Circuit de Val\u00e8ncia\"), held in November in the nearby town of Cheste. Periodically the Spanish round of the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters touring car racing Championship (DTM) is held in Valencia.\nRugby League.\nValencia is also the home of the Asociaci\u00f3n Espa\u00f1ola de Rugby League, who are the governing body for Rugby league in Spain. The city plays host to a number of clubs playing the sport and to date has hosted all of the country's international home matches. In 2015, Valencia hosted their first match in the Rugby league European Federation C competition, which was a qualifier for the 2017 Rugby League World Cup. Spain won the fixture 40\u201330.\nDistricts.\nOther towns within the municipality of Valencia.\nThese towns administratively are within districts of Valencia.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nValencia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nValencia also has friendly relations with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63863", "revid": "43746503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63863", "title": "Verilog", "text": "Hardware description language\nVerilog, standardized as IEEE 1364, is a hardware description language (HDL) used to model electronic systems. It is most commonly used in the design and verification of digital circuits, with the highest level of abstraction being at the register-transfer level. It is also used in the verification of analog circuits and mixed-signal circuits, as well as in the design of genetic circuits.\nIn 2009, the Verilog standard (IEEE 1364-2005) was merged into the SystemVerilog standard, creating IEEE Standard 1800-2009. Since then, Verilog has been officially part of the SystemVerilog language. The current version is IEEE standard 1800-2023.\nOverview.\nHardware description languages such as Verilog are similar to software programming languages because they include ways of describing the propagation time and signal strengths (sensitivity). There are two types of assignment operators; a blocking assignment (=), and a non-blocking (&lt;=) assignment. The non-blocking assignment allows designers to describe a state-machine update without needing to declare and use temporary storage variables. Since these concepts are part of Verilog's language semantics, designers could quickly write descriptions of large circuits in a relatively compact and concise form. At the time of Verilog's introduction (1984), Verilog represented a tremendous productivity improvement for circuit designers who were already using graphical schematic capture software and specially written software programs to document and simulate electronic circuits.\nThe designers of Verilog wanted a language with syntax similar to the C programming language, which was already widely used in engineering software development. Like C, Verilog is case-sensitive and has a basic preprocessor (though less sophisticated than that of ANSI C/C++). Its control flow keywords (if/else, for, while, case, etc.) are equivalent, and its operator precedence is compatible with C. Syntactic differences include: required bit-widths for variable declarations, demarcation of procedural blocks (Verilog uses begin/end instead of curly braces {}), and many other minor differences. Verilog requires that variables be given a definite size. In C these sizes are inferred from the 'type' of the variable (for instance an integer type may be 32 bits).\nA Verilog design consists of a hierarchy of modules. Modules encapsulate \"design hierarchy\", and communicate with other modules through a set of declared input, output, and bidirectional ports. Internally, a module can contain any combination of the following: net/variable declarations (wire, reg, integer, etc.), concurrent and sequential statement blocks, and instances of other modules (sub-hierarchies). Sequential statements are placed inside a begin/end block and executed in sequential order within the block. However, the blocks themselves are executed concurrently, making Verilog a dataflow language.\nVerilog's concept of 'wire' consists of both signal values (4-state: \"1, 0, floating, undefined\") and signal strengths (strong, weak, etc.). This system allows abstract modeling of shared signal lines, where multiple sources drive a common net. When a wire has multiple drivers, the wire's (readable) value is resolved by a function of the source drivers and their strengths.\nA subset of statements in the Verilog language are synthesizable. Verilog modules that conform to a synthesizable coding style, known as RTL (register-transfer level), can be physically realized by synthesis software. Synthesis software algorithmically transforms the (abstract) Verilog source into a netlist, a logically equivalent description consisting only of elementary logic primitives (AND, OR, NOT, flip-flops, etc.) that are available in a specific FPGA or VLSI technology. Further manipulations to the netlist ultimately lead to a circuit fabrication blueprint (such as a photo mask set for an ASIC or a bitstream file for an FPGA).\nHistory.\nBeginning.\nVerilog was created by Prabhu Goel, Phil Moorby and Chi-Lai Huang between late 1983 and early 1984. Chi-Lai Huang had earlier worked on a hardware description LALSD, a language developed by Professor S.Y.H. Su, for his PhD work. The rights holder for this process, at the time proprietary, was \"Automated Integrated Design Systems\" (later renamed to Gateway Design Automation in 1985). Gateway Design Automation was purchased by Cadence Design Systems in 1990. Cadence now has full proprietary rights to Gateway's Verilog and the Verilog-XL, the HDL-simulator that would become the de facto standard (of Verilog logic simulators) for the next decade. Originally, Verilog was only intended to describe and allow simulation; the automated synthesis of subsets of the language to physically realizable structures (gates etc.) was developed after the language had achieved widespread usage.\nVerilog is a portmanteau of the words \"verification\" and \"logic\".\nVerilog-95.\nWith the increasing success of VHDL at the time, Cadence decided to make the language available for open standardization. Cadence transferred Verilog into the public domain under the https:// (OVI) (now known as Accellera) organization. Verilog was later submitted to IEEE and became IEEE Standard 1364-1995, commonly referred to as Verilog-95.\nIn the same time frame Cadence initiated the creation of Verilog-A to put standards support behind its analog simulator Spectre. Verilog-A was never intended to be a standalone language and is a subset of Verilog-AMS which encompassed Verilog-95.\nVerilog 2001.\nExtensions to Verilog-95 were submitted back to IEEE to cover the deficiencies that users had found in the original Verilog standard. These extensions became IEEE Standard 1364-2001 known as Verilog-2001.\nVerilog-2001 is a significant upgrade from Verilog-95. First, it adds explicit support for (2's complement) signed nets and variables. Previously, code authors had to perform signed operations using awkward bit-level manipulations (for example, the carry-out bit of a simple 8-bit addition required an explicit description of the Boolean algebra to determine its correct value). The same function under Verilog-2001 can be more succinctly described by one of the built-in operators: +, -, /, *, \u00bb&gt;. A generate\u2013endgenerate construct (similar to VHDL's generate\u2013endgenerate) allows Verilog-2001 to control instance and statement instantiation through normal decision operators (case\u2013if\u2013else). Using generate\u2013endgenerate, Verilog-2001 can instantiate an array of instances, with control over the connectivity of the individual instances. File I/O has been improved by several new system tasks. And finally, a few syntax additions were introduced to improve code readability (e.g. always @*, named parameter override, C-style function/task/module header declaration).\nVerilog-2001 is the version of Verilog supported by the majority of commercial EDA software packages.\nVerilog 2005.\nNot to be confused with SystemVerilog, \"Verilog 2005\" (IEEE Standard 1364-2005) consists of minor corrections, spec clarifications, and a few new language features (such as the uwire keyword).\nA separate part of the Verilog standard, Verilog-AMS, attempts to integrate analog and mixed signal modeling with traditional Verilog.\nSystemVerilog.\nThe advent of hardware verification languages such as OpenVera, and Verisity's e language encouraged the development of Superlog by Co-Design Automation Inc (acquired by Synopsys). The foundations of Superlog and Vera were donated to Accellera, which later became the IEEE standard P1800-2005: SystemVerilog.\nSystemVerilog is a superset of Verilog-2005, with many new features and capabilities to aid design verification and design modeling. As of 2009, the SystemVerilog and Verilog language standards were merged into SystemVerilog 2009 (IEEE Standard 1800-2009).\nUpdates since 2009.\nThe SystemVerilog standard was subsequently updated in 2012, 2017, and most recently in December 2023.\nExample.\nA simple example of two flip-flops follows:\nmodule toplevel(clock,reset);\n input clock;\n input reset;\n reg flop1;\n reg flop2;\n always @ (posedge reset or posedge clock)\n if (reset)\n begin\n flop1 &lt;= 0;\n flop2 &lt;= 1;\n end\n else\n begin\n flop1 &lt;= flop2;\n flop2 &lt;= flop1;\n end\nendmodule\nThe codice_1 operator in Verilog is another aspect of its being a hardware description language as opposed to a normal procedural language. This is known as a \"non-blocking\" assignment. Its action does not register until after the always block has executed. This means that the order of the assignments is irrelevant and will produce the same result: flop1 and flop2 will swap values every clock.\nThe other assignment operator codice_2 is referred to as a blocking assignment. When codice_2 assignment is used, for the purposes of logic, the target variable is updated immediately. In the above example, had the statements used the codice_2 blocking operator instead of codice_1, flop1 and flop2 would not have been swapped. Instead, as in traditional programming, the compiler would understand to simply set flop1 equal to flop2 (and subsequently ignore the redundant logic to set flop2 equal to flop1).\nAn example counter circuit follows:\nmodule Div20x (rst, clk, cet, cep, count, tc);\n// TITLE 'Divide-by-20 Counter with enables'\n// enable CEP is a clock enable only\n// enable CET is a clock enable and\n// enables the TC output\n// a counter using the Verilog language\nparameter size = 5;\nparameter length = 20;\ninput rst; // These inputs/outputs represent\ninput clk; // connections to the module.\ninput cet;\ninput cep;\noutput [size-1:0] count;\noutput tc;\nreg [size-1:0] count; // Signals assigned\n // within an always\n // (or initial)block\n // must be of type reg\nwire tc; // Other signals are of type wire\n// The always statement below is a parallel\n// execution statement that\n// executes any time the signals\n// rst or clk transition from low to high\nalways @ (posedge clk or posedge rst)\n if (rst) // This causes reset of the cntr\n count &lt;= {size{1'b0}};\n else\n if (cet &amp;&amp; cep) // Enables both true\n begin\n if (count == length-1)\n count &lt;= {size{1'b0}};\n else\n count &lt;= count + 1'b1;\n end\n// the value of tc is continuously assigned\n// the value of the expression\nassign tc = (cet &amp;&amp; (count == length-1));\nendmodule\nAn example of delays:\nreg a, b, c, d;\nwire e;\nalways @(b or e)\n begin\n a = b &amp; e;\n b = a | b;\n #5 c = b;\n d = #6 c ^ e;\n end\nThe always clause above illustrates the other type of method of use, i.e. it executes whenever any of the entities in the list (the b or e) changes. When one of these changes, a is immediately assigned a new value, and due to the blocking assignment, \"b\" is assigned a new value afterward (taking into account the new value of a). After a delay of 5 time units, c is assigned the value of b and the value of c ^ e is tucked away in an invisible store. Then after 6 more time units, d is assigned the value that was tucked away.\nSignals that are driven from within a process (an initial or always block) must be of type reg. Signals that are driven from outside a process must be of type wire. The keyword reg does not necessarily imply a hardware register.\nDefinition of constants.\nThe definition of constants in Verilog supports the addition of a width parameter. The basic syntax is:\n&lt;\"size\"&gt;'&lt;\"base\"&gt;&lt;\"value\"&gt;\nWhere:\nExamples:\nSynthesizable constructs.\nThere are several statements in Verilog that have no analog in real hardware, such as the $display command. However, the examples presented here are the classic (and limited) subset of the language that has a direct mapping to real gates.\n// Mux examples \u2014 Three ways to do the same thing.\n// The first example uses continuous assignment\nwire out;\nassign out = sel ? a : b;\n// the second example uses a procedure\n// to accomplish the same thing.\nreg out;\nalways @(a or b or sel)\n begin\n case(sel)\n 1'b0: out = b;\n 1'b1: out = a;\n endcase\n end\n// Finally \u2014 you can use if/else in a\n// procedural structure.\nreg out;\nalways @(a or b or sel)\n if (sel)\n out = a;\n else\n out = b;\nThe next interesting structure is a transparent latch; it will pass the input to the output when the gate signal is set for \"pass-through\", and captures the input and stores it upon transition of the gate signal to \"hold\". The output will remain stable regardless of the input signal while the gate is set to \"hold\". In the example below the \"pass-through\" level of the gate would be when the value of the if clause is true, i.e. gate = 1. This is read \"if gate is true, the din is fed to latch_out continuously.\" Once the if clause is false, the last value at latch_out will remain and is independent of the value of din.\n// Transparent latch example\nreg latch_out;\nalways @(gate or din)\n if(gate)\n latch_out = din; // Pass through state\n // Note that the else isn't required here. The variable\n // latch_out will follow the value of din while gate is\n // high. When gate goes low, latch_out will remain constant.\nThe flip-flop is the next significant template; in Verilog, the D-flop is the simplest, and it can be modeled as:\nreg q;\nalways @(posedge clk)\n q &lt;= d;\nThe significant thing to notice in the example is the use of the non-blocking assignment. A basic rule of thumb is to use &lt;= when there is a posedge or negedge statement within the always clause.\nA variant of the D-flop is one with an asynchronous reset; there is a convention that the reset state will be the first if clause within the statement.\nreg q;\nalways @(posedge clk or posedge reset)\n if(reset)\n q &lt;= 0;\n else\n q &lt;= d;\nThe next variant is including both an asynchronous reset and asynchronous set condition; again the convention comes into play, i.e. the reset term is followed by the set term.\nreg q;\nalways @(posedge clk or posedge reset or posedge set)\n if(reset)\n q &lt;= 0;\n else\n if(set)\n q &lt;= 1;\n else\n q &lt;= d;\nNote: If this model is used to model a Set/Reset flip flop then simulation errors can result. Consider the following test sequence of events. 1) reset goes high 2) clk goes high 3) set goes high 4) clk goes high again 5) reset goes low followed by 6) set going low. Assume no setup and hold violations.\nIn this example the always @ statement would first execute when the rising edge of reset occurs which would place q to a value of 0. The next time the always block executes would be the rising edge of clk which again would keep q at a value of 0. The always block then executes when set goes high which because reset is high forces q to remain at 0. This condition may or may not be correct depending on the actual flip flop. However, this is not the main problem with this model. Notice that when reset goes low, that set is still high. In a real flip flop this will cause the output to go to a 1. However, in this model it will not occur because the always block is triggered by rising edges of set and reset \u2013 not levels. A different approach may be necessary for set/reset flip flops.\nThe final basic variant is one that implements a D-flop with a mux feeding its input. The mux has a d-input and feedback from the flop itself. This allows a gated load function.\n// Basic structure with an EXPLICIT feedback path\nalways @(posedge clk)\n if(gate)\n q &lt;= d;\n else\n q &lt;= q; // explicit feedback path\n// The more common structure ASSUMES the feedback is present\n// This is a safe assumption since this is how the\n// hardware compiler will interpret it. This structure\n// looks much like a latch. The differences are the\n// @(posedge clk) and the non-blocking &lt;=\nalways @(posedge clk)\n if(gate)\n q &lt;= d; // the \"else\" mux is \"implied\"\nNote that there are no \"initial\" blocks mentioned in this description. There is a split between FPGA and ASIC synthesis tools on this structure. FPGA tools allow initial blocks where reg values are established instead of using a \"reset\" signal. ASIC synthesis tools don't support such a statement. The reason is that an FPGA's initial state is something that is downloaded into the memory tables of the FPGA. An ASIC is an actual hardware implementation.\nInitial and always.\nThere are two separate ways of declaring a Verilog process. These are the always and the initial keywords. The always keyword indicates a free-running process. The initial keyword indicates a process executes exactly once. Both constructs begin execution at simulator time 0, and both execute until the end of the block. Once an always block has reached its end, it is rescheduled (again). It is a common misconception to believe that an initial block will execute before an always block. In fact, it is better to think of the initial-block as a special-case of the always-block, one which terminates after it completes for the first time.\n//Examples:\ninitial\n begin\n a = 1; // Assign a value to reg a at time 0\n #1; // Wait 1 time unit\n b = a; // Assign the value of reg a to reg b\n end\nalways @(a or b) // Any time a or b CHANGE, run the process\nbegin\n if (a)\n c = b;\n else\n d = ~b;\nend // Done with this block, now return to the top (i.e. the @ event-control)\nalways @(posedge a)// Run whenever reg a has a low to high change\n a &lt;= b;\nThese are the classic uses for these two keywords, but there are two significant additional uses. The most common of these is an always keyword without the @(...) sensitivity list. It is possible to use always as shown below:\nalways\n begin // Always begins executing at time 0 and NEVER stops\n clk = 0; // Set clk to 0\n #1; // Wait for 1 time unit\n clk = 1; // Set clk to 1\n #1; // Wait 1 time unit\n end // Keeps executing \u2014 so continue back at the top of the begin\nThe always keyword acts similar to the C language construct while(1) {..} in the sense that it will execute forever.\nThe other interesting exception is the use of the initial keyword with the addition of the forever keyword.\nThe example below is functionally identical to the always example above.\ninitial forever // Start at time 0 and repeat the begin/end forever\n begin\n clk = 0; // Set clk to 0\n #1; // Wait for 1 time unit\n clk = 1; // Set clk to 1\n #1; // Wait 1 time unit\n end\nFork/join.\nThe fork/join pair are used by Verilog to create parallel processes. All statements (or blocks) between a fork/join pair begin execution simultaneously upon execution flow hitting the fork. Execution continues after the join upon completion of the longest running statement or block between the fork and join.\ninitial\n fork\n $write(\"A\"); // Print char A\n $write(\"B\"); // Print char B\n begin\n #1; // Wait 1 time unit\n $write(\"C\"); // Print char C\n end\n join\nThe way the above is written, it is possible to have either the sequences \"ABC\" or \"BAC\" print out. The order of simulation between the first $write and the second $write depends on the simulator implementation, and may purposefully be randomized by the simulator. This allows the simulation to contain both accidental race conditions as well as intentional non-deterministic behavior.\nNotice that VHDL cannot dynamically spawn multiple processes like Verilog.\nRace conditions.\nThe order of execution is not always guaranteed within Verilog. This can best be illustrated by a classic example. Consider the code snippet below:\ninitial\n a = 0;\ninitial\n b = a;\ninitial\n begin\n #1;\n $display(\"Value a=%d Value of b=%d\",a,b);\n end\nDepending on the order of execution of the initial blocks, it could be zero and zero, or alternately zero and some other arbitrary uninitialized value. The codice_10 statement will always execute after both assignment blocks have completed, due to the #1 delay.\nOperators.\nNote: These operators are \"not\" shown in order of precedence.\nFour-valued logic.\nThe IEEE 1364 standard defines a four-valued logic with four states: 0, 1, Z (high impedance), and X (unknown logic value). For the competing VHDL, a dedicated standard for multi-valued logic exists as IEEE 1164 with nine levels.\nSystem tasks.\nSystem tasks are available to handle simple I/O and various design measurement functions during simulation. All system tasks are prefixed with $ to distinguish them from user tasks and functions. This section presents a short list of the most frequently used tasks. It is by no means a comprehensive list.\nProgram Language Interface (PLI).\nThe PLI provides a programmer with a mechanism to transfer control from Verilog to a program function written in C language. It is officially deprecated by IEEE Std 1364-2005 in favor of the newer Verilog Procedural Interface, which completely replaces the PLI.\nThe PLI (now VPI) enables Verilog to cooperate with other programs written in the C language such as test harnesses, instruction set simulators of a microcontroller, debuggers, and so on. For example, it provides the C functions codice_11 and codice_12 which are used to write and read the 64-bit integer argument of the current Verilog task or function, respectively. For 32-bit integers, codice_13 and codice_14 are used.\nSimulation software.\nFor information on Verilog simulators, see the list of Verilog simulators.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63864", "revid": "4788526", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63864", "title": "DICOM", "text": "Open standard from the medical computer science\nDigital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) is a technical standard for the digital storage and transmission of medical images and related information. It includes a file format definition, which specifies the structure of a DICOM file, as well as a network communication protocol that uses TCP/IP to communicate between systems. The primary purpose of the standard is to facilitate communication between the software and hardware entities involved in medical imaging, especially those that are created by different manufacturers. Entities that utilize DICOM files include components of picture archiving and communication systems (PACS), such as imaging machines (modalities), radiological information systems (RIS), scanners, printers, computing servers, and networking hardware.\nThe DICOM standard has been widely adopted by hospitals and the medical software industry, and is sometimes used in smaller-scale applications, such as dentists' and doctors' offices.\nThe National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) holds the copyright to the published standard, which was developed by the DICOM Standards Committee (which includes some NEMA members. It is also known as NEMA standard PS3, and as ISO standard 12052:2017: \"Health informatics \u2013 Digital imaging and communication in medicine (DICOM) including workflow and data management\".\nApplications.\nDICOM is used worldwide to store, exchange, and transmit medical images. DICOM has been central to the development of modern\nradiological imaging: DICOM incorporates standards for imaging modalities such as radiography, ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and radiation therapy. DICOM includes protocols for image exchange (e.g., via portable media such as DVDs), image compression, 3-D visualization, image presentation, and results reporting.\nHistory.\nDICOM is a standard developed by American College of Radiology (ACR) and National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA).\nIn the beginning of the 1980s, it was very difficult for anyone other than manufacturers of computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging devices to decode the images that the machines generated. Radiologists and medical physicists wanted to use the images for dose-planning for radiation therapy. ACR and NEMA collaborated and formed a standard committee in 1983. Their first standard, ACR/NEMA 300, entitled \"Digital Imaging and Communications\", was released in 1985. Very soon after its release, it became clear that improvements were needed. The text was vague and had internal contradictions.\nIn 1988 the second version was released. This version gained more acceptance among vendors. The image transmission was specified as over a dedicated 2 pair cable (EIA-485). The first demonstration of ACR/NEMA V2.0 interconnectivity technology was held at Georgetown University, May 21\u201323, 1990. Six companies participated in this event, DeJarnette Research Systems, General Electric Medical Systems, Merge Technologies, Siemens Medical Systems, Vortech (acquired by Kodak that same year) and 3M. Commercial equipment supporting ACR/NEMA 2.0 was presented at the annual meeting of the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) in 1990 by these same vendors. Many soon realized that the second version also needed improvement. Several extensions to ACR/NEMA 2.0 were created, like Papyrus (developed by the University Hospital of Geneva, Switzerland) and SPI (Standard Product Interconnect), driven by Siemens Medical Systems and Philips Medical Systems.\nThe first large-scale deployment of ACR/NEMA technology was made in 1992 by the US Army and Air Force, as part of the MDIS (Medical Diagnostic Imaging Support) program based at Ft. Detrick, Maryland. Loral Aerospace and Siemens Medical Systems led a consortium of companies in deploying the first US military PACS (Picture Archiving and Communications System) at all major Army and Air Force medical treatment facilities and teleradiology nodes at a large number of US military clinics. DeJarnette Research Systems and Merge Technologies provided the modality gateway interfaces from third party imaging modalities to the Siemens SPI network. The Veterans Administration and the Navy also purchased systems from this contract.\nIn 1993 the third version of the standard was released. Its name was then changed to \"Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine\", abbreviated DICOM. New service classes were defined, network support added and the Conformance Statement was introduced. Initially the DICOM standard was referred to as \"DICOM 3.0\" to distinguish it from its predecessors. DICOM has been constantly updated and extended since 1993, with the intent that changes are backward compatible, except in rare cases where the earlier specification was incorrect or ambiguous. Officially there is no \"version\" of the standard except the current standard, hence the \"3.0\" version number is no longer used. There are no \"minor\" versions to the standard (e.g., no such thing as \"DICOM 3.1\") and there are no current plans to develop a new, incompatible, version of the standard (i.e., no \"DICOM 4.0\"). The standard should be referenced without specification of the date of release of a particular published edition, except when specific conformance requirements are invoked that depend on a retired feature that is no longer documented in the current standard.\nWhile the DICOM standard has achieved a near universal level of acceptance among medical imaging equipment vendors and healthcare IT organizations, the standard has its limitations. DICOM is a standard directed at addressing technical interoperability issues in medical imaging. It is not a framework or architecture for achieving a useful clinical workflow. The Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) initiative layered on top of DICOM (and HL-7) defines profiles to select features from these standards to implement transactions for specific medical imaging interoperability use cases.\nThough always Internet compatible and based on transport over TCP, over time there has been an increasing need to support port 80 HTTP transport to make use easier within the web browser. Most recently, a family of DICOM RESTful web services have been defined to allow mobile device friendly access to DICOM objects and services, which include WADO-RS, STOW-RS and QIDO-RS, which together constitute the DICOMweb initiative.\nDerivations.\nThere are some derivations from the DICOM standard into other application areas. These include DICONDE (\"Digital Imaging and Communication in Nondestructive Evaluation\") that was established by ASTM International and DICOS (\"Digital Imaging and Communication in Security\").\nDICONDE.\nDICONDE was established in 2004 as a way for nondestructive testing manufacturers and users to share image data. DICONDE can be used for computed radiography, digital radiography, computed tomography, ultrasonic testing, eddy-current testing, and thermographic testing. DICONDE is used worldwide to store, send, and exchange data from nondestructive material testing. Unlike DICOM in the medical field, the adoption of DICONDE has been slower due to the lack of regulatory requirements for manufacturer-independent interoperability. DICONDE is also gaining importance in the context of Industry 4.0 due to its extensive capabilities for networking systems from different manufacturers.\nDICOS.\nDICOS was established in 2009 to be used for image sharing in airport security, cargo scanning, and other security applications.\nData format.\nDICOM groups information into data sets. For example, a file of a chest x-ray image may contain the patient ID within the file, so that the image can never be separated from this information by mistake. This is similar to the way that image formats such as JPEG can also have embedded tags to identify and otherwise describe the image.\nA DICOM data object consists of a number of attributes, including items such as name, ID, etc., and also one special attribute containing the image pixel data (i.e. logically, the main object has no \"header\" as such, being merely a list of attributes, including the pixel data). A single DICOM object can have only one attribute containing pixel data. For many modalities, this corresponds to a single image. However, the attribute may contain multiple \"frames\", allowing storage of cine loops or other multi-frame data. Another example is NM data, where an NM image, by definition, is a multi-dimensional multi-frame image. In these cases, three- or four-dimensional data can be encapsulated in a single DICOM object. Pixel data can be compressed using a variety of standards, including JPEG, lossless JPEG, JPEG 2000, and run-length encoding (RLE). LZW (zip) compression can be used for the whole data set (not just the pixel data), but this has rarely been implemented.\nDICOM uses three different data element encoding schemes. With explicit value representation (VR) data elements, for VRs that are not OB, OW, OF, SQ, UT, or UN, the format for each data element is: GROUP (2 bytes) ELEMENT (2 bytes) VR (2 bytes) LengthInByte (2 bytes) Data (variable length). For the other explicit data elements or implicit data elements, see section 7.1 of Part 5 of the DICOM Standard.\nThe same basic format is used for all applications, including network and file usage, but when written to a file, usually a true \"header\" (containing copies of a few key attributes and details of the application that wrote it) is added.\nImage display.\nTo promote identical grayscale image display on different monitors and consistent hard-copy images from various printers, the DICOM committee developed a lookup table to display digitally assigned pixel values. To use the DICOM grayscale standard display function (GSDF), images must be viewed (or printed) on devices that have this lookup curve or on devices that have been calibrated to the GSDF curve.\nValue representations.\nIn addition to a value representation, each attribute also has a \"value multiplicity\" to indicate the number of data elements contained in the attribute. For character string value representations, if more than one data element is being encoded, the successive data elements are separated by the backslash character \"\\\".\nServices.\nDICOM consists of services, most of which involve transmission of data over a network. The file format for offline media is a later addition to the standard.\nStore.\nThe DICOM Store service is used to send images or other persistent objects (structured reports, etc.) to a picture archiving and communication system (PACS) or workstation.\nStorage commitment.\nThe DICOM storage commitment service is used to confirm that an image has been permanently stored by a device (either on redundant disks or on backup media, e.g. burnt to a CD). The Service Class User (SCU: similar to a client), a modality or workstation, etc., uses the confirmation from the Service Class Provider (SCP: similar to a server), an archive station for instance, to make sure that it is safe to delete the images locally.\nQuery/retrieve.\nThis enables a workstation to find lists of images or other such objects and then retrieve them from a picture archiving and communication system.\nModality worklist.\nThe DICOM modality worklist service provides a list of imaging procedures that have been scheduled for performance by an image acquisition device (sometimes referred to as a modality system). The items in the worklist include relevant details about the subject of the procedure (patient ID, name, sex, and age), the type of procedure (equipment type, procedure description, procedure code) and the procedure order (referring physician, accession number, reason for exam). An image acquisition device, such as a CT scanner, queries a service provider, such as a RIS, to get this information which is then presented to the system operator and is used by the imaging device to populate details in the image metadata.\nPrior to the use of the DICOM modality worklist service, the scanner operator was required to manually enter all the relevant details. Manual entry is slower and introduces the risk of misspelled patient names, and other data entry errors.\nModality performed procedure step.\nA complementary service to modality worklist, this enables the modality to send a report about a performed examination including data about the images acquired, beginning time, end time, and duration of a study, dose delivered, etc.\nIt helps give the radiology department a more precise handle on resource (acquisition station) use. Also known as MPPS, this service allows a modality to better coordinate with image storage servers by giving the server a list of objects to send before or while actually sending such objects.\nPrint.\nThe DICOM print service is used to send images to a DICOM printer, normally to print an \"X-Ray\" film. There is a standard calibration (defined in DICOM Part 14) to help ensure consistency between various display devices, including hard copy printout.\nOffline media (files).\nThe format for offline media files is specified in Part 10 of the DICOM Standard. Such files are sometimes referred to as \"Part 10 files\".\nDICOM restricts the filenames on DICOM media to 8 characters (some systems wrongly use 8.3, but this does not conform to the standard). No information must be extracted from these names (PS3.10 Section 6.2.3.2). This is a common source of problems with media created by developers who did not read the specifications carefully. This is a historical requirement to maintain compatibility with older existing systems. It also mandates the presence of a media directory, the DICOMDIR file, which provides index and summary information for all the DICOM files on the media. The DICOMDIR information provides substantially greater information about each file than any filename could, so there is less need for meaningful file names.\nDICOM files typically have a .dcm file extension if they are not part of a DICOM media (which requires them to be without extension).\nThe MIME type for DICOM files is defined by RFC 3240 as codice_1.\nThe Uniform Type Identifier type for DICOM files is codice_2.\nThere is also an ongoing media exchange test and \"connectathon\" process for CD media and network operation that is organized by the IHE organization.\nApplication areas.\nThe core application of the DICOM standard is to capture, store and distribute medical images. The standard also provides services related to imaging such as managing imaging procedure worklists, printing images on film or digital media like DVDs, reporting procedure status like completion of an imaging acquisition, confirming successful archiving of images, encrypting datasets, removing patient identifying information from datasets, organizing layouts of images for review, saving image manipulations and annotations, calibrating image displays, encoding ECGs, encoding CAD results, encoding structured measurement data, and storing acquisition protocols.\nTypes of equipment.\nThe DICOM information object definitions encode the data produced by a wide variety of imaging device types, including, CT (computed tomography), MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), ultrasound, X-ray, fluoroscopy, angiography, mammography, breast tomosynthesis, PET (positron emission tomography), SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography), Endoscopy, microscopy, nd whole slide imaging, OCT (optical coherence tomography).\nDICOM is also implemented by devices associated with images or imaging workflow including, PACS (picture archiving and communication systems), image viewers and display stations, CAD (computer-aided detection/diagnosis systems), 3D visualization systems, clinical analysis applications, image printers, Film scanners, media burners (that export DICOM files onto CDs, DVDs, etc.), media importers (that import DICOM files from CDs, DVDs, USBs, etc.), RIS (radiology information systems), VNA (vendor-neutral archives), EMR (electronic medical record) systems, and radiology reporting systems\nFields of medicine.\nMany fields of medicine have a dedicated Working Group within DICOM, and DICOM is applicable to any field of medicine in which imaging is prevalent, including:, radiology, cardiology, oncology, nuclear medicine, radiotherapy, neurology, orthopedics, obstetrics, gynecology, ophthalmology, dentistry, maxillofacial surgery, dermatology, pathology, clinical trials, veterinary medicine, and medical/clinical photography\nPort numbers over IP.\nDICOM have reserved the following TCP and UDP port numbers by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA): 104 well-known port for DICOM over Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or User Datagram Protocol (UDP). Since 104 is in the reserved subset, many operating systems require special privileges to use it;\n2761 registered port for DICOM using Integrated Secure Communication Layer (ISCL) over TCP or UDP;\n2762 registered port for DICOM using Transport Layer Security (TLS) over TCP or UDP;\n11112 registered port for DICOM using standard, open communication over TCP or UDP.\nThe standard recommends but does not require the use of these port numbers.\nDisadvantages.\nAccording to a paper presented at an international symposium in 2008, the DICOM standard has problems related to data entry. \"A major disadvantage of the DICOM Standard is the possibility for entering probably too many optional fields. This disadvantage is mostly showing in inconsistency of filling all the fields with the data. Some image objects are often incomplete because some fields are left blank and some are filled with incorrect data.\"\nAnother disadvantage is that the file format admits executable code and may contain malware.\nStandards used by DICOM.\nThe best known standards and protocols used by DICOM are:\nStandards that use DICOM.\nThe DICOM standard is used in a wide variety of resources (IHE, HL7 ... a) that are related to images.\nThe ISO12052: 2017 and CEN 12052 standards refer to the DICOM standard.\nSecurity.\nIn December 2023, cybersecurity researcher Sina Yazdanmehr unveiled a critical security issue within the Store service. This revelation, presented at Black Hat Briefings, demonstrated the potential for malicious actors to manipulate existing series of medical images. Yazdanmehr's research highlighted the alarming capability of attackers to destroy a series of images or introduce misleading indicators of illness.\nEnsuring the security of patient data within DICOM is critical, as these files often contain sensitive personal health information (PHI). Security measures for DICOM data include encryption, access control, and auditing mechanisms to prevent unauthorized access, modification, or disclosure of patient information. Compliance with regulations such as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) in the United States and the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in Europe is essential for protecting patient privacy and ensuring the integrity of medical records.\nDe-identification of DICOM.\nDe-identification of DICOM refers to the process of removing or anonymizing personal health information (PHI) from medical images to protect patient privacy. This process is vital for sharing medical data for research, educational purposes, or public health activities while complying with privacy regulations. Techniques for de-identification involve stripping out or masking identifiable data elements within the DICOM metadata, such as patient names, birth dates, and other unique identifiers. Ensuring thorough de-identification is crucial to balance the benefits of data sharing with the obligation to maintain patient confidentiality.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63866", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63866", "title": "Palermo scale", "text": "Logarithmic scale in astronomy\nThe Palermo scale or Palermo technical impact hazard scale is a logarithmic scale used by astronomers to rate the potential hazard of impact of a near-Earth object (NEO). It combines two types of data\u2014probability of impact and estimated kinetic yield\u2014into a single \"hazard\" value. A rating of 0 means the hazard is equivalent to the background hazard (defined as the average risk posed by objects of the same size or larger over the years until the date of the potential impact). A rating of +2 would indicate the hazard is 100 times as great as a random background event. Scale values less than \u22122 reflect events for which there are no likely consequences, while Palermo scale values between \u22122 and 0 indicate situations that merit careful monitoring. A similar but less complex scale is the Torino scale, which is used for simpler descriptions in the non-scientific media.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], no asteroid has a cumulative rating for impacts above 0, and only two asteroids have ratings between \u22122 and 0. Historically, three asteroids had ratings above 0 and half a dozen more above \u22121, but most were downrated since.\nScale.\nThe Palermo scale was devised for astronomers to compare impact hazards at a technical level, rather than for the general public. It was adopted at the meeting of the Working Group on Near-Earth Objects of the Scientific and Technical Subcommittee of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space which was held in Palermo, Italy, on June 11\u201316, 2001.\nThe scale compares the likelihood of the detected potential impact with the average risk posed by objects of the same size or larger over the years until the date of the potential impact. This average risk from random impacts is known as the background risk. The Palermo scale value, formula_1, is defined by the equation:\nformula_2\nwhere\n*formula_3 is the impact probability\n*formula_4 is the time interval until the potential impact that is considered\n*formula_5 is the background impact frequency\nThe background impact frequency is defined for this purpose as:\nformula_6\nwhere the energy threshold formula_7 is measured in megatons, and yr is the unit of formula_4 divided by one year.\nFor instance, this formula implies that the expected value of the time from now until the next impact greater than 1 megaton is 33 years, and that when it occurs, there is a 50% chance that it will be above 2.4 megatonnes. This formula is only valid over a certain range of formula_7.\nHowever, another paper published in 2002 \u2013 the same year as the paper on which the Palermo scale is based \u2013 found a power law with different constants:\nformula_10\nThis formula gives considerably lower rates for a given formula_7. For instance, it gives the rate for bolides of 10 megatonnes or more (like the Tunguska explosion) as 1 per thousand years, rather than 1 per 210 years (or a 38% probability that it happens at least once in a century) as in the Palermo formula. However, the authors give a rather large uncertainty (once in 400 to 1800 years for 10 megatonnes), due in part to uncertainties in determining the energies of the atmospheric impacts that they used in their determination.\nFor asteroids with multiple (formula_12) potential impacts, the cumulative Palermo scale rating, formula_13, is the rating that can be calculated with the sum of the probability ratios of the individual potential impacts (each calculated with a formula_3 probability and a formula_15 time until potential impact), which can also be expressed as the logarithm of the sum of 10 raised to the formula_16 Palermo scale rating of the individual potential impacts:\nformula_17\nRisk calculation.\nFor NASA, a unit of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), the Center for Near-Earth Object Studies (CNEOS) calculates impact risks and assigns ratings in its Sentry Risk Table, while another unit of JPL, Solar System Dynamics (SSD) provides orbital and close approach data. For ESA, similar services are provided by its Near-Earth Object Coordination Centre (NEOCC), which maintains its own Risk List and Close Approaches List.\nThe basis for the risk evaluation is the most recent orbit calculation based on all known reliable observations. Along the calculated orbit, close approaches with Earth are determined. Due to measurement and model imprecision, the orbit calculation has an uncertainty, which can be quantified for the close approach distance. Assuming a two-dimensional Gaussian probability distribution in the plane perpendicular to the asteroid's orbit (the B-plane), the uncertainty can be characterised by the standard deviation (sigma) the close approach point in the directions along the asteroid's orbit and perpendicular to it, where the former is usually much larger. The one-sigma margin, which is used by ESA NEOCC one-sigma, means that the close approach point is within those bounds with a 68.3% probability, while the 3-sigma margin, used by NASA JPL SSD, corresponds to 99.7% probability. The probability of an impact is the integral of the probability distribution over the cross section of Earth in the B-plane.\nWhen the close approach of a newly discovered asteroid is first put on a risk list with a significant risk, it is normal for the risk to first increase, regardless whether the potential impact will eventually be ruled out or confirmed with the help of additional observations. After discovery, Earth will be close to the center of the probability distribution, that is, the 3-sigma uncertainty margin will be much bigger than the nominal close encounter distance. With additional observations, the uncertainty will decrease, thus the 3-sigma uncertainty region will shrink, thus Earth will initially cover an increasing part of the probability distribution, resulting in increased risk, and an increasing rating. If the real orbit bypasses Earth, with further observations, Earth will only intersect the tail of the probability distribution (the 3-sigma region will shrink to exclude the Earth) and the impact risk will fall towards zero; while in case the asteroid will hit the Earth, the probability distribution will contract towards its intersection (the 3-sigma region will shrink into Earth's intersection in the B-plane) and the risk will rise towards 100%.\nAsteroids with high ratings.\nIn 2002 the near-Earth asteroid reached a positive rating of 0.18 on the Palermo scale, indicating a higher-than-background threat. The value was subsequently lowered after more measurements were taken. 2002 NT7 is no longer considered to pose any risk and was removed from the Sentry Risk Table on 1 August 2002.\nIn September 2002, the highest Palermo rating was that of asteroid (29075) 1950 DA, with a value of 0.17 for a possible collision in the year 2880. By March 2022, the rating had been reduced to \u22122.0. In May 2024, a study that incorporated observations by the astrometry space observatory \"Gaia\" increased the impact risk, consequently, the rating was raised above \u22121 again.\nFor a brief period in late December 2004, with an observation arc of 190 days, asteroid 99942 Apophis (then known only by its provisional designation 2004 MN4) held the record for the highest Palermo scale value, with a value of 1.10 for a possible collision in the year 2029. The 1.10 value indicated that a collision with this object was considered to be almost 12.6 times as likely as a random background event: 1 in 37 instead of 1 in 472. With further observations, the risk of impact during later close approaches was completely eliminated and Apophis was removed from the Sentry Risk Table in February 2021.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63867", "revid": "38439518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63867", "title": "Martorell", "text": "Martorell () is a municipality, county, and city that forms part of the Baix Llobregat comarca, in Catalonia, Spain, primarily known for its medieval Devil's bridge. It lies at the confluence of the Llobregat and Anoia rivers.\nIt has three railway stations - one on the Renfe line from Manresa to Sant Vicen\u00e7 de Calders (via Barcelona and Vilafranca del Pened\u00e8s) called \"Martorell\", and three on the FGC line from Barcelona to Manresa called \"Martorell-Vila\", \"Martorell-Enlla\u00e7\" and \"Martorell-Central\".\nMartorell is home to the SEAT corporate headquarters and automobile factory, where the SEAT Ibiza, Leon, Arona and Audi A1 are manufactured.\nHistory.\nArchaeological findings indicate human presence in the Llobregat Valley dating back to the Neolithic period, as well as the existence of Iberian settlements. The area also saw the presence of Carthaginian settlements, who were the first to build a bridge over the Llobregat River. The Romans occupied the territory as early as the 2nd century BC, and Martorell later became a key point along the Via Augusta, which crossed the river via the so-called Pont del Diable, a Roman bridge that still stands today. Roman rule was followed by Visigothic domination from the 4th century onward, as evidenced by the remains of a paleochristian church and a necropolis in Santa Margarida, which confirm the spread of Christianity in the 5th century.\nSparsely inhabited for centuries, the area saw significant population growth in the late 9th century, and by 878, a settlement had been established on the right bank of the Llobregat. The first recorded mention of Martorell dates back to 1032, when the region was under the rule of the Castelvell family before passing to the Moncada lineage. In 1344, Roger Bernard III of Foix granted Martorell the status of a municipality. In the early 15th century, the town suffered the consequences of the succession struggles between the House of Foix and King Martin I of Aragon.\nDuring the Guerra dels Segadors, Martorell became the headquarters of the troops defending Barcelona. In 1641, the town was besieged and destroyed by the forces of the Marquis de los V\u00e9lez. After being rebuilt, it was devastated once again in 1652 by a severe plague epidemic that swept through much of Europe. In 1714, the Castle of Rosades was occupied, and its Torre de l'Homenatge was blown up. The early 19th century brought further turmoil with the war against the French, during which Napoleon's troops plundered the town. The following decades were marked by Spain's political instability, which saw three civil wars, seven different constitutions, seven monarchs, a change of dynasty, multiple military coups, and a short-lived republic lasting just one year\u2014all of which had a lasting impact on Martorell.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63869", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63869", "title": "(89959) 2002 NT7", "text": "Asteroid\n(89959) 2002 NT7 (provisional designation 2002 NT7) is a near-Earth object with a diameter of 1.4 kilometers and potentially hazardous asteroid of the Apollo group. It has a well determined orbit with an observation arc of 64 years including precovery images by Palomar Observatory dating back to 1954.\n2002 NT7 became the first object observed by NASA's NEO program to be assigned a positive rating on both the Torino scale and the Palermo scale for a small chance of an impact on 1 February 2019, however it passed Earth at roughly on 13 January 2019 with an uncertainty region of around \u00b1108\u00a0km.\nDiscovery.\nIt was discovered on 9 July 2002 by the Lincoln Near-Earth Asteroid Research team (LINEAR) at the U.S. Lincoln Laboratory Experimental Test Site near Socorro, New Mexico. At the time of discovery it only had a 6-day observation arc of 9\u201314 July, which poorly constrained possible future positions of the asteroid.\nDespite inflammatory press reports, the object had a \"low probability\" of impact, approximately one in a million, for 1 February 2019. On 22 July 2002, NEODyS posted a positive 0.18 Palermo scale rating. Further observations, especially from Erich Meyer, quickly lowered the probability. https://. On 25 July 2002, the hazard rating on the Palermo scale was lowered to \u22120.25. However, the discovery of the object with an initial Palermo scale rating of 0.06 was a historical event for the NEO observation program.\n2002 NT7 was removed from the Sentry Risk Table on 1 August 2002 (23 days after discovery), meaning there is no risk of an impact by it in the next 100 years. On 13 January 2019, the asteroid safely passed from Earth with a 3-sigma uncertainty region of about \u00b1108\u00a0km. Between 1900 and 2195 the closest approach to Earth will occur on 15 January 2099 at a distance of roughly with an uncertainty region of about \u00b1430\u00a0km.\nOn 30 January 2020, the asteroid safely passed from 2 Pallas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63871", "revid": "50562842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63871", "title": "Polytechnic University of Catalonia", "text": "Public university in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain (European Union)\nThe Polytechnic University of Catalonia (, , UPC), currently referred to as BarcelonaTech, is one of the largest polytechnic universities in Spain. The majority of its Engineering Schools and Research facilities are consistently ranked as leading academic institutions in their fields in Europe. \nIt was established in 1971 as a result of different higher technical schools founded in the 18th century merging together. Those schools include Industrial Engineers of Barcelona (ETSEIB) and Terrassa (ETSEIAT), the Higher Technical School of Architecture of Barcelona (ETSAB) and some research institutes. \nAs of 2025[ [update]] it has 18 schools in Catalonia located in the cities of Barcelona, Castelldefels, Manresa, Sant Cugat del Vall\u00e8s, Terrassa, Igualada, and Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa. As of the academic year 2024\u201325, the UPC has over 30,000 students and over 3,000 teaching and research staff, 67 undergraduate programs, 96 graduate programs and 46 doctorate programs.\nUPC is a member of the Top Industrial Managers for Europe network, which allows for student exchanges between leading European engineering schools. It is also a member of several university federations, including the Conference of European Schools for Advanced Engineering Education and Research (CESAER) and UNITECH. UPC is also a parent institution of the Institut Barcelona d'Estudis Internacionals (IBEI).\nRankings.\nUniversitat Polit\u00e8cnica de Catalunya \u00b7 BarcelonaTech (UPC) is one of the top public universities in Spain. It is ranked #97 in QS World University Rankings in the field of Engineering and Technology in 2025. While other rankings, such as that of EduRank, ranks UPC as the best Engineering university in Spain\nThe QS World University Rankings also place the UPC among the world's 50 best universities in disciplines such as Architecture, Civil Engineering, Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Telecommunications Engineering, Instruments Science and Technology and Remote Sensing.\nAccording to the annual university ranking conducted by El Mundo, UPC also reigns first place in fields such as Civil Engineering, Computer Science, and Mechanical Engineering in Spain.\nHistory.\nInstituto Polit\u00e9cnico Superior (1968-1971).\nThe university traces its origins to the foundation of the Polytechnic Higher Institute in 1968, which was formed by the merger in Barcelona of the state technical schools of Architecture and Engineering established in the mid-19th century. The institute was presided over by industrial and aeronautical engineer V\u00edctor de Buen Lozano.\nPolytechnic University of Barcelona (1971\u20131983).\nIn March 1971 the Polytechnic University of Barcelona (UPB) was established, initially comprising:\nIts first rector was V\u00edctor de Buen Lozano, former president of the Polytechnic Higher Institute. That same year saw the creation of the Technical School of Telecommunications Engineering of Barcelona (ETSETB) and the Institute of Educational Sciences (ICE-UPC).\nIn 1972 the University Schools of Technical Industrial Engineering at Terrassa (now the School of Engineering of Terrassa, EUETIT) and at Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa (now EPSEVG), the University School of Technical Architecture of Barcelona (now EPSEB), and the University School of Technical Mining Engineering of Manresa (which that year was renamed Polytechnic University School of Manresa, EUPM, now EPSEM) were integrated into the UPB. That year also saw the establishment of the University Schools of Technical Agricultural Engineering at Girona and Lleida; Girona\u2019s school soon became a full Polytechnic University School, and Lleida began offering first- and second-cycle courses. In December 1972 Gabriel Ferrat\u00e9 Pascual succeeded V\u00edctor de Buen Lozano as rector.\nIn 1974 the Technical School of Civil Engineering of Barcelona (ETSECCPB) opened. In March 1976 the Faculty of Informatics of Barcelona (FIB) was founded, and Juli\u00e1n Fern\u00e1ndez Ferrer was elected rector, succeeding Gabriel Ferrat\u00e9, who had been appointed Director General of Universities and Research in Madrid. Also in 1977 the University School of Optics (EUOOT) opened in Terrassa by ministerial order.\nIn 1978 Gabriel Ferrat\u00e9 was re-elected rector, serving until 1994. In 1979 the Technical School of Architecture of the Vall\u00e8s (ETSAV) opened in the Sabadell-Terrassa area; it moved to Sant Cugat del Vall\u00e8s in 1991.\nPolytechnic University of Catalonia (1983\u2013present).\nOn 4 July 1983 Spain\u2019s University Reform Act (LRU 232/1985) paved the way for new statutes, and in 1984 the institution was officially renamed the Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC). On 19 December 1984 the Parliament of Catalonia established university coordination laws and social councils, appointing Pere Duran Farell as the first President of the UPC Social Council.\nIn 1990 the School of Civil Marine Engineering became the Faculty of Nautical Studies (FNB). In 1991 the Polytechnic University School of the Baix Llobregat opened (later EPSC in Castelldefels), and in 1992 the Faculty of Mathematics and Statistics (FME) was established; that year the UPC schools in Girona and Lleida joined the newly founded University of Girona and University of Lleida respectively.\nIn 1994 Gabriel Ferrat\u00e9 stepped down to become first rector of the Open University of Catalonia; Jaume Pag\u00e8s i Fita succeeded him as rector and Xavier Llobet Colom became President of the Social Council. That year saw the founding of Edicions UPC and the Polit\u00e8cnica Foundation, and the opening of the School of Photography in Terrassa. In 1996 the Rector Gabriel Ferrat\u00e9 Library opened at the Diagonal Nord Campus. The UPC also began integrating two Barcelona provincial schools\u2014EUETIB and EUETAB\u2014into its system.\nIn 1998 the Multimedia School in Terrassa opened and later merged with the School of Photography to form the Centre for Image and Multimedia Technology (CITM). Expansion continued with new campuses in Manresa and Castelldefels, and the creation of the Barcelona Industrial School Consortium (CEIB). UPCnet, the university\u2019s Internet service, launched the same year.\nIn 2000 the technology centres at Vilanova i la Geltr\u00fa and Manresa began operations. In September 2001 the first building of the Mediterranean Technology Park opened at Baix Llobregat, followed in October by the Barcelona Technology Park at Diagonal Sud. That year the Baix Llobregat School was renamed EPSC and in 2010 became the School of Telecommunications and Aerospace Engineering of Castelldefels (EETAC).\nIn 2002 Josep Ferrer Llop was elected rector under a universal weighted suffrage system, and Joaquim Molins became President of the Social Council. On 12 February 2003 the Parliament of Catalonia approved the Universities Law (LUC), and in May the UPC Senate ratified new statutes. A collaboration agreement with the Department of Universities, Research and Information Society (DURSI) initiated curricula adaptation to the European Higher Education Area from 2004. In 2003 the Centre for Interdisciplinary Higher Education (CFIS) was founded at the Diagonal Sud Campus.\nIn 2004 UPC hosted the first International Conference on Higher Education organised by the Global University Network for Innovation (GUNI), subsequently held biennially. In January 2005 the second phase of the Omega Building opened at Diagonal Nord, and the MareNostrum supercomputer was installed in the Torre Girona chapel, co-managed by the Barcelona Supercomputing Center, UPC, the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science, and DURSI. Meanwhile, the Baix Llobregat campus opened new facilities for EUETAB and the Institute of Photonic Sciences (ICFO), and Manresa inaugurated a combined university library. In Villanova i la Geltr\u00fa the city council granted space in the Ne\u00e0polis building for the technology centre and EPSEVG, while ETSAV opened its Technology Transfer Centre (CRITT).\n2006\u20132010.\nIn March 2006, Professor Antoni Gir\u00f3 Roca was elected rector, which brought forth the adoption of the European Higher Education Area and the launch of the \u201cHorizon 2010\u201d Research and Innovation Plan. Over the next five years the UPC:\n2011\u2013present.\nSince 2011 the UPC has continued expanding its research infrastructure, global partnerships, and campus life:\nSchools.\nAffiliated Schools\nUPC Research Centers.\nThe UPC has a number of research centres.\nScience Fiction Award.\nFrom 1991\u20132010, the Board of Trustees at the UPC organized and awarded an annual Science Fiction Award. Currently the award is presented bi-annually.\nPrevious winners include:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63872", "revid": "50944725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63872", "title": "Pompeu Fabra University", "text": "University in Barcelona, Spain\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63873", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63873", "title": "Pompeu Fabra", "text": "Spanish engineer and grammarian (1868\u20131948)\nPompeu Fabra i Poch (; 20 February 1868 \u2013 25 December 1948) was a Catalan engineer, linguist, and grammarian. He was the main author of the normative reform of the contemporary Catalan language and is considered the father of modern Catalan grammar. The Pompeu Fabra University in Barcelona is named after him.\nFabra was known as the \"wise organizer of the Catalan language\" for his pioneering work establishing the modern norms of the language. \nThe Catalan writer Josep Pla wrote that \"Fabra has been the most important Catalan of our time because he is the only citizen of this country, at this time, who, having set out to achieve a specific public and general goal, accomplished it in an explicit and indisputable way.\"\nBiography.\nChildhood.\nPompeu Fabra was born in 1868 at number 32 Carrer de la Mare de D\u00e9u de la Salut, in the La Salut neighborhood of the former village of Gr\u00e0cia, and later lived at 87 Carrer Gran de Gr\u00e0cia. He was the son of Josep Fabra i Roca and Carolina Poch i Mart\u00ed. He had twelve siblings and was the youngest of all; however, ten of them died, leaving only him and two sisters.\nWhen he was five years old (1873), the First Spanish Republic was proclaimed in Spain, and his father, a republican, was elected mayor of the village. Although the family moved to Carrer de la Diputaci\u00f3 in Barcelona when he was six, Fabra always remembered his Gr\u00e0cia origins.\nHis father had a strong influence on him during his childhood and youth, both through early contact with dictionaries and grammars circulating at home, such as the \"Diccionari de la llengua catalana ab la correspondencia castellana y llatina\" by Pere Lab\u00e8rnia and the \"Gram\u00e1tica de la lengua catalana\" by Antoni de Bofarull and Adolf Blanch, and through choosing his career path as an engineer, a decision influenced by his father, who unfortunately did not live to see it completed, having died in 1888.\nFertile and controversial beginnings.\nFabra began studies in industrial engineering, which he gradually combined with a strong self-taught interest in philology. In 1889, he joined as an editor at \"L'Aven\u00e7\", which in 1891 published through its editorial the grammar \"Ensayo de gram\u00e1tica del catal\u00e1n moderno\". This was the first time, using a scientific methodology, that the spoken language was described with careful phonetic transcription.\nTogether with Joaquim Casas Carb\u00f3 and Jaume Mass\u00f3 i Torrents, Fabra undertook the second linguistic campaign of \"L'Aven\u00e7\", which lasted throughout 1892. It consisted of a series of dense, generally unsigned notes published under the heading \u00abLa Reforma Ling\u00fc\u00edstica\u00bb starting in the March issue. These articles \u00abprovided a theoretical justification for the orthographic changes being gradually adopted\u00bb. These were the first scientific attempts to systematize the language, which caused heated controversies and formed the outline of the future standardization. In \"L'Aven\u00e7\", Pompeu Fabra published articles under the pseudonym Esteve Arnau, to avoid direct confrontation and criticism of real people with established careers at the time, as well as to conceal his participation in a magazine from which he felt ideologically distant.\nNonetheless, these proposals were considered revolutionary and difficult to accept by the traditional majority, including the floralists, some of the most renowned writers of the Renaixen\u00e7a such as Narc\u00eds Oller, V\u00edctor Catal\u00e0, and \u00c0ngel Guimer\u00e0, as well as the press. The campaign in \"L'Aven\u00e7\" provoked a reaction from the traditionalists, who counterattacked \u2014 which was precisely what the campaign's promoters sought. A clear example was Fabra\u2019s article in \"La Vanguardia\" on 22 March 1892 titled \u00abSobre la reforma ling\u00fc\u00edstica y ortogr\u00e1fica\u00bb (\u201cOn Linguistic and Orthographic Reform\u201d), in which he responded to an earlier article by Omar y Barrera in the same newspaper and summarized his program of action.\nIn 1895, Fabra submitted \"Contribuci\u00f3 a la gram\u00e0tica de la llengua catalana\" to the special prize for best grammar at the Jocs Florals of 1895, which opposed his theories and was left vacant. He submitted it again in 1896, when the jury awarded him an honourable mention. The work was not published until 1898 by the Tipografia de L'Aven\u00e7 because Fabra feared a trap if it was published by the Jocs Florals commission. The work is considered a crucial milestone in the grammar codification of modern Catalan.\nFrom Bilbao to Badalona.\nIn 1902, he obtained by competitive examination the chair of chemistry at the School of Engineering in Bilbao. On 5 September 1902, he married Dolors Mestre at the Church of Sant Vicen\u00e7 in Sarri\u00e0, shortly before the academic year began. The couple stayed in Bilbao for ten years, where they had three daughters: Carola (Bilbao, 1904\u20131998), Teresa (Bilbao, 1908\u20131948), and Dolors (Bilbao, 1912\u20131993). Despite being far from Catalonia, during those years he intensified his dedication to philology. In 1912, after holding a chair at the University of Bilbao, he decided to resign from his position and return to Catalonia to devote himself fully to linguistic work, which he had never entirely abandoned, even while living in the Basque Country. The Fabra family did not settle in Barcelona, but in Badalona. One of the main reasons for Fabra\u2019s decision was his middle daughter Teresa\u2019s delicate health; doctors had recommended sea air and frequent sea baths. Badalona, located right on the coast, provided this proximity to the sea along with convenient access to his work at the university and the Institute of Catalan Studies. Furthermore, since his time living in Bego\u00f1a, Fabra preferred living in smaller towns, away from the hustle and bustle of large capital cities. He lived in Badalona until he was forced into exile in 1939 and was an active member of the local community. He became the first director of the Municipal School of Arts and Crafts, where he befriended other teachers and colleagues, such as Pau Rodon i Amig\u00f3. Numerous anecdotes became popular in the city, especially regarding the discussions he used to have with friends and acquaintances during his regular tram commutes between Badalona and Barcelona, a mode of transport he was particularly fond of.\nIn 1906, he participated in the First International Congress of the Catalan Language with the paper \"Q\u00fcestions d'ortografia catalana\" (\"Questions of Catalan Orthography\"). His intellectual prestige was greatly enhanced, to the point that Prat de la Riba invited him to lead a project to standardize the Catalan language. He returned to Catalonia, was appointed a founding member of the Philological Section of the IEC, and was awarded a chair at the Estudis Universitaris Catalans. In 1912, he published a \"Gram\u00e1tica de la lengua catalana\", still in Spanish; a year later, he released the \"Normes ortogr\u00e0fiques\" (1913), a broad orthographic reform issued by the Institute of Catalan Studies. While the reform gained significant support, it also sparked strong opposition. One of the fundamental principles of Fabra\u2019s orthography was respect for both the pronunciation of the dialects and the etymology of words. The \"Diccionari ortogr\u00e0fic\" (1917), published by the Institute of Catalan Studies under his direction, completed the 1913 \"Normes\" and served as the official codification of Catalan orthography.\nAn effective mastery.\nStarting in 1918, with the publication of the \"Catalan Grammar\" (\"Gram\u00e0tica catalana\"), which was practically adopted as official, a new stage began that culminated in 1931 with the publication of the \"General Dictionary of the Catalan Language\" (\"Diccionari general de la llengua catalana\"). That same year, Fabra also released the \"Intermediate Course of Catalan Grammar\" (\"Curs mitj\u00e0 de gram\u00e0tica catalana\"), aimed particularly at schools, which was later reissued in 1968 as \"Introduction to Catalan Grammar\" (\"Introducci\u00f3 a la gram\u00e0tica catalana\").\nThe \"Philological Conversations\" (\"Converses filol\u00f2giques\", 1924) arose from Fabra\u2019s desire to popularize his linguistic reflections. These were relatively short articles originally published in the republican newspaper \"La Publicitat\", addressing and resolving frequent language doubts. The notes served as practical lessons, written in a spontaneous style in response to queries from readers, establishing a direct and close rapport.\nIn 1925, Fabra began working for the Provincial Council of Barcelona (\"Diputaci\u00f3 de Barcelona\"), specifically in the Department of Public Instruction and Fine Arts. In 1927, he was appointed professor of Catalan Prosody at the Institut del Teatre.\nFabra's pedagogical influence in some areas of the Girona region became evident in the early 1930s. His relationship with Ignasi Enric Jord\u00e0 i Caball\u00e9 (1886\u20131977), a priest and professor of Catalan grammar at the Normal School of Girona, led to Fabra giving lectures and offering grammar lessons, either in person or by correspondence.\nOne notable event was the Catalan Grammar Course held in Santa Coloma de Farners in the summer of 1931. The registration leaflet from the organizing committee stated: \u201cGiven the great interest aroused throughout Catalonia in the teaching of Catalan, Santa Coloma cannot be left behind; thus, a Catalan Grammar Course has been organized.\u201d Fortunately, a photograph of the course\u2019s closing session has been preserved, illustrating the event\u2019s success. Among those pictured are Joan Vinyoli and Fabra himself.\nConsolidation of a task.\nIn 1932, Fabra directly obtained, due to his prestige, the chair of Catalan language at the University of Barcelona. With him, the Catalan language officially entered the university for the first time in history. In 1933, Fabra became president of the board of trustees of the newly created Autonomous University of Barcelona. The dictionary of 1932, already mentioned, and popularly known as \"Diccionari Fabra\" or \"el Pompeu\", was conceived as the draft \u2013\u00abcanem\u00e0s\u00bb (\"framework\"), as Fabra himself called it\u2013 of a future official dictionary of the Institute of Catalan Studies. The criteria that governed the making of the dictionary can be summarized as follows:\nLast years.\nIn 1934, he was arrested following the October events as head of the University Board, along with the rest of the members of the body. They were imprisoned on the prison ship Uruguay, where the Catalan Government was also held. He remained imprisoned there for six weeks and one day. On December 8, his case was dismissed and he was released. However, it is noteworthy that during his captivity, he did not abandon his work; with permission from the ship's authorities, he gave some lectures, which were attended by imprisoned politicians and intellectuals and impressed the guards.\nIn 1934, he was one of the signatories of the manifesto \"For the Conservation of the Catalan Race.\" This racist manifesto fits the period when human eugenics was a negotiable topic, but in Nazi Germany at that time, it led to industrial-scale murders of Jews, homosexuals, Roma and Sinti people, and other excesses.\nIn 1937, he published \"Les principals faltes de gram\u00e0tica\" (The Main Grammar Errors), a popular science book about language, edited by Editorial Barcino as part of the Barcino Popular Collection, revised by Fabra and co-written with Jeroni Marv\u00e0 (pseudonym of Artur Martorell and Emili Vall\u00e8s) and Bernat Montsi\u00e0 (pseudonym of C\u00e8sar August Jordana i Mayans).\nIn the winter of 1939, he went to the house in Sant Feliu de Codines, from where he left for exile in France. Although he was not personally persecuted, due to the unstable situation it became increasingly difficult to live in Catalonia, and his status as a Republican and Catalan nationalist made him leave. Before leaving, he met with some colleagues, such as Joan Oliver and Antoni Rovira i Virgili, to decide to continue the work of the Institut d'Estudis Catalans (Institution of Catalan Letters), whether inside or outside Catalonia. Finally, in the early hours of January 24, the Fabra family left their home, Can Viladomat, heading to Girona, then to Bescan\u00f3, Olot, and Agullana, where refugees began arriving a few days later. They crossed the Franco-Spanish border on January 31, 1939, five days after General Francisco Franco's troops entered Barcelona. Afterwards, he lived a long pilgrimage with stays in Paris, Montpellier, Perpignan, and finally Prades, at number 15 Marxants Street.\nOn January 30, 1940, the provincial court of political responsibilities in Barcelona opened a file \u2013 number 2223 \u2013 against the publisher Josep Queralt i Clap\u00e9s and him as suspects of Catalan nationalist affiliation. The Civil Guard accused him of being a \"staunch separatist element,\" a verdict later confirmed by the regional court, which labeled him \"hostile to Spanish matters.\" On May 10, 1941, a sentence was issued. Pompeu Fabra was fined 5,000 pesetas for his Catalanism \"and profound contempt and enmity towards Spain,\" accompanied by \"an absolute, perpetual, and strangely everlasting disqualification from national territory.\" However, Pompeu Fabra's financial situation led Judge Francisco Eyre Varela to declare his insolvency on October 15, 1941. On March 15, 1947, the Audiencia Provincial de Barcelona annulled the sentence. Eleven years later, the liquidation commission of the regulations pardoned him and restored his honor, albeit posthumously.\nBetween September 14, 1945, and January 22, 1948, he held the position of counselor of the Government of Catalonia in exile.\nThe last years of his life were very precarious, living thanks to food and clothes that were sent to him. Despite adverse conditions, he continued working and completed a new \"Catalan Grammar\", published posthumously in 1956 by Joan Coromines, and the \"Philological Conversations\".\nIn 1947, his daughter Teresa was diagnosed with cancer, a fact that deeply upset him; it made him aware of his age and led him to think often about death. So much so that on November 27, 1947, he went to Andorra to make his will. The death of his daughter affected Pompeu Fabra deeply; he was about to turn 80 years old. The words of Joan Alavedra at his funeral reflected the feelings of the community of Catalan exiles who had been preparing a celebration for the philologist\u2019s eightieth birthday, turned into mourning for the family loss. Nevertheless, the tribute for his eightieth birthday was finally held, and the Catalan community in exile gave him a gold medal purchased by popular subscription, with his bust modeled by the sculptor Joan Rebull.\nHe died at his residence in Prades on December 25, 1948.\nCivic life.\nAteneu Barcelon\u00e8s.\nHe was linked throughout his life to the Ateneu Barcelon\u00e8s. He joined as a resident member in 1891, registered in the literature section. He resigned and rejoined several times. He renewed his resident membership at Ateneu Barcelon\u00e8s on June 13, 1913. He was a member until June 1938, a year managed by the Association of Ateneistes of Barcelona, and from this date his membership is lost in the records of the Ateneu Barcelon\u00e8s Historical Archive. \nHe was president of the Ateneu Barcelon\u00e8s between 1924 and 1926. The Ateneu archive preserves two photographs and various letters and writings by Fabra.\nSport.\nFabra considered sport indispensable for the formation of the person and the articulation of the nation, and he was the top leader of Catalan sport during the years of the Republic, until he ceased his activity when the Spanish Civil War broke out. He always regarded sports from the perspective of physical education and leisure, without emphasizing the competitive aspect.\nWhen he returned to Catalonia in 1914, he was one of the founders of the Badalona Lawn-Tennis Club, of which he was president. Later, he was elected president of the Lawn Tennis Association, today known as the Catalan Tennis Federation. In 1933, when the Catalan Union of Sports Federations was created, he became its first president. Additionally, he was part of the tennis section of FC Barcelona. He usually played tennis on the courts belonging to the chemical factory Cros in Badalona, together with his daughter Carola.\nIn an interview, he spoke about the importance of tennis in Catalonia: \"Our land is one of the main centers in the Peninsula. The others are Madrid, the Basque Country, Huelva, and now it is starting to grow in other cities. Tennis in Catalonia has reached a remarkable level of importance and prestige, not only due to the growing number of people who play it, but also because of the excellent quality of many players, which surpasses that of the best from other mentioned places.\"\nWith his presidency of the Catalan Union of Sports Federations, Fabra became the top leader of Catalan sport during the years of the Second Spanish Republic, until he ceased his activity when the Spanish Civil War broke out.\nLegacy.\nEvery year, his tomb in the Cuix\u00e0 monastery near Prada is visited by thousands of Catalans.\nThe Universitat Pompeu Fabra in Barcelona bears his name.\nThe metro station in Barcelona Badalona Pompeu Fabra (Barcelona Metro) bears Pompeu Fabra's name and legacy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63875", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63875", "title": "Near-earth object", "text": ""}
{"id": "63876", "revid": "39241006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63876", "title": "History of the United States", "text": "The land which became the United States was inhabited by Native Americans for tens of thousands of years; their descendants include but may not be limited to 574 federally recognized tribes. The history of the present-day United States began in 1607 with the establishment of Jamestown in modern-day Virginia by settlers who arrived from the Kingdom of England, and the landing of the \"Mayflower\" by English pilgrims to Plymouth in 1620. In the late 15th century, European colonization began and largely decimated Indigenous societies through wars and epidemics. By the 1760s, the Thirteen Colonies, then part of British America and the Kingdom of Great Britain, were established. The Southern Colonies built an agricultural system on slave labor and enslaving millions from Africa. After the British victory over the Kingdom of France in the French and Indian Wars, Parliament imposed a series of taxes and issued the Intolerable Acts on the colonies in 1773, which were designed to end self-governance. Tensions between the colonies and British authorities subsequently intensified, leading to the Revolutionary War, which commenced with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. In June 1775, the Second Continental Congress established the Continental Army and unanimously selected George Washington as its commander-in-chief. The following year, on July 4, 1776, the Second Continental Congress unanimously declared its independence, issuing the Declaration of Independence. On September 3, 1783, in the Treaty of Paris, the British acknowledged the independence and sovereignty of the Thirteen Colonies, leading to the establishment of the United States. On September 17, 1787, the U.S. Constitution was signed by a majority of delegates, and was later ratified by the Thirteen Colonies, leading to the first modern U.S. government.\nIn the 1788-89 presidential election, Washington was elected the nation's first U.S. president. Along with his Treasury Secretary, Alexander Hamilton, Washington sought to create a relatively stronger central government than that favored by other founders, including Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. On March 4, 1789, the new nation debated, adopted, and ratified the U.S. Constitution, which is now the oldest and longest-standing written and codified national constitution in the world. In 1791, a Bill of Rights was added to guarantee inalienable rights. In 1803, Jefferson, then serving as the nation's third president, negotiated the Louisiana Purchase, which doubled the size of the country. Encouraged by available, inexpensive land, and the notion of manifest destiny, the country underwent westward expansion in a project of settler colonialism marked by a series of conflicts with the continent's indigenous inhabitants. The most notable advocate of manifest destiny was President James K. Polk, who annexed Texas in 1845, and declared war on Mexico the next year. An overwhelming U.S. victory in the Mexican-American War led to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, where the U.S. acquired much of the American Southwest from Mexico. Whether or not slavery should be legal in the expanded territories was an issue of national contention, and led to increasing tensions over slavery.\nFollowing the election of Abraham Lincoln as the nation's 16th president in the 1860 presidential election, southern states seceded and formed the pro-slavery Confederate States of America. In April 1861, at the Battle of Fort Sumter, Confederates launched the Civil War. However, the Union's victory at the Battle of Gettysburg, the deadliest battle in American military history with over 50,000 casualties, proved a turning point in the war, leading to the Union's victory in 1865, which preserved the nation. On April 15, 1865, Lincoln was assassinated. The Confederates' defeat led to the abolition of slavery. In the subsequent Reconstruction era from 1865 to 1877, the national government gained explicit duty to protect individual rights. In 1877, white southern Democrats regained political power in the South, often using paramilitary suppression of voting and Jim Crow laws to maintain white supremacy. During the Gilded Age from the late 19th century to the early 20th century, the United States emerged as the world's leading industrial power, largely due to entrepreneurship, industrialization, and the arrival of millions of immigrant workers. Dissatisfaction with corruption, inefficiency, and traditional politics stimulated the Progressive movement, leading to reforms, including to the federal income tax, direct election of U.S. Senators, citizenship for many Indigenous people, alcohol prohibition, and women's suffrage.\nInitially neutral during World War I, the United States declared war on Germany in 1917, joining the successful Allies. After the prosperous Roaring Twenties, the Wall Street crash of 1929 marked the onset of a decade-long global Great Depression. President Franklin D. Roosevelt launched New Deal programs, including unemployment relief and Social Security. Following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, the United States entered World War II, helping defeat Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in the European theater and, in the Pacific War, defeating Imperial Japan after using nuclear weapons on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. The war led to the U.S. occupation of Japan and the Allied-occupied Germany.\nFollowing the end of World War II, the Cold War commenced with the United States and the Soviet Union emerging as superpower rivals; the two countries largely confronted each other indirectly in the arms race, the Space Race, propaganda campaigns, and proxy wars, which included the Korean War and the Vietnam War. In the 1960s, due largely to the civil rights movement, social reforms enforced African Americans' constitutional rights of voting and freedom of movement. In 1991, the United States led a coalition and invaded Iraq during the Gulf War. Later in the year, the Cold War ended with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, leaving the United States as the world's sole superpower.\nIn the post-Cold War era, the United States has been drawn into conflicts in the Middle East, especially following the September 11 attacks, with the start of the war on terror. In the 21st century, the country was negatively impacted by the Great Recession of 2007 to 2009 and the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 to 2023. Recently, the U.S. withdrew from the war in Afghanistan, intervened in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and became militarily involved in the Middle Eastern crisis, which included the Red Sea crisis, a military conflict between the U.S., and the Houthi movement in Yemen, and the American bombing of Iran during the Iran\u2013Israel war.\nIndigenous inhabitants.\nIt is not definitively known how or when Native Americans first settled the Americas. The prevailing theory proposes that people from Eurasia followed game across Beringia, a land bridge that connected Siberia to present-day Alaska during the Ice Age, and then spread southward, perhaps as early as 30,000 years ago. These early inhabitants, called Paleo-Indians, soon diversified into hundreds of culturally distinct groups.\nPaleo-Indians.\nBy 10,000 BCE, humans had already been well-established throughout North America. Originally, Paleo-Indians hunted Ice Age megafauna like mammoths, but as they began to go extinct, people turned instead to bison as a food source, and later foraging for berries and seeds. Paleo-Indians in central Mexico were the first in the Americas to farm, around 8,000 BCE. Eventually, the knowledge began to spread northward. By 3,000 BCE, corn was being grown in the valleys of Arizona and New Mexico, followed by primitive irrigation systems and, by 300 BCE, early villages of the Hohokam.\nOne of the earlier cultures in the present-day United States was the Clovis culture (9,100 to 8,850 BCE), who are primarily identified by the use of fluted spear points called the Clovis point. The Folsom culture was similar, but is marked by the use of the Folsom point.\nA later migration around 8,000 BCE included Na-Dene-speaking peoples, who reached the Pacific Northwest by 5,000 BCE. From there, they migrated along the Pacific Coast and into the interior. Another group, the Oshara tradition people, who lived from 5,500 BCE to 600 CE, were part of the Archaic Southwest.\nMound builders and pueblos.\nThe Adena began constructing large earthwork mounds around 600 BCE. They are the earliest known people to have been Mound Builders, although there are mounds in the United States that predate this culture. The Adenans were absorbed into the Hopewell tradition, a powerful people who traded tools and goods across a wide territory. They continued the Adena tradition of mound-building and pioneered a trading system called the Hopewell Exchange System, which at its greatest extent ran from the present-day Southeast up to the Canadian side of Lake Ontario. By 500 CE, the Hopewellians had been absorbed into the larger Mississippian culture.\nThe Mississippians were a broad group of tribes. Their most important city was Cahokia, near modern-day St. Louis, Missouri. At its peak in the 12th century, the city had an estimated population of 20,000, larger than the population of London at the time. The entire city was centered around the Monks Mound that stood tall. Cahokia, like many other cities and villages of the time, depended on hunting, foraging, trading, and agriculture, and developed a class system with slaves and human sacrifice that was influenced by societies to the south, like the Mayans.\nIn the Southwest, the Anasazi began constructing stone and adobe pueblos around 900 BCE. These apartment-like structures were often built into cliff faces, as seen in the Cliff Palace at Mesa Verde. Some grew to be the size of cities, with Pueblo Bonito along the Chaco River in New Mexico once consisting of 800 rooms.\nNorthwest and northeast.\nThe Indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest were likely the most affluent Native Americans. Many distinct cultural groups and political entities developed there, but they all shared certain beliefs, traditions, and practices, such as the centrality of salmon as a resource and spiritual symbol. Permanent villages began to develop in this region as early as 1,000\u00a0BCE, and these communities celebrated by the gift-giving feast of the potlatch.\nIn present-day upstate New York, the Iroquois formed a confederacy of tribal peoples in the mid-15th century, consisting of the Oneida, Mohawk, Onondaga, Cayuga, and Seneca. Each tribe was represented in a group of 50 sachem chiefs. It has been suggested that their culture contributed to political thinking during the development of the United States government. The Iroquois were powerful, waging war with many neighboring tribes, and later, Europeans. As their territory expanded, smaller tribes were forced further west, including the Osage, Kaw, Ponca, and Omaha peoples.\nNative Hawaiians.\nThe exact date for the settling of Hawaii is disputed but the first settlement most likely took place between 940 and 1130 CE. Around 1200 CE, Tahitian explorers found and began settling the area. This marked the rise of the Hawaiian civilization, which would be largely separated from the rest of the world until the arrival of the British 600 years later. Europeans under the British explorer James Cook arrived in the Hawaiian Islands in 1778, and within five years of contact, European military technology would help Kamehameha I conquer most of the island group, and eventually unify the islands for the first time, establishing the Hawaiian Kingdom.\nPuerto Rico.\nThe island of Puerto Rico has been settled for at least 4,000 years. Starting with the Ortoiroid culture, successive generations of native migrations arrived replacing or absorbing local populations. By the year 1000 Arawak people had arrived from South America via the Lesser Antilles; these settlers would become the Ta\u00edno encountered by the Spanish in 1493. Upon European contact a native population between 30,000 and 60,000 was likely, led by a single chief called a Cacique. Colonization resulted in the decimation of the local inhabitants due to the harsh Encomienda system and epidemics caused by Old World diseases. Puerto Rico would remain a part of Spain until American annexation in 1898.\nEuropean colonization (1075\u20131754).\nNorse exploration.\nThe earliest recorded European mention of America is in a treatise by the medieval chronicler Adam of Bremen, circa 1075, where it is referred to as Vinland. It is also extensively referred to in the Norse Vinland sagas. The strongest archaeological evidence of the existence of Norse settlements in America is located in Canada; there is significant scholarly debate as to whether Norse explorers also made landfall in New England.\nEarly settlements.\nEuropeans brought horses, cattle, and hogs to the Americas and took back maize, turkeys, tomatoes, potatoes, tobacco, beans, and squash to Europe. Many explorers and early settlers died after being exposed to new diseases in the Americas. However, the effects of new Eurasian diseases carried by the colonists, especially smallpox and measles, were much worse for the Native Americans, as they had no immunity to them. They suffered epidemics and died in very large numbers, usually before large-scale European settlement began. Their societies were disrupted by the scale of deaths.\nSpanish contact.\nSpanish explorers were the first Europeans, after the Norse, to reach the present-day United States, after the voyages of Christopher Columbus (beginning in 1492) established possessions in the Caribbean, including the modern-day U.S. territories of Puerto Rico, and parts of the U.S. Virgin Islands. Juan Ponce de Le\u00f3n landed in Florida in 1513. Spanish expeditions quickly reached the Appalachian Mountains, the Mississippi River, the Grand Canyon, and the Great Plains.\nIn 1539, Hernando de Soto extensively explored the Southeast, and a year later Francisco Coronado explored from Arizona to central Kansas in search of gold. Escaped horses from Coronado's party spread over the Great Plains, and the Plains Indians mastered horsemanship within a few generations. Small Spanish settlements eventually grew to become important cities, such as San Antonio, Albuquerque, Tucson, Los Angeles, and San Francisco.\nDutch mid-Atlantic.\nThe Dutch East India Company sent explorer Henry Hudson to search for a Northwest Passage to Asia in 1609. New Netherland was established in 1621 by the company to capitalize on the North American fur trade. Growth was slow at first due to mismanagement by the Dutch and Native American conflicts. After the Dutch purchased the island of Manhattan from the Native Americans, the land was named New Amsterdam and became the capital of New Netherland. The town rapidly expanded and in the mid-1600s it became an important trading center. Despite being Calvinists and building the Reformed Church in America, the Dutch were tolerant of other religions and cultures and traded with the Iroquois to the north.\nThe colony served as a barrier to British expansion from New England, and as a result a series of wars were fought. The colony was taken over by Britain as New York in 1664 and its capital was renamed New York City.\nSwedish settlement.\nIn the early years of the Swedish Empire, Swedish, Dutch, and German stockholders formed the New Sweden Company to trade furs and tobacco in North America. The company's first expedition was led by Peter Minuit, who had been governor of New Netherland from 1626 to 1631, and landed in Delaware Bay in March 1638. The settlers founded Fort Christina at the site of modern-day Wilmington, Delaware, and made treaties with Indigenous peoples for land ownership on both sides of the Delaware River.\nOver the following seventeen years, 12 more expeditions brought settlers from the Swedish Empire to New Sweden. The colony established 19 permanent settlements along with many farms, extending into modern-day Maryland, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey. It was incorporated into New Netherland in 1655 after a Dutch invasion from the neighboring New Netherland colony during the Second Northern War.\nFrench.\nGiovanni da Verrazzano landed in North Carolina in 1524, and was the first European to sail into New York Harbor and Narragansett Bay. In the 1540s, French Huguenots settled at Fort Caroline near present-day Jacksonville, Florida. In 1565, Spanish forces led by Pedro Men\u00e9ndez destroyed the settlement and established the first Spanish settlement in what would become the United States \u2014 St. Augustine.\nMost French lived in Quebec and Acadia (modern Canada), but far-reaching trade relationships with Native Americans spread their influence. French colonists in small villages along the Mississippi and Illinois rivers lived in farming communities that served as a grain source for Gulf Coast settlements. The French established plantations in Louisiana along with settling New Orleans, Mobile, and Biloxi.\nBritish colonies.\nThe English, drawn in by Francis Drake's raids on Spanish treasure ships leaving the New World, settled the strip of land along the east coast in the 1600s. The early British colonies were established by private groups seeking profit, and were marked by starvation, disease, and Native American attacks. Many immigrants were people seeking religious freedom or escaping political oppression, peasants displaced by the Industrial Revolution, or those simply seeking adventure and opportunity. Between the late 1610s and the Revolution, the British shipped an estimated 50,000 to 120,000 convicts to their American colonies.\nIn some areas, Native Americans taught colonists how to grow local crops. In others, they attacked the settlers. Virgin forests provided an ample supply of building material and firewood. Natural inlets and harbors lined the coast, providing easy ports for essential trade with Europe. Settlements remained close to the coast due to this as well as Native American resistance and the Appalachian Mountains in the interior.\nFirst settlement in Jamestown.\nThe first successful English colony, Jamestown, was established by the Virginia Company in 1607 on the James River in Virginia. The colonists were preoccupied with the search for gold and were ill-equipped for life in the New World. Captain John Smith held the fledgling Jamestown together in the first year, and the colony descended into anarchy and nearly failed when he returned to England two years later. John Rolfe began experimenting with tobacco from the West Indies in 1612, and by 1614 the first shipment arrived in London. It became Virginia's chief source of revenue within a decade.\nIn 1624, after years of disease and Indian attacks, including the Powhatan attack of 1622, King James I revoked the Virginia Company's charter and made Virginia a royal colony.\nNew England Colonies.\nNew England was initially settled primarily by Puritans fleeing religious persecution. The Pilgrims sailed for Virginia on the Mayflower in 1620, but were knocked off course by a storm and landed at Plymouth, where they agreed to a social contract of rules in the Mayflower Compact. About half died in the first winter. Like Jamestown, Plymouth suffered from disease and starvation, but local Wampanoag Indians taught the colonists how to farm maize.\nPlymouth was followed by the Puritans and Massachusetts Bay Colony in 1630. They maintained a charter for self-government separate from England, and elected founder John Winthrop as governor. Roger Williams opposed Winthrop's treatment of Native Americans and religious intolerance, and established the colony of Providence Plantations, later Rhode Island, on the basis of freedom of religion. Other colonists established settlements in the Connecticut River Valley, and on the coasts of present-day New Hampshire and Maine. Native American attacks continued, with the most significant occurring in the 1637 Pequot War and the 1675 King Philip's War.\nNew England became a center of commerce and industry due to the poor, mountainous soil making agriculture difficult. Rivers were harnessed to power grain mills and sawmills, and the numerous harbors facilitated trade. Tight-knit villages developed around these industrial centers, and Boston became one of America's most important ports.\nMiddle Colonies.\nIn the 1660s, the Middle Colonies of New York, New Jersey, and Delaware were established in the former Dutch New Netherland, and were characterized by a large degree of ethnic and religious diversity. At the same time, the Iroquois of New York, strengthened by years of fur trading with Europeans, formed the powerful Iroquois Confederacy.\nThe last colony in this region was Pennsylvania, established in 1681 by William Penn as a home for religious dissenters, including Quakers, Methodists, and the Amish. The capital of the colony, Philadelphia, became a dominant commercial center in a few short years. While Quakers populated the city, German immigrants began to flood into the Pennsylvanian hills and forests, while the Scots-Irish pushed into the far western frontier.\nSouthern Colonies.\nThe overwhelmingly rural Southern Colonies contrasted sharply with the New England and Middle Colonies. After Virginia, the second British colony south of New England was Maryland, established as a Catholic haven in 1632. The economy of these two colonies was built entirely on yeoman farmers and planters. The planters established themselves in the Tidewater region of Virginia, establishing massive plantations with slave labor.\nIn 1670, the Province of Carolina was established, and Charleston became the region's great trading port. While Virginia's economy was also based on tobacco, Carolina was more diversified, exporting rice, indigo, and lumber as well. In 1712, it was divided in two, creating North and South Carolina. The Georgia Colony was established by James Oglethorpe in 1732 as a border to Spanish Florida and a reform colony for former prisoners and the poor.\nReligion.\nReligiosity expanded greatly after the First Great Awakening, a religious revival in the 1740s led by preachers such as Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield. American Evangelicals affected by the Awakening added a new emphasis on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that implanted new believers with an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and carried the newly created evangelicalism into the early republic, setting the stage for the Second Great Awakening in the late 1790s. In the early stages, evangelicals in the South, such as Methodists and Baptists, preached for religious freedom and abolition of slavery.\nGovernment.\nEach of the American colonies had a slightly different governmental structure. Typically, a colony was ruled by a governor appointed from London who controlled the executive administration and relied upon a locally elected legislature to vote on taxes and make laws. By the 18th century, the American colonies were growing very rapidly as a result of low death rates along with ample supplies of land and food. The colonies were richer than most parts of Britain, and attracted a steady flow of immigrants, especially teenagers who arrived as indentured servants.\nServitude and slavery.\nOver half of all European immigrants to Colonial America arrived as indentured servants. Typically, people would sign a contract agreeing to a set term of labor, usually four to seven years, and in return would receive transport to America and a piece of land at the end of their servitude. In some cases, ships' captains received rewards for the delivery of poor migrants, and so extravagant promises and kidnapping were common.\nThe first African slaves arrived in 1619. Initially regarded as indentured servants who could buy their freedom, the institution of slavery began to harden and the involuntary servitude became lifelong as the demand for labor on tobacco and rice plantations grew in the 1660s. Slavery became identified with brown skin color, and the children of slave women were born slaves, known as \"partus sequitur ventrem\". By the 1770s, African slaves comprised a fifth of the American population.\nThe question of independence from Britain did not arise as long as the colonies needed British military support against the French and Spanish powers. Those threats were gone by 1765. However, London continued to regard the American colonies as existing for the benefit of the mother country in a policy known as mercantilism.\nColonial America was defined by a severe labor shortage that used forms of unfree labor, such as slavery and indentured servitude. The British colonies were also marked by a policy of avoiding strict enforcement of parliamentary laws, known as salutary neglect. This permitted the development of an American spirit distinct from that of its European founders.\nRevolutionary period (1754\u20131793).\nLead-up to the Revolution.\nThe French and Indian War (1754\u20131763), part of the larger Seven Years' War, was a watershed event in the political development of the colonies. The influence of the French and Native Americans, the main rivals of the British Crown in the colonies and Canada, was significantly reduced and the territory of the Thirteen Colonies expanded into New France in Canada and Louisiana. The war effort also resulted in greater political integration of the colonies, as reflected in the Albany Congress and symbolized by Benjamin Franklin's call for the colonies to \"Join, or Die.\"\nKing George III issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, to organize the new North American empire and protect the Native Americans from colonial expansion west of the Appalachian Mountains. Strains developed in the relations between the colonists and the Crown. The British Parliament passed the Stamp Act of 1765, imposing a tax on the colonies without going through the colonial legislatures. Crying \"No taxation without representation\", the colonists refused to pay. On March 5, 1770, in an event that would fuel anti-British sentiment in Boston, British troops opened fire on protesters in Boston, killing five people in the Boston Massacre.\nOn December 16, 1773, the Boston Tea Party was a direct action to protest the new tax on tea. Parliament responded the next year with the Intolerable Acts, stripping Massachusetts of its historic right of self-government and putting it under military rule, which sparked outrage and resistance in all thirteen colonies. Patriot leaders from every colony convened the First Continental Congress to coordinate their resistance. The Congress called for a boycott of British trade, published a list of rights and grievances, and petitioned the king to rectify those grievances. This appeal had no effect.\nAmerican Revolution.\nThe Second Continental Congress voted to declare independence on July 2, 1776. The Declaration of Independence presented arguments in favor of the rights of citizens, stating that all men are created equal, supporting the rights of Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness, and demanding the consent of the governed. The Founding Fathers were guided by the ideology of republicanism, rejecting the monarchism of Great Britain. The Declaration of Independence was signed by members of the Congress on July 4. This date has since been commemorated as Independence Day.\nThe American Revolutionary War began with the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. George Washington was appointed general of the Continental Army. Washington's crossing of the Delaware River began a series of victories that expelled British forces from New Jersey. The British began the Saratoga campaign in 1777 to capture Albany, New York, as a choke point. After American victory at Saratoga, France, the Netherlands, and Spain began providing support to the Continental Army. Britain responded to defeat in the northern theater by advancing in the southern theater, beginning with the Capture of Savannah in 1778. American forces reclaimed the south in 1781, and the British Army was defeated in the Siege of Yorktown on October 19, 1781.\nKing George III formally ordered the end of hostilities on December 5, 1782, recognizing American independence. The Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783, and was ratified by the Congress of the Confederation on January 14, 1784.\nConfederation period.\nThe Articles of Confederation were ratified as the governing law of the United States, written to limit the powers of the central government in favor of states. This caused economic decline, as the government was unable to pass economic legislation, levy taxes, and pay its debts. Nationalists worried that the confederate nature of the union was too fragile to withstand an armed conflict with any adversarial states, or even internal revolts such as Shays' Rebellion of 1786 in Massachusetts.\nIn the 1780s the western regions were ceded by the states to Congress and became territories. With the migration of settlers to the Northwest, soon they became states. The American Indian Wars continued in the 1780s as settlers moved west. The Northwestern Confederacy and American settlers began fighting the Northwest Indian War in the late 1780s; the Northwestern Confederacy received British support, but the settlers received little assistance from the American government.\nNationalists \u2013 most of them war veterans \u2013 organized in every state and convinced Congress to call the Philadelphia Convention in 1787. The delegates from every state wrote a new Constitution that created a federal government with a strong president and powers of taxation. The new government reflected the prevailing republican ideals of guarantees of individual liberty and of constraining the power of government through separation of powers. The constitution was ratified by a sufficient number of states in 1788 to begin forming a federal government.\nEarly republic (1793\u20131830).\nThe United States Electoral College chose George Washington as the first President in 1789. The national capital moved from New York to Philadelphia in 1790 and finally, in 1800, to Washington, D.C.\nThe major accomplishment of the Washington Administration was the creation of a strong national government that was recognized by all Americans. Washington's government, following the vigorous leadership of Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton, assumed the debts of the states, created the Bank of the United States, and set up a uniform system of tariffs and other taxes to pay off the debt and provide a financial infrastructure. Hamilton created the Federalist Party to support his programs. In 1791, to assuage the Anti-Federalists who feared a too-powerful central government, the Congress adopted the United States Bill of Rights by amending it to the U.S. Constitution, to guarantee individual liberties such as freedom of speech and religious practice.\nThomas Jefferson and James Madison formed an opposition Republican Party (usually called the Democratic-Republican Party). In 1794, Hamilton and Washington presented the country with the Jay Treaty which re-established good relations with Britain. The Jeffersonians vehemently protested, and the voters aligned behind one party or the other, thus setting up the First Party System. Although the treaty passed, politics became intensely heated. Serious challenges to the new federal government included the Northwest Indian War, the ongoing Cherokee\u2013American wars, and the 1794 Whiskey Rebellion, in which western settlers protested against a federal tax on liquor.\nWashington refused to serve more than two terms, setting a precedent for future administrations. John Adams of the Federalist Party defeated Jefferson in the 1796 election. War was looming with France, and the Federalists used the opportunity to try silencing the Republicans with the Alien and Sedition Acts; they also built up a large army with Hamilton at the head, in preparation for a French invasion. However, the Federalists became divided after Adams sent a successful peace mission to France that ended the Quasi-War of 1798.\nIncreasing demand for slave labor.\nDuring the first two decades after the Revolutionary War, there were dramatic changes in the status of slavery among the states and an increase in the number of free blacks. Inspired by revolutionary ideals of equality, and influenced by their reduced economic reliance on the use of slaves, the Northern states abolished slavery.\nStates of the Upper South made manumission easier, resulting in an increase in the proportion of free blacks in the Upper South (as a percentage of the total non-white population) from less than one percent in 1792 to more than ten percent by 1810. By that date, a total of 13.5\u00a0percent of all blacks in the United States were free. In 1807, with four million slaves already in the United States, Congress severed U.S. involvement with the Atlantic slave trade.\nSecond Great Awakening.\nThe Second Great Awakening was a Protestant revival movement that affected virtually all of society during the early 19th century and led to rapid church growth. It began around 1790 and was gaining momentum by 1800; its membership rose rapidly after 1820 among Baptist and Methodist congregations, whose preachers led the movement. It was past its peak by the 1840s.\nThe movement enrolled millions of new members in existing evangelical denominations and led to the formation of new denominations. The Second Great Awakening stimulated the establishment of many reform movements, including abolitionism and temperance.\nLouisiana and Jeffersonian republicanism.\nThomas Jefferson heavily defeated John Adams in the 1800 presidential election. Jefferson's major achievement as president was the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, which provided U.S. settlers with vast potential for expansion west of the Mississippi River. He supported expeditions to explore and map the new domain, most notably the Lewis and Clark Expedition.\nJefferson believed deeply in republicanism and advocated that it should be based on the independent yeoman farmer and planter; he distrusted cities, factories and banks. He also distrusted the federal government and judges, and he tried to weaken the judiciary. Although the Constitution specified a Supreme Court, its functions were vague until John Marshall, the Chief Justice of the United States (1801\u200d\u2013\u200d1835), defined them \u2013 especially the power to overturn acts of Congress or states that violated the Constitution, first enunciated in 1803 in the \"Marbury v. Madison\" case.\nWar of 1812.\nAmericans were increasingly angered by the British violation of American ships' neutral rights to harm France, the coercion of 10,000 American sailors needed by the Royal Navy to fight Napoleon, and British support for hostile Indians attacking American settlers in the American Midwest \u2013 with the goal of creating a pro-British Indian barrier state to block American expansion westward. Britain may also have wished to annex all or part of British North America, although this is still heavily debated. Despite strong opposition from the Northeast, especially from Federalists who did not want to disrupt trade with Britain, Congress declared war on the United Kingdom on June 18, 1812.\nBoth sides tried to invade the other and were repelled. The American militia proved ineffective because the soldiers were reluctant to leave home, and efforts to invade Canada failed repeatedly. The British blockade ruined American commerce, bankrupted the Treasury, and further angered New Englanders who began smuggling supplies to Britain. Under General William Henry Harrison, the Americans eventually gained naval control of Lake Erie and defeated the Indians under Tecumseh in Canada, while Andrew Jackson ended the Indian threat in the Southeast. The Indian threat to expansion into the Midwest was permanently ended. The British invaded and occupied much of Maine.\nIn 1814, the British raided and burned Washington but were pushed back at Baltimore, where \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" was written to celebrate the American success. In upstate New York, a major British invasion of New York State was repelled at the Battle of Plattsburgh, and Andrew Jackson decisively defeated a major British invasion at the Battle of New Orleans in early 1815. The Americans claimed victory on February 18, as the news broke of Jackson's victory of New Orleans and the peace treaty that left the pre-war boundaries in place. This \"second war of independence\" contributed to an emerging American identity that cemented national pride over state pride. The War of 1812 also dispelled America's negative perception of a standing army as opposed to ill-equipped and poorly trained militias.\nEra of Good Feelings.\nNational euphoria after the victory at New Orleans ruined the prestige of the Federalists, and they no longer played a significant role as a political party. President Madison and most of the Republicans realized they had been foolish to allow the First Bank of the United States to close down, for its absence had greatly hindered the financing of the war. With the assistance of foreign bankers, they chartered the Second Bank of the United States in 1816.\nThe Republicans also imposed tariffs designed to protect the infant industries that had been created when Britain was blockading the U.S. With the collapse of the Federalists as a party, the adoption of many Federalist principles by the Republicans, and the systematic policy of President James Monroe in his two terms (1817\u200d\u2013\u200d1825) to downplay partisanship, society entered an Era of Good Feelings and closed out the First Party System.\nExpressed in 1823, the Monroe Doctrine proclaimed the idealistic standpoint of the United States that European powers should no longer colonize or interfere in the Americas. This was a defining moment in U.S. foreign policy.\nIn 1832, President Andrew Jackson ran for a second term under the slogan \"Jackson and no bank\" and did not renew the Second Bank's charter, dissolving the bank in 1836. He was convinced that central banking was used by the elite to take advantage of the average American, and he opted instead to implement publicly owned banks in various U.S. states, popularly known as \"pet banks\".\nExpansion and reform (1830\u20131848).\nSecond Party System.\nThe former Jeffersonian (Democratic-Republican) party split into factions over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe, and the party faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles, led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the Democratic Party. As Norton explains the transformation in 1828:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Jacksonians believed the people's will had finally prevailed. Through a lavishly financed coalition of state parties, political leaders, and newspaper editors, a popular movement had elected the president. The Democrats became the nation's first well-organized national party, and tight party organization became the hallmark of nineteenth-century American politics.Opposing factions led by Henry Clay helped form the Whig Party. The Democratic Party had a small but decisive advantage over the Whigs until the 1850s, when the Whigs fell apart over the issue of slavery.\nWestward expansion and manifest destiny.\nThe country grew rapidly in population and area, as pioneers pushed the frontier of settlement west. Native American tribes in some places resisted militarily, but they were overwhelmed by settlers and the army, and after 1830, were relocated to reservations in the west. That year, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act, which authorized the president to negotiate treaties that exchanged Native American tribal lands in the eastern states for lands west of the Mississippi River. Its goal was primarily to remove Native Americans, including the Five Civilized Tribes, from desirable lands in what's now Oklahoma. Thousands of deaths resulted from the relocations, as seen in the Cherokee Trail of Tears, most infamously of which resulted in approximately 4,000 of the 16,000 relocated Cherokee dying along the way in 1838. Many of the Seminole Indians in Florida refused to move west, and fought the Army for years in the Seminole Wars.\nManifest destiny was the belief that American settlers were destined to expand across the continent. Manifest destiny was rejected by modernizers, especially the Whigs like Henry Clay and Abraham Lincoln who wanted to build cities and factories \u2013 not more farms. Democrats strongly favored expansion, and won the key election of 1844. After a bitter debate in Congress, the Republic of Texas was annexed in 1845, leading to the Mexican\u2013American War. The U.S. Army invaded Mexico at several points, captured Mexico City, and won the war decisively.\nThe Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo ended the war in 1848. In the treaty, the U.S. acquired much of the American Southwest, including California and New Mexico, with Mexico being paid $15 million in compensation. Many Democrats wanted to annex all of Mexico, but that idea was rejected by White Southerners, who argued that incorporating millions of Mexican people, mainly of mixed race, would undermine the U.S. as an exclusively white republic. Instead, the U.S. took Texas and the lightly settled northern parts (California and New Mexico). Simultaneously, gold was discovered in California in 1848, and led to over 100,000 white settlers flocking to California in 1849, the California Gold Rush miners, known as '49ers. California grew rapidly, and by 1850,the non-native population went from 1,000 to over 125,000 people by 1850. However, many Indians were devastated by the rapid influx of the rush of white settlers in the 1850s, and to clear the state for white settlement, the U.S. government began a policy of forcibly removing and exterminating the natives. The early 1830s to 1869, the Oregon Trail and its offshoots were used by over 300,000 settlers headed to California, Oregon, and other points in the far west. Wagon trains took five or six months on foot. \nA peaceful compromise with Britain gave the U.S. ownership of the Oregon Country, which was renamed the Oregon Territory. The demand for guano, prized as an agricultural fertilizer, led the U.S. to pass the Guano Islands Act in 1856, which enabled U.S. citizens to take possession, in the name of the country, of unclaimed islands containing guano deposits. Under the act, the U.S. annexed nearly 100 islands in the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea. By 1903, 66 of these islands were recognized as U.S. territories.\nThe women's suffrage movement began with the Seneca Falls Convention in 1848. It was organized by women's rights advocates and abolitionists, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott. The convention began on July 19, 1848 in the town of Seneca Falls, New York, with 300 people in attendance, and concluded the next day with signing the Declaration of Sentiments demanding equal rights for women, including the right to vote. The women's rights campaign during first-wave feminism was led by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucy Stone and Susan B. Anthony, among others. Stone and Paulina Wright Davis organized the prominent and influential National Women's Rights Convention in 1850.\nCivil War and Reconstruction (1848\u20131877).\nDivisions between North and South.\nThe central issue after 1848 was the expansion of slavery, with the anti-slavery elements in the North pitted against the pro-slavery elements in the South. By 1860, there were four million slaves in the South. A small number of Northerners called abolitionists sought the immediate abolition of slavery, while much larger numbers in the North were opposed to the expansion of slavery and sought to put it on the path to extinction. \nThere was resistance to slavery by both peaceful and violent means. Slave rebellions by Gabriel Prosser (1800), Denmark Vesey (1822) and Nat Turner (1831), caused fear in the white South, where stricter oversight of slaves was imposed, and the rights of free Black people were reduced. Southern white Democrats insisted that slavery was of economic, social, and cultural benefit, even to the slaves themselves. Supporters of slavery argued that a sudden end to the slave economy would have a fatal economic impact in the South, causing widespread unemployment and chaos; slave labor was the foundation of their economy. \nThe plantations were highly profitable because of the heavy European demand for raw cotton. Northern cities and regional industries were tied economically to slavery through banking, shipping, and manufacturing, including their textile mills. In addition, Southern states benefited from slavery by having an increased apportionment in Congress due to the partial counting of slaves in their populations.\nThe issue of slavery in the new territories was seemingly settled by the Compromise of 1850, which included the admission of California as a free state in exchange for no federal restrictions on slavery placed on Utah or New Mexico. A point of contention was the Fugitive Slave Act, requiring free states to cooperate with slave owners when attempting to capture escaped slaves who defected via the Underground Railroad, while punishing those who aided runaway slaves. The act garnered outrage in the North, as they were forced to play a role in Southern slavery.\nThe Missouri Compromise was repealed in 1854 with the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act; promoted by Stephen Douglas in the name of \"popular sovereignty\" and democracy, this act of Congress permitted voters to decide on the legality of slavery in each territory, and repealed the Missouri Compromise of 1820, which explicitly banned slavery in this territory. Anti-slavery forces rose in anger and alarm, forming the new Republican Party to oppose the expansion of slavery out west. Pro- and anti- slavery settlers rushed to Kansas to vote for or against slavery, resulting in years of bloodshed and violence called Bleeding Kansas. By the late 1850s, the young Republican Party dominated nearly all Northern states, and hence the electoral colleges. The party insisted that slavery would never be allowed to expand and would therefore slowly die out.\nThe Supreme Court's 1857 decision in \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\" ruled that the Compromise was unconstitutional, and that free Black people were not U.S. citizens, and therefore unable to sue for their freedom. The decision enraged Northerners, and the Republicans worried that the decision could be used to expand slavery. The decision exacerbated tensions over slavery.\nCivil War.\nAfter Republican Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 election, seven Southern states seceded from the Union and formed the Confederate States of America (Confederacy) on February 8, 1861 in order to persevere the instituton of slavery. The Civil War began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces attacked a U.S. military installation at Fort Sumter in South Carolina. In response, Lincoln called on the states to send militiamen to recapture forts, protect Washington D.C., and \"preserve the Union\". Lincoln's call led to four more states seceding and joining the Confederacy. A few of the (northernmost) slave states did not secede and became known as the border states; these were Delaware, Maryland, Kentucky, and Missouri. During the war, the northwestern portion of Virginia seceded from the Confederacy, becoming the new Union state of West Virginia.\nThe two armies' first major battle was the First Battle of Bull Run, which the Confederate victory proved to both sides that the war would be much longer than anticipated. In the western theater, the Union Army was relatively successful, with major battles such as Perryville and Shiloh, along with Union Navy gunboat dominance of navigable rivers producing strategic Union victories and destroying major Confederate operations. Warfare in the eastern theater began poorly for the Union. U.S. General George B. McClellan failed to capture the Confederate capital of Richmond, Virginia, in his Peninsula campaign and retreated after attacks from Confederate General Robert E. Lee. \nMeanwhile, in 1861 and 1862, both sides concentrated on raising and training new armies. The Union successfully gained control of the border states, driving the Confederates out. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia won battles in late 1862 and spring 1863, but he pushed too hard and ignored the Union threat in the west. He invaded Pennsylvania in search of supplies and to cause war-weariness in the North. In September 17, 1862, the Battle of Antietam was fought in Maryland, which would result in over 23,000 casualties in bloodiest day of the Civil War.\nThe Emancipation Proclamation, issued by Lincoln on January 1, 1863, freed three million slaves in designated areas of the Confederacy in order to weaken the Confederate's troops and supplies. In perhaps the turning point of the war, Lee's army was badly beaten by the Army of the Potomac, and in July 1863, the Union's victory at the Battle of Gettysburg in Pennsylvania, the deadliest battle in American military history with over 50,000 causualties, proved a turning point in the war. Survivors of the battle were immediately redeployed to suppress the New York City draft riots by Irish Americans protesting Civil War conscription and the city's free Black population. \nIn July 1863, Union forces under General Ulysses S. Grant gained control of the Mississippi River at the Battle of Vicksburg, splitting the Confederacy. In 1864, Union General William Tecumseh Sherman marched south from Chattanooga to capture Atlanta, a decisive victory that ended war jitters among Republicans in the North and helped Lincoln win re-election. Sherman's march to the sea was almost unopposed. Much of the South was destroyed, and could no longer provide desperately needed supplies to its armies. In spring 1864, Grant launched a war of attrition and pursued Lee to the final Appomattox campaign, which resulted in Lee surrendering in April 1865, ending the war after four years. By May 1865, the Union Army controlled all of the Confederacy and liberated all of the designated slaves.\nThe Civil War was the world's earliest industrial war. Railroads, the telegraph, steamships, and mass-produced weapons were employed extensively. Civilian factories, mines, shipyards, and were mobilized. Foreign trade increased, with the U.S. providing both food and cotton to Britain, and Britain sending in manufactured products and thousands of volunteers for the Union Army, and a few to the Confederate army. The Union blockade shut down Confederate ports. It remains the deadliest war in American history, resulting in the deaths of about 750,000 soldiers and an undetermined number of civilian casualties. About ten percent of all Northern males 20\u201345 years old, and thirty percent of all Southern white males aged 18\u201340 died. Many Black people died after being dislocated during the war and Reconstruction.\nReconstruction.\nReconstruction followed after the end of the war. Days after the American Civil War ended with the Union victory and the surrender of the Appatomox Court House. Lincoln was assassinated at Ford's Theater in Washington D.C. in April 1865 by John Wilkes Booth, and was succeeded by Andrew Johnson.\nAfter the war, the far west was developed and settled, first by wagon trains and riverboats, and then by the first transcontinental railroad in 1869. Many Northern European immigrants took up low-cost or free farms in the Prairie States. Mining for silver and copper encouraged development.\nThe severe threats of starvation and displacement of the unemployed Freedmen were met by the first major federal relief agency, the Freedmen's Bureau, operated by the Army. The bureau also took in freed slaves. Three \"Reconstruction Amendments\" expanded civil rights for black Americans: the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment outlawed slavery; the 1868 Fourteenth Amendment guaranteed equal rights and citizenship for Black people; the 1870 Fifteenth Amendment prevented race from being used to disenfranchise men. \nEx-Confederates remained in control of most Southern states for over two years, until the Radical Republicans gained control of Congress in the 1866 elections. Johnson, who sought good treatment for ex-Confederates, was virtually powerless in the face of Congress and vetoed many civil rights laws; he was impeached in 1868, but the Senate's attempt to remove him from office failed by one vote. Congress enfranchised black men and temporarily banned many ex-Confederate leaders from holding office. New Republican governments came to power based on a coalition of Freedmen made up of Carpetbaggers (new arrivals from the North), and Scalawags (native white Southerners), backed by the Army. Opponents said they were corrupt and violated the rights of whites. \nDuring Reconstruction, for a brief period, many freed blacks could vote, and even hold public office as the Republicans occupied the South. In response to Radical Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan (KKK) emerged in 1865 as a white-supremacist terrorist organization opposed to black civil rights and Republican rule. President Ulysses Grant's enforcement of the Ku Klux Klan Act of 1871 shut them down. Paramilitary groups, such as the White League and Red Shirts emerging around 1874, openly intimidated and attacked Black people voting.\nReconstruction ended after the disputed 1876 election. The Compromise of 1877 gave Republican Rutherford B. Hayes the presidency in exchange for removing all remaining federal troops in the South, as the Democrats regained control of the Congress, and Reconstruction came to an end in 1877. As a result, the southern states passes harsh laws on African-Americans known as Jim Crow laws, that effectively disenfranchised Black and poor white voters by making voter registration more difficult through poll taxes and literacy tests. Black people were segregated from whites in the violently enforced Jim Crow system, and lynchings and threats of violence against blacks were commonplace. In 1882, the United States passed the Chinese Exclusion Act (which barred all Chinese immigrants except for students and businessmen), and the Immigration Act of 1882 (which barred all immigrants with mental health issues). \nGilded Age and the Progressive Era (1877\u20131914).\nAfter Reconstruction.\nThe \"Gilded Age\" was a term that Mark Twain used to describe the period of the late 19th century with a dramatic expansion of American wealth and prosperity, underscored by mass corruption in government. Some historians have argued that the United States was effectively plutocratic for at least part of the era. As financiers and industrialists such as J.P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller began to amass vast fortunes, many observers were concerned that the nation was losing its pioneering egalitarian spirit.\nAn unprecedented wave of immigration from Europe served to both provide the labor for American industry and create diverse communities in previously undeveloped areas. From 1880 to 1914, peak years of immigration, more than 22 million people migrated to the country. Most were unskilled workers who quickly found jobs in mines, mills, and factories. Many immigrants were craftsmen and farmers who purchased inexpensive land on the prairies. Poverty, growing inequality and dangerous working conditions, along with socialist and anarchist ideas diffusing from European immigrants, led to the rise of the labor movement.\nDissatisfaction on the part of the growing middle class with the corruption and inefficiency of politics, and the failure to deal with increasingly important urban and industrial problems, led to the dynamic progressive movement starting in the 1890s. Progressives called for the modernization and reform of decrepit institutions in the fields of politics, education, medicine, and industry. \"Muckraking\" journalists exposed corruption in business and government, and highlighted rampant inner-city poverty. Progressives implemented antitrust laws and regulated such industries of meatpacking, drugs, and railroads. Four new constitutional amendments \u2013 the Sixteenth through Nineteenth \u2013 resulted from progressive activism, bringing the federal income tax, direct election of Senators, prohibition, and female suffrage.\nIn 1881, President James A. Garfield was assassinated by Charles Guiteau.\nUnions and strikes.\nSkilled workers banded together to control their crafts and raise wages by forming labor unions in industrial areas of the Northeast. Samuel Gompers led the American Federation of Labor (1886\u20131924), coordinating multiple unions. In response to heavy debts and decreasing farm prices, wheat and cotton farmers joined the Populist Party.\nThe Panic of 1893 created a severe nationwide depression. Many railroads went bankrupt. Labor unrest involved numerous strikes, most notably the violent Pullman Strike of 1894, which was forcibly shut down by federal troops. One of the disillusioned leaders of the Pullman strike, Eugene V. Debs, went on to become the leader of the Socialist Party of America.\nEconomic growth.\nImportant legislation of the era included the 1883 Civil Service Act, which mandated a competitive examination for applicants for government jobs, the 1887 Interstate Commerce Act, which ended railroads' discrimination against small shippers, and the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act, which outlawed monopolies in business.\nAfter 1893, the Populist Party gained strength among farmers and coal miners, but was overtaken by the even more popular Free silver movement, which demanded using silver to enlarge the money supply and end the depression. Financial and railroad communities fought back hard, arguing that only the gold standard would save the economy. In the 1896 presidential election, conservative Republican William McKinley defeated silverite William Jennings Bryan.\nProsperity returned under McKinley. The gold standard was enacted, and the tariff was raised. By 1900, the U.S. had the strongest economy in the world. McKinley was assassinated by Leon Czolgosz in 1901, and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt.\nThe period also saw a major transformation of the banking system, with the arrival of the first credit union in 1908 and the creation of the Federal Reserve System in 1913. Apart from two short recessions in 1907 and 1920, the economy remained prosperous and growing until 1929.\nImperialism.\nThe United States Army continued to fight wars with Native Americans as settlers encroached on their traditional lands. Gradually the U.S. purchased tribal lands and extinguished their claims, forcing most tribes onto subsidized reservations. According to the U.S. Census Bureau in 1894, from 1789 to 1894, the Indian Wars killed 19,000 white people and more than 30,000 Indians.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War began when Spain refused American demands to reform its oppressive policies in Cuba. The war was a series of quick American victories on land and at sea. At the Treaty of Paris peace conference the United States acquired the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. Cuba became an independent country, under close American tutelage. William Jennings Bryan led his Democratic Party in opposition to control of the Philippines, which he denounced as imperialism. After defeating an insurrection by Filipino nationalists, the United States achieved little in the Philippines except in education. Infrastructural development lost much of its early vigor with the failure of the railroads.\nBy 1908, however, Americans lost interest in an empire and turned their international attention to the Caribbean, especially the building of the Panama Canal. The canal opened in 1914 and increased trade with Japan and the rest of the Far East. A key innovation was the Open Door Policy, whereby the imperial powers were given equal access to Chinese business, with none of them allowed to take control of China.\nWomen's suffrage.\nThe women's suffrage movement reorganized after the Civil War. By the end of the 19th century, a few Western states had granted women full voting rights, and women gained rights in areas such as property and child custody law.\nAround 1912, the feminist movement reawakened, putting an emphasis on its demands for equality and arguing that the corruption of American politics demanded purification by women. Alice Paul split from the large, moderate National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), led by Carrie Chapman Catt, and formed the more militant National Woman's Party. Suffragists were arrested during their \"Silent Sentinels\" pickets at the White House and taken as political prisoners.\nThe anti-suffragist argument that only men could fight in a war, therefore only men deserved the right to vote, was refuted by the participation of American women on the home front in World War I. The success of women's suffrage was demonstrated by the politics of some U.S. states that were already allowing women to vote, including Montana, which elected the first woman to the House of Representatives, Jeannette Rankin. The main resistance came from the South, where white leaders were worried about the threat of black women being allowed to vote. Congress passed the Nineteenth Amendment in 1919, and women first voted in 1920. Politicians responded to the new electorate by emphasizing issues of special interest to women, especially prohibition, child health, and world peace.\nModern America and World Wars (1914\u20131945).\nWorld War I and the interwar years.\nAs World War I raged in Europe from 1914, President Woodrow Wilson declared neutrality, but warned Germany that resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare against American ships would mean war. Germany decided to take the risk, and try to win by cutting off supplies to Britain through the sinking of ships such as the RMS \"Lusitania\". The U.S. declared war in April 1917.\nBy the summer of 1918 soldiers in General John J. Pershing's American Expeditionary Forces arrived at the rate of 10,000 a day, while Germany was unable to replace its losses. Dissent against the war was suppressed by the Sedition Act of 1918 and Espionage Act of 1917. Over 2,000 were imprisoned for speaking out against the war.\nThe Allies won in November 1918. Wilson dominated the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, putting his geopolitical hopes in the new League of Nations as Germany was treated harshly in the Treaty of Versailles (1919). Wilson refused to compromise with Senate Republicans over the issue of Congressional power to declare war, and the Senate rejected the Treaty and the League. Instead, the United States chose to pursue unilateralism. The aftershock of Russia's October Revolution resulted in fears of Communism in the United States, leading to a Red Scare and the deportation of non-citizens considered subversive.\nDespite the Progressive-era modernization of hospitals and medical schools, the country lost around 550,000 lives to the Spanish flu pandemic in 1918 and 1919. During the \"Roaring\" 1920s, the economy expanded. African-Americans benefited from the Great Migration and had more cultural power, an example being the Harlem Renaissance which spread jazz music. Meanwhile, the Ku Klux Klan had a resurgence, and the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed to strictly limit the number of new entries.\nProhibition began in 1920, when the manufacture, sale, import and export of alcohol were prohibited by the Eighteenth Amendment. Bootlegged alcohol in the cities ended up under the control of gangs, who fought each other for territory. Italian bootleggers in New York City gradually formed the Mafia crime syndicate. In 1933, President Franklin D. Roosevelt repealed prohibition.\nGreat Depression and the New Deal.\nThe Great Depression (1929\u20131939) and the New Deal (1933\u20131936) were decisive moments in American political, economic, and social history. A financial bubble was fueled by an inflated stock market, which led to the Wall Street crash on October 29, 1929. This, along with other economic factors, triggered a worldwide depression. The United States experienced deflation as prices fell, unemployment soared from 3% in 1929 to 25% in 1933, farm prices fell by half, and manufacturing output plunged by one-third.\nThe New Deal enacted by President Franklin D. Roosevelt was a series of permanent reform programs including Social Security, unemployment relief and insurance, public housing, bankruptcy insurance, farm subsidies, and regulation of financial securities. It also provided unemployment relief through the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and for young men, the Civilian Conservation Corps. Large-scale spending projects designed to rebuild infrastructure were under the purview of the Public Works Administration.\nState governments introduced the sales tax to pay for new programs. Ideologically, the New Deal established modern liberalism in the United States. The New Deal coalition won re-election for Roosevelt in 1936, 1940, and 1944. The Second New Deal in 1935 and 1936 brought the economy further left, building up labor unions through the Wagner Act. Roosevelt weakened his second term by a failed effort to pack the Supreme Court, which had been a center of conservative resistance to his programs. The economy essentially recovered by 1936, but long-term unemployment remained a problem until it was solved by wartime spending. Most of the relief programs were dropped in the 1940s, when the conservatives regained power in Congress through the Conservative coalition.\nWorld War II.\nDuring the Depression, the United States remained focused on domestic concerns. U.S. legislation in the Neutrality Acts sought to avoid foreign conflicts; however, policy clashed with increasing anti-Nazi feelings following the German invasion of Poland in September 1939 that started World War II. At first, Roosevelt positioned the U.S. as the \"Arsenal of Democracy\", pledging full-scale financial and munitions support for the Allies and Lend-Lease agreements \u2013 but no military personnel.\nJapan tried to neutralize America's power in the Pacific by attacking Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941, but instead it catalyzed American support to enter the war. Roosevelt's Executive Order 9066 resulted in over 120,000 Americans of Japanese descent being removed from their homes and placed in internment camps. The Allies fought against Germany in the European theater and Japan in the Pacific War. The United States was one of the \"Allied Big Four\", alongside the United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and China.\nThe U.S. gave the Allied war effort money, food, petroleum, technology, and military personnel. The U.S. focused on maximizing its national economic output, causing a dramatic increase in GDP, the end of unemployment, and a rise in civilian consumption, even as 40% of the GDP went to the war effort. A wartime production boom led to the end of the Great Depression. Tens of millions of workers moved into the active labor force and to higher-productivity jobs. Labor shortages encouraged industries to look for new sources of workers, finding new roles for women and Black people. Economic mobilization was managed by the War Production Board. Most durable goods became unavailable or were tightly rationed, while housing for industrial jobs was in short supply. Prices and wages were controlled, and Americans saved a high portion of their incomes, which led to post-war growth.\nThe U.S. stopped Japanese expansion in the Pacific in 1942; after the loss of the Philippines to Japanese conquests, as well as a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea in May, the American Navy then inflicted a decisive blow at Midway in June 1942. The Allied forces built up a garrison on Guadalcanal island, formerly held by the Japanese, after the successes of the Battle of the Eastern Solomons and the Battle of Guadalcanal. The Japanese then stopped advancing south, and the U.S. began taking New Guinea. Japan also lost their invasion of the Alaskan Aleutian Islands, allowing the U.S. to begin attacking the Japanese-controlled Kuril Islands.\nAmerican ground forces assisted in the North African campaign and the collapse of Fascist Italy in 1943. A more significant European front was opened on D-Day, June 6, 1944, in which Allied forces invaded Nazi-occupied France. The Allies began pushing the Germans out of France in the Normandy campaign. After Allied forces landed at the French Riviera in Operation Dragoon, Hitler allowed his army to retreat from Normandy. Roosevelt died in 1945, and was succeeded by Harry Truman. The western front stopped short of Berlin, leaving the Soviets to take it in the Battle of Berlin. The Nazi regime formally capitulated in May 1945, ending the war in Europe. \nIn the Pacific, the U.S. implemented an island hopping strategy toward Tokyo. The Philippines was eventually reconquered, after Japan and the United States fought in history's largest naval battle, the Battle of Leyte Gulf. After the war, the U.S. granted the Philippines independence.\nMilitary research and development increased during the war, leading to the Manhattan Project, a secret effort to harness nuclear fission to produce atomic bombs; the first nuclear device was detonated on July 16, 1945. U.S. airfields in the Mariana Islands allowed for easier bombing of Japan and hard-fought U.S. victories at Iwo Jima and Okinawa in 1945. The U.S. initially prepared to invade Japan's home islands, but they dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945, killing at least 200,000 residents in both cities, compelling Japan to surrender and ending World War II. The U.S. occupied Japan (and part of Germany). Throughout the 4 years of American involvement in World War II, 400,000 American military personnel and civilians were killed. Nuclear weapons have not been used since the war ended, and a \"long peace\" began between the global powers, but they still competed in the Cold War.\nCold War (1945\u20131991).\nEconomic boom and the beginning of the Cold War.\nTruman administration.\nIn the decades after World War II, the United States became a global influence in economic, political, military, cultural, and technological affairs. Following World War II, the United States emerged as one of the two dominant superpowers, the Soviet Union being the other. The U.S. Senate approved U.S. participation in the United Nations (UN), which marked a turn away from traditional American isolationism and toward increased international involvement. The United States and other major Allied powers became the foundation of the UN Security Council. The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was created in 1947.\nThe U.S. wished to rescue Europe from the devastation of World War II, and to contain the expansion of communism, represented by the Soviet Union. U.S. foreign policy during the Cold War was built around the support of Western Europe and Japan along with the policy of containment (containing the spread of communism). The Truman Doctrine in 1947 was the U.S.' attempt to secure trading partners in Europe, by providing military and economic aid to Greece and Turkey to counteract the threat of communist expansion in the Balkans. In 1948, the United States replaced piecemeal financial aid programs with a comprehensive Marshall Plan, which pumped money into Western Europe, and removed trade barriers, while modernizing the managerial practices of businesses and governments. Post-war American aid to Europe totaled $25 billion, out of the U.S. GDP of $258\u00a0billion in 1948.\nIn 1949, the United States, rejecting the long-standing policy of no military alliances in peacetime, formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) alliance. In response, the Soviets formed the Warsaw Pact of communist states, leading to the \"Iron Curtain\". In 1949, the Soviets performed their first nuclear weapon test. This escalated the risk of nuclear warfare; the threat of mutually assured destruction, however, prevented both powers from nuclear war, and resulted the proxy wars in which the two sides did not directly confront each other.\nThe U.S. fought against communists in the Korean War and Vietnam War, and to try to stop its spread, such as Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954. McCarthyism was a widespread government program led by Senator Joseph McCarthy to expose communists in government and business. Hollywood was targeted by the House Un-American Activities Committee. Gay people were targeted under the McCarthyist Lavender Scare.\nEisenhower administration.\nDwight D. Eisenhower was elected president in 1952 in a landslide. He ended the Korean War, and avoided any other major conflict. He cut military spending by relying on advanced technology, such as nuclear weapons carried by long-range bombers and intercontinental missiles. After Stalin died in 1953, Eisenhower worked to obtain friendlier relationships with the Soviet Union. At home, he ended McCarthyism, expanded the Social Security program, and presided over a decade of bipartisan cooperation.\nDomestically, after 1948, America entered an economic boom: 60% of the American population had attained a \"middle-class\" standard of living by the mid-1950s, compared with only 31% in the 1928 and 1929. Between 1947 and 1960, the average real income for American workers increased by as much as it had in the previous half-century. The economy allowed for an affordable lifestyle with large families; this created the baby boom, in which millions of children were born at increased rates from 1945 to 1964. Many Americans moved into suburban neighborhoods.\nIn 1954, the Supreme Court ruled on \"Brown v. Board of Education\", finding public school segregation unconstitutional. When nine Black students were threatened over their admission into all-white Little Rock Central High School, Eisenhower sent in a thousand National Guard troops to ensure peace. Starting in the late 1950s, institutionalized racism across the United States, but especially in the South, was increasingly challenged by the growing civil rights movement. The activism of Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr. led to the boycott of segregated public buses in Montgomery, Alabama in 1955, organized by King and the Montgomery Improvement Association. They faced multiple acts of violence, but continued the boycott for a year, until the Supreme Court ordered the city to desegregate the buses.\nThe Soviets unexpectedly surpassed American technology in 1957 with Sputnik, the first Earth satellite. The R-7 missile which launched Sputnik into space could have hypothetically dropped a nuclear bomb into U.S. air space from above; new American fears regarding Soviet power began the Space Race, a competition between the two countries to prove their technological superiority through space exploration. In 1958, Eisenhower created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) for this purpose. Angst about the weaknesses of American education led to large-scale federal support for science education and research.\nCivil unrest and social reforms.\nIn 1960, John F. Kennedy was elected President. His administration saw the acceleration of the country's role in the Space Race, escalation of the American role in the Vietnam War, the Bay of Pigs Invasion, and the Cuban Missile Crisis. President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963. Lyndon B. Johnson then became president. He secured congressional passage of his Great Society programs, dealing with civil rights, the end of legal segregation, Medicare, extension of welfare, federal aid to education at all levels, subsidies for the arts and humanities, environmental activism, and a series of programs designed to wipe out poverty.\nCivil rights and counterculture movements.\nFor years, nonviolent civil rights activists organized direct actions, such as the 1963 Birmingham campaign, the 1965 Selma to Montgomery march, and the 1966 Chicago open housing movement, where they also became victims of violence. Along with Supreme Court decisions like \"Loving v. Virginia\" and the 1963 March on Washington, these movements achieved great steps toward equality with laws like the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the Fair Housing Act of 1968. These ended the Jim Crow laws that had legalized racial segregation. Native Americans protested federal courts, highlighting the federal government's failure to honor treaties involving them. One of the most outspoken Native American groups was the American Indian Movement (AIM). In the 1960s, Cesar Chavez began organizing poorly paid Mexican-American farm workers in California, eventually forming the country's first successful union of farm workers, the United Farm Workers of America (UFW).\nAmid the Cold War, the United States entered the Vietnam War, whose growing unpopularity fed already existing social movements. Feminism and the environmental movement became political forces, and progress continued toward civil rights for all Americans. A counterculture revolution in the late sixties and early seventies further divided Americans in a \"culture war\" but also brought forth more liberated social views. Frustrations with the seemingly slow progress of the integration movement led to the emergence of more radical politics, such as the Black Power movement. The summer of 1967 saw opposing philosophies in two widespread movements, the more peaceful summer of love and the radical long, hot summer, which included nationwide riots. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968. The modern gay rights movement started after the Stonewall riots in 1969.\nA new consciousness of the inequality of American women began sweeping the nation, starting with the 1963 publication of Betty Friedan's best-seller, \"The Feminine Mystique\", which critiqued the American cultural idea that women could only find fulfillment through their roles as wives, mothers, and keepers of the home. In 1966, Friedan and others established the National Organization for Women (NOW) to advocate for women's rights. Protests began, and the new women's liberation movement grew in size and power, gaining much media attention. The proposed Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution, passed by Congress in 1972, was defeated by a conservative coalition mobilized by Phyllis Schlafly. However, many federal laws established women's equal status under the law, such as those equalizing pay, employment, education, employment opportunities, and credit between genders, and ending pregnancy discrimination. State laws criminalized spousal abuse and marital rape, and the Supreme Court ruled that the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment applied to women. Social custom and consciousness began to change, accepting women's equality. Abortion, deemed by the Supreme Court as a fundamental right in \"Roe v. Wade\" (1973), is still a point of debate.\nD\u00e9tente.\nNixon and Ford administrations.\nPresident Richard Nixon (1969\u20131974) largely continued the New Deal and Great Society programs he inherited. Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency, opened relations with China, and attempted to gradually turn the Vietnam War effort over to the South Vietnamese. He negotiated the peace treaty in 1973 which secured the release of POWs and led to the withdrawal of U.S. troops. The war had cost the lives of 58,000 American troops. Nixon manipulated the fierce distrust between the Soviet Union and China to the advantage of the U.S., achieving \"d\u00e9tente\" with both parties. He was also president during the U.S.' landing on the Moon in 1969.\nThe Watergate scandal, involving Nixon's cover-up of his operatives' break-in into the Democratic National Committee headquarters, destroyed his political base and forced his resignation on August 9, 1974. He was succeeded by Vice President Gerald Ford.\nThe Fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975, ended the Vietnam War. In Central America, the U.S. government supported right-wing governments against left-wing groups, such as in El Salvador and Guatemala. In South America, they supported Argentina and Chile, who carried out Operation Condor, a campaign of assassinations of exiled political opponents by Southern Cone governments, created at the behest of Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet in 1975.\nThe OPEC oil embargo marked a long-term economic transition: energy prices skyrocketed, and American factories faced serious competition from foreign automobiles, clothing, electronics, and consumer goods. By the late 1970s, the economy suffered an energy crisis, slow economic growth, high unemployment, very high inflation, and high interest rates (stagflation). Since economists agreed on deregulation, many of the New Deal era regulations were ended. Meanwhile, the first mass-market personal computers were being developed in California's Silicon Valley.\nCarter administration.\nJimmy Carter was elected president in 1976. Carter brokered the Camp David Accords between Israel and Egypt. In 1979, Iranian students stormed the U.S. embassy in Tehran and took 66 Americans hostage. Carter lost the 1980 election to the Republican Ronald Reagan. On January 20, 1981, minutes after Carter's term ended, the remaining U.S. captives were released.\nEnd of the Cold War.\nReagan administration.\nPresident Ronald Reagan's conservative policies produced a major political realignment with his 1980 and 1984 landslide elections. Reagan's neoliberal economic policies (dubbed \"Reaganomics\") included the implementation of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981. Reagan continued to downsize government taxation and regulation; New Deal and Great Society programs were ended. The U.S. experienced a recession in 1982, but after inflation decreased, unemployment then decreased, and the economic growth rate increased from 4.5% in 1982 to 7.2% in 1984. However, homelessness and economic inequality also rose.\nThe Reagan administration's expansion of the war on drugs led to an increase in incarceration, particularly among African Americans, with the number of people imprisoned for drug offences rising from 50,000 to 400,000 between 1980 and 1997. Manufacturing industries moving out of inner cities increased poverty in those areas; poverty increased drug dealing and contributed to the crack epidemic, which led to increased crime and incarceration. The government also reacted slowly to the AIDS crisis, and banned reliable information on the disease, which led to higher infection rates.\nReagan ordered a buildup of the U.S. military, incurring additional budget deficits. The 1983 invasion of Grenada and 1986 bombing of Libya were popular in the U.S., though Reagan's backing of the Contra rebels was mired in the controversy over the Iran\u2013Contra affair. Reagan also introduced a complicated missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative. The Soviets reacted harshly because they thought it violated the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, and would give the U.S. a major military advantage, so they stopped negotiating disarmament deals until the late 1980s.\nReagan met four times with Gorbachev, and their summit conferences led to the signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.\nGeorge H. W. Bush administration.\nInternational affairs drove the George H. W. Bush presidency, which navigated the end of the Cold War and a new era of U.S.\u2013Soviet relations. In 1989 Bush directed a military invasion of Panama to overthrow Manuel Noriega. On December 3, 1989, Gorbachev and Bush declared the Cold War over at the Malta Summit. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, Bush successfully pushed for the reunification of Germany in close cooperation with West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl, overcoming the reluctance of Gorbachev. The Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, leaving the United States as the sole superpower.\nContemporary United States (1991\u2013present).\nGeorge H. W. Bush and Clinton administrations.\nAfter the collapse of the Soviet Union, the United States continued to intervene in international affairs. George H. W. Bush's administration led an international coalition against Iraq in the Gulf War after Iraq invaded neighboring Kuwait in 1990. The war undid the Iraqi annexation of Kuwait. Under Bush, the U.S. also became involved in wars in Panama, Somalia, Bosnia, and Croatia. In 1992, there were riots in Los Angeles over police brutality.\nElected in 1992, President Bill Clinton oversaw economic expansion and passed the first balanced federal budget in 30 years. Much of the economic boom was a side effect of the Digital Revolution, and new business opportunities created by the Internet. During the Clinton administration, the U.S. was involved in wars in Haiti and Kosovo.\nConservative Republicans heavily won the 1994 midterm elections in a \"Republican Revolution\", which was built around the Contract with America policy agenda. Newt Gingrich was chosen as House Speaker, and he would heavily influence the Republican Party to engage in \"confrontational\" political speech. Clinton's leadership after the Oklahoma City bombing increased his popularity, and he won in the 1996 presidential elections. In 1998, Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives on charges of lying under oath about a sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky. He was acquitted by the Senate.\nIn 2000, the dot-com bubble, a widespread overvaluation of Internet company stocks, burst and hurt the U.S. economy. The presidential election in 2000 between Governor George W. Bush and Al Gore was extremely close and produced a dramatic dispute over the counting of votes. Bush ultimately won.\nGeorge W. Bush administration.\nIn the September 11 attacks on September 11, 2001, 19 al-Qaeda hijackers commandeered four commercial planes to be used in suicide attacks. Two were crashed intentionally into both Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, and a third into the Pentagon in Arlington County, Virginia. The fourth plane was retaken by the passengers and crew and crashed into an empty field in Pennsylvania. Every building of the World Trade Center partially or completely collapsed, massively damaging the surrounding area and blanketing Lower Manhattan in toxic dust clouds. 2,977 victims died in the attacks, which proved the deadliest terrorist attack in world history.\nOn September 20, Bush announced a \"war on terror\". In October 2001, the U.S. and NATO invaded Afghanistan and ousted the Taliban regime, which had harbored al-Qaeda and its leader Osama bin Laden. Bin Laden escaped to Pakistan, starting a manhunt. The U.S. established new domestic efforts to prevent future attacks. The Patriot Act increased the power of government to monitor communications and removed legal restrictions on intelligence sharing between federal law enforcement agencies. The government's indefinite detention of terrorism suspects captured abroad at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp led to allegations of human rights abuses and violations of international law. The Department of Homeland Security was created to lead federal counter-terrorism activities.\nIn March 2003, the U.S. launched an invasion of Iraq, claiming Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Intelligence backing WMDs were later found to be inaccurate. The war led to the collapse of the Iraqi government and the eventual capture of Hussein. The Iraq War fueled international protests and gradually saw domestic support decline.\nIn 2005, Hurricane Katrina killed 1,800 people around New Orleans after the city's levees broke. In 2007, after years of violence by the Iraqi insurgency, Bush deployed more troops in a strategy dubbed \"the surge\". While the death toll decreased, the political stability of Iraq remained in doubt. In 2008, the U.S. entered the Great Recession. Multiple overlapping crises were involved, especially the housing market crisis, a subprime mortgage crisis, soaring oil prices, an automotive industry crisis, rising unemployment, and the 2008 financial crisis, the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers threatened the stability of the entire economy in September 2008. Starting in October, the federal government lent $245\u00a0billion to financial institutions through the bipartisan Troubled Asset Relief Program.\nObama administration.\nBarack Obama, the first multiracial and African American president, was elected in 2008. He signed the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act, which allowed people to serve in the military while openly gay. To help the economy, he signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Consumer Assistance to Recycle and Save Act, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, informally called \"Obamacare\", and the Dodd\u2013Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. The unemployment rate began falling as the economy and labor markets experienced a recovery.\nThese changes to the economic system created new political movements, such as the Occupy movement and the Tea Party movement. The recession officially ended in mid-2009. Following the 2010 midterm elections, Congress was in gridlock, leading to the Budget Control Act of 2011. The economic expansion that followed the Great Recession was the longest in U.S. history; the unemployment rate reached a 50-year low in 2019. Despite the strong economy, increases in the cost of living surpassed increases in wages.\nIn 2009, Obama issued an executive order banning the use of torture. He ordered the closure of secret CIA-run prisons overseas, and sought to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, but his efforts were stymied by Congress. American military personnel left Iraq in 2011. Meanwhile, Obama increased involvement in Afghanistan, adding 30,000 troops, while proposing to begin withdrawal in 2014. The U.S., with NATO, intervened in the Libyan Civil War in 2011. In May 2011, Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan in a Navy SEALs raid ordered by Obama. While al-Qaeda was near collapse in Afghanistan, affiliated organizations continued to operate in Yemen and other remote areas, as the CIA used drones to hunt down its leadership. In October, Obama sent troops to Central Africa to fight the Lord's Resistance Army.\nFollowing Obama's 2012 re-election, Congressional gridlock continued, resulting in the first government shutdown since the Clinton administration. In 2012, the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in Newtown, Connecticut, led to unsuccessful attempts from Obama to promote gun reform. The Boston Marathon bombing of 2013 killed three people and injured more than 260. In 2013, the U.S. also started a counter-terrorist intervention in Niger, and began a covert operation to train rebels in Syria who were fighting against the terrorist group ISIS. The latter program was publicized and expanded in 2014. That year, ISIS grew in scope in the Middle East, and inspired many terrorist attacks in the United States, including the 2015 San Bernardino attack. The U.S. and its allies began a significant military offensive against ISIS in Iraq which lasted from 2014 to 2021. In December 2014, Obama officially ended the combat mission in Afghanistan. \nThe shooting of Black teen Michael Brown by police officer Darren Wilson, and a grand jury declining to charge Wilson with murder, led to the Ferguson unrest in Missouri in 2014 and 2015. In 2012, President Obama became the first president to openly support same-sex marriage. The Supreme Court provided federal recognition of same-sex marriages in 2013, and then legalized gay marriage nationwide with \"Obergefell v. Hodges\" in 2015. Also in 2015, the U.S. joined the international Paris Agreement on climate change.\nFirst Trump administration.\nIn November 2016, Donald Trump was elected president. The election's legitimacy was disputed when the FBI and Congress investigated if Russia interfered in the election to help Trump win. There were also accusations of collusion between Trump's campaign and Russian officials. The Mueller report concluded that Russia attempted to help Trump's campaign, but there was no evidence of \"explicit\" collusion.\nDuring Trump's presidency, he espoused an \"America First\" ideology, placing restrictions on asylum seekers, expanding the wall on the U.S.-Mexico border, and banning immigration from seven Muslim-majority countries. Many of his actions were challenged in court. He confirmed three new Supreme Court justices (cementing a conservative majority), started a trade war with China, signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, and removed the U.S. from the Paris Agreement. In 2018, the administration separated families which were illegally immigrating to the country. After public outcry, Trump rescinded the policy. A whistleblower complaint alleged that Trump had withheld foreign aid from Ukraine under the demand that they investigate the business dealings of Hunter Biden; Hunter's father, Democrat Joe Biden, would be Trump's opponent in the 2020 presidential election. Trump was impeached for abuse of power and obstruction of congress, but was acquitted in 2020.\nIn the 2010s and early 2020s, Americans became more politically polarized. The #MeToo movement exposed alleged sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace. Many celebrities were accused of misconduct or rape. The Black Lives Matter movement gained support after multiple police killings of African-Americans. White supremacy also grew. The 2017 Women's March against Trump's presidency was one of the largest protests in American history. Multiple mass shootings, including the 2016 Pulse Nightclub shooting, 2017 Las Vegas shooting, and 2018 Parkland shooting, led to increased calls for gun reform, such as in the March for Our Lives student protest movement.\nCOVID-19 started spreading in China in 2019. In March 2020, the WHO declared a pandemic. American state and local governments imposed stay-at-home orders to slow the virus' spread, reducing patient overload in hospitals. By April, the U.S. had the most cases of any country, at 100,000. On April 11, the U.S. death toll became the highest in the world at 20,000, and by May 2022, one million had died. Unemployment rates were the highest since the Great Depression. The biggest mass vaccination campaign in U.S. history started in December 2020.\nThe May 2020 murder of George Floyd caused mass protests and riots in many cities over police brutality. Many organizations attempted to rid themselves of institutionalized racism. 2020 was also marked by a rise in domestic terrorist threats and widespread conspiracy theories around mail-in voting and COVID-19. The QAnon conspiracy theory gained publicity. Multiple major cities were hit by rioting and fighting between far-left anti-fascist groups and far-right groups like the Proud Boys. \nJoe Biden defeated Trump in the 2020 presidential election. Trump repeatedly made false claims of massive voter fraud and election rigging, leading to the January 6 United States Capitol attack by supporters of Trump and right-wing militias. The attack was widely described as a coup d'\u00e9tat. It led to Trump's impeachment for incitement of insurrection, making him the only U.S. president to be impeached twice. The Senate later acquitted Trump, despite some fellow Republicans voting against him. Kamala Harris was inaugurated as the first Black, Asian, and female vice president.\nBiden administration.\nIn 2021, Biden completed the withdrawal of American troops from Afghanistan which had started under the first Trump administration. After an evacuation of over 120,000 American citizens, Afghanistan fell to the Taliban in August. Biden signed into law the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021, a $1.9\u00a0trillion stimulus bill. He also proposed a significant expansion of the social safety net through the Build Back Better Act, but those efforts, along with voting rights legislation, failed in Congress. He signed bills regarding infrastructure, gun reform, inflation reduction, and healthcare for veterans, among other issues. New preventative restrictions were put in place in reaction to the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant.\nIn 2022, following Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, the Biden administration provided extensive military and economic aid to Ukraine, approving tens of billions of dollars in assistance and coordinating sanctions against Russia with NATO allies. The U.S. also supplied advanced weaponry, including artillery and missile defense systems, while reinforcing NATO's eastern flank in response to the conflict.\nIn the early 2020s, Republican-led states began rollbacks of LGBTQ rights as well as restrictions on voting rights. In 2022, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Dobbs v. Jackson\" that the right to have an abortion is not protected by the U.S. Constitution, overturning \"Roe v. Wade\" and \"Planned Parenthood v. Casey\" and sparking nationwide protests. Biden appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson to become the first Black woman to serve on the court. In 2023, Trump began appearing in court as a defendant in multiple notable criminal trials. Meanwhile, the U.S. began supporting Israel in the Gaza war and protecting shipping in the Red Sea from attacks by the Yemeni Houthis.\nIn May 2024, Trump became the first former president to be convicted of a crime, when found guilty of 34 felony counts for falsifying business documents related to his paying off of Stormy Daniels. In July, the Supreme Court ruled in \"Trump v. United States\" that presidents are somewhat immune from criminal prosecution, aiding Trump prior to his planned election subversion trial. Later in July, Biden dropped out of the 2024 race and endorsed his running mate Kamala Harris for president. During the election season, there were two assassination attempts on Trump. Trump won the 2024 presidential election. Biden delivered his farewell address from the Oval Office on January 15, 2025. He opened by announcing that a hostage release deal had been reached between Israel and Hamas. Additionally, he advocated for continued renewable energy investment, strengthening checks and balances in government, and warned against the dangers of what he termed the 'tech\u2013industrial complex'.\nSecond Trump administration.\nIn November 2024, Trump was elected president to a nonconsecutive second term. The election was certified by Congress on January 6, 2025, and Trump assumed office on January 20. On his first day, Trump pardoned about 1,500 people convicted of offenses in the January 6 Capitol attack of 2021. Within his first month, he signed approximately 70 executive orders (far more than any of his recent predecessors), some of which are being challenged in court. On immigration, he signed executive orders blocking asylum-seekers from entry to the U.S., reinstated the national emergency at the Mexico\u2013U.S. border, designated drug cartels as terrorist organizations, and attempted to end birthright citizenship. He signed the Laken Riley Act as the first legislation of his term. Trump established the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE), led by the businessman Elon Musk, which is tasked with cutting spending by the federal government, limiting bureaucracy, and which has overseen mass layoffs of civil servants.\nIn international affairs, Trump withdrew the United States from the World Health Organization and the Paris Climate Accords. He started a trade war with Canada and Mexico and continued the ongoing trade war with China. He has repeatedly expressed interest in annexing Canada, Greenland, and the Panama Canal. In response to the Gaza War, he proposed an American takeover of the Gaza Strip, forcibly relocating the Palestinian population to other Arab states, and rebuilding Gaza into a tourist resort. Amid the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Trump administration temporarily suspended the provision of intelligence and military aid to Ukraine, offered concessions to Russia, requested half of Ukraine's oil and minerals as repayment for American support, and said that Ukraine bore partial responsibility for the invasion. The administration resumed the aid after Ukraine agreed to a potential ceasefire.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63879", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63879", "title": "Initial public offering", "text": "Type of securities offering in which a private company becomes a public company\nAn initial public offering (IPO) or stock launch is a public offering in which shares of a company are sold to institutional investors and usually also to retail (individual) investors. An IPO is typically underwritten by one or more investment banks, who also arrange for the shares to be listed on one or more stock exchanges. Through this process, colloquially known as floating, or going public, a privately held company is transformed into a public company. Initial public offerings can be used to raise new equity capital for companies, to monetize the investments of private shareholders such as company founders or private equity investors, and to enable easy trading of existing holdings or future capital raising by becoming publicly traded.\nAfter the IPO, shares are traded freely in the open market at what is known as the free float. Stock exchanges stipulate a minimum free float both in absolute terms (the total value as determined by the share price multiplied by the number of shares sold to the public) and as a proportion of the total share capital (i.e., the number of shares sold to the public divided by the total shares outstanding). Although IPO offers many benefits, there are also significant costs involved, chiefly those associated with the process such as banking and legal fees, and the ongoing requirement to disclose important and sometimes sensitive information.\nDetails of the proposed offering are disclosed to potential purchasers in the form of a lengthy document known as a prospectus. Most companies undertake an IPO with the assistance of an investment banking firm acting in the capacity of an underwriter. Underwriters provide several services, including help with correctly assessing the value of shares (share price) and establishing a public market for shares (initial sale). Alternative methods such as the Dutch auction have also been explored and applied for several IPOs.\nHistory.\nThe earliest form of a company which issued \"public shares\" was the case of the \"publicani\" during the Roman Republic, although this claim is not shared by all modern scholars. Like modern joint-stock companies, the \"publicani\" were legal bodies independent of their members whose ownership was divided into shares, or \"parts\". There is evidence that these shares were sold to public investors and traded in a type of over-the-counter market in the Forum, near the Temple of Castor and Pollux. The shares fluctuated in value, encouraging the activity of speculators, or \"quaestors\". Mere evidence remains of the prices for which \"parts\" were sold, the nature of initial public offerings, or a description of stock market behavior. \"Publicani\" lost favor with the fall of the Republic and the rise of the Empire.\nIn the United States, the first IPO was the public offering of Bank of North America around 1783.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nAdvantages.\nWhen a company becomes publicly listed, the money paid by the investing public for the newly issued shares goes directly to the company (primary offering) as well as to any early private investors who opt to sell all or a portion of their holdings (secondary offerings) as part of the larger IPO. An IPO, therefore, allows a company to tap into a wide pool of potential investors to provide itself with capital for future growth, repayment of the debt, or working capital. A company selling common shares is never required to repay the capital to its public investors. Those investors must endure the unpredictable nature of the open market to price and trade their shares. After the IPO, when shares are traded in the market, money passes between public investors. For early private investors who choose to sell shares as part of the IPO process, the IPO represents an opportunity to monetize their investment. After the IPO, once shares are traded in the open market, investors holding large blocks of shares can either sell those shares piecemeal in the open market or sell a large block of shares directly to the public, at a fixed price, through a secondary market offering. This type of offering is not dilutive since no new shares are being created. Stock prices can change dramatically during a company's first days in the public market.\nOnce a company is listed, it is able to issue additional common shares in a number of different ways, one of which is the follow-on offering. This method provides capital for various corporate purposes through the issuance of equity (see stock dilution) without incurring any debt. This ability to quickly raise potentially large amounts of capital from the marketplace is a key reason many companies seek to go public.\nAn IPO accords several benefits to the previously private company:\nDisadvantages.\nThere are several disadvantages to completing an initial public offering:\nProcedure.\nIPO procedures are governed by different laws in different countries. In the United States, IPOs are regulated by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Act of 1933. In the United Kingdom, the UK Listing Authority reviews and approves prospectuses and operates the listing regime.\nPlanning.\nPlanning is crucial to a successful IPO. One book suggests the following seven planning steps:\nRetention of underwriters.\nIPOs generally involve one or more investment banks known as \"underwriters\". The company offering its shares, called the \"issuer\", enters into a contract with a lead underwriter to sell its shares to the public. The underwriter then approaches investors with offers to sell those shares.\nA large IPO is usually underwritten by a \"syndicate\" of investment banks, the largest of which take the position of \"lead underwriter\". Upon selling the shares, the underwriters retain a portion of the proceeds as their fee. This fee is called an underwriting spread. The spread is calculated as a discount from the price of the shares sold (called the gross spread). Components of an underwriting spread in an initial public offering (IPO) typically include the following (on a per-share basis): manager's fee, underwriting fee\u2014earned by members of the syndicate, and the concession\u2014earned by the broker-dealer selling the shares. The manager would be entitled to the entire underwriting spread. A member of the syndicate is entitled to the underwriting fee and the concession. A broker-dealer who is not a member of the syndicate but sells shares would receive only the concession, while the member of the syndicate who provided the shares to that broker-dealer would retain the underwriting fee. Usually, the managing/lead underwriter, also known as the bookrunner, typically the underwriter selling the largest proportions of the IPO, takes the highest portion of the gross spread, up to 8% in some cases.\nMultinational IPOs may have many syndicates to deal with differing legal requirements in both the issuer's domestic market and other regions. For example, an issuer based in the E.U. may be represented by the major selling syndicate in its domestic market, Europe, in addition to separate group corporations or selling them for US/Canada and Asia. Usually, the lead underwriter in the head selling group is also the lead bank in the other selling groups.\nBecause of the wide array of legal requirements and because it is an expensive process, IPOs also typically involve one or more law firms with major practices in securities law, such as the Magic Circle firms of London and the white-shoe firms of New York City.\nFinancial historians Richard Sylla and Robert E. Wright have shown that before 1860 most early U.S. corporations sold shares in themselves directly to the public without the aid of intermediaries like investment banks. The direct public offering (DPO), as they term it, was not done by auction but rather at a share price set by the issuing corporation. In this sense, it is the same as the fixed price public offers that were the traditional IPO method in most non-US countries in the early 1990s. The DPO eliminated the agency problem associated with offerings intermediated by investment banks.\nAllocation and pricing.\nThe sale (allocation and pricing) of shares in an IPO may take several forms. Common methods include:\nPublic offerings are sold to both institutional investors and retail clients of the underwriters. A licensed securities salesperson (Registered Representative in the US and Canada) selling shares of a public offering to his clients is paid a portion of the selling concession (the fee paid by the issuer to the underwriter) rather than by his client. In some situations, when the IPO is not a \"hot\" issue (undersubscribed), and where the salesperson is the client's advisor, it is possible that the financial incentives of the advisor and client may not be aligned.\nThe issuer usually allows the underwriters an option to increase the size of the offering by up to 15% under a specific circumstance known as the greenshoe or overallotment option. This option is always exercised when the offering is considered a \"hot\" issue, by virtue of being oversubscribed.\nIn the US, clients are given a preliminary prospectus, known as a red herring prospectus, during the initial quiet period. The red herring prospectus is so named because of a bold red warning statement printed on its front cover. The warning states that the offering information is incomplete, and may be changed. The actual wording can vary, although most roughly follow the format exhibited on the Facebook IPO red herring. During the quiet period, the shares cannot be offered for sale. Brokers can, however, take indications of interest from their clients. At the time of the stock launch, after the Registration Statement has become effective, indications of interest can be converted to buy orders, at the discretion of the buyer. Sales can only be made through a final prospectus cleared by the Securities and Exchange Commission.\nThe final step in preparing and filing the final IPO prospectus is for the issuer to retain one of the major financial \"printers\", who print (and today, also electronically file with the SEC) the registration statement on Form S-1. Typically, preparation of the final prospectus is actually performed at the printer, wherein one of their multiple conference rooms the issuer, issuer's counsel (attorneys), underwriter's counsel (attorneys), the lead underwriter(s), and the issuer's accountants/auditors make final edits and proofreading, concluding with the filing of the final prospectus by the financial printer with the Securities and Exchange Commission.\nBefore legal actions initiated by New York Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, which later became known as the Global Settlement enforcement agreement, some large investment firms had initiated favorable research coverage of companies in an effort to aid corporate finance departments and retail divisions engaged in the marketing of new issues. The central issue in that enforcement agreement had been judged in court previously. It involved the conflict of interest between the investment banking and analysis departments of ten of the largest investment firms in the United States. The investment firms involved in the settlement had all engaged in actions and practices that had allowed the inappropriate influence of their research analysts by their investment bankers seeking lucrative fees. A typical violation addressed by the settlement was the case of CSFB and Salomon Smith Barney, which were alleged to have engaged in the inappropriate spinning of \"hot\" IPOs and issued fraudulent research reports in violation of various sections within the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.\nPricing.\nA company planning an IPO typically appoints a lead manager, known as a bookrunner, to help it arrive at an appropriate price at which the shares should be offered. There are two primary ways in which the price of an IPO can be determined. Either the company, with the help of its lead managers, fixes a price (\"fixed price method\"), or the price can be determined through analysis of confidential investor demand data compiled by the bookrunner (\"book building\").\nHistorically, many IPOs have been underpriced. The effect of underpricing an IPO is to generate additional interest in the stock and a rapid rise in share price when it first becomes publicly traded (known as an \"IPO pop\"). Flipping, or quickly selling shares for a profit, can lead to significant gains for investors who were allocated shares of the IPO at the offering price. However, underpricing an IPO results in lost potential capital for the issuer. One extreme example is theglobe.com IPO which helped fuel the IPO \"mania\" of the late 1990s internet era. Underwritten by Bear Stearns on 13 November 1998, the IPO was priced at $9 per share. The share price quickly increased 1,000% on the opening day of trading, to a high of $97. Selling pressure from institutional flipping eventually drove the stock back down, and it closed the day at $63. Although the company did raise about $30\u00a0 million from the offering, it is estimated that with the level of demand for the offering and the volume of trading that took place they might have left upwards of $200\u00a0million on the table.\nThe danger of overpricing is also an important consideration. If a stock is offered to the public at a higher price than the market will pay, the underwriters may have trouble meeting their commitments to sell shares. Even if they sell all of the issued shares, the stock may fall in value on the first day of trading. If so, the stock may lose its marketability and hence even more of its value. This could result in losses for investors, many of whom being the most favored clients of the underwriters. Perhaps the best-known example of this is the Facebook IPO in 2012.\nUnderwriters, therefore, take many factors into consideration when pricing an IPO, and attempt to reach an offering price that is low enough to stimulate interest in the stock but high enough to raise an adequate amount of capital for the company. When pricing an IPO, underwriters use a variety of key performance indicators and non-GAAP measures. The process of determining an optimal price usually involves the underwriters (\"syndicate\") arranging share purchase commitments from leading institutional investors.\nSome researchers (Friesen &amp; Swift, 2009) believe that the underpricing of IPOs is less a deliberate act on the part of issuers and/or underwriters, and more the result of an over-reaction on the part of investors (Friesen &amp; Swift, 2009). One potential method for determining to underprice is through the use of IPO underpricing algorithms. Other researchers have discovered that firms with higher revenues from licensing-based technology commercialization exhibit greater IPO underpricing, while a firm's stock of patents mitigates this effect.\nDutch auction.\nA Dutch auction allows shares of an initial public offering to be allocated based only on price aggressiveness, with all successful bidders paying the same price per share. One version of the Dutch auction is OpenIPO, which is based on an auction system designed by economist William Vickrey. This auction method ranks bids from highest to lowest, then accepts the highest bids that allow all shares to be sold, with all winning bidders paying the same price. It is similar to the model used to auction Treasury bills, notes, and bonds since the 1990s. Before this, Treasury bills were auctioned through a discriminatory or pay-what-you-bid auction, in which the various winning bidders each paid the price (or yield) they bid, and thus the various winning bidders did not all pay the same price. Both discriminatory and uniform price or \"Dutch\" auctions have been used for IPOs in many countries, although only uniform price auctions have been used so far in the US. Large IPO auctions include Japan Tobacco, Singapore Telecom, BAA Plc and Google (ordered by size of proceeds).\nA variation of the Dutch auction has been used to take a number of U.S. companies public including Morningstar, Interactive Brokers Group, Overstock.com, Ravenswood Winery, Clean Energy Fuels, and Boston Beer Company. In 2004, Google used the Dutch auction system for its initial public offering. Traditional U.S. investment banks have shown resistance to the idea of using an auction process to engage in public securities offerings. The auction method allows for equal access to the allocation of shares and eliminates the favorable treatment accorded important clients by the underwriters in conventional IPOs. In the face of this resistance, the Dutch auction is still a little used method in U.S. public offerings, although there have been hundreds of auction IPOs in other countries.\nIn determining the success or failure of a Dutch auction, one must consider competing objectives. If the objective is to reduce risk, a traditional IPO may be more effective because the underwriter manages the process, rather than leaving the outcome in part to random chance in terms of who chooses to bid or what strategy each bidder chooses to follow. From the viewpoint of the investor, the Dutch auction allows everyone equal access. Moreover, some forms of the Dutch auction allow the underwriter to be more active in coordinating bids and even communicating general auction trends to some bidders during the bidding period. Some have also argued that a uniform price auction is more effective at price discovery, although the theory behind this is based on the assumption of independent private values (that the value of IPO shares to each bidder is entirely independent of their value to others, even though the shares will shortly be traded on the aftermarket). Theory that incorporates assumptions more appropriate to IPOs does not find that sealed bid auctions are an effective form of price discovery, although possibly some modified form of auction might give a better result.\nIn addition to the extensive international evidence that auctions have not been popular for IPOs, there is no U.S. evidence to indicate that the Dutch auction fares any better than the traditional IPO in an unwelcoming market environment. A Dutch auction IPO by WhiteGlove Health, Inc., announced in May 2011 was postponed in September of that year, after several failed attempts to price. An article in \"the Wall Street Journal\" cited the reasons as \"broader stock-market volatility and uncertainty about the global economy have made investors wary of investing in new stocks\".\nQuiet period.\nUnder American securities law, there are two-time windows commonly referred to as \"quiet periods\" during an IPO's history. The first and the one linked above is the period of time following the filing of the company's S-1 but before SEC staff declare the registration statement effective. During this time, issuers, company insiders, analysts, and other parties are legally restricted in their ability to discuss or promote the upcoming IPO (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2005).\nThe other \"quiet period\" refers to a period of 10 calendar days following an IPO's first day of public trading. During this time, insiders and any underwriters involved in the IPO are restricted from issuing any earnings forecasts or research reports for the company. When the quiet period is over, generally the underwriters will initiate research coverage on the firm. A three-day waiting period exists for any member that has acted as a manager or co-manager in a secondary offering.\nDelivery of shares.\nNot all IPOs are eligible for delivery settlement through the DTC system, which would then either require the physical delivery of the stock certificates to the clearing agent bank's custodian or a delivery versus payment (DVP) arrangement with the selling group firm.\nStag profit (flipping).\n\"Stag profit\" is a situation in the stock market before and immediately after a company's initial public offering (or any new issue of shares). A \"stag\" is a party or individual who subscribes to the new issue expecting the price of the stock to rise immediately upon the start of trading. Thus, stag profit is the financial gain accumulated by the party or individual resulting from the value of the shares rising. This term is more popular in the United Kingdom than in the United States. In the US, such investors are usually called flippers, because they get shares in the offering and then immediately turn around \"flipping\" or selling them on the first day of trading.\nLargest IPO markets.\nPrior to 2009, the United States was the leading issuer of IPOs in terms of total value. Since that time, however, China (Shanghai, Shenzhen and Hong Kong) has been the leading issuer, raising $73\u00a0billion (almost double the amount of money raised on the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq combined) up to the end of November 2011. India was the second-biggest IPO market in 2024, with $20.5 billion raised via 91 offerings.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63880", "revid": "50052465", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63880", "title": "Acarnania", "text": "Acarnania () is a region of west-central Greece that lies along the Ionian Sea, west of Aetolia, with the Achelous River for a boundary, and north of the gulf of Calydon, which is the entrance to the Gulf of Corinth. Today it forms the western part of the regional unit of Aetolia-Acarnania. The capital and principal city in ancient times was Stratos.\nAcarnania's foundation in Greek mythology was traditionally ascribed to Acarnan, son of Alcmaeon.\nHistory.\nPre-Peloponnesian War.\nThe name of Acarnania appears to have been unknown in the earliest times. Homer (8th century BC) only calls the country opposite Ithaca and Cephalonia, under the general name of \"Epeirus\" (\u1fce\u03b7\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2), or the mainland, although he frequently mentions the Aetolians.\nThe country is said to have been originally inhabited by the Taphii (or Teleboae), the Leleges, and the Curetes. The Taphii, or Teleboae were chiefly found in the islands off the western coast of Acarnania, where they maintained themselves by piracy. The Leleges were more widely disseminated, and were also in possession at one period of Aetolia, Locris, and other parts of Greece. The Curetes are said to have come from Aetolia, and to have settled in Acarnania, after they had been expelled from the former country by Aetolus and his followers. The name of Acarnania is derived from Acarnan, the son of Alcmaeon, who is said to have settled at the mouth of the Achelous. If this tradition is of any value, it would intimate that an Argive colony settled on the coast of Acarnania at an early period. \nIn the 7th century BC, Greek influence in the region became prominent when Corinth settled Anactorium, Sollium and Leucas, and Kefalonia settled Astacus. The original inhabitants of the country were driven more into the interior; they never made much progress in the arts of civilised life; and even at the time of the Peloponnesian War, they were a rude and barbarous people, engaged in continual wars with their neighbours, and living by robbery and piracy. The settlements of Alyzeia, Coronta, Limnaea, Medion, Oeniadae, Palaerus, Phoitiai and Stratus are also mentioned by Thucydides, this latter city being the seat of a loose confederation of Acarnanian powers that was maintained until the late 1st century BC.\nThe ancient Acarnanians, however, were Greeks, and as such were allowed to contend in the great Pan-Hellenic games, although they were closely connected with their neighbors, the Agraeans and Amphilochians on the Ambracian Gulf, who were barbarian or non-Hellenic nations. Like other rude mountaineers, the Acarnanians are praised for their fidelity and courage. They formed good light-armed troops, and were excellent slingers. They lived, for the most part, dispersed in villages, retiring, when attacked, to the mountains. Strabo relates that they were united, however, in a political League (the Acarnanian League), of which Aristotle wrote an account in a work now lost (). Thucydides mentions a hill, named Olpae, near the Amphilochian Argos, which the Acarnanians had fortified as a place of judicial meeting for the settlement of disputes. The meetings of the League were usually held at Stratus, which was the chief town in Acarnania; but, in the time of the Romans, the meetings took place either at Thyrium, or at Leucas, the latter of which places became, at that time, the chief city in Acarnania. \nAt an early period, when part of Amphilochia belonged to the Acarnanians, they used to hold a public judicial congress at Olpae, a fortified hill about from Argos Amphilochicum. Of the constitution of their League, we have scarcely any particulars. We learn from an inscription found at Punta, the site of ancient Actium, that there were a council and a general assembly of the people, by which decrees were passed: . At the head of the League, there was a strategus (\u03a3\u03c4\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b7\u03b3\u03cc\u03c2) or general; and the Council had a secretary (\u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03bc\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b5\u03cd\u03c2), who appears to have been a person of importance, as in the Achaean and Aetolian Leagues. The chief priest (\u1f31\u03b5\u03c1\u03b1\u03c0\u03cc\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2) of the temple of Apollo at Actium seems to have been a person of high rank; and either his name or that of the strategus was employed for official dates, like that of the first Archon at Athens.\nClassical and Hellenistic period.\nBecause it is located strategically on the maritime route to Italy, Acarnania was involved in many wars. Their hatred against the Corinthian settlers, who had deprived them of all their best ports, naturally led the Acarnanians to side with the Athenians; but the immediate cause of their alliance with the latter arose from the expulsion of the Amphilochians from the town of Argos Amphilochicum by the Corinthian settlers from Ambracia, about 432 BC. The Acarnanians espoused the cause of the expelled Amphilochians, and in order to obtain the restoration of the latter, they applied for assistance to Athens. The Athenians accordingly sent an expedition under Phormio, who took Argos, expelled the Ambraciots, and restored the town to the Amphilochians and Acarnanians. An alliance was now formally concluded between the Acarnamians and Athenians. The only towns of Acarnania which did not join it were Oeniadae and Astacus. \nThe Acarnanians were of great service in maintaining the supremacy of Athens in the western part of Greece, and they distinguished themselves particularly in 426 BC, when they gained a signal victory under the command of Demosthenes over the Peloponnesians and Ambraciots at the Battle of Olpae. At the conclusion of this campaign they concluded a peace with the Ambraciots, although they still continued allies of Athens. In 391 BC we find the Acarnanians engaged in war with the Achaeans, who had taken possession of Calydon in Aetolia; and as the latter were hard-pressed by the Acarnanians, they applied for aid to the Lacedaemonians (Spartans), who sent an army into Acarnania, commanded by King Agesilaus. The latter ravaged the country, but his expedition was not attended with any lasting consequences, whilst the cities of Acarnania surrendered to the Lacedaemonians under Agesilaus, and continued to be Spartan allies for a time, they joined the Second Athenian League in 375 BC. The Acarnanians later sided with the Boeotians in their fight against Sparta, and with Athens against Philip II of Macedon at Chaeronea.\nAfter the time of Alexander the Great, in 314 BC, at the behest of the Macedonian king Cassander, the settlements of Acarnania lying near the Aetolian border were conglomerated into fewer, larger settlements. Still, border conflicts with the Aetolians were frequent, and led to Acarnania's territory being partitioned between Aetolia and Epirus in, c. 250 BC. After the fall of the king of Epirus, the Acarnanian territory that had been given to Epirus regained its independence, and Leucas became the capital of the region, but conflict with the Aetolians remained. The Acarnanians in consequence united themselves closely to the Macedonian kings, to whom they remained faithful in their various vicissitudes of fortune. They refused to desert the cause of Philip in his war with the Romans, and it was not till after the capture of Leucas, their principal town, and the defeat of Philip at the Battle of Cynoscephalae that they submitted to Rome. When Antiochus III king of Syria, invaded Greece, 191 BC, the Acarnanians were persuaded by their countryman Mnasilochus to espouse his cause; but on the expulsion of Antiochus from Greece, they came again under the supremacy of Rome. In the settlement of the affairs of Greece by Aemilius Paulus and the Roman commissioners after the defeat of Perseus (168 BC), Leucas was separated from Acarnania, and the city of Thyrreion was appointed the new capital. \nRoman and Byzantine period.\nIn the 1st century BC, Acarnania suffered greatly at the hands of pirates, and in Roman civil wars. When Greece was reduced to the form of a Roman province, it is doubtful whether Acarnania was annexed to the province of Achaea or of Epirus, but it is mentioned at a later time as part of Epirus. The inhabitants of several of its towns were removed by Augustus to Nicopolis, which he founded after the Battle of Actium, and Acarnania fell under that city's rule; and in the time of Augustus emperor the country is described by Strabo as utterly worn out and exhausted.\nIn 395, it became part of the Eastern Roman Empire. When the empire was attacked by Western powers in the Fourth Crusade (1204), Acarnania passed to the Despotate of Epirus and in 1348 it was conquered by Serbia. Then in 1480 it fell to the Ottoman Empire. Since 1832 it has been part of Greece.\nGeography.\nAcarnania is composed of three main regions: 1) a rocky coastline, 2) a rugged strip of mountain range that follows the coastline, and 3) plains lying between these mountains and the Achelous River.\nAnciently, Acarnania was reckoned the most westerly province of Greece, bounded on the north by the Ambracian Gulf, on the northeast by Amphilochia, on the west and southwest by the Ionian Sea, and on the east by Aetolia. It contained about . Under the Romans, or probably a little earlier, the river Achelous formed the boundary between Acarnania and Aetolia; but in the time of the Peloponnesian War, the territory of Oeniadae, which was one of the Acarnanian towns, extended east of this river. The interior of Acarnania was covered with forests and mountains of no great elevation. Between these mountains there are several lakes, and many fertile valleys. The chief river of the country is the Achelous, which in the lower part of its course flows through a vast plain of great natural fertility, called after itself the Paracheloitis. By the 19th century, the plain was covered with marshes, and the greater part of it appeared to have been formed by the alluvial depositions of the Achelous. Owing to this circumstance, and to the river having frequently altered its channel, the southern part of the coast of Acarnania has undergone numerous changes since antiquity. The chief affluent of the Achelous in Acarnania is the Anapus (\u1f0c\u03bd\u03b1\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2), which flowed into the main stream 80 stadia south of Stratus. \nThere are several promontories on the coast, but of these only two are especially named by writers in antiquity, the promontory of Actium and that of Crithote (\u039a\u03c1\u03b9\u03b8\u03c9\u03c4\u03ae), on the west coast, forming one side of the small bay, on which the town of Astacus stood. Of the inland lakes, the only one mentioned by name by the classical writers is that of Melite (\u039c\u03b5\u03bb\u03af\u03c4\u03b7; the modern Lake Trichonida), 30 stadia long and 20 broad, north of the mouth of the Achelous, in the territory of Oeniadae. There was a lagoon, or salt lake, between Leucas and the Ambracian gulf, to which Strabo gives the name of Myrtuntium (\u039c\u03c5\u03c1\u03c4\u03bf\u03cd\u03bd\u03c4\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd). Although the soil of Acarnania was fertile, it was not much cultivated by the inhabitants. The products of the country are rarely mentioned by the ancient writers. Pliny speaks of iron mines, and also of a pearl-fishery off Actium. The chief wealth of the inhabitants consisted in their herds and flocks, which pastured in the rich meadows in the lower part of the Achelous. There were numerous islands off the western coast of Acarnania. Of these the most important were the Echinades, extending from the mouth of the Achelous along the shore to the North; the Taphiae Insulae, lying between Leucas and Acarnania, and Leucas itself, which originally formed part of the mainland of Acarnania, but was afterwards separated from the latter by a canal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
