{"id": "59022", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59022", "title": "Pierce Egan", "text": "British journalist, sportswriter, and writer\nPierce Egan (1772\u20131849) was a British journalist, sportswriter, and writer on popular culture. His popular book \"Life in London\", published in 1821, was adapted into the stage play \"Tom and Jerry, or Life in London\" later that year, which became the first play to have a continuous run of 100 performances in London while at the Adelphi Theatre in the West End.\nCoining the term \"the Sweet Science\" as an epithet for prizefighting \u2014 which he dubbed \"the Sweet Science of Bruising\" as a description of England\u2019s bare-knuckle fight scene, the first volume of his prizefighting articles, \"Boxiana; or Sketches of Ancient and Modern Pugilism\", was published in 1813.\nLife.\nEgan's parents were Irish but he may have been born in the London area. He went into the printing trade, and was a compositor for George Smeeton in 1812. He established himself as the country's leading reporter of sporting events, which at the time meant mainly prize-fights and horse-races.\nHe died on 3 August 1849 and was buried on 10 August on the western side of Highgate Cemetery, North London. His plot (no.3267) no longer has a headstone or any identifying memorial. The inscription on his grave was published in the book \"the Monumental Inscriptions of Middlesex Vol 2\": \"Sacred to the memory of Pierce Egan, Author of several popular works, who died on the 3rd August 1849. Requiescat in Pace\", but the year of death is incorrectly recorded as 1840.\nWorks.\nIn 1814, he wrote, set and printed a book about the relationship between the Prince Regent (later George IV) and Mary Robinson, called \"The Mistress of Royalty, or the Loves of Florizel and Perdita.\" However, Egan soon became known for his sporting work.\nFour volumes of \"Boxiana; or Sketches of Ancient and Modern Pugilism\" appeared, lavishly illustrated, between 1813 and 1824. Following a dispute with his publisher, Egan was replaced for the fourth \"Boxiana\" volume (replaced by \"Jon Bee\"), the court permitting Egan continued rights to the title provided he used the \"New Series\" prefix. Two volumes of Egan's \"New Series Boxiana\" were published in 1828/29.\nIn 1821, Egan announced the publication of a regular journal: \"Life in London\", appearing monthly at a shilling a time. It was to be illustrated by George Cruikshank (1792\u20131878), and was dedicated to the king, George IV, who at one time had received Egan at court. The first edition of \"Life in London or, the Day and Night Scenes of Jerry Hawthorn, esq., and his elegant friend, Corinthian Tom, accompanied by Bob Logic, the Oxonian, in their rambles and sprees through the Metropolis\" appeared on 15 July 1821.\nEgan's creation was an instant success, and was an early favourite of Thackeray's. Pirate versions appeared, featuring such figures as \"Bob Tallyho\", \"Dick Wildfire\" and the like. Print-makers speedily knocked off cuts featuring the various \"stars\" and the real-life public flocked to the \"sporting\" addresses that Egan had his heroes frequent. There was a translation into French. At least six plays were based on Egan's characters, contributing to yet more sales. One of these was exported to America, launching the \"Tom and Jerry\" craze there. The version created by William Thomas Moncrieff was praised as \"The Beggar's Opera of its day\". Moncrieff's production of \"Tom and Jerry, or Life in London\" ran continuously at the Adelphi Theatre for two seasons and it was the dramatist's work as much as the author's that did so much to popularise the book's trademark use of fashionable slang. \"Life in London\" appeared until 1828, when Egan closed it down.\nEgan published a report of the trial of John Thurtell and Joseph Hunt, for the murder of William Weare. Thurtell allegedly mentioned, just seven hours before his execution, that among his final wishes was a desire to read Egan's coverage of a recent prizefight. Egan wrote also satirical legal pieces such as \"The Fancy Tog's Man versus Young Sadboy, the Milling Quaker\".\nIn 1824, he launched a new journal, \"Pierce Egan's Life in London and Sporting Guide\", a weekly newspaper priced at eightpence-halfpenny. Focusing on crime and sport, this newspaper lasted until November 1827, after which it merged with Bell's Life in London. Other works included sporting anecdotes, theatrical autobiographies, guide-books, and 'fancy ditties'. Among his later efforts, in 1838, was a series of pieces on the delights to be found on and immediately adjacent to the Thames. It was dedicated, with permission, to the young Queen Victoria and featured the illustrative work of his son Pierce Egan the Younger.\nIn 1823, Egan produced an edition of Francis Grose's \"Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue\" (1785 et seq.), including mainly sporting Regency slang. He also cut the \"coarse\" and \"broad\" expressions which Grose had allowed.\nThe 1788 and 1823 definitions of \"Academy, or Pushing School\" show the extent of his wish to soften definitions \"where propriety pointed out such a course as not only necessary, but, perhaps, essential\". However, although he noted in his Preface that some slang terms had developed a different meaning, giving as an example \"rum\"\u2014which Grose had defined as \"Fine, good, valuable\", but which \"is now generally used for the very opposite qualities\"\u2014Egan allowed Grose's definition to remain in the dictionary itself.\nDon Atyeo, author of \"Blood &amp; Guts: Violence in Sports\" (1979), wrote that:\"Boxiana\" is riddled with \"Fancy\" slang: '\"Ogles\" were blackened, \"peepers\" plunged into darkness, \"tripe-shops\" received \"staggerers\", \"ivories\" were cracked, \"domino boxes\" shattered, and \"claret\" flowed in a steady stream.\nAnd as Egan's character Corinthian Tom explains in \"Life in London\":\nA kind of \"cant\" phraseology is current from one end of the Metropolis to the other, and you will scarcely be able to move a single step, my dear JERRY, without consulting a \"Slang\" Dictionary, or having some friend at your elbow to explain the strange expressions which, at every turn, will assail your ear. Such a dictionary is what Egan offers, hoping in sum that his efforts work \"to improve, and not to degrade mankind; to remove \"ignorance\", and put the UNWARY on their guard; to rouse the \"sleepy\", and to keep them AWAKE; to render those persons who are a little UP, more FLY: and to cause every one to be \"down\" to those tricks, manoeuvres and impositions practised in life, which daily cross the paths of both young and old.\"\nPublications.\nJournals:\nBooks:\nAdaptations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59024", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59024", "title": "List of knots", "text": "This list of knots includes many alternative names for common knots and lashings. Knot names have evolved over time, and there are many conflicting or confusing naming issues. The overhand knot, for example, is also known as the thumb knot. The figure-eight knot is also known as the Savoy knot or the Flemish knot.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59027", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59027", "title": "Yaren, Nauru", "text": ""}
{"id": "59028", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59028", "title": "Yaren", "text": "District and de facto capital of Nauru\nYaren (in earlier times Makwa/Moqua) is a district of the Pacific island country of Nauru. It is the \"de facto\" capital of Nauru and is coextensive with Yaren Constituency. Yaren is located on the southern coast of the island and is the location of Nauru's government offices.\nHistory.\nThe district was created in 1968. Its original name, Makwa (or Moqua), refers to Moqua Well, an underground lake and primary source of drinking water for the Nauruan people.\nGeography.\nYaren is located in the south of the island. Its area is , and its elevation was as of 2007[ [update]]. To the north of Yaren is Buada, to the east is Meneng and to the west is Boe.\nClimate.\nYaren has a marine tropical rainforest climate (K\u00f6ppen Af) with hot, humid conditions across the year.\nAdministration.\nYaren (and sometimes Aiwo) is usually listed as the capital of Nauru. However, this is incorrect; the republic does not have cities nor an official capital. Yaren is accepted by the United Nations as the \"main district\".\nEnglish and Nauruan, the official languages of Nauru, are spoken in the district.\nGovernment and administrative buildings.\nThe following government offices are located in this district:\nConstituency.\nYaren also constitutes a political constituency. It returns two members to the Parliament of Nauru.\nEducation.\nThe primary and secondary schools serving all of Nauru are Yaren Primary School in Yaren District (Years 1\u20133), Nauru Primary School in Meneng District (Years 4\u20136), Nauru College in Denigomodu District (Years 7\u20139), and Nauru Secondary School (Years 10\u201312) in Yaren District.\nThe Nauru Learning Village in Yaren houses the University of the South Pacific Nauru Campus, the Nauru Technical &amp; Vocational Education Training Centre, and Nauru Secondary.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "59033", "revid": "1453997", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59033", "title": "Geelong", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeelong ( ; Wathawurrung: \"Djilang\"/\"Djalang\") is a port city in Victoria, Australia, located at the eastern end of Corio Bay (the smaller western portion of Port Phillip Bay) and the left bank of Barwon River, about southwest of Melbourne. With an estimated population of 282,809 in 2023, Geelong is the second-largest city in the state of Victoria. It is the administrative centre for the City of Greater Geelong municipality, which is Port Phillip's only regional metropolitan area, and covers all the urban, rural and coastal reserves around the city including the entire Bellarine Peninsula and running from the plains of Lara in the north to the rolling hills of Waurn Ponds to the south, with Corio Bay to the east and the Barrabool Hills to the west.\nThe traditional owners of the land on which Geelong sits are the Wadawurrung (also known as Wathaurong) Aboriginal people of the Kulin nation. The modern name of Geelong, first recorded in 1827, was derived from the local Wadawurrung name for the region, \"Djilang\", thought to mean \"land\", \"cliffs\" or \"tongue of land or peninsula\". The area was first surveyed by the European settlers in 1838, three weeks after Melbourne. During the 1850s Victorian gold rush, Geelong experienced a brief boom as the main port to the goldfields of central Victoria. The town then diversified into manufacturing, and during the 1860s became one of the largest manufacturing centres in Australia with its wool mills, ropeworks, and paper mills. During the city's early years, inhabitants of Geelong were often called Geelongites or Pivotonians, derived from the city's nickname of \"The Pivot\", referring to the city's role as a shipping and rail hub for Ballarat and the Western District.\nGeelong was proclaimed a city in 1910, with industrial growth from this time until the 1960s establishing the city as a manufacturing centre for the state, and the population grew to over 100,000 by the mid-1960s. Population increases during the 21st century were largely due to growth in service industries, as the manufacturing sector has declined. Redevelopment of the inner city has occurred since the 1990s, as well as gentrification of inner suburbs, and currently has a population growth rate higher than the national average.\nToday, Geelong stands as an emerging healthcare, education and advanced manufacturing centre. The city's economy is shifting quickly, and, despite experiencing the drawbacks of losing much of its heavy manufacturing, it is seeing much growth in other tertiary sectors, positioning itself as one of the leading non-capital Australian cities. It is now Australia's second fastest-growing city. Geelong is regarded as the \"Gateway City\" due to its critical location to surrounding western Victorian regional centres, providing a transport corridor for surrounding regions to the state capital Melbourne. It is also home to the Geelong Football Club, the second-oldest club in the Australian Football League.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe name Geelong comes from \"Djilang\", used by the Wadawurrung traditional owners of the area at the time of settlement.\nEarly history and foundation.\nThe area of Geelong and the Bellarine Peninsula are the traditional lands of the Wadawurrung (Wathaurong) Indigenous Australian tribe. The first non-Indigenous person recorded as visiting the region was Lieutenant John Murray, who commanded the brig . After anchoring outside Port Phillip Heads (the narrow entrance to Port Phillip, onto which both Geelong and Melbourne now front), on 1 February 1802, he sent a small boat with six men to explore. Led by John Bowen, they explored the immediate area, returning to \"Lady Nelson\" on 4 February. On reporting favourable findings, \"Lady Nelson\" entered Port Phillip on 14 February, and did not leave until 12 March. During this time, Murray explored the Geelong area and, whilst on the far side of the bay, claimed the entire area for Britain. He named the bay Port King, after Philip Gidley King, then Governor of New South Wales. Governor King later renamed the bay Port Phillip after the first governor of New South Wales, Arthur Phillip. Arriving not long after Murray was Matthew Flinders, who entered Port Phillip on 27 April 1802. He charted the entire bay, including the Geelong area, believing he was the first to sight the huge expanse of water, but in a rush to reach Sydney before winter set in, he left Port Phillip on 3 May.\nIn January 1803, Surveyor-General Charles Grimes arrived at Port Phillip in the sloop and mapped the area, including the future site of Geelong, but reported the area was unfavourable for settlement and returned to Sydney on 27 February. In October of the same year, led by Lieutenant Colonel David Collins arrived in the bay to establish the Sullivan Bay penal colony. Collins was dissatisfied with the area chosen, and sent a small party led by First Lieutenant J.H. Tuckey to investigate alternative sites. The party spent 22 to 27 October on the north shore of Corio Bay, where the first Aboriginal death at the hands of a European in Victoria occurred.\nThe next European visit to the area was by the explorers Hamilton Hume and William Hovell. They reached the northern edge of Corio Bay \u2013 the area of Port Phillip that Geelong now fronts \u2013 on 16 December 1824, and it was at this time they reported that the Aboriginals called the area \"Corayo\", the bay being called \"Djillong\". Hume and Hovell had been contracted to travel overland from Sydney to Port Phillip, and having achieved this, they stayed the night and began their return journey two days later on 18 December.\nThe convict William Buckley escaped from the Sullivan Bay settlement in 1803, and lived among the Wadawurrung people for 32 years on the Bellarine Peninsula. In 1835, John Batman used Indented Head as his base camp, leaving behind several employees whilst he returned to Tasmania (then known as Van Diemen's Land) for more supplies and his family. In this same year, Buckley surrendered to the party led by John Helder Wedge and was later pardoned by Lieutenant-Governor Sir George Arthur, and subsequently given the position of interpreter to the natives.\nIn March 1836, three squatters, David Fisher, James Strachan, and George Russell, arrived on \"Caledonia\" and settled the area. Geelong was first surveyed by Assistant Surveyor W. H. Smythe three weeks after Melbourne, and was gazetted as a town on 10 October 1838. There was already a church, hotel, store, wool store, and 82 houses, and the town population was 545. By 1841, the first wool had been sent to England and a regular steamer service was running between Geelong and Melbourne. Captain Foster Fyans was commissioned as the local Police Magistrate in 1837 and established himself on the Barwon River at the site of the area of present-day Fyansford. Fyans arranged the first muster of the Indigenous population and 275 Aboriginal people were found to be living in the area. Fyans distributed blankets, sugar and flour to these people but soon ordered his soldiers to \"click their triggers\" at them when a lack of blankets caused anger. Fyans constructed a breakwater to improve the water supply to the city by preventing the salty lower reaches from mixing with fresh water and pooling water. In 1839, Charles Sievwright, the newly appointed Assistant Protector of Aborigines (for the western district) sets up camp on the Barwon River near Fyans ford.\nThe Geelong Keys were discovered around 1845 by Governor Charles La Trobe on Corio Bay. They were embedded in the stone in such a way that he believed that they had been there for 100\u2013150 years, possibly dropped by Portuguese explorers. In 1849, Fyans was nominated as the inaugural Mayor of the Geelong Town Council and renowned fly fishing author Alfred Ronalds engraved the town seal. An early settler of Geelong, Alexander Thomson, for which the area of Thomson in Geelong East is named, settled on the Barwon River, and was Mayor of Geelong on five occasions from 1850 to 1858.\nThe population was 1,370 by 1848.\n1850s: Gold rush.\nGold was discovered in nearby Ballarat in 1851, causing the Geelong population to grow to 23,000 people by the mid-1850s. To counter this, a false map was issued by Melbourne interests to new arrivals, showing the quickest road to the goldfields as being via Melbourne. The first issue of the \"Geelong Advertiser\" newspaper was published in 1840 by James Harrison, who also built the world's first ether vapour compression cycle ice-making and refrigeration machine in 1844, later being commissioned by a brewery in 1856 to build a machine that cooled beer.\nThe Geelong Hospital was opened in 1852, and construction on the Geelong City Hall commenced in 1855. Development of the Port of Geelong began with the creation of the first shipping channel in Corio Bay in 1853. The Geelong-to-Melbourne railway was built by the Geelong &amp; Melbourne Railway Company in 1857. Rabbits were introduced to Australia in 1859 by Thomas Austin, who imported them from England for hunting purposes at his Barwon Park property near Winchelsea. One of Geelong's best-known department stores, Bright &amp; Hitchcocks, was established in 1861, and the HM Prison Geelong built using convict labour, was opened in 1864.\nIn 1866, Graham Berry started a newspaper, the \"Geelong Register\", as a rival to the established \"Geelong Advertiser\". When this proved unsuccessful, he bought the \"Advertiser\" and made himself editor of the now-merged papers. Using the paper as a platform, he was elected for Geelong West in 1869. In 1877, he switched to Geelong, which he represented until 1886, and served as Victorian Premier in 1875, 1877\u20131880, and 1880\u20131881. On the Market Square in the middle of the city, a clock tower was erected in 1856, and an Exhibition Building was opened in 1879.\n1860s: The 'Sleepy Hollow'.\nThe gold rush had seen Ballarat and Bendigo grow larger than Geelong in terms of population. Melbourne critics dubbed Geelong 'Sleepy Hollow', a tag that recurred many times in the following years. A number of industries became established in Geelong, including Victoria's first woollen mill at South Geelong in 1868. In 1869, the clipper \"Lightning\" caught fire at the Yarra Street pier and was cast adrift in Corio Bay to burn, before being sunk by artillery fire. Improvements to transport saw Geelong emerge as the centre of the Western District of Victoria, with railway lines extended towards Colac in 1876, and to Queenscliff in 1879. Construction of the Hopetoun shipping channel began in 1881 and completed in 1893.\nThe Geelong Cup was first held in 1872, and Victoria's first long-distance telephone call was made from Geelong to Queenscliff on 8 January 1878, only one year after the invention of the device itself. Geelong was also the home of a prosperous wine industry until the emergence of the sap-sucking insect \"Phylloxera vastatrix\" at Fyansford in 1875, which led to the Victorian Government ordering the destruction of all vines in the Geelong area to prevent the spread of the pest, killing the industry until the 1960s. Between 1886 and 1889, the central business district's major banks and insurance companies erected new premises in a solid and ornate character. The existing Geelong Post Office was built during this time and the Gordon Technical College was established. Further industrial growth occurred, with the Fyansford cement works being established in 1890.\nThe town became referred to as \"The Pivot\" in the 1860s, owing to its being a rail and shipping hub for western Victoria.\n1900s: A city develops.\nThe town of Geelong officially became a city on 8 December 1910. The city gained a number of essential services, with electric light supplied by the Geelong Power Station starting in 1902, the Geelong Harbour Trust was formed in December 1905, and the Geelong Waterworks and Sewerage Trust formed in 1908. Electric trams began operation in 1912, travelling from the city centre to the suburbs until their demise in 1956. The first of many stores on the Market Square was opened in 1913, and the first Gala Day festival was held in 1916.\nGeelong's industrial growth accelerated in the 1920s: woollen mills, fertiliser plants, Ford's vehicle plant at Norlane, and the Corio whisky distillery were all established in this period. The \"Geelong Advertiser\" radio station 3GL (now K-Rock) commenced transmission in 1930, the Great Ocean Road was opened in 1932, and in 1934, the T &amp; G Building opened on the most prominent intersection in the city, the corner of Ryrie and Moorabool Streets.\nBy 1936, Geelong had displaced Ballarat as Victoria's second-largest city.\nIn 1938, one of the last Port Philip Bay steamers, \"Edina\", made its final trip to Geelong, ending a period of seaside excursions and contests for the fastest trip. The Eastern Beach foreshore beautification and pool was completed in 1939 after almost 10 years of work.\nOn the eve of World War\u00a0II, the International Harvester works were opened beside Ford at North Shore, along with a grain elevator at nearby Corio Quay, and the Shell Australia oil refinery.\nPost-war period.\nGovernment housing was constructed in the suburbs of East Geelong, Norlane, North Shore, and Corio from the 1950s. The banks of the Barwon River burst in 1952, inundating nearby Belmont Common.\nGeelong continued to expand with Corio, Highton, and Belmont growing at such a rate that in February 1967, Geelong accounted for 21% of private home development in Greater Melbourne. Private vehicles became the city's major mode of transport. The first parking meters in the city were introduced in 1961, new petrol stations were constructed and the city's first supermarket, operated by Woolworths, opened in 1965. Later, support came for Cycling in Geelong with Australia's first bike plan in 1977.[3][4]\nIndustrial growth continued with a second cement works operating at Waurn Ponds by 1964 and the Alcoa Point Henry aluminium smelter constructed in 1962.\nFederal government policy changes on tariff protection led to the closure of many Geelong industrial businesses from the 1970s. Most woollen mills closed in 1974 and hectares of warehouse space in the city centre were left empty after wool-handling practices changed. The Target head office opened in North Geelong, Deakin University was established at Waurn Ponds in 1974, and the Geelong Performing Arts Centre opened in 1981. Later, the Australian Animal Health Laboratory was opened in 1985, and the National Wool Museum in 1988.\nMarket Square, the first enclosed shopping centre in the city, was opened in 1985, with neighbouring Bay City Plaza opened in 1988. The Pyramid Building Society, founded in Geelong in 1959, collapsed in 1990, leaving debts of AU$1.3\u00a0billion to over 200,000 depositors, and causing the Geelong economy to stagnate. On 18 May 1993, the City of Greater Geelong was formed by the amalgamation of a number of smaller municipalities with the former City of Geelong. The Waterfront Geelong redevelopment, started in 1994, was designed to enhance use and appreciation of Corio Bay and in 1995 the Barwon River overflowed in the worst flood since 1952.\n21st century.\nIn 2000, the Carousel Pavilion was opened as a landmark and symbol of the refurbishment of the Geelong waterfront. In 2004, Avalon Airport was upgraded to accommodate interstate passenger travel, providing a base for low-cost airline Jetstar to serve the Melbourne and Geelong urban areas. Geelong is planned to expand towards the south coast, with 2,500 hectares of land to become a major suburban development for 55,000 to 65,000 people, known as Armstrong Creek. In 2006, construction began on the Geelong Ring Road, designed to replace the Princes Highway through Geelong from Corio to Waurn Ponds. It opened in 2009.\nMore than AU$500-million-worth of major construction was under way in 2007. Major projects include the $150-million Westfield Geelong expansion works, involving a flyover of Yarra Street, the city's first Big W store, and an additional 70 new speciality stores; the $37-million Deakin Waterfront campus redevelopment, and the $23-million Deakin Medical School; the $50-million Edgewater apartment development on the waterfront; a number of multimillion-dollar office developments in the CBD; and a new $30-million aquatic centre in Waurn Ponds.\nMajor developments within Geelong are advocated by influential, non-government group the https:// and the region's local government alliance, http://.\nThe City of Greater Geelong and four other local municipalities form part of the alliance which identifies the Geelong region's priorities, and advocates all levels of government for funding and implement the projects. G21 developed http:// which was launched by https:// in 2007. It was the approved strategic plan for the Geelong region. In addition, major projects such as the Geelong Ring Road Connections and duplication of the Princes Highway West obtained funding due to the combined efforts of the region's municipalities. As at May 2017, a further http:// are planned for the Geelong region.\nThe Victoria Government announced the relocation of the Transport Accident Commission headquarters from Melbourne to Geelong in October 2006, which created 850 jobs and an annual economic benefit over $59\u00a0million to the Geelong region. The construction of the $80-million Brougham Street headquarters was completed in late 2008. In November 2008, Ford Australia announced that its Australian-designed I6 engine would be re-engineered to meet the latest emissions regulations, and that consequently the engine manufacturing plant would be upgraded (however, all manufacturing of motor vehicles in Geelong and elsewhere throughout Australia ceased by 2017).\nA change to the city skyline is occurring with a number of modern apartment buildings on the Waterfront and central business district planned or under construction. On 10 July 2008, approval was given for a $100-million twin-tower apartment complex of 16 and 12 floors to be built on Mercer St in the city's western edge. The towers will become the tallest buildings in the city, taking the title from the Mercure Hotel. Further highrise developments are planned as part of the City of Greater Geelong's Geelong Western Edge strategic plan. A$17-million 11-story apartment tower has also recently been proposed to be built next to the Deakin Waterfront Campus.\nIn 2012, a design competition for a \"city icon\" was run for the City of Geelong by Deakin University and Senia Lawyers. The recipient of the prize and winning design entry was JOH Architects and their design titled \"The Sea Dragon\".\nGeelong's new Library and Heritage Centre opened to the public in November 2015. The new addition to Geelong offers new research facilities, display areas and hosts Geelong's extensive heritage, modern and Indigenous. The new library was awarded the Sir Zelman Cowen Award for Public Architecture in 2016.\nGeelong is subject to a major revival effort: the Green Spine Project. The Green Spine project aims to connect Johnstone Park to the Botanic Gardens by a continuous line of trees via Malop Street. The redevelopment of Malop Street will see the installation of bike lanes separated from both pedestrians and local traffic by greenery, the design is an Australian first. This project includes the installation of art sculptures and street art throughout the city centre. Major redevelopments are also occurring at Johnstone Park, with a new raingarden installation, and Lt Malop Street is seeing more upgrades.\nIn the suburbs, Geelong West's Pakington Street is seeing major upgrades, with new plantings and improvements to many of the shops. Shannon Avenue in Manifold Heights will see redevelopment to make it more pedestrian friendly. To Geelong's north, Rippleside is undergoing major changes, with the development of Balmoral Quay which will see Rippleside Park and nearby St Helens Park connected via a waterfront footpath, as well as beach restoration and a boat dock expansion.\nRecently new high rise buildings are being built giving Geelong more jobs and housing. Worksafe Victoria opened up a new 14-storey building on Malop St. It opened in mid-2018 and was the tallest building until it was announced that two residential high rises would be built and completed in late 2019. They are called The Mercer and Miramar Apartments.\nGeography.\nGeelong is located on the shores of the western tip of Corio Bay, a southwestern inlet of Port Phillip Bay. During clear weather, the distant Melbourne skyline is visible from higher areas of Geelong when viewed across the waters of Port Phillip. The Barwon River flows through the southern fringe of the Geelong city centre before entering Lake Connewarre and the estuary at Barwon Heads before draining into the Bass Strait. The city is situated just east of the gap between the Otway Ranges and Brisbane Ranges, and commands the only lowland passage between the Werribee Plain and Western Volcanic Plains.\nGeologically, the oldest rocks in the area date back to the Cambrian period 500 million years ago, with volcanic activities occurring in the Devonian period 350 million years ago. In prehistoric times water covered much of the lowlands that are now Geelong, with the Barwon River estuary located at Belmont Common, the course of the river being changed when Mount Moriac erupted and lava was sent eastwards towards Geelong.\nTo the east of the city are the Bellarine Hills and the undulating plains of the Bellarine Peninsula. To the west are the sandstone-derived Barrabool Hills and basalt Mount Duneed, and the volcanic plains to the north of Geelong extend to the Brisbane Ranges and the You Yangs. Soils vary from sandy loam, basalt plains, and river loam to rich volcanic soils, suitable for intensive farming, grazing, forestry, and viticulture.\nMany materials used to construct buildings were quarried from Geelong, such as bluestone from the You Yangs and sandstone from the Brisbane Ranges. A small number of brown coal deposits exist in the Geelong region, most notably at Anglesea, where it has been mined to fuel Alcoa's Anglesea Power Station since 1969. Limestone has also been quarried for cement production at Fyansford since 1888, and Waurn Ponds since 1964.\nCity and suburbs.\nGeelong has over 60 suburbs, including the following:\nAnakie, \nArmstrong Creek, \nAvalon, \nBalliang, \nBarwon Heads, \nBatesford, \nBell Park, \nBell Post Hill, \nBellarine, \nBelmont, \nBreakwater, \nBreamlea, \nCeres, \nCharlemont, \nCity of Greater Geelong, \nClifton Springs, \nConnewarre, \nCorio, \nCurlewis, \nDrumcondra, \nDrysdale, \nEast Geelong, \nFyansford, \nGeelong, \nGeelong West, \nGrovedale, \nHamlyn Heights, \nHerne Hill, \nHighton, \nIndented Head, \nLara, \nLeopold, \nLittle River, \nLovely Banks, \nManifold Heights, \nMannerim, \nMarcus Hill, \nMarshall, \nMoolap, \nMoorabool, \nMount Duneed, \nNewcomb, \nNewtown, \nNorlane, \nNorth Geelong, \nNorth Shore, \nOcean Grove, \nPoint Lonsdale, \nPoint Wilson, \nPortarlington, \nQueenscliff, \nRippleside, \nSouth Geelong, \nSt Albans Park, \nSt Leonards,\nStaughton Vale, \nSwan Bay, \nThomson, \nWallington, \nWandana Heights, \nWaurn Ponds, \nand Whittington.\nDevelopment in Geelong started on the shores of Corio Bay in what is now the inner city. Development later spread to the south towards the Barwon River, and the hill of Newtown and Geelong West. Major development south of the river in Belmont did not start until the 1920s, stimulated by the construction of a new bridge over the river in 1926, and the extension of the Geelong tramway system in 1927. Industrial areas were traditionally located on the Corio Bay for port access, or the Barwon River for waste disposal.\nIn the interwar and post-World War II years, heavy industry continued to establish itself in the flatter northern suburbs, where today industries such as the Geelong Oil Refinery and Ford engine plant reside. Residential development also spread to Corio and Norlane in the north, with new Housing Commission of Victoria estates built to cater for employees of the new industries. From the 1960s, residential growth spread to the Highton hills in the south and North Geelong following prosperous industries like the gasworks, followed by Grovedale in the 1970s. A number of light industrial areas were also established in Breakwater, Moolap and South Geelong.\nChanging cargo-handling methods at the Port of Geelong left woolstores in inner Geelong unused, redevelopment beginning in the 1980s with the expansion of Westfield Geelong towards Corio Bay, and culminating in the Waterfront Geelong development. Gentrification of former working-class inner suburbs such as Geelong West, North Geelong, and South Geelong has also occurred. Today, the major residential growth corridors are north towards Lara, east towards Leopold, and south towards Mount Duneed as the Armstrong Creek Growth Area.\nClimate.\nGeelong has a temperate oceanic climate (\"Cfb\" in the K\u00f6ppen climate classification) with dominant westerly winds, variable clouds, moderate rainfall that tends to fall lightly, mild to warm summers, and cool winters. February is the hottest month and July is the coldest. The highest temperature recorded was on 7 February 2009 during a two-week-long heat wave, with the lowest of recorded on 24 July 1997. The city gets around 37.6 clear days annually.\nThe average annual rainfall is around , which makes Geelong one of the driest cities in Australia, owing to the pronounced rain shadow of the Otway Ranges to the south-west. Within the city, rainfall shows a strong gradient from south to north, so that the southernmost suburbs can receive around whilst more northerly Lara receives as little as , which is the lowest rainfall in southern Victoria.\nEconomy.\nMore than 10,000 businesses employ over 80,000 people in the Geelong region, with manufacturing and processing industries providing around 15,000 jobs, followed by 13,000 in retail, and 8,000 in health and community services.\nIn 2020, the Committee for Geelong published a research paper https:// which tracks the Geelong economy over several decades. Written Deakin University's https://, Resilient Geelong makes a series of recommendations for the future of Geelong.\nGeelong's major employers were the Ford engine plant in Norlane (closed in 2016), aircraft maintenance at Avalon Airport, the head office of retail chain Target Australia (until 2018), the Bartter (Steggles) chicken processing plant and the Shell oil refinery at Corio. GMHBA, a health insurance company, is headquartered in Geelong.\nThe Geelong region attracted over 6 million tourists during 2001. Major tourist attractions include the Waterfront Geelong precinct and Eastern Beach on the shores of Corio Bay, and the National Wool Museum in the city, and more than 30 historical buildings listed on the Victorian Heritage Register. The Geelong area hosts regular international events which are also tourist drawcards, including the Australian International Airshow.\nGeelong has a number of shopping precincts in the CBD and surrounding suburbs. The two main shopping centres are located in the CBD - Westfield Geelong and Market Square, with smaller centres in the suburbs including Belmont Village and Waurn Ponds Shopping Centre in the south, Bellarine Village in Newcomb in the east, and Corio Shopping Centre in the north. The opening of the major shopping centres has caused a decline in strip shopping on Moorabool Street, with many empty shops and few customers. Geelong is also home to Mitre 10's largest franchisee \u2013 Fagg's \u2013 operating five stores across the town and employing over 160 people.\nThese major research laboratories are located in the Geelong area: the CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratory in East Geelong, CSIRO Division of Textiles and Fibres Technology in Belmont, and the Marine and Freshwater Resources Institute at Queenscliff.\nThe scheduled closure of Ford's Australian manufacturing base in 2016 was confirmed in late May 2013. Headquartered in the Victorian suburb of Broadmeadows, the company had registered losses of AU$600 million over the five years prior to the announcement. It was noted that the corporate fleet and government sales that accounted for two-thirds of large, local car sales in Australia were insufficient to keep Ford's products profitable and viable in Australia.\nFollowing the decision by Shell to close its Geelong refinery in April 2013, a third consecutive annual loss was recorded for Shell's Australian refining and fuel marketing assets. Revealed in June 2013, the writedown is worth AU$203 million, and was preceded by a $638-million writedown in 2012 and a $407-million writedown in 2011 after the closure of the Clyde Refinery in Sydney.\nIn April 2016 Target announced that it would be moving its headquarters out of North Geelong to Williams Landing in Melbourne's west.\nDemographics.\nAs of the 2006 census, 160,000 people resided in 68,000 households. The median age of persons in Geelong was 37 years. About 19.4% of the population of Geelong were children aged between 0\u201314 years, and 26.6% were persons aged 55 years and over. Each dwelling is on average occupied by 2.59 persons, slightly lower than the state and national averages. The median household income was $901 per week, $121 less than the state average, partly due to higher reliance on manufacturing for employment. The population of Geelong is growing by 2500 people each year, and the City of Greater Geelong had the highest rate of building activity in Victoria outside metropolitan Melbourne.\nAbout 78.4% of people from Geelong are Australian-born, with the most common overseas birthplaces being: England (3.6%), Italy (1.1%), Croatia (1.0%), the Netherlands (0.9%), and Scotland (0.8%). Around 14.2% of households speak a language other than English in the home. Notable ethnic groups in the city are the Croatian community, who first came to the city in the 1850s and with migration since World War II are now the largest Croatian community in Australia, and the German settlers who founded Germantown (now Grovedale) in 1849 to escape repression in Prussia for their Lutheran faith.\nThe 2006 census found the most common religious affiliation in Geelong was Catholicism at 29.4%. St. Mary of the Angels Basilica is the largest congregation in the city. Other affiliations of resident of Geelong include no religion 20.5%, Anglican 14.6%, Uniting Church 7.9%, and Presbyterian and Reformed at 4.3%. The city has a large number of traditional Christian churches, as well as Orthodox Christian churches in the northern suburbs.\nGovernance.\nIn local government, the Geelong region is covered by the City of Greater Geelong. The council was created in 1993 as an amalgamation of a number of other municipalities in the region, with the council chambers located at the Geelong City Hall in central Geelong. The city is made up of four wards - Brownbill (central Geelong and inner suburbs), Bellarine, Kardinia (southern Geelong, south of the Barwon River) and Windermere (northern suburbs). Brownbill, Kardinia and Bellarine are each represented by three councillors, whereas Windermere is represented by two.\nFrom 2012 to 2016, the Mayor of Geelong was directly elected by the public to a four-year term. Entrepreneur and former paparazzo Darryn Lyons held this position from 2013 to 2016.\nOn 16 April 2016, the Victorian Government dismissed the Mayor and Councillors of the Greater Geelong City Council, following a Commission of Inquiry which found that the council is riven with conflict, unable to manage Geelong's economic challenges, has dysfunctional leadership and has a culture of bullying. The government appointed administrators to run the council until council elections were held in 2017. In 2023, the Victorian Government announced that it would appoint monitors to oversee the appointment of a new CEO.\nIn state politics, the Legislative Assembly districts of Geelong, South Barwon, Lara, and Bellarine cover the Geelong area. After the 2022 Victorian Election, all four of these electorates are held by the Australian Labor Party. Lara and Geelong are currently safe Labor seats with South Barwon increasing its margin and Bellarine more marginal.\nOn 12 February 2020, Minister for Planning Richard Wynn established Geelong Authority to advise on strategies to attract investment to central Geelong and on major planning applications to help create jobs and drive growth in Geelong. The committee is chaired by Diana Taylor (lawyer) and consists of Mark Edmonds (former Chairman of Geelong Chamber of Commerce), Aamir Qutub (CEO of Enterprise Monkey), Jill Smith (former General Manager of Geelong Arts Centre) and Rory Costelloe (Executive Director of Villawood Properties) and Dr Sarah Leach.\nIn federal politics, the House of Representatives seats - the Division of Corio and Division of Corangamite cover the Geelong region. Corio roughly covers the northern half of Geelong and has been a safe Australian Labor Party seat since the 1970s, but was previously the seat of Richard Casey, a leading conservative Cabinet member in the 1930s and later Governor-General, as well as Hubert Opperman, a former cycling champion and a prominent minister in the 1960s. It was also the seat of Gordon Scholes, who was Speaker during the Whitlam government. Corio is currently held by Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles.\nCorangamite, which includes roughly the southern half of Geelong and the Bellarine Peninsula, was traditionally safe for the Liberal Party, but become more marginal in recent years due to demographic changes, and redistributions which led to it including more of suburban Geelong. Corangamite had been a safe seat for the Liberal Party and its predecessors from the 1930s through the 2000s. Future Prime Minister of Australia James Scullin served one term in this seat in the 1910s. It was won by the Australian Labor Party at the 2019 federal election and again in 2022 by Libby Coker where the margin was increased.\nCulture.\nEvents and festivals.\nThe Royal Geelong Show is held each year at the Geelong Showgrounds. Other events include Pako Festa (held annually in February), Gala Day Parade (annual event that celebrated its 96th year in 2012) and Family Fun Day (held annually as part of the Gala Day celebrations), and the Geelong Heritage Festival that is run by the local branch of the National Trust. The Gala Day Parade was axed in 2023.\nGeelong hosts Victoria's only international photographic salon 'VIGEX' every two years. VIGEX is an acronym for \"VIctoria Geelong EXhibition\" and the inaugural event was held in 1980. The Australian Photographic Society, the world governing body of exhibition photography the International Federation of Photographic Art and the Victorian Association of Photographic Societies are patrons of the biennial photographic salon.\nGeelong's History is preserved through both the Geelong Historical Society, and the associated Geelong Heritage Centre, housed in the regional library building opened in 2015.\nNow defunct, Geelong hosted a digital conference Pivot Summit which was headlined by Apple Co-founder Steve Wozniak in 2017.\nArts and entertainment.\nRecognising a long history in design excellence, Geelong was designated as a UNESCO Creative City of Design in 2017.\nGeelong is home to a number of pubs, nightclubs, and live-music venues. The city is also the birthplace or starting point for a number of notable Australian bands and musicians, such as Barry Crocker, Gyan Evans, Magic Dirt, Jeff Lang, Denis Walter, Chrissy Amphlett, and Helen Garner.\nGeelong also hosts music festivals such as the Meredith Music Festival, Offshore Festival, Poppykettle Festival, and National Celtic Festival.\nThe city's prominent cultural venues are the Geelong Performing Arts Centre (commonly known as \"GPAC\"), the 1500-seat Costa Hall auditorium and the Geelong Art Gallery.\nBased in Geelong, Back to Back Theatre is a globally renown, contemporary Australian theatre companies engaging with disability on stage. With work produced by the company, Back to Back Theatre explores questions about politics, ethics and philosophy in humanity and tours nationally and globally. In 2022, Back to Back Theatre was awarded the $300,000 International Ibsen Award.\nLocal community-led, not for profit Creative Geelong Inc was established in 2015 to support local creatives and highlight the opportunities for creative industries practitioners in the region. In 2017, Creative Geelong partnered with Deakin University to crowdfund and produce three documentaries about Geelong's transformation from a heavy manufacturing hub to a creative destination. Hubcaps to Creative Hubs series showcase three locations in Geelong including the https://, https:// and the https:// and tells the story of their industrial past and new purpose as creative hot spots.\nMedia.\nThe \"Geelong Advertiser\", the oldest newspaper title in Victoria and the second-oldest in Australia, was established in 1840. The free \"Geelong Independent\" and \"Geelong News\" are the city's other major newspapers.\nGeelong is part of the Melbourne television licence area, and receives all of the free-to-air stations from Melbourne, including ABC, SBS, Seven, Nine, Ten, and the community channel C31. In some elevated areas of Geelong it is also possible to pick up UHF Ballarat channels but a high-gain antenna must be used. The Geelong region also receives cable and satellite television services through pay television operators Foxtel and Neighbourhood Cable.\nThe local radio stations are K-Rock (rock and pop music), 3GL (classic hits), Rhema FM (now 96three FM) (Christian community station), Hot Country Radio (country music station), The Pulse (community station), 3GPH (radio reading service), and Bay FM (adult contemporary music). The transmitters for K-Rock, The Pulse, Rhema FM, and Bay FM are located at a shared transmitter site on Mount Bellarine, near Drysdale. Most Melbourne-based AM and FM radio stations can also be received clearly in the Geelong region. DAB+ radio services direct from Melbourne can also be received in most areas of Geelong.\nSport.\nEstablished in 1859, the Geelong Football Club is the second oldest club in the Australian Football League (AFL) and one of the world's oldest football clubs. Its home ground is Kardinia Park stadium. With more than 80,000 members and an all-time average home game attendance at Kardinia Park of over 20,000 a match, it has the highest membership and average attendance for a non-capital city based football club in Australia. It also fields a reserves side in the Victorian Football League, and three independent football leagues run in the area: the Geelong Football League, the Geelong &amp; District Football League, and the Bellarine Football League.\nThe Geelong Arena in North Geelong is the home of the Geelong Supercats basketball team, and was used for basketball games during the 2006 Commonwealth Games. The Geelong Basketball and Netball Centre was formerly the home to another basketball team from the region, the Corio Bay Stingrays.\nThe city co-hosted the 2003 FIBA Oceania Championship, at which Australia's national basketball team won the gold medal.\nNorth Geelong Warriors FC are the region's primary soccer club, playing in the National Premier Leagues Victoria competition. The club played in the Victorian Premier League from 1992 to 1997 and in the top tier of the NPL in 2015. Other soccer clubs include Northern based Geelong Rangers FC, Geelong SC, Corio SC, Lara United FC and Southern based Surf Coast SC. Western United play a few home games every year in GMHBA stadium, Geelong is included in the marketing for the club in western victoria.\nGeelong has a horse-racing club, the Geelong Racing Club, which schedules about 22 race meetings a year, including the Geelong Cup meeting in October. The Geelong Cup was first run in 1872, and is considered one of the most reliable guides to the result of the Melbourne Cup. It also has a picnic horse-racing club, Geelong St Patricks Racing Club, which holds its one race meeting a year in February.\nGeelong Harness Racing Club conducts regular meetings at its racetrack at Corio, and the Geelong Greyhound Racing Club holds regular meetings.\nFounded in 1882, the Geelong Lawn Tennis Club has 27 tennis courts and plays host to a number of tennis tournaments including the Davis Cup tie between Australia and China in 2012.\nThe Eastern Beach foreshore and nearby Eastern Gardens regularly host internationally televised triathlons, and annual sports car and racing car events such as the Geelong Speed Trials.\nCorio Bay is also host to many sailing and yachting events. Geelong also has many golf courses, sporting and recreation ovals, and playing fields, as well as facilities for water skiing, rowing, fishing, hiking, and greyhound and harness racing.\nGeelong Athletics holds competitions during both the summer and winter, including high-profile events such as Victorian and sometimes national and international track and field meets.\nGeelong is home to Australia's largest indoor skate park, and has \"more skate parks per capita than any other municipality in Australia.\"\nGeelong is also the birthplace of Bev Francis, an IFBB professional Australian female bodybuilder, powerlifter, and national shot put champion.\nThe Cadel Evans Great Ocean Road Race, named in honour of the Tour de France winner and 2009 World Champion starts in the city. It then goes through Barwon Heads on the Bellarine Peninsula, passing by the famous surf beach of Bells Beach in Surf Coast Shire and continuing along the Great Ocean Road. The race then heads via rolling hills back to Geelong for three circuits of the city before a waterfront finish. The race generally suits \"puncheurs\" who are capable of getting into breakaways and can easily climb short, steep hills.\nThe city's Kardinia Park Stadium hosted the first match of the 2022 Men's T20 cricket World Cup. Along with other cities in regional Victoria, Geelong was scheduled host the 2026 Commonwealth Games until they were cancelled.\nThe Geelong Sharks compete in the state's Rugby League competition run by NRL Victoria.\nPublic services.\nEducation.\nGeelong is served by a number of public and private schools that cater to local and overseas students. Over 40,000 primary and secondary students are enrolled in schools in Geelong, with another 27,000 students enrolled in tertiary and further education programs. The first schools in Geelong were established when the town was settled from the 1850s, among them were the historic private schools The Geelong College and Geelong Grammar School.\nGeelong is also home to the oldest state secondary school in Victoria, Geelong High School (est. 1910), which has been serving the community for over 100 years.\nThe Gordon Memorial Technical College opened in 1888, and is known today as the Gordon Institute of TAFE. In 1976, the Gordon Institute was divided into two parts, with academic courses becoming part of the newly formed Deakin University based at the Waurn Ponds campus. Deakin University enrolled its first students at its Waurn Ponds campus in 1977. Today, the university is located on a site at Waurn Ponds and has over 1,000 staff members and over 4,000 on-campus students. The university also has a campus located on the waterfront of Corio Bay in the Geelong CBD, a campus in Burwood, Melbourne, and a campus in Warrnambool, in Western Victoria. From 2008 the campus at Waurn Ponds also has been home to Victoria's first regional medical school.\nHealth.\nThe major public health service is Barwon Health, which operates 21 separate health sites including University Hospital Geelong on Ryrie Street, and the McKellar Centre on Ballarat Road. Barwon Health services the entire region. The largest private hospital is the nearby St John of God Health Care centre on Myers Street. Prominent healthcare services include the Epworth Hospital located at 1 Epworth Place, Waurn Ponds VIC 3216., and Geelong Health (Geelong West).\nUtilities.\nWater storage and supply in Geelong is managed by Barwon Water, a Victoria government-owned urban water corporation. Geelong is supplied with water from three river systems: the Barwon, the East Moorabool, and the West Moorabool Rivers. The catchment areas are the Brisbane Ranges to Geelong's north-west, and the Otway Ranges to the south-west. The first water supplies to Geelong were from the Stony Creek reservoirs near Steiglitz, but, as of 2010, Geelong, together with Ballarat, consumes about 70% of the Moorabool River's water flow. Sewage from Geelong and district is treated at the Black Rock Treatment Plant at Breamlea and then discharged into Bass Strait.\nGeelong was first supplied with electricity in 1902 when the Geelong Power Station opened on the corner of Yarra and Brougham Streets. Later known as Geelong A, the power station was rebuilt in 1920 to increase its capacity, with the station operating until 1961. In 1936, Geelong was connected to the state electrical grid. The Geelong B power station at North Geelong opened in 1954, and was closed in 1970 due to the increasing efficiency of the power stations in the Latrobe Valley.\nThe supply of piped coal gas was started in 1860 by the Geelong Gas Company. The rail -served gasworks were located in North Geelong next to the North Geelong railway station. Geelong was converted to natural gas in 1971, with the Geelong Gas Company being taken over by the Gas &amp; Fuel Corporation of Victoria on 30 June 1971.\nTransport.\nThe main form of transportation in Geelong is the automobile. Geelong is well-connected by roads to all of south-west Victoria, to Melbourne by a major-arterial the Princes Freeway (M1) with three or four lanes in each direction, to Warrnambool by the Princes Highway (A1), the Bellarine Peninsula by the Bellarine Highway (B110), Ballarat by the Midland Highway (A300), and to Hamilton by the Hamilton Highway (B140). The $380\u00a0million Geelong Ring Road (an extension of the Princes Freeway) bypasses the greater Geelong urban area exiting the Princes Highway near Corio to rejoin the highway at Waurn Ponds. The Lewis Bandt Bridge, named in honour of the Ford Australia engineer who is credited as the inventor of the ute (1934), in Geelong is a feature of the new road.\nAvalon Airport.\nAvalon Airport is located about to the north-east of the city of Geelong in the suburb of Avalon. It was established in 1953 for the production of military aircraft. It was also used for the repair of commercial aircraft, and for pilot training. Avalon Airport has also been home to low-cost airline Jetstar since 2004. Flights to Sydney use the airport and in June 2015, Jetstar announced it would fly to the Gold Coast daily from Avalon Airport commencing October 2015. Avalon Airport is the venue for 'Thunder Down Under' Australian International Airshow every other year.\nTher have been a few attempts to institute international flights from the airport. AirAsia X provided flights to and from Kuala Lumpur and Citilink to Denpasar, but they were cancelled during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nRail.\nGeelong is a major hub for rail transport in Victoria, having frequent services to and from Melbourne, and being at the junction of the Port Fairy, Western standard gauge and the Geelong-Ballarat lines. Eight passenger railway stations are in the urban area, all along the Warrnambool line and served by V/Line trains. The Geelong line provides passenger services to Melbourne in the off-peak with trains departing Geelong every 20 minutes on weekdays, with more frequent services at peak times. According to V/Line, the Geelong line carries more passengers than any other regional rail line in Australia. None of the lines are electrified and all trains servicing Geelong are diesel powered.\nGeelong's currently operating stations include Little River, Lara, Corio, North Shore, North Geelong, Geelong, South Geelong, Marshall and Waurn Ponds.\nIn the past, a rail line connected Geelong city to the Bellarine Peninsula through to Queenscliff. Regular rail passenger services ceased in 1931, although summer Sunday excursion trains ran until the 1970s. The line was closed in 1976. The Bellarine Railway now operates on a section of the line between Drysdale and Queenscliff as a tourist attraction.\nPassenger services run to Warrnambool five times daily, connecting Geelong with Colac, Terang, and Camperdown. Journey Beyond's \"The Overland\" service between Melbourne and Adelaide stops at the standard-gauge platform provided at North Shore station. It runs two days a week. Freight trains also operate from Melbourne to Geelong serving local industries, as well as to Warrnambool and other western Victorian towns. The main Melbourne-Adelaide standard-gauge line is the main interstate freight route.\nVictoria's electronic ticketing system, Myki, was implemented on rail services between Marshall and Melbourne on 29 July 2013.\nThe Victorian government is currently in process of land acquisition and inspection for a potential Torquay rail line which would service both Torquay and the Armstrong Creek growth corridor.\nPorts and ferry services.\nThe Port of Geelong is located on the shores of Corio Bay, and is the sixth-largest seaport in Australia by tonnage. Major commodities include crude oil and petroleum products, export grain, woodchips, alumina imports, and fertiliser. The Bellarine Peninsula has been linked to the Mornington Peninsula since 1987 by the Searoad ferry, which runs every hour using two roll-on/roll-off ferries between Queenscliff and Sorrento\nPort Phillip Ferries began operating twice daily services between Portarlington and Melbourne Docklands in November 2016. Three years later overcrowding on trains led to a similar service being introduced from Geelong to Docklands. The services are popular with both tourists and commuters, providing an alternative access for Geelong and the Bellarine Peninsula to Melbourne. The catamaran ferries seat over 400 passengers, provide a comfortable vantage point to enjoy the sights of Port Phillip. The introduction of the Portarlington service led to a major revamp of the local pier, with pier extensions and a protective rock wall installed.\nOn 23 October 2022 the Tasmanian ferry service, the Spirit of Tasmania, started operating from a new terminal in North Geelong rather than from Port Melbourne.\nBus and taxi.\nA bus network covering the city centre and most surrounding suburbs provides public transport. Until June 2015 they were operated under the umbrella of the Geelong Transit System. Public Transport Victoria contracts CDC Geelong and McHarry's Buslines to provide Geelong's bus services and bus services to Torquay and the Bellarine Peninsula. V/Line services link Geelong with Ballarat, Daylesford, Bendigo, Apollo Bay, the Great Ocean Road, the Twelve Apostles and Warrnambool.\nTaxi services in Geelong are provided by Geelong Taxi Network, a newly formed depot following the effective merger of Bay City Cabs and Geelong Radio Cabs in July 2007.\nThe majority of the network covers the city and suburban areas of the city, with \"urban\" classification for the vehicles in use. The Bellarine Peninsula, and Torquay areas, although part of Geelong Taxi Network, are both covered by separate \"country\" classification taxis. Often, disputes occur in regards to different taxis from one licence area, picking up work from either of the other two licence areas, which is illegal in most circumstances under current taxi regulations in Victoria. Call centre and radio dispatch services for the new combined network are provided by Silver Top Taxis in Melbourne.\nCycling and walking.\nGeelong also has many kilometres of bicycle trails, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59034", "revid": "20151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59034", "title": "Vaduz, Leichenstein", "text": ""}
{"id": "59036", "revid": "48731005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59036", "title": "Vaduz", "text": "Capital of Liechtenstein\nVaduz (; or ; []) is the capital of Liechtenstein and also the seat of the national parliament. The village, which is located along the Rhine, has 5,696 residents. The most prominent landmark of Vaduz is Vaduz Castle, perched atop a steep hill overlooking the village. It is home to the reigning prince of Liechtenstein and the Liechtenstein princely family. The village's distinctive architecture is also displayed in landmarks such as the Cathedral of St. Florin, Government House, Village Hall, the National Art Gallery, as well as the National Museum. Although Vaduz is the best-known village in the principality internationally, it is not the largest; neighbouring Schaan has a larger population.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Vaduz\" had been first recorded as \"de Faduzes\". The name of the settlement, like most other towns in the Rhine Valley region, is of Romance origin. The name can be traced back to Old Rhaeto-Romance root \"auadutg\" 'aqueduct', which in turn evolved from the Latin .\nHistory.\nVaduz is mentioned in historic 12th-century manuscripts as \"Faduzes\". In 1322 a mention of the castle is made, which was sacked by the Swiss in 1499 during the Swabian War. The entire village was also destroyed.\nIn the 17th century the Liechtenstein family was seeking a seat in the Imperial diet, the \"Reichstag\". As they did not hold any territory that was directly under the Imperial throne they were unable to meet the primary requirement to qualify.\nThe family yearned for the added power a seat in the Imperial government would bring, and therefore sought to acquire lands that would be \"reichsunmittelbar\", or held directly from the Holy Roman Emperor himself, without any intermediate feudal patronage. After some time, the family was able to arrange the purchase of the minuscule \"Herrschaft\" (\"Lordship\") of Schellenberg and the countship of Vaduz (in 1699 and 1712, respectively) from the Hohenems. Tiny Schellenberg and Vaduz possessed exactly the political status required: no feudal lord other than the Emperor.\nThereby, on 23 January 1719, after the purchase had been duly made, Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor, decreed Vaduz and Schellenberg were united, and raised to the dignity of \"F\u00fcrstentum\" (\"principality\") with the name \"Liechtenstein\" in honour of \"[his] true servant, Anton Florian of Liechtenstein\". It is on this date that Liechtenstein became a sovereign member state of the Holy Roman Empire. As testimony to the pure political expediency of the purchases, the Princes of Liechtenstein did not set foot in their new principality for over 120 years.\nPolitics.\nVaduz is located in the Oberland electoral district, which has fifteen seats in the Landtag of Liechtenstein. Since the introduction of Liechtenstein municipal law of 1864, Vaduz has been locally administered by a mayor and municipal council. Until 1941, this consisted of the mayor, the municipal treasurer, and seven other councillors.\nIn 1974, the municipal law was revised which extended the term of the mayor and council to four years and increased the seats of Vaduz's municipal council to twelve. The system to elect the municipal council was changed to use an open list proportional representation system. In 1976, Vaduz replaced universal male suffrage with universal suffrage. Universal suffrage was not introduced to Liechtenstein on a national level until 1984.\nThe incumbent mayor is Florian Meier, elected in the 2024 Vaduz mayoral by-election.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nVaduz features an oceanic climate with warm summers and chilly winters. K\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as Marine West Coast Climate (Cfb). The village experiences a noticeable increase in precipitation during the summer, but in general all twelve months see some precipitation. Vaduz receives, on average, approximately of precipitation per year.\nVaduz's warmest month, July, sees average high temperatures reach while average low temperatures are about . The village's coldest month, January, sees average highs of and average lows of .\nMain sights.\nVaduz Castle is the home of the reigning prince of Liechtenstein and the Liechtenstein princely family. The castle is visible from almost any location in Vaduz, being perched atop a steep hill in the middle of the village. The Cathedral of St. Florin, Government House and Village Hall display the various styles and periods of architecture in the village.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2019, 5,696 people lived in Vaduz. Foreigners resident in the village make up 42% of the population. With 67% the population is predominantly Roman Catholic, while the percentage of Catholics is significantly higher among residents with Liechtenstein nationality (81%) than among foreigner residents (47%). The largest minority religions in the village are Protestantism (10%) and Islam (8%).\nCulture.\nThe National Art Gallery as well as the National Museum are located in Vaduz. The art gallery (Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein) is a museum of modern and contemporary art, and also shows displays from the private princely Liechtenstein Collection, the main public display of which is in Vienna. The building is an architectural landmark built by the Swiss architects Morger, Degelo and Kerez. It was completed in November 2000 and forms a \"black box\" of tinted concrete and black basalt stone. The museum collection is also the national art collection of Liechtenstein. The Liechtenstein National Museum is showing a permanent exhibition on the cultural and natural history of Liechtenstein as well as special exhibitions. There are also the Postage Stamp Museum and a Ski Museum. Vaduz has a kind of folksong that has been greatly influenced by Switzerland, known as \"K\u00f6puge\u00e4ng\".\nEconomy and transport.\nVaduz is one of the few capital cities in the world to not have an airport. The closest major airport is Zurich Airport, and the closest minor airport being the St. Gallen\u2013Altenrhein Airport. Friedrichshafen Airport also provides access to Vaduz. By car, Vaduz is directly accessible via the A13 motorway in Switzerland, or via the A14 motorway in Austria. Vaduz is connected to Switzerland over the Rhine river by the Vaduz\u2013Sevelen footbridge, or the Werdenberger-Binnenkanal bridge for motor vehicles, which was opened in 1975. Buses can be taken from Buchs, St. Gallen, Sevelen and Feldkirch into Vaduz. These buses typically run every 20 to 40 minutes and are operated by Liechtenstein Bus.\nSchaan-Vaduz railway station, located in Schaan, is the closest railway station to Vaduz. The station is situated on the Feldkirch\u2013Buchs railway, Liechtenstein's only railway line, and is served by the S2 of the Vorarlberg S-Bahn, which is operated by Austrian Federal Railways (\u00d6BB). It was opened on 24 October 1872 by agreement with Austria-Hungary and Switzerland. There have been attempts to expand the rail network to connect with Vaduz, though these have been unsuccessful.\nEducation.\nVaduz has two primary schools: \u00c4ule Primary School, near the Vaduzer-Saal; and Ebenholz Primary School, near the University of Liechtenstein, which is also located in the village. Both schools have the same secretariat and administration. The school assignments of children are largely determined by their street addresses. There are four kindergarten sites, of the Kindergarten Bartlegrosch, in Vaduz.\nRealschule Vaduz and Oberschule Vaduz are in the Schulzentrum M\u00fchleholz II in Vaduz. Liechtensteinisches Gymnasium is also located in Vaduz. Realschule Schaan and Sportschule Liechtenstein are in nearby Schaan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59037", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59037", "title": "Yaounde, Cameroon", "text": ""}
{"id": "59038", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59038", "title": "Fourier series", "text": "Decomposition of periodic functions\nA Fourier series () is a series expansion of a periodic function into a sum of trigonometric functions. The Fourier series is an example of a trigonometric series. By expressing a function as a sum of sines and cosines, many problems involving the function become easier to analyze because trigonometric functions are well understood. For example, Fourier series were first used by Joseph Fourier to find solutions to the heat equation. This application is possible because the derivatives of trigonometric functions fall into simple patterns. Fourier series cannot be used to approximate arbitrary functions, because most functions have infinitely many terms in their Fourier series, and the series do not always converge. Well-behaved functions, for example smooth functions, have Fourier series that converge to the original function. The coefficients of the Fourier series are determined by integrals of the function multiplied by trigonometric functions, described in .\nThe study of the convergence of Fourier series focus on the behaviors of the \"partial sums\", which means studying the behavior of the sum as more and more terms from the series are summed. The figures below illustrate some partial Fourier series results for the components of a square wave.\nFourier series are closely related to the Fourier transform, a more general tool that can even find the frequency information for functions that are \"not\" periodic. Periodic functions can be identified with functions on a circle; for this reason Fourier series are the subject of Fourier analysis on the circle group, denoted by formula_1 or formula_2. The Fourier transform is also part of Fourier analysis, but is defined for functions on formula_3.\nSince Fourier's time, many different approaches to defining and understanding the concept of Fourier series have been discovered, all of which are consistent with one another, but each of which emphasizes different aspects of the topic. Some of the more powerful and elegant approaches are based on mathematical ideas and tools that were not available in Fourier's time. Fourier originally defined the Fourier series for real-valued functions of real arguments, and used the sine and cosine functions in the decomposition. Many other Fourier-related transforms have since been defined, extending his initial idea to many applications and birthing an area of mathematics called Fourier analysis.\nHistory.\nThe Fourier series is named in honor of Jean-Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768\u20131830), who made important contributions to the study of trigonometric series, after preliminary investigations by Leonhard Euler, Jean le Rond d'Alembert, and Daniel Bernoulli. Fourier introduced the series for the purpose of solving the heat equation in a metal plate, publishing his initial results in his 1807 \"M\u00e9moire sur la propagation de la chaleur dans les corps solides\" (\"Treatise on the propagation of heat in solid bodies\"), and publishing his \"Th\u00e9orie analytique de la chaleur\" (\"Analytical theory of heat\") in 1822. The \"M\u00e9moire\" introduced Fourier analysis, specifically Fourier series. Through Fourier's research the fact was established that an arbitrary (at first, continuous and later generalized to any piecewise-smooth) function can be represented by a trigonometric series. The first announcement of this great discovery was made by Fourier in 1807, before the French Academy. Early ideas of decomposing a periodic function into the sum of simple oscillating functions date back to the 3rd century BC, when ancient astronomers proposed an empiric model of planetary motions, based on deferents and epicycles.\nIndependently of Fourier, astronomer Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel introduced Fourier series to solve Kepler's equation. His work was published in 1819, unaware of Fourier's work which remained unpublished until 1822.\nThe heat equation is a partial differential equation. Prior to Fourier's work, no solution to the heat equation was known in the general case, although particular solutions were known if the heat source behaved in a simple way, in particular, if the heat source was a sine or cosine wave. These simple solutions are now sometimes called eigensolutions. Fourier's idea was to model a complicated heat source as a superposition (or linear combination) of simple sine and cosine waves, and to write the solution as a superposition of the corresponding eigensolutions. This superposition or linear combination is called the Fourier series.\nFrom a modern point of view, Fourier's results are somewhat informal, due to the lack of a precise notion of function and integral in the early nineteenth century. Later, Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet and Bernhard Riemann expressed Fourier's results with greater precision and formality.\nAlthough the original motivation was to solve the heat equation, it later became obvious that the same techniques could be applied to a wide array of mathematical and physical problems, and especially those involving linear differential equations with constant coefficients, for which the eigensolutions are sinusoids. The Fourier series has many such applications in electrical engineering, vibration analysis, acoustics, optics, signal processing, image processing, quantum mechanics, econometrics, shell theory, etc.\nBeginnings.\nJoseph Fourier wrote\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Joseph Fourier\u2014\u200a\nThis immediately gives any coefficient \"ak\" of the trigonometric series for \u03c6(\"y\") for any function which has such an expansion. It works because if \u03c6 has such an expansion, then (under suitable convergence assumptions) the integral\nformula_4\ncan be carried out term-by-term. But all terms involving formula_5 for \"j\" \u2260 \"k\" vanish when integrated from \u22121 to 1, leaving only the formula_6 term, which is \"1\".\nIn these few lines, which are close to the modern formalism used in Fourier series, Fourier revolutionized both mathematics and physics. Although similar trigonometric series were previously used by Euler, d'Alembert, Daniel Bernoulli and Gauss, Fourier believed that such trigonometric series could represent any arbitrary function. In what sense that is actually true is a somewhat subtle issue and the attempts over many years to clarify this idea have led to important discoveries in the theories of convergence, function spaces, and harmonic analysis.\nWhen Fourier submitted a later competition essay in 1811, the committee (which included Lagrange, Laplace, Malus and Legendre, among others) concluded: \"...the manner in which the author arrives at these equations is not exempt of difficulties and...his analysis to integrate them still leaves something to be desired on the score of generality and even rigour\".\nFourier's motivation.\nThe Fourier series expansion of the sawtooth function (below) looks more complicated than the simple formula formula_7, so it is not immediately apparent why one would need the Fourier series. While there are many applications, Fourier's motivation was in solving the heat equation. For example, consider a metal plate in the shape of a square whose sides measure formula_8 meters, with coordinates formula_9. If there is no heat source within the plate, and if three of the four sides are held at 0 degrees Celsius, while the fourth side, given by formula_10, is maintained at the temperature gradient formula_11 degrees Celsius, for formula_12 in formula_13, then one can show that the stationary heat distribution (or the heat distribution after a long time has elapsed) is given by\n formula_14\nHere, sinh is the hyperbolic sine function. This solution of the heat equation is obtained by multiplying each term of the equation from Analysis \u00a7 Example by formula_15. While our example function formula_16 seems to have a needlessly complicated Fourier series, the heat distribution formula_17 is nontrivial. The function formula_18 cannot be written as a closed-form expression. This method of solving the heat problem was made possible by Fourier's work.\nOther applications.\nAnother application is to solve the Basel problem by using Parseval's theorem. The example generalizes and one may compute \u03b6(2\"n\"), for any positive integer \"n\".\nDefinition.\nThe Fourier series of a complex-valued \"P\"-periodic function formula_16, integrable over the interval formula_20 on the real line, is defined as a trigonometric series of the form\nformula_21\nsuch that the \"Fourier coefficients\" formula_22 are complex numbers defined by the integral\nformula_23\nThe series does not necessarily converge (in the pointwise sense) and, even if it does, it is not necessarily equal to formula_16. Only when certain conditions are satisfied (e.g. if formula_16 is continuously differentiable) does the Fourier series converge to formula_16, i.e.,\nformula_27\nFor functions satisfying the Dirichlet sufficiency conditions, pointwise convergence holds. However, these are not necessary conditions and there are many theorems about different types of convergence of Fourier series (e.g. uniform convergence or mean convergence). The definition naturally extends to the Fourier series of a (periodic) distribution formula_28 (also called \"Fourier-Schwartz series\"). Then the Fourier series converges to formula_16 in the distribution sense.\nThe process of determining the Fourier coefficients of a given function or signal is called analysis, while forming the associated trigonometric series (or its various approximations) is called synthesis.\nSynthesis.\nA Fourier series can be written in several equivalent forms, shown here as the formula_30 partial sums formula_31 of the Fourier series of formula_16:\nSine-cosine form\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExponential form\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe harmonics are indexed by an integer, formula_33 which is also the number of cycles the corresponding sinusoids make in interval formula_34. Therefore, the sinusoids have:\nThese series can represent functions that are just a sum of one or more frequencies in the harmonic spectrum. In the limit formula_39, a trigonometric series can also represent the intermediate frequencies or non-sinusoidal functions because of the infinite number of terms.\nAnalysis.\nThe coefficients can be given/assumed, such as a music synthesizer or time samples of a waveform. In the latter case, the exponential form of Fourier series synthesizes a discrete-time Fourier transform where variable formula_12 represents frequency instead of time. In general, the coefficients are determined by \"analysis\" of a given function formula_16 whose domain of definition is an interval of length formula_42.\nFourier coefficients\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe formula_43 scale factor follows from substituting Eq.1 into Eq.3 and utilizing the orthogonality of the trigonometric system. The equivalence of Eq.1 and Eq.2 follows from Euler's formula\nformula_44\nresulting in:\nExponential form coefficients\nformula_45\nwith formula_46 being the mean value of formula_28 on the interval formula_42. Conversely:\nInverse relationships\nformula_49\nExample.\nConsider a sawtooth function:\nformula_50\nIn this case, the Fourier coefficients are given by\nformula_51\nIt can be shown that the Fourier series converges to formula_16 at every point formula_12 where formula_28 is differentiable, and therefore:\nformula_55\nWhen formula_56, the Fourier series converges to 0, which is the half-sum of the left- and right-limit of formula_28 at formula_56. This is a particular instance of the Dirichlet theorem for Fourier series.\nThis example leads to a solution of the Basel problem.\nAmplitude-phase form.\nIf the function formula_16 is real-valued then the Fourier series can also be represented as\nAmplitude-phase form\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_60 is the amplitude and formula_61 is the phase shift of the formula_62 harmonic.\nThe equivalence of Eq.4 and Eq.1 follows from the trigonometric identity:\nformula_63\nwhich implies\nformula_64\nare the rectangular coordinates of a vector written in polar coordinates as\nformula_65\nwhere\nformula_66\nAn example of determining the parameter formula_67 for one value of formula_68 is shown in Figure 2. It is the value of formula_69 at the maximum correlation between formula_16 and a cosine \"template,\" formula_71. The blue graph is the cross-correlation function, also known as a matched filter:\nformula_72\nFortunately, it is not necessary to evaluate this entire function, because its derivative is zero at the maximum:\nformula_73 Hence\nformula_74\nCommon notations.\nThe notation formula_22 is inadequate for discussing the Fourier coefficients of several different functions. Therefore, it is customarily replaced by a modified form of the function (formula_76 in this case), such as formula_77 or formula_78 and functional notation often replaces subscripting:\nformula_79\nIn engineering, particularly when the variable formula_12 represents time, the coefficient sequence is called a frequency domain representation. Square brackets are often used to emphasize that the domain of this function is a discrete set of frequencies.\nAnother commonly used frequency domain representation uses the Fourier series coefficients to modulate a Dirac comb:\nformula_81\nwhere formula_82 represents a continuous frequency domain. When variable formula_12 has units of seconds, formula_82 has units of hertz. The \"teeth\" of the comb are spaced at multiples (i.e. harmonics) of formula_85, which is called the fundamental frequency. formula_16 can be recovered from this representation by an inverse Fourier transform:\nformula_87\nThe constructed function formula_88 is therefore commonly referred to as a Fourier transform, even though the Fourier integral of a periodic function is not convergent at the harmonic frequencies.\nTable of common Fourier series.\nSome common pairs of periodic functions and their Fourier series coefficients are shown in the table below.\nTable of basic transformation rules.\nThis table shows some mathematical operations in the time domain and the corresponding effect in the Fourier series coefficients. Notation:\nProperties.\nSymmetry relations.\nWhen the real and imaginary parts of a complex function are decomposed into their even and odd parts, there are four components, denoted below by the subscripts RE, RO, IE, and IO. And there is a one-to-one mapping between the four components of a complex time function and the four components of its complex frequency transform:\nformula_99 \nFrom this, various relationships are apparent, for example:\nRiemann\u2013Lebesgue lemma.\nIf formula_108 is integrable, formula_109, formula_110 and formula_111\nParseval's theorem.\nIf formula_28 belongs to formula_113 (periodic over an interval of length formula_42) then: formula_115\nPlancherel's theorem.\nIf formula_116 are coefficients and formula_117 then there is a unique function formula_118 such that formula_119 for every formula_68.\nConvolution theorems.\nGiven formula_42-periodic functions, formula_122 and formula_123 with Fourier series coefficients formula_124 and formula_125 formula_126\nDerivative property.\nIf formula_28 is a formula_42-periodic function on formula_141 which is formula_142 times differentiable, and its formula_6 derivative is continuous, then formula_28 belongs to the function space formula_145.\nCompact groups.\nOne of the interesting properties of the Fourier transform which we have mentioned, is that it carries convolutions to pointwise products. If that is the property which we seek to preserve, one can produce Fourier series on any compact group. Typical examples include those classical groups that are compact. This generalizes the Fourier transform to all spaces of the form \"L\"2(\"G\"), where \"G\" is a compact group, in such a way that the Fourier transform carries convolutions to pointwise products. The Fourier series exists and converges in similar ways to the [\u2212\"\u03c0\",\"\u03c0\"] case.\nAn alternative extension to compact groups is the Peter\u2013Weyl theorem, which proves results about representations of compact groups analogous to those about finite groups.\nRiemannian manifolds.\nIf the domain is not a group, then there is no intrinsically defined convolution. However, if formula_158 is a compact Riemannian manifold, it has a Laplace\u2013Beltrami operator. The Laplace\u2013Beltrami operator is the differential operator that corresponds to Laplace operator for the Riemannian manifold formula_158. Then, by analogy, one can consider heat equations on formula_158. Since Fourier arrived at his basis by attempting to solve the heat equation, the natural generalization is to use the eigensolutions of the Laplace\u2013Beltrami operator as a basis. This generalizes Fourier series to spaces of the type formula_161, where formula_158 is a Riemannian manifold. The Fourier series converges in ways similar to the formula_163 case. A typical example is to take formula_158 to be the sphere with the usual metric, in which case the Fourier basis consists of spherical harmonics.\nLocally compact Abelian groups.\nThe generalization to compact groups discussed above does not generalize to noncompact, nonabelian groups. However, there is a straightforward generalization to Locally Compact Abelian (LCA) groups.\nThis generalizes the Fourier transform to formula_165 or formula_166, where formula_167 is an LCA group. If formula_167 is compact, one also obtains a Fourier series, which converges similarly to the formula_163 case, but if formula_167 is noncompact, one obtains instead a Fourier integral. This generalization yields the usual Fourier transform when the underlying locally compact Abelian group is formula_141.\nExtensions.\nFourier-Stieltjes series.\nFormally, the Fourier-Stieltjes series can be defined as the Fourier series whose coefficients are given by\nformula_172\nfor any formula_173, where formula_174 is the space finite Borel measures on the interval formula_20. As such, when formula_173, the function formula_177 is also referred to as a Fourier-Stieltjes transform.\nThis follows from an earlier and more concrete representation of a Radon measure (i.e. a locally finite Borel measure) on formula_141, given by F. Riesz. That is, if formula_179 is function of bounded variation on the interval formula_20 then the Fourier coefficients can be expressed by the Riemann-Stieltjes integral\nformula_181\ncalled the \"Fourier-Stieltjes coefficients\" of formula_179. As the distributional derivative of formula_179 is a Radon measure, it is subject to the Lebesgue decomposition and can be expressed as formula_184. If formula_185 the expression reduces to the original definition of the Fourier coefficients, hence a Fourier series is a Fourier-Stieltjes series.\nThe question whether or not formula_186 exists for a given sequence of formula_22 forms the basis of the trigonometric moment problem.\nThe Fourier series can be generalized still further from measures to distributions. If the Fourier coefficients are determined by a distribution formula_188 then the series is sometimes described as a \"Fourier-Schwartz series\". \nWhile it is often extremely difficult to decide whether a given series is a Fourier or a Fourier-Stieltjes series, deciding whether or not it is a Fourier-Schwartz series is relatively trivial.\nFourier series on a square.\nWe can also define the Fourier series for functions of two variables formula_12 and formula_190 in the square formula_191:\nformula_192\nAside from being useful for solving partial differential equations such as the heat equation, one notable application of Fourier series on the square is in image compression. In particular, the JPEG image compression standard uses the two-dimensional discrete cosine transform, a discrete form of the Fourier cosine transform, which uses only cosine as the basis function.\nFor two-dimensional arrays with a staggered appearance, half of the Fourier series coefficients disappear, due to additional symmetry.\nFourier series of a Bravais-lattice-periodic function.\nA three-dimensional Bravais lattice is defined as the set of vectors of the form\nformula_193\nwhere formula_194 are integers and formula_195 are three linearly independent but not necessarily orthogonal vectors. Let us consider some function formula_196 with the same periodicity as the Bravais lattice, \"i.e.\" formula_197 for any lattice vector formula_198. This situation frequently occurs in solid-state physics where formula_196 might, for example, represent the effective potential that an electron \"feels\" inside a periodic crystal. In presence of such a periodic potential, the quantum-mechanical description of the electron results in a periodically modulated plane-wave commonly known as Bloch state.\nIn order to develop formula_196 in a Fourier series, it is convenient to introduce an auxiliary function formula_201 Both formula_196 and formula_203 contain essentially the same information. However, instead of the position vector formula_204, the arguments of formula_205 are coordinates formula_206 along the unit vectors formula_207 of the Bravais lattice, such that formula_205 is an ordinary periodic function in these variables,formula_209 This trick allows us to develop formula_205 as a multi-dimensional Fourier series, in complete analogy with the square-periodic function discussed in the previous section. Its Fourier coefficients areformula_211 where formula_212 are all integers. formula_213 plays the same role as the coefficients formula_214 in the previous section but in order to avoid double subscripts we note them as a function.\nOnce we have these coefficients, the function formula_205 can be recovered via the Fourier series formula_216 We would now like to abandon the auxiliary coordinates formula_206 and to return to the original position vector formula_204. This can be achieved by means of the reciprocal lattice whose vectors formula_219 are defined such that they are orthonormal (up to a factor formula_220) to the original Bravais vectors formula_221, formula_222with formula_223 the Kronecker delta. With this, the scalar product between a reciprocal lattice vector formula_224 and an arbitrary position vector formula_204 written in the Bravais lattice basis becomes \nformula_226which is exactly the expression occurring in the Fourier exponents. The Fourier series for formula_227 can therefore be rewritten as a sum over the all reciprocal lattice vectors formula_228,formula_229 and the coefficients areformula_230 The remaining task will be to convert this integral over lattice coordinates back into a volume integral. The relation between the lattice coordinates formula_231 and the original cartesian coordinates formula_232 is a linear system of equations,\nformula_233which, when written in matrix form, formula_234involves a constant matrix formula_235 whose columns are the unit vectors formula_236 of the Bravais lattice. When changing variables from formula_204 to formula_238 in an integral, the same matrix formula_235 appears as a Jacobian matrixformula_240\nIts determinant formula_241 is therefore also constant and can be inferred from any integral over any domain; here we choose to calculate the volume of the primitive unit cell formula_242 in both coordinate systems:\nformula_243 The unit cell being a parallelepiped, we have formula_244 and thus formula_245 This allows us to write formula_246 as the desired volume integral over the primitive unit cell formula_242 in ordinary cartesian coordinates:\nformula_248\nHilbert space.\nAs the trigonometric series is a special class of orthogonal system, Fourier series can naturally be defined in the context of Hilbert spaces. For example, the space of square-integrable functions on formula_163 forms the Hilbert space formula_250. Its inner product, defined for any two elements formula_82 and formula_205, is given by:\nformula_253\nThis space is equipped with the orthonormal basis formula_254.\nThen the (generalized) Fourier series expansion of formula_255, given by\nformula_256\ncan be written as\nformula_257\nThe sine-cosine form follows in a similar fashion. Indeed, the sines and cosines form an orthogonal set:\nformula_258\nformula_259\n(where \"\u03b4\"\"mn\" is the Kronecker delta), and\nformula_260\nHence, the set\nformula_261\nalso forms an orthonormal basis for formula_250. The density of their span is a consequence of the Stone\u2013Weierstrass theorem, but follows also from the properties of classical kernels like the Fej\u00e9r kernel.\nFourier theorem proving convergence of Fourier series.\nIn engineering, the Fourier series is generally assumed to converge except at jump discontinuities since the functions encountered in engineering are usually better-behaved than those in other disciplines. In particular, if formula_28 is continuous and the derivative of formula_16 (which may not exist everywhere) is square integrable, then the Fourier series of formula_28 converges absolutely and uniformly to formula_16. If a function is square-integrable on the interval formula_267, then the Fourier series converges to the function almost everywhere. It is possible to define Fourier coefficients for more general functions or distributions, in which case pointwise convergence often fails, and convergence in norm or weak convergence is usually studied.\nThe theorems proving that a Fourier series is a valid representation of any periodic function (that satisfies the Dirichlet conditions), and informal variations of them that do not specify the convergence conditions, are sometimes referred to generically as \"Fourier's theorem\" or \"the Fourier theorem\".\nLeast squares property.\nThe earlier Eq.2:\nformula_268\nis a trigonometric polynomial of degree formula_269 that can be generally expressed as:\nformula_270\nParseval's theorem implies that:\nformula_276\nwhere the Hilbert space norm is defined as:\nformula_277\nConvergence theorems.\nBecause of the least squares property, and because of the completeness of the Fourier basis, we obtain an elementary convergence result.\nIf formula_28 is continuously differentiable, then formula_286 is the formula_68th Fourier coefficient of the first derivative formula_288. Since formula_288 is continuous, and therefore bounded, it is square-integrable and its Fourier coefficients are square-summable. Then, by the Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality,\nformula_290\nThis means that formula_28 is absolutely summable. The sum of this series is a continuous function, equal to formula_28, since the Fourier series converges in formula_293 to formula_28:\nThis result can be proven easily if formula_28 is further assumed to be formula_299, since in that case formula_300 tends to zero as formula_301. More generally, the Fourier series is absolutely summable, thus converges uniformly to formula_28, provided that formula_28 satisfies a H\u00f6lder condition of order formula_304. In the absolutely summable case, the inequality:\nformula_305\nproves uniform convergence.\nMany other results concerning the convergence of Fourier series are known, ranging from the moderately simple result that the series converges at formula_12 if formula_28 is differentiable at formula_12, to more sophisticated results such as Carleson's theorem which states that the Fourier series of an formula_309 function converges almost everywhere.\nDivergence.\nSince Fourier series have such good convergence properties, many are often surprised by some of the negative results. For example, the Fourier series of a continuous \"T\"-periodic function need not converge pointwise. The uniform boundedness principle yields a simple non-constructive proof of this fact.\nIt is possible to give explicit examples of a continuous function whose Fourier series diverges at 0: for instance, the even and 2\u03c0-periodic function \"f\" defined for all \"x\" in [0,\u03c0] by\nformula_310\nBecause the function is even the Fourier series contains only cosines:\nformula_311\nThe coefficients are:\nformula_312\nAs {{mvar|m}} increases, the coefficients will be positive and increasing until they reach a value of about formula_313 at formula_314 for some {{mvar|n}} and then become negative (starting with a value around formula_315) and getting smaller, before starting a new such wave. At formula_316 the Fourier series is simply the running sum of formula_317 and this builds up to around\nformula_318\nin the {{mvar|n}}th wave before returning to around zero, showing that the series does not converge at zero but reaches higher and higher peaks. Note that though the function is continuous, it is not differentiable."}
{"id": "59039", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59039", "title": "Melaleuca", "text": "Genus of plants in the Myrtle family\nMelaleuca () is a genus of nearly 300 species of plants in the myrtle family, Myrtaceae, commonly known as paperbarks, honey-myrtles, bottlebrushes or tea-trees (although the last name is also applied to species of \"Leptospermum\"). They range in size from small shrubs that rarely grow to more than high, to trees up to . Their flowers generally occur in groups, forming a \"head\" or \"spike\" resembling a brush used for cleaning bottles, containing up to 80 individual flowers.\nMelaleucas are an important food source for nectarivorous insects, birds, and mammals. Many are popular garden plants, either for their attractive flowers or as dense screens and a few have economic value for producing fencing and oils such as \"tea tree\" oil. Most melaleucas are endemic to Australia, with a few also occurring in Malesia. Seven are endemic to New Caledonia, and one is found only on Australia's Lord Howe Island. \nMelaleucas are found in a wide variety of habitats. Many are adapted for life in swamps and boggy places, while others thrive in the poorest of sandy soils or on the edge of saltpans. Some have a wide distribution and are common, whilst others are rare and endangered. Land clearing, exotic myrtle rust, and especially draining and clearing of swamps threaten many species.\nDescription.\nMelaleucas range in size from small shrubs such as \"M. aspalathoides\" and \"M. concinna\" which rarely grow to more than high, to trees like \"M. cajuputi\" and \"M. quinquenervia\", which can reach . (One specimen of \"M. cajuputi\" reached a height of .)\nMany, like \"M. lineariifolia\", are known as paperbarks and have bark that can be peeled in thin sheets, whilst about 20% of the genus, including \"M. bracteata\", have hard, rough bark and another 20% have fibrous bark. All are evergreen, and the leaves vary in size from minute and scale-like (\"M. micromera\") to long (\"M. leucadendra\"). Most have distinct oil glands dotted in the leaves, making the leaves aromatic, especially when crushed.\nMelaleuca flowers are usually arranged in spikes or heads. Within the head or spike, the flowers are often in groups of two or three, each flower or group having a papery bract at its base. Five sepals occur, although these are sometimes fused into a ring of tissue and five petals which are usually small, not showy, and fall off as the flower opens or soon after. The stamens vary greatly in colour, from white to cream or yellow, red, or mauve with their yellow tips (the anthers) contrasting with their \"stalks\" (filaments).\nThe fruits are woody, cup-shaped, barrel-shaped, or almost spherical capsules, often arranged in clusters along the stems. The seeds are sometimes retained in the fruit for many years, only opening when the plant, or part of it, dies or is heated in a bushfire. In tropical areas, seeds are released annually in the wet season.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Melaleuca\" is derived from the Ancient Greek \u03bc\u03ad\u03bb\u03b1\u03c2 (\"m\u00e9las\") meaning \"dark\" or \"black\" and \u03bb\u03b5\u03c5\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2 (\"leuk\u00f3s\") meaning \"white\", apparently because one of the first specimens described had fire-blackened white bark. The common name \"tea tree\" has been applied to species in the genera \"Leptospermum\", \"Melaleuca\", \"Kunzea\", and \"Baeckea\" because the sailors on the \"Endeavour\" used the leaves of a shrub from one of these groups as a replacement for tea (\"Camellia sinensis)\" during Captain James Cook's 1770 voyage to Australia.\nTaxonomy.\nThe first known description of a \"Melaleuca\" species was written by Rumphius in 1741, in \"Herbarium amboinense\" before the present system of naming plants was written. The plant he called \"Arbor alba\" is now known as \"Melaleuca leucadendra\". The name \"Melaleuca\" was first used by Linnaeus in 1767. Many species previously known as \"Metrosideros\" were then placed in \"Melaleuca\". In Australia, \"Melaleuca\" is the third most diverse plant genus with up to 300 species.\nThe genus \"Callistemon\" was raised by Robert Brown, who noted its similarity to \"Melaleuca\", distinguishing it only on the basis of whether the stamens are free of each other, or joined in bundles. Botanists in the past, including Ferdinand von Mueller and Lyndley Craven have proposed uniting the two genera but the matter is not decided. Evidence from DNA studies suggests that either \"Callistemon\" and some other genera be incorporated into \"Melaleuca\" or that at least 10 new genera be created from the present genus.\nIn 2014, Lyndley Craven and others proposed, on the basis of DNA evidence and a lack of morphological support, that species in the genera \"Beaufortia\", \"Calothamnus\", \"Conothamnus\", \"Eremaea\", \"Lamarchea\", \"Petraeomyrtus\", \"Phymatocarpus\" and \"Regelia\" be transferred to \"Melaleuca\". The World Checklist of Selected Plant Families maintained by the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew lists \"Calothamnus\" and the other genera as synonyms of the accepted genus \"Melaleuca\". The move has not been adopted by all Australian herbaria with some taxonomists, including Alex George opposing the move.\nDistribution and habitat.\nMost melaleucas occur naturally only on the Australian mainland. Eight occur in Tasmania, but only two are endemic to that island. One (\"M. howeana\") is endemic to Lord Howe Island and seven are endemic to Grande Terre, the main island of New Caledonia. A few tropical species also occur in Papua New Guinea, and the distribution of one subspecies, \"Melaleuca cajuputi\" subsp. \"cumingiana\" extends as far north as Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam. The southwest of Western Australia has the greatest density of species, and in the tropical north of the continent, species such as \"M. argentea\" and \"M. leucadendra\" are the dominant species over large areas.\nMelaleucas grow in a range of soil types and many tolerate occasional or even permanent waterlogging. Some species, especially the South Australian swamp paperbark, \"M. halmaturorum\", thrive in saline soils where few other species survive. Many are fire tolerant, regenerating from epicormic buds or by coppicing, but no melaleucas occur in rainforest and few species occur in the arid zone.\nEcology.\nMelaleucas are mostly pollinated by insects, including the introduced honey bee (\"Apis mellifera\"), flies, beetles, wasps and thrips. Birds such as lorikeets and honeyeaters as well as bats often visit the flowers and are probably also pollinators.\nSome species of \"Melaleuca\", especially \"M. alternifolia\", are cultivated for the production of tea tree oil, and in plantations are susceptible to a number of insect pests. The most significant of these is the chrysomelid \"Paropsisterna tigrina\", but other beetles, cutworm caterpillars (\"Agrotis species\"), psyllids, mole crickets (\"Gryllotalpa\"), and others cause significant damage. More than 100 species of insects are known to feed on melaleucas. Native stands have fewer predators, but tea tree sawfly (\"Pterygophorus\" species) and longicorn beetles are often found. The scale insect \"Beesonia ferrugineus\" forms round, fluffy-looking galls on branches of several \"Melaleuca\" species.\nMelaleucas are also susceptible to myrtle rust (\"Puccinia psidii\") which can result in damage to soft plant material and the death of highly susceptible hosts. Myrtle rust is common in eastern Australia, including Tasmania and has been detected in the Tiwi Islands.\nInvasive species.\n\"Melaleuca quinquenervia\" (broad-leaved paperbark) is the most damaging of 60 exotic species introduced to the Florida Everglades to help drain low-lying swampy areas. Introduced in the early 20th century, it has become a serious invasive species, with damaging effects including the displacement of native species, reduction in wildlife habitat, alteration of hydrology, modification of soil, and changes in fire regimes. The tree's perseverance in the face of efforts to eradicate it has earned it the nickname \"punktree\".\nUses.\nTraditional Aboriginal uses.\nAboriginal Australians used several species of \"Melaleuca\" to make rafts, as roofing for shelter, bandages, and food preparation. \"Bee bread\" and honey were collected from the hives of native stingless bees in melaleuca forests in the Northern Territory. The Bundjalung people traditionally lived in the area of north-eastern New South Wales where \"Melaleuca alternifolia\" is endemic, and they treated skin infections by crushing the leaves of that species over skin infections then covering the area with a warm mudpack.\nEssential oils.\n\"Melaleuca alternifolia\" is notable for its essential oil. Though it is safe for topical applications, tea tree oil is toxic if ingested orally.\nThe oil is produced on a commercial scale and marketed as tea tree oil. \"Melaleuca cajuputi\" is used to produce a similar oil, known as cajuput oil, which is used in Southeast Asia to treat a variety of infections and to add fragrance to food and soaps.\nHorticulture.\nMelaleucas are popular garden plants, both in Australia and other tropical areas worldwide. The first to be cultivated were grown in England from seed in 1771. Some melaleucas are commonly cultivated, grown as trees for parks and large gardens (such as \"Melaleuca leucadendra\") or as ornamentals (sometimes as \"Callistemon\") such as \"M. citrina\" (\"Callistemon citrinus\"), \"M. hypericifolia\" and \"M. wilsonii\".\nIn popular culture.\nTea trees (spelled \"Ti-Trees\") are specifically mentioned in the lyrics of a short aria 'Joy' published around 1916 by J.D.Fletcher &amp; Co of London, by Australian composer Arthur Chanter (1866-1950).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59040", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59040", "title": "Transportation in Azerbaijin", "text": ""}
{"id": "59042", "revid": "47578520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59042", "title": "Aristobulus III of Judea", "text": "Last ruler of the Hasmonean dynasty (53-36 BC)\nAristobulus III (53\u201336 BCE) was the last scion of the Hasmonean royal house, brother of Herod the Great's wife Mariamne, and grandson of Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II. He was a favourite of the people on account of his noble descent and handsome presence, and thus became an object of fear to Herod, who at first sought to ignore him entirely by debarring him from the high priesthood. But his mother Alexandra, through intercession with Cleopatra and Mark Antony, compelled Herod to remove Ananelus from the office of high priest and appoint Aristobulus instead.\nTo secure himself against danger from Aristobulus, Herod instituted a system of espionage against him and his mother. This surveillance proved so onerous that they sought to gain their freedom by taking refuge with Cleopatra. As told by the Roman Jewish historian Josephus, their plans were betrayed, and the disclosure had the effect of greatly increasing Herod's suspicions against his brother-in-law. As Herod dared not resort to open violence, he caused him to be drowned while he was bathing in a pool in Jericho during a banquet organized by Alexandra.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59043", "revid": "40579331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59043", "title": "Asher ben Jehiel", "text": "Rabbi and Talmudist (1250/1259\u20131327)\nAsher ben Jehiel (, or Asher ben Yechiel, sometimes Asheri) (1250 or 1259 \u2013 1327) was an eminent rabbi and Talmudist best known for his abstract of Talmudic law. He is often referred to as Rabbenu Asher, \u201cour Rabbi Asher\u201d or by the Hebrew acronym for this title, the Rosh (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e8\u05d0\"\u05e9\u200e). His yahrzeit is on 9 Cheshvan.\nBiography.\nThe Rosh was probably born in Cologne, Holy Roman Empire, and died in Toledo. His family was prominent for learning and piety, his father Yechiel was a Talmudist, and one of his ancestors was Rabbi Eliezer ben Nathan (the \"RaABaN\"). Asher had eight sons, the most prominent of whom were Jacob (author of the \"Arba'ah Turim\") and Judah.\nIn 1286, King Rudolf I had instituted a new persecution of the Jews, and the great teacher of the Rosh, Rabbi Meir of Rothenburg, left Germany but was captured and imprisoned. The Rosh raised a ransom for his release, but Rabbi Meir refused it, for fear of encouraging the imprisonment of other rabbis. Thereafter the Rosh assumed Rabbi Meir's position in Worms. He was, however, forced to emigrate (in all likelihood, a victim of blackmail by the government, aimed at acquiring his fortune). After leaving Germany, he first settled in southern France, and then in Toledo, Spain, where he became rabbi on the recommendation of Rabbi Solomon ben Abraham Aderet (\"RaShBA\"). Rabbenu Asher's son Judah testified to the fact that he died in poverty. Rabbeinu Asher died in Toledo on 9 Cheshvan 5088 (1327 CE). His known surviving children were said to have been killed in the ensuing persecutions that affected Spain in 1392.\nRabbenu Asher possessed \"methodical and systematic\" Talmudic knowledge, and was distinguished for his ability to analyze and thereby clarify long Talmudic discussions. The Rosh was known for his independent legal reasoning: \"We must not be guided in our decisions by the admiration of great men, and in the event of a law not being clearly stated in the Talmud, we are not bound to accept it, even if it be based on the works of the Geonim.\" (For instance, the Rosh ruled that the liturgy of the Geonim was not subject to the Talmudic rule against change in the prayers.)\nRabbenu Asher was opposed to the study of secular knowledge, especially philosophy. He held that philosophy is based on critical research, whereas religion is based on tradition and the two are thus \"incapable of harmonization\". He said that \"none that go unto her may return\"\u2014in fact, he thanked God for having saved him from its influence, and boasted of possessing no knowledge outside the Torah. He attempted to issue a decree against the study of non-Jewish learning. One effect of this attitude was to limit his influence on secular Spanish Jewry. At the same time, within rabbinic circles, \"he transplanted the strict and narrow Talmudic spirit from Germany to Spain\", and this, in some measure, turned Spanish Jews from secular research to the study of the Talmud.\nWorks.\nRabbenu Asher's best known work is his abstract of Talmudic law. This work specifies the final, practical \"halakha\", leaving out the intermediate discussion and concisely stating the final decision. It omits areas of law limited to \"Eretz Yisrael\" (such as agricultural and sacrificial laws) as well as the \"aggadic\" portions of the Talmud. Asher's son Jacob compiled a list of the decisions found in the work, under the title \"Piskei Ha-Rosh\" (decisions of the Rosh). Commentaries on his \"Halachot\" were written by a number of later Talmudists. In \"yeshivot,\" this work is studied as a regular part of the daily Talmud study.\nThis work resembles the \"Halakhot\" of the Rif (Rabbi Isaac Alfasi)\u2014also an adumbration\u2014but differs in quoting later authorities: Maimonides, the Tosafists and Alfasi himself. One theory states that the work is actually not a commentary on the \"Talmud\" but is rather a commentary on the \"Rif\", given that it always starts with the text of the \"Rif\". Some however dispute this.\nRabbenu Asher's work has been printed with almost every edition of the Talmud since its publication. This work was so important in Jewish law that Yosef Karo included the Rosh together with Maimonides and Isaac Alfasi as one of the three major \"poskim\" (decisors) considered in determining the final ruling in his \"Shulchan Arukh.\"\nRabbi Asher also wrote:\nInfluence.\nDuring the Toledo era of Spanish Jewish history, the influence of R. Asher ben Jehiel and his followers, who maintained a distinctly Talmudic rabbinic approach, was significant. However, the wider intellectual Jewish culture was deeply drawn to philosophy, with Zaragoza emerging as a prominent center where philosophy was studied alongside Talmudic scholarship within the local \"yeshivas\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "59044", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59044", "title": "Rav Ashi", "text": "Babylonian rabbi\nRav Ashi () (\"Rabbi Ashi\") (352\u2013427) was a Babylonian Jewish rabbi, of the sixth generation of amoraim. He reestablished the Academy at Sura and was the first editor of the Babylonian Talmud.\nThe original pronunciation of his name may have been \"Asheh\", as suggested by the rhyming of his name with \"Mosheh\" in Maimonides' writings, and a possible rhyme with the word \"mikdashei\" () in the Talmud itself.\nBiography.\nAccording to a tradition preserved in the academies, Rav Ashi was born in the same year that Rava (the great teacher of Mahuza) died, and he was the first important teacher in the Talmudic Academies in Babylonia after Rava's death. Simai, Ashi's father, was a rich and learned man, a student of the college of Naresh near Sura, which was directed by Rav Pappa, Rava's disciple. Ashi's teacher was Rav Kahana III, a member of the same college, who later became president of the academy at Pumbedita. Ashi married the daughter of Rami bar Hama, or Rami b. Abba according to other texts.\nAshi was rich and influential, owning many properties and forests. The Talmud gives him as an example of \"Torah and greatness combined in one place\", that is to say, he possessed both scholarly accomplishment and political authority, and he had authority even over the exilarch Huna bar Nathan.\nElevation of Sura.\nWhile still young, Rav Ashi became the head of the Sura Academy, his great learning being acknowledged by the older teachers. It had been closed since Rav Chisda's death (309), but under Rav Ashi it once again became the intellectual center of the Babylonian Jews. Ashi contributed to its material grandeur also, rebuilding the academy and the synagogue connected with it in Mata Mehasya, sparing no expense and personally superintending their reconstruction. As a direct result of Rav Ashi's renown, the Exilarch came annually to Sura in the month after Rosh Hashana to receive the respects of the assembled representatives of the Babylonian academies and congregations. These festivities and other conventions in Sura were so splendid that Rav Ashi expressed his surprise that some of the Gentile residents of Sura were not tempted to accept Judaism.\nSura maintained the prominence conferred on it by Rav Ashi for several centuries, and only during the last two centuries of the Gaonic period did Pumbedita again become its rival. Rav Ashi's son Tabyomi (known as Mar bar Rav Ashi) was a recognized scholar, but only in 455, 28 years after his father's death, did he receive the position that his father had so successfully filled for more than half a century.\nCompilation of the Gemara.\nHis commanding personality, his scholarly standing, and wealth are sufficiently indicated by the saying, then current, that since the days of Rabbi Judah haNasi, learning and social distinction were never so united in one person as in Rav Ashi. Indeed, just as Judah haNasi compiled and edited the Mishnah; Rav Ashi made it the labor of his life to collect and edit under the name of Gemara, the explanations of the Mishnah which had been taught in the Babylonian academies since the days of Rav, together with all the discussions connected with them, and all the halakhic and aggadic material covered in the schools.\nTogether with his disciples and the scholars who gathered in Sura for the \"Kallah\", or semi-annual college conference, he completed this task. The kindly attitude of King Yazdegerd I, as well as the devoted and respectful recognition of his authority by the academies of Nehardea and Pumbedita, greatly favored the undertaking. A particularly important element in Ashi's success was the length of his tenure of office as head of Sura Academy. According to a tradition brought by Hai Gaon, he held the position for 60 years, though given his approximately 75-year lifespan it is possible this number was rounded upwards. According to the same tradition, these 60 years were so symmetrically apportioned that each tractate required six months (including a single Kallah) for the study of its Mishnah and the redaction of the traditional expositions of the same (Gemara), totaling 30 years for the 60 tractates. The same process was repeated in the next 30 years. Indeed, the Talmud itself mentions an earlier and a later version of Rav Ashi's teachings on at least one subject.\nBeyond this, the Talmud itself contains not the slightest intimation of the activity which Ashi and his school exercised in this field for more than half a century. Even whether this editorial work was written down, and thus, whether the putting of the Babylonian Talmud into writing took place under Rav Ashi or not, cannot be answered from any statement in the Talmud. It is nevertheless probable that the fixation of the text of so comprehensive a literary work could not have been accomplished without the aid of writing. Rav Ashi often provides comments at the very end of broad Talmudic discussions, occasionally providing conclusions to issues that remain unresolved up to that point.\nThe work begun by Rav Ashi was continued in the two succeeding generations and completed by Ravina II, another president of the college at Sura, who died in 499. To the work as Ravina left it, only slight additions were made by the Saboraim. To one of these additions\u2014that to an ancient utterance concerning the \"Book of Adam, the First Man,\"\u2014this statement is appended: \"Rav Ashi and Ravina are the last representatives of independent decision (\"hora'ah\")\", an evident reference to the work of these two in editing the Babylonian Talmud, which as an object of study and a fountainhead of practical \"decision\" was to have the same importance for the coming generations as the Mishnah had had for the Amoraim.\nTomb of Rav Ashi.\nSome ultra-Orthodox Jews from the Breslov Hasidic sect believe, Rav Ashi is buried at a site, which sits on the Lebanese Mount Shanan on the border with Israel overlooking Kibbutz Manara. \nLocal Lebanese people dispute this, they believe that a 16th century Shia Muslim cleric named Sheikh Abbad is buried there. Sheikh Abbad is considered a founder of the Shi'ite movement in Lebanon. \nIn May 2000, when Israel withdrew from South Lebanon, after the Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon (19852\u20132000) the main obstacle holding up the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers (UNIFIL) along the border was the allocation of this disputed site. It was among the last to be settled between the State of Israel and Lebanon. One option was to erect a barricade around the tomb to prevent Muslims and Jews from visiting the site. Subsequent to the Blue Line drawn by the United Nations, the border fence cuts through the middle of the disputed tomb.\nIn February 2025, during the fragile Israel\u2013Lebanon ceasefire after Israeli invasion of Lebanon, it became public that a group of Haredi Israelis entered Lebanese territory to reach the believed tomb, undertook work on the grave and fenced it off. They tried to turn it into a place for prayer and worship. It was not specified when they entered nor the amount of time they spent inside Lebanon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article\u00a0incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0\nIt has the following bibliography:"}
{"id": "59045", "revid": "93143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59045", "title": "NATO phonetic alphabet", "text": "Letter names for unambiguous communication\nThe International Radiotelephony Spelling Alphabet or simply the Radiotelephony Spelling Alphabet, commonly known as the NATO phonetic alphabet, is the most widely used set of clear-code words for communicating the letters of the Latin/Roman alphabet. Technically a \"radiotelephonic spelling alphabet\", it goes by various names, including NATO spelling alphabet, ICAO phonetic alphabet, and ICAO spelling alphabet. The ITU phonetic alphabet and figure code is a rarely used variant that differs in the code words for digits.\nAlthough spelling alphabets are commonly called \"phonetic alphabets\", they are not phonetic in the sense of phonetic transcription systems such as the International Phonetic Alphabet.\nTo create the code, a series of international agencies assigned 26\u00a0clear-code words (also known as \"phonetic words\") acrophonically to the letters of the Latin alphabet, with the goal that the letters and numbers would be easily distinguishable from one another over radio and telephone. The words were chosen to be accessible to speakers of English, French and Spanish. Some of the code words were changed over time, as they were found to be ineffective in real-life conditions. In 1956, NATO modified the then-current set used by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO): the NATO version was accepted by ICAO that year, and by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) a few years later, thus becoming the international standard. \nThe 26\u00a0code words are as follows (ICAO spellings): \"Alfa\", \"Bravo\", \"Charlie\", \"Delta\", \"Echo\", \"Foxtrot\", \"Golf\", \"Hotel\", \"India\", \"Juliett\", \"Kilo\", \"Lima\", \"Mike\", \"November\", \"Oscar\", \"Papa\", \"Quebec\", \"Romeo\", \"Sierra\", \"Tango\", \"Uniform\", \"Victor\", \"Whiskey\", \"Xray\", \"Yankee\", and \"Zulu\". \u27e8Alfa\u27e9 and \u27e8Juliett\u27e9 are spelled that way to avoid mispronunciation by people unfamiliar with English orthography; NATO changed \u27e8X-ray\u27e9 to \u27e8Xray\u27e9 for the same reason. The code words for digits are their English names, though with their pronunciations modified in the cases of \"three\", \"four\", \"five\", \"nine\" and \"thousand\".\nThe code words have been stable since 1956. A 1955 NATO memo stated that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is known that [the spelling alphabet] has been prepared only after the most exhaustive tests on a scientific basis by several nations. One of the firmest conclusions reached was that it was not practical to make an isolated change to clear confusion between one pair of letters. To change one word involves reconsideration of the whole alphabet to ensure that the change proposed to clear one confusion does not itself introduce others.\nInternational adoption.\nSoon after the code words were developed by ICAO (see history below), they were adopted by other national and international organizations, including the ITU, the International Maritime Organization (IMO), the United States Federal Government as Federal Standard 1037C: Glossary of Telecommunications Terms and its successors ANSI T1.523-2001 and ATIS Telecom Glossary (ATIS-0100523.2019) (all three using the spellings \"Alpha\" and \"Juliet\"), the United States Department of Defense, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) (using the spelling \"Xray\"), the International Amateur Radio Union (IARU), the American Radio Relay League (ARRL), the Association of Public-Safety Communications Officials-International (APCO), and by many military organizations such as NATO (using the spelling \"Xray\") and the now-defunct Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO).\nThe same alphabetic code words are used by all agencies, but each agency chooses one of two different sets of numeric code words. NATO uses the regular English numerals (\"zero\", \"one\", \"two\", etc., though with some differences in pronunciation), whereas the ITU (beginning on 1 April 1969) and the IMO created compound code words (\"nadazero\", \"unaone\", \"bissotwo\" etc.). In practice the compound words are used very rarely.\nUsage.\nA spelling alphabet is used to distinguish those parts of a message that contain letters and digits, because the names of many letters sound similar, for instance \"bee\" and \"pee\", \"en\" and \"em\" or \"ef\" and \"ess\". The potential for confusion increases if static or other interference is present, as is commonly the case with radio and telephonic communication. For instance, the target message \"proceed to map grid DH98\" would be transmitted as \"proceed to map grid Delta-Hotel-Niner-Ait\". \nCivilian industry uses the code words to avoid similar problems in the transmission of messages by telephone systems. For example, it is often used in the retail industry where customer or site details are conveyed by telephone (for example to authorize a credit agreement or confirm stock codes), although ad-hoc code words are often used in that instance. It has been used by information technology workers to communicate serial numbers and reference codes, which are often very long, by voice. Most major airlines use the alphabet to communicate passenger name records (PNRs) internally, and in some cases, with customers. It is often used in a medical context as well.\nSeveral codes words and sequences of code words have become well-known, such as Bravo Zulu (letter code BZ) for \"well done\", Checkpoint Charlie (Checkpoint C) in Berlin, and Zulu Time for Greenwich Mean Time or Coordinated Universal Time. During the Vietnam War, the US government referred to the Viet Cong guerrillas and the group itself as VC, or Victor Charlie; the name \"Charlie\" became synonymous with this force.\nPronunciation of code words.\nThe final choice of code words for the letters of the alphabet and for the digits was made after hundreds of thousands of comprehension tests involving 31 nationalities. The qualifying feature was the likelihood of a code word being understood in the context of others. For example, \"Football\" has a higher chance of being understood than \"Foxtrot\" in isolation, but \"Foxtrot\" is superior in extended communication.\nPronunciations were set out by the ICAO before 1956 with advice from the governments of both the United States and United Kingdom. To eliminate national variations in pronunciation, posters illustrating the pronunciation desired by ICAO are available. However, there remain differences in the pronunciations published by ICAO and other agencies, and ICAO has apparently conflicting Latin-alphabet and IPA transcriptions. At least some of these differences appear to be typographic errors. In 2022, the Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung (DIN) attempted to resolve these conflicts. For example, they consistently transcribe for what the ICAO had transcribed variously as in IPA and as \"a, ah, ar, er\" in orthography. \nJust as words are spelled out as individual letters, numbers are spelled out as individual digits. That is, 17 is rendered as \"one seven\" and 60 as \"six zero\". Depending on context, the word \"thousand\" may be used as in English, and, for whole hundreds only (when the sequence 00 occurs at the end of a number), the word \"hundred\" may be used. For example, 1300 is read as \"one three zero zero\" if it is a transponder code or serial number, and as \"one thousand three hundred\" if it is an altitude or distance.\nThe ICAO, NATO, and FAA use modifications of English digits as code words, with 3, 4, 5 and 9 being pronounced \"tree\", \"fower\" (rhymes with \"lower\"), \"fife\" and \"niner\". The digit 3 is specified as \"tree\" so that it will not be mispronounced \"sri\" (and similarly \"thousand\" is pronounced \"tousand\"); the long pronunciation of 4 (still found in some English dialects) keeps it somewhat distinct from \"for\"; 5 is pronounced with a second \"f\" because the normal pronunciation with a \"v\" is easily confused with \"fire\"; and 9 has an extra syllable to keep it distinct from the German word \"nein\" \"no\". (Prior to 1956, \"three\" and \"five\" had been pronounced with the English consonants, but with the vowels broken into two syllables.) For directions presented as the hour-hand position on a clock, the additional numerals \"ten\", \"eleven\" and \"twelve\" are used with the word \"o'clock\".\nThe ITU and IMO, however, specify a different set of code words for digits. These are compounds of ICAO and Latinesque roots.\nThe IMO's GMDSS procedures permits the use of either set of code words.\nTables.\nThere are two IPA transcriptions of the letter names, from the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the Deutsches Institut f\u00fcr Normung (DIN). Both authorities indicate that a non-rhotic pronunciation is standard. That of the ICAO, first published in 1950 and reprinted many times without correction (e.g. the error in 'golf'), uses a large number of vowels. For instance, it has six low/central vowels: , , , , and . The DIN consolidates all six into the single low-central vowel . The DIN vowels are partly predictable, with the more open vowels in closed syllables and the more close vowels in open syllables, apart from \"echo\" and \"sierra\", which have as in English, German and Italian. The DIN also reduced the number of stressed syllables in \"bravo\" and \"x-ray\", consistent with the ICAO English respellings of those words and with the NATO change of spelling of \"x-ray\" to \"xray\" so that people would know to pronounce it as a single word.\nThere is no authoritative IPA transcription of the digits. However, there are respellings into both English and French, which can be compared to clarify some of the ambiguities and inconsistencies. \nThe Combined Communications-Electronics Board (CCEB) has code words for punctuation, including those in the table below.\nOthers are: \"colon\", \"semi-colon\", \"exclamation mark\", \"question mark\", \"apostrophe\", \"quote\", and \"unquote\".\nHistory.\nPrior to World War I and the development and widespread adoption of two-way radio that supported voice, telephone spelling alphabets were developed to improve communication on low-quality and long-distance telephone circuits.\nThe first non-military internationally recognized spelling alphabet was adopted by the CCIR (predecessor of the ITU) during 1927. The experience gained with that alphabet resulted in several changes being made during 1932 by the ITU. The resulting alphabet was adopted by the International Commission for Air Navigation, the predecessor of the ICAO, and was used for civil aviation until World War II. It continued to be used by the IMO until 1965.\nThroughout World War II, many nations used their own versions of a spelling alphabet. The US adopted the Joint Army/Navy radiotelephony alphabet during 1941 to standardize systems among all branches of its armed forces. The US alphabet became known as \"Able Baker\" after the words for A and B. The Royal Air Force adopted one similar to the United States one during World War II as well. Other British forces adopted the RAF radio alphabet, which is similar to the phonetic alphabet used by the Royal Navy during World War I. At least two of the terms are sometimes still used by UK civilians to spell words over the phone, namely \"F for Freddie\" and \"S for Sugar\".\nTo enable the US, UK, and Australian armed forces to communicate during joint operations, in 1943 the CCB (Combined Communications Board; the combination of US and UK upper military commands) modified the US military's Joint Army/Navy alphabet for use by all three nations, with the result being called the US-UK spelling alphabet. It was defined in one or more of CCBP-1: \"Combined Amphibious Communications Instructions\", CCBP3: \"Combined Radiotelephone (R/T) Procedure\", and CCBP-7: \"Combined Communication Instructions.\" The CCB alphabet itself was based on the US Joint Army/Navy spelling alphabet. The CCBP (Combined Communications Board Publications) documents contain material formerly published in US Army Field Manuals in the 24-series. Several of these documents had revisions, and were renamed. For instance, CCBP3-2 was the second edition of CCBP3.\nDuring World War II, the US military conducted significant research into spelling alphabets. Major F. D. Handy, directorate of Communications in the Army Air Force (and a member of the working committee of the Combined Communications Board), enlisted the help of Harvard University's Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory, asking them to determine the most successful word for each letter when using \"military interphones in the intense noise encountered in modern warfare.\" He included lists from the US, Royal Air Force, Royal Navy, British Army, AT&amp;T, Western Union, RCA Communications, and that of the International Telecommunications Convention. According to a report on the subject:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter World War II, with many aircraft and ground personnel from the allied armed forces, \"Able Baker\" was officially adopted for use in international aviation. During the 1946 Second Session of the ICAO Communications Division, the organization adopted the so-called \"Able Baker\" alphabet that was the 1943 US\u2013UK spelling alphabet. However, many sounds were unique to English, so an alternative \"Ana Brazil\" alphabet was used in Latin America. In spite of this, International Air Transport Association (IATA), recognizing the need for a single universal alphabet, presented a draft alphabet to the ICAO during 1947 that had sounds common to English, French, Spanish and Portuguese.\nFrom 1948 to 1949, Jean-Paul Vinay, a professor of linguistics at the Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al, worked closely with the ICAO to research and develop a new spelling alphabet. The directions of ICAO were that \"To be considered, a word must:\nAfter further study and modification by each approving body, the revised alphabet was adopted on 1 November 1951, to become effective on 1 April 1952 for civil aviation (but it may not have been adopted by any military).\nProblems were soon found with this list. Some users believed that they were so severe that they reverted to the old \"Able Baker\" alphabet. Confusion among words like \"Delta\" and \"Extra\", and between \"Nectar\" and \"Victor\", or the poor intelligibility of other words during poor receiving conditions were the main problems. Later in 1952, ICAO decided to revisit the alphabet and their research. To identify the deficiencies of the new alphabet, testing was conducted among speakers from 31 nations, principally by the governments of the United Kingdom and the United States. In the United States, the research was conducted by the USAF-directed Operational Applications Laboratory (AFCRC, ARDC), to monitor a project with the Research Foundation of Ohio State University. Among the more interesting of the research findings was that \"higher noise levels do not create confusion, but do intensify those confusions already inherent between the words in question\".\nBy early 1956 the ICAO was nearly complete with this research, and published the new official phonetic alphabet in order to account for discrepancies that might arise in communications as a result of multiple alphabet naming systems coexisting in different places and organizations. NATO was in the process of adopting the ICAO spelling alphabet, and apparently felt enough urgency that it adopted the proposed new alphabet with changes based on NATO's own research, to become effective on 1 January 1956, but quickly issued a new directive on 1 March 1956 adopting the now official ICAO spelling alphabet, which had changed by one word (November) from NATO's earlier request to ICAO to modify a few words based on US Air Force research.\nAfter all of the above study, only the five words representing the letters C, M, N, U, and X were replaced. The ICAO sent a recording of the new \"Radiotelephony Spelling Alphabet\" to all member states in November 1955. The final version given in the table above was implemented by the ICAO on 1 March 1956, and the ITU adopted it no later than 1959 when they mandated its usage via their official publication, \"Radio Regulations\". Because the ITU governs all international radio communications, it was also adopted by most radio operators, whether military, civilian, or amateur. It was finally adopted by the IMO in 1965.\nDuring 1947 the ITU adopted the compound Latinate prefix-number words (\"Nadazero\", \"Unaone\", etc.), later adopted by the IMO during 1965.\nIn the official version of the alphabet, two spellings deviate from the English norm: \"Alfa\" and \"Juliett\". \"Alfa\" is spelled with an \"f\" as it is in most European languages because the spelling \"Alpha\" may not be pronounced properly by native speakers of some languages \u2013 who may not know that \"ph\" should be pronounced as \"f\". The spelling \"Juliett\" is used rather than \"Juliet\" for the benefit of French speakers, because they may otherwise treat a single final \"t\" as silent. For similar reasons, \"Charlie\" and \"Uniform\" have alternative pronunciations where the \"ch\" is pronounced \"sh\" and the \"u\" is pronounced \"oo\". Early on, the NATO alliance changed \"X-ray\" to \"Xray\" in its version of the alphabet to ensure that it would be pronounced as one word rather than as two, while the global organization ICAO keeps the spelling \"X-ray\".\nThe alphabet is defined by various international conventions on radio, including:\nTables.\nFor the 1938 and 1947 phonetics, each transmission of figures is preceded and followed by the words \"as a number\" spoken twice.\nThe ITU adopted the IMO phonetic spelling alphabet in 1959, and in 1969 specified that it be \"for application in the maritime mobile service only\".\nPronunciation was not defined prior to 1959. For the post-1959 phonetics, the underlined syllable of each letter word should be emphasized, and each syllable of the code words for the post-1969 figures should be equally emphasized.\nInternational aviation.\nThe Radiotelephony Spelling Alphabet is used by the International Civil Aviation Organization for international aircraft communications.\nInternational maritime mobile service.\nThe ITU-R Radiotelephony Alphabet is used by the International Maritime Organization for international marine communications.\nVariants.\nSince \"Nectar\" was changed to \"November\" in 1956, the code has been mostly stable. However, there is occasional regional substitution of a few code words, such as replacing them with earlier variants, to avoid confusion with local terminology.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59046", "revid": "1318288930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59046", "title": "Silly Putty", "text": "Toy putty (slime)\nSilly Putty is a toy containing silicone polymers that has unusual physical properties. It can flow like a liquid, bounce and can be stretched or broken depending on the amount of physical stress to which it is subjected. It contains viscoelastic liquid silicones, a type of non-Newtonian fluid, which makes it act as a viscous liquid over a long period of time but as an elastic solid over a short time period. It was originally created during research into a potential rubber substitute for use by the United States in World War II.\nThe name \"Silly Putty\" is a trademark of Crayola LLC. Other names are used to market similar substances from other manufacturers.\nDescription.\nAs a bouncing putty, Silly Putty is noted for its unusual characteristics. It bounces when dropped from a height, but breaks when struck or stretched sharply; it can also float in a liquid and will form a puddle given enough time. Silly Putty and most other retail putty products have viscoelastic agents added to reduce the flow and enable the putty to hold its shape.\nThe original coral-colored Silly Putty is composed of 65% dimethylsiloxane (hydroxy-terminated polymers with boric acid), 17% silica (crystalline quartz), 9% Thixatrol ST (castor oil derivative), 4% polydimethylsiloxane, 1% decamethyl cyclopentasiloxane, 1% glycerine, and 1% titanium dioxide.\nSilly Putty's unusual flow characteristics are due to the ingredient polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), a viscoelastic substance. Viscoelasticity is a type of non-Newtonian flow, characterizing a material that acts as a viscous liquid over a long time period but as an elastic solid over a short time period. Because its apparent viscosity increases directly with respect to the amount of force applied, Silly Putty can be characterized as a dilatant fluid.\nSilly Putty is also a fairly good adhesive. When newspaper ink was petroleum based, Silly Putty could be used to transfer newspaper images to other surfaces, providing amusement by distorting the transferred image afterwards. Newer papers with soy-based inks are more resistant to this process.\nGenerally, Silly Putty is difficult to remove from textured items such as dirt and clothing. Hand sanitizers containing alcohol are often helpful. Silly Putty will dissolve when in contact with an alcohol; after the alcohol evaporates, the material will not exhibit its original properties.\nIf Silly Putty is submerged in warm or hot water, it will become softer and thus \"melt\" much faster. It also becomes harder to remove small amounts of it from surfaces. After a long period of time, it will return to its original viscosity.\nSilly Putty is sold as a piece of clay inside an egg-shaped plastic container. The Silly Putty brand is owned by Crayola LLC (formerly the Binney &amp; Smith company). As of July 2009[ [update]], twenty thousand eggs of Silly Putty were sold daily. Since 1950, more than 300 million eggs of Silly Putty (approximately ) have been sold. It is available in various colors, including glow-in-the-dark and metallic. Other brands offer similar materials, sometimes in larger-sized containers, and in a similarly wide variety of colors or with different properties, such as magnetism and iridescence.\nHistory.\nDuring World War II, Japan invaded rubber-producing countries as it expanded its sphere of influence in the Pacific Rim. Rubber was vital for the production of rafts, tires, vehicle and aircraft parts, gas masks, and boots. In the US, all rubber products were rationed; citizens were encouraged to make their rubber products last until the end of the war and to donate spare tires, boots, and coats. Meanwhile, the government funded research into synthetic rubber compounds to attempt to solve this shortage.\nCredit for the invention of Silly Putty is disputed and has been attributed variously to Earl Warrick of the then newly formed Dow Corning; Harvey Chin; and James Wright, a Scottish-born inventor working for General Electric in New Haven, Connecticut. Throughout his life, Warrick insisted that he and his colleague, Rob Roy McGregor, received the patent for Silly Putty before Wright did; but Crayola's history of Silly Putty states that Wright first invented it in 1943. Both researchers independently discovered that reacting boric acid with silicone oil would produce a gooey, bouncy material with several unique properties. The non-toxic putty would bounce when dropped, could stretch farther than regular rubber, would not go moldy, and had a very high melting temperature. However, the substance did not have all the properties needed to replace rubber.\nIn 1949, toy store owner Ruth Fallgatter came across the putty. She contacted marketing consultant Peter C. L. Hodgson (1912\u20131976). The two decided to market the bouncing putty by selling it in a clear case. Although it sold well, Fallgatter did not pursue it further. However, Hodgson saw its potential.\nAlready US$12,000 in debt, Hodgson borrowed $147 to buy a batch of the putty to pack portions into plastic eggs for $1, calling it Silly Putty. Initial sales were poor, but after a \"New Yorker\" article mentioned it, Hodgson sold over 250,000 eggs of silly putty in three days. However, Hodgson was almost put out of business in 1951 by the Korean War. Silicone, the main ingredient in silly putty, was put on ration, harming his business. A year later, the restriction on silicone was lifted and the production of Silly Putty resumed. Initially, it was primarily targeted towards adults. However, by 1955, the majority of its customers were aged six to twelve. In 1957, Hodgson produced the first televised commercial for Silly Putty, which aired during the \"Howdy Doody Show\".\nIn 1961, Silly Putty went worldwide, becoming a hit in the Soviet Union and Europe. In 1968, it was taken into lunar orbit by the Apollo 8 astronauts.\nPeter Hodgson died in 1976. A year later, Binney &amp; Smith, the makers of Crayola products, acquired the rights to Silly Putty. As of 2005[ [update]], annual Silly Putty sales exceeded six million eggs.\nSilly Putty was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame on May 28, 2001.\nOther uses.\nIn addition to its success as a toy, other uses for the putty have been found. In the home, it can be used to remove substances such as dirt, lint, pet hair, and ink from various surfaces. The material's unique properties have found niche use in medical and scientific applications. Occupational therapists use it for rehabilitative therapy of hand injuries. A number of other brands (such as \"Power Putty\" and \"TheraPutty\") alter the material's properties, offering different levels of resistance. The material is also used as a tool to help reduce stress, and exists in various viscosities based on the user's preference.\nBecause of its adhesive characteristics, it was used by Apollo astronauts to secure their tools in zero gravity. Scale model building hobbyists use the putty as a masking medium when spray-painting model assemblies. The Steward Observatory uses a Silly Putty-backed lap to polish astronomical telescope mirrors.\nResearchers from Trinity College Dublin School of Physics (Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices (CRANN) and Advanced Materials and Bioengineering Research (AMBER) Research Centers) have discovered nano composite mixtures of graphene and Silly Putty behave as sensitive pressure sensors, claiming the ability to measure the footsteps of a spider crawling on it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59047", "revid": "47905244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59047", "title": "Albury", "text": "City in New South Wales, Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlbury (; ) is a major regional city that is located in the Murray region of New South Wales, Australia. It is part of the twin city of Albury-Wodonga and is located on the Hume Highway and the northern side of the Murray River. Albury is the seat of local government for the council area which also bears the city's name \u2013 the City of Albury. It is on the Victoria\u2013New South Wales border.\nAlbury has an urban population of 53,677 and is separated from its twin city in Victoria, Wodonga, by the Murray River. Together, the two cities form an urban area with a population of 97,793 in 2021. It is from the state capital Sydney and from the Victorian capital Melbourne.\nSaid to be named after a village in England, United Kingdom, Albury developed as a major transport link between New South Wales and Victoria and was proclaimed a city in 1946.\nHistory.\nThe Wiradjuri (Wiradjuri northern dialect pronunciation [wira\u02d0jd\u032au\u02d0raj]) or Wirraayjuurray people (Wiradjuri southern dialect pronunciation [wira\u02d0j\u025fu\u02d0raj]) people were the first known humans to occupy the area, and are a group of Indigenous Australian Aboriginal people that were united by a common language, strong ties of kinship and survived as skilled hunter\u2013fisher\u2013gatherers in family groups or clans scattered throughout central New South Wales.\nIn the 21st century, major Wiradjuri groups live in Condobolin, Peak Hill, Narrandera and Griffith. There are significant populations at Wagga Wagga and Leeton and smaller groups at West Wyalong, Parkes, Dubbo, Forbes, Cootamundra, Cowra and Young.\nEuropean exploration.\nThe explorers Hume and Hovell arrived at what their maps called 'Crossing Point', but is now known as the Murray River at Albury, on 16 November 1824. They named the river the \"Hume River\", after Hume's father, and the next day inscribed a tree by the river bank before continuing their journey south to Westernport in Victoria. In 1830, explorer Captain Charles Sturt discovered the Hume River downstream at its junction with the Murrumbidgee River. Not realising it was the same river, he named it the Murray River. Both names persisted for some time, Hume falling into disuse eventually in favour of Murray. The Aboriginal name for the river was \"Millewa\". A crossing place for the Murray became popular close to where Hovell inscribed the tree. In summer it was usually possible to cross the river by foot.\nBritish settlement.\nAmong the first squatters to follow in the steps of the explorers and settle in the district were William Wyse and Charles Ebden.\nThe first European buildings erected at the crossing place were a provisions store and some small huts. A survey for a town was commissioned in 1838 by Assistant Surveyor Thomas Townsend who mapped out Wodonga Place (the present Wodonga Place) as the western boundary, Hume Street as the northern boundary, Kiewa Street to the east and Nurigong Street to the south, with Townsend Street being the only other north\u2013south road, and Ebden and Hovell Streets being the two other east\u2013west roads. Townsend proposed the settlement be named 'Bungambrawatha ', the Aboriginal name for the area, but when his plan was eventually approved and published in the Government Gazette on 13 April 1839 the name had been changed to Albury.\nAlbury is said to be named after a village in Kent, England which it apparently resembled, though that referenced publication seems incorrect since there is no Albury in Kent. More plausible is Albury in adjacent Surrey, straddling the Tillingbourne river and a significant 18th century site of mills and industry.\nFrontier town.\nBy 1847 the Albury settlement included two public houses and a handful of huts, a police barracks and a blacksmiths. A log punt established in 1844 serviced the crossing of the Murray River. Albury Post Office opened on 1 April 1843, closed in 1845, then reopened in the township on 1 February 1847.\nIn 1851, with the separation of Victoria from New South Wales, and the border falling on the Murray River, Albury found itself a frontier town. With an increase in commerce with Melbourne, the first bridge was built in 1860 to the design of surveyor William Snell Chauncy. Albury at this time became a customs post between the two colonies as New South Wales held a protectionist stance after gaining its constitution in 1856.\nAlbury was at this time starting to grow substantially with German speaking immigrants using the area to grow grapes for wine. By the 1870s a butter factory was established, flour mill, wineries and locally brewed cider and soft drinks were available.\nThe railway line from Sydney arrived at Albury in 1881 (see Transport-Rail below). The North-Eastern Railway line from Melbourne to Wodonga was completed in 1873 and a wooden railway bridge connected the Albury Railway Station to the Victorian line in 1883. New South Wales and Victoria had different track gauges until 1962, when the first train ran direct from Sydney to Melbourne. The two states could not initially agree which should be the transfer point so they had an expensive and attractive iron lattice bridge sent from Scotland which accommodated both gauges.\nThere was a school operating at Albury in 1848, catering for 13 private students. The following year the first National School opened on the corner of Dean and Kiewa Streets, with 73 students enrolled. In 1862 a new school was built in Olive Street on land which is now part of Albury Public School. The city's first mayor, James Fallon, was an innovator of the Public School, funding a demonstration High School to be built on Kiewa Streets. Albury High School opened in Kiewa Street in 1927.\n20th-century city.\nThe \"Royal Commission on Sites for the Seat of Government of the Commonwealth\" report of 1903 recommended Albury (along with Tumut) as the preferred candidate for the national capital, though the proposal met staunch opposition from residents. At a public meeting, just one member of parliament voted in favour of Albury \u2013 Isaac Isaacs, member for Indi. The lack of support for other places ultimately led to the selection of Canberra as the preferred site.\nIn 1934, a Douglas DC-2 airliner of KLM (the \"Uiver\"), a competitor in the MacRobertson Trophy Air Race (also known as the London to Melbourne Air Race), made an emergency night landing at the town's racecourse after becoming lost during severe thunderstorms. After signalling by Morse code A-L-B-U-R-Y to the lost aircrew by using the entire town's public lighting system, the \"Uiver\" was guided in to land safely. The makeshift runway at the racecourse was illuminated by the headlights of cars belonging to local residents who had responded to a special news bulletin on ABC radio station 2CO. The next morning many local volunteers helped pull the stranded aircraft out of the mud and the aircraft was able to take off and continue to Melbourne where it won first prize in the race's handicap category and was second overall.\nAlbury and Wodonga played a military role in World War II with the establishment of ordnance bases at Bandiana and Bonegilla. Proclaimed a city in 1946, Albury played a role in the post-war immigration to Australia with the establishment nearby of Australia's first migrant centre, the Bonegilla Migrant Reception and Training Centre in 1947.\nAlbury's proximity to Wodonga has spurred several efforts to achieve some kind of municipal governmental union (see Albury-Wodonga). In 1973, Albury-Wodonga was selected as the primary focus of the Whitlam federal government's scheme to redirect the uncontrolled growth of Australia's large coastal cities (Sydney and Melbourne in particular) by encouraging decentralisation. Grand plans were made to turn Albury-Wodonga into a major inland city and large areas of the surrounding farmland were compulsorily purchased by a government agency, the Albury Wodonga Development Corporation. Some industries were enticed to move there, and a certain amount of population movement resulted. However, the current urban population is approximately 92,200.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2021 census of Population, there were 53,677 people in the Albury part of the Albury \u2013 Wodonga Urban Centre.\nClimate and geography.\nAlbury is situated above the river flats of the Murray River, in the foothills of the Great Dividing Range. At the city's airport, Albury is above sea level.\nClimate.\nAlbury has a mild, temperate climate, with cool, damp winters and warm to hot, mostly dry, summers. Under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Albury has a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"), but would have tendencies of a Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\") as well.\nIn high summer, the mean daily maximum temperature is with low humidity; however, this is subject to substantial daily variation. An average of 17 days with a maximum above occur in this summer period, with many cooler days. Mean mid winter maxima are with many cloudy days, and is likewise the wettest season. Albury gets approximately 20 days per year featuring minima of below freezing, though the cloud cover tends to limit frost. Sleet may occur during the winter months, but settling snowfalls are very rare, with the last significant snowfall in July 1966. The highest temperature recorded at Albury was 46.1\u00a0\u00b0C on 4 January 2020, and the lowest temperature was \u22124.0\u00a0\u00b0C recorded on 8 August 1994 (both at the Airport AWS station).\nAlbury's mean annual rainfall is . Rainfall peaks distinctly in the winter months with a high mean of in July and August, comparing with the February low of . Albury has quite a high evaporation rate in summer, giving the environment a relatively arid appearance. The city enjoys a high amount of sunshine, getting around 108 days of clear skies annually (with the majority in summer and early autumn). The sunniest month is January, with 14.6 clear days (and 7.7 cloudy days), and the cloudiest month is July, with 17.5 cloudy days (and 3.9 clear days).\nAlbury Airport AWS (1993\u20132022).\nThe airport is a more sheltered site than the reservoir, generally attaining greater maximum temperatures but also lower minima. Rainfall is lower across the board.\nGovernance.\nAlbury is the largest city in the Federal electorate of Farrer, whose current representative is Sussan Ley of the Liberal Party. The previous Federal MP was Tim Fischer, who was leader of the National Party and Deputy Prime Minister of Australia. In State politics, the Electoral district of Albury is currently represented by Justin Clancy, also of the Liberal Party. The member for Albury between 1932 and 1946, Alexander Mair, was the Premier of New South Wales from 1939 to 1941.\nLocal government is the responsibility of the Albury City Council, whose area of responsibility has gradually been enlarged to cover new housing estates on the city's fringes. Amanda Duncan-Strelec became Albury's first female Mayor in 1995, serving for one year. The current mayor of Albury is Kevin Mack.\nAlbury has a longstanding connection to conservative politics. Following the first convention in Canberra to form the Liberal Party of Australia, delegates, including Sir Robert Menzies, met for a second conference in Albury at Mate's Department Store between 14 and 16 December 1944. The delegates agreed on the structure of the party organisation, adopted a provisional constitution and appointed a federal executive until one could be formally elected.\nCity and suburbs.\nThe city has a number of suburbs.\nCentral Albury comprises the central business district (CBD) and lies between the railway line, the Murray River and Monument Hill. Much commercial activity is concentrated here, with Dean Street forming the axis of the main shopping and office district. A cultural precinct is centred on QEII Square, which includes the Albury Library Museum, Murray Art Museum Albury (MAMA), Albury Entertainment Centre and Convention Centre, and the Murray Conservatorium. In the same block are the Post Office, Police Station and Courthouse, and St Matthew's Anglican Church (which was rebuilt after being destroyed by fire in 1990). The Albury City Council offices are located on Kiewa Street.\nForrest Hill lies directly north west and covers the saddle between Monument Hill and Nail Can Hill. West over the ridge lies West Albury. West Albury is primarily a residential area, but it is home to the First World War Memorial (locally known as the Monument), Riverwood Retirement Village, Albury Wodonga Private Hospital (which lies on the corner of Pemberton Street and the Riverina Highway), and the Albury sewage treatment plant. All of West Albury was once wetland and bush. The only remnant of this is Horseshoe Lagoon to the south-west of the suburb, which has been declared a Wildlife Refuge by NSW Parks &amp; Wildlife and incorporated into the Wonga Wetlands. To the north-west of West Albury is Pemberton Park.\nEast Albury lies east of the railway line/freeway from the CBD and houses now cover the eastern hill alongside the Albury Base Hospital, while the flat land directly north of it is covered by parkland, housing and light industry, and a retail park including Harvey Norman and Spotlight franchises, as well as the city airport. The Mungabareena Reserve lies on the Murray south of the airport, and is considered an Aboriginal cultural site of some significance. Mungabareena means \"place of plenty talk\" in the Wiradjuri language.\nSouth Albury is a mix of residential and industrial areas, with the floodplains south of the railway line and freeway still used for farming and grazing. Flood mitigation works in the 1990s have dramatically reduced the risk of flooding in this area.\nNorth Albury was covered by orchards and vineyards in the first half of the 20th century, and a swamp existed where James Fallon High School now stands. After the World War II, housing development in the area increased and Waugh Road was extended from David Street to the \"Five Ways\" intersection at Union Road, which ascribes the border between North Albury and Lavington. The locality of \"Glenroy\" is adjacent to North Albury, west of the Bungambrawartha Creek, and housing was developed here in the 1970s, including a significant Housing Commission public housing estate.\nLavington is the largest suburb of Albury, and the only suburb which has its own postcode (2641, as opposed to 2640 for the balance of Albury). The suburb was originally named Black Range in the 1850s and 1860s, before being renamed Lavington in 1910. Originally within the boundaries of Hume Shire, it was absorbed into the City of Albury Local Government Area in the 1950s. Housing and commercial development has continued from that point until this day. Prior to 2007, the Hume Highway \u2013 passed north-east through the suburb, with Urana Road passing north-west through the suburb from the \"Five Ways\" road junction. In 2007, an internal bypass of the Hume Freeway was opened, with the former name of the Hume Highway section officially reverting to the commonly used \"Wagga Road\". The suburb of Lavington also includes the localities of Springdale Heights, Hamilton Valley and Norris Park. Albury's lawn cemetery and crematorium lies at the western end of Union Road.\nThurgoona, to the east of Lavington, was established as a new residential suburb by the Albury Wodonga Development Corporation in the 1970s. In the 1990s a new campus of Charles Sturt University was established here, as was an office of the Murray Darling Freshwater Research Centre. A major golf club (Thurgoona Country Club Resort) is also situated in this suburb.\nFurther outlying localities include Splitters Creek \u2013 a small residential/farming community to the west, Ettamogah (home of the Ettamogah Pub), Bowna and Table Top to the north, and Wirlinga and Lake Hume village to the east. Howlong (20\u00a0km west) and Jindera (16\u00a0km north) are the closest towns outside the Albury city area, and act as commuter dormitories as well as service centres for the local rural industries.\nAlbury's houses and buildings are numbered using a special system introduced in 1920. The centre of the city, which is defined as the intersection of Dean and Olive Streets, is numbered 500, and all other houses are numbered depending on whether they are north, south, east or west of the centre.\nLake Hume.\nLake Hume is situated on the Murray River upstream of Albury. The Hume Dam (colloquially termed the Weir locally) wall construction took 17 years, from 1919 to 1936. A hydro-electric power plant supplies 60\u00a0MW of power to the state grid. When full, the lake covers .\nThe lake was created for irrigation purposes and has caused significant changes to the flow patterns and ecology of the Murray River. Before the construction of the Hume Weir, flows in normal (non-drought) years were low in summer and autumn (though still significant overall), rising in winter due to seasonal rainfall and reaching a flood-peak in late spring due to snow-melt in the Murray and its tributaries' alpine headwaters. The flow is now effectively reversed, with low flows in winter and sustained, relatively high flows in late spring, summer and early autumn to meet irrigation demands, although the spring flood peak has been virtually eliminated. The water released from the base of the Hume Weir is unnaturally cold, at least colder than it naturally should be. This flow reversal, temperature depression, and removal of the spring flood peak, has led to the drying out and loss of many billabongs and has harmed the populations of native fish of the Murray River such as the iconic Murray Cod.\nFlora and fauna.\nSeveral threatened species can be found in Albury, including the Sloane's froglet, Regent Honeyeater, and Squirrel Glider (Petaurus norfolcensis).\nTransport.\nRoad.\nSituated on the Hume Highway, Albury is a major transit point for interstate commerce. In March 2007, Albury city centre was bypassed by a new section of the Hume Freeway. The city centre bypass includes the new Spirit of Progress Bridge over the Murray River, and cost $518\u00a0million, the most expensive road project built in rural Australia at that time.\nCreation of the lake resulting from construction of the Hume Dam from 1915 onward necessitated a 30\u00a0km deviation of the Hume Highway. The Highway originally ran east out of Albury, along what is now the Riverina Highway, then turned north through Thurgoona via today\u2019s Table Top Rd then Old Sydney Road, then crossed Bowna Creek to follow Plunkett Rd to Bowna. The deviation, opened in 1933, follows the first 9\u00a0km of the Wagga Road, then crossed the railway and ran to Bells Road before turning east then southeast to Bowna. Most of this route, although now duplicated, remains as part of the Hume Highway, other than the 2009 Yellow Creek deviation.\nThe other minor highways which connect to Albury are the Riverina Highway, which runs west through Berrigan to Deniliquin and east to Lake Hume; and the Olympic Highway which diverges north from the Hume north of Albury, and runs across the South Western Slopes via Wagga Wagga, Cootamundra and Young to terminate at the Mid-Western Highway at Cowra.\nIn 1888, the Smollett Street wrought iron arch bridge was constructed over Bungambrawatha Creek. Smollet Street was extended westward through the botanical gardens to give direct access from Albury railway station to Howlong Road by a straight street. The bridge is near the botanic gardens and the local swimming pool. The bridge is a rare example of a metal arch bridge in New South Wales, and is the oldest of only two such bridges in New South Wales, the other being the Sydney Harbour Bridge.\nRail.\nAlbury railway station is on the main Sydney-Melbourne railway line. Originally, New South Wales and Victoria had different track gauges, which meant that all travellers in either direction had to change trains at Albury. To accommodate this, a very long railway platform was needed; the long covered platform is one of the longest in Australia. The broad gauge section of track between Seymour and Albury has now been converted to standard gauge; there is no longer a break-of-gauge at Albury station. The station is served by a three daily V/Line train services from Melbourne (terminating at Albury) and the NSW TrainLink Melbourne-Sydney XPT service, which runs twice daily in each direction.\nIn 1873, the broad gauge railway line from Melbourne reached the township of Belvoir/Wodonga. In 1881, the New South Wales standard gauge railway line reached Albury, with a railway bridge joining the two colonies in 1883. Albury became the stop over, where passengers on the Melbourne-Sydney journey changed trains until 1962, when a standard gauge track was opened between the two capitals. After World War II, in an attempt to overcome the difference in gauges and speed up traffic, a bogie exchange device lifted freight wagons and carriages allowing workers to refit rolling stock with different gauged wheel-sets.\nThe break of railway gauge at Albury was a major impediment to Australia's war effort and infrastructure during both World Wars, as every soldier, every item of equipment, and all supplies had to be off-loaded from the broad gauge and reloaded onto a standard gauge railway wagon on the opposite side of the platform. In his book \"Tramps Abroad\", writer Mark Twain in 1895 wrote of the break of gauge at Albury and changing trains: \"\"Now comes a singular thing, the oddest thing, the strangest thing, the most unaccountable marvel that Australia can show. At the frontier between NSW and Victoria our multitude of passengers were routed out of their snug beds by lantern light in the morning in the biting cold to change cars. Think of the paralysis of intellect that gave that idea birth, imagine the boulder it emerged from, on some petrified legislator's shoulders.\"\nDuring World War II military armouries and warehouses were established in the vicinity of Albury at Bonegilla, Wirlinga and Bandiana. Similar stores were also established at Tocumwal and Oaklands. The conversion of the broad gauge track to a second standard gauge track, between Seymour and Albury, was substantially completed in 2011. The railway station and its associated yards are listed on both the Australian National Heritage List and the New South Wales State Heritage Register.\nAir.\nAlbury Airport, owned and operated by the City of Albury, is the second busiest regional airport in New South Wales with around 280,000 passenger movements per year. The airport, east of the city centre, has scheduled daily flights to Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane through commercial carriers. The road leading from Albury Airport to the city was renamed Borella Road in 1979, in honour of Victoria Cross recipient Albert Chalmers Borella, who was buried at Albury.\nPublic transport and cycling.\nLocal public transport is provided exclusively by private bus operators, Martin's Albury and Dysons who run day time bus services. The overwhelming majority of local transport is by private car, however traffic is generally moderate. The opening of the Hume Freeway bypass on 4 March 2007, has greatly eased previous traffic congestion on the Lincoln Causeway, allowing vastly better flow between Albury and Wodonga.\nThere is a good network of bicycle paths in the city, including one to the outlying suburb of Thurgoona and across the state border to Wodonga. A new program has built many more bike tracks, including one from the riverside parks to Wonga Wetlands.\nIndustry.\nAlbury serves as an administrative centre for the agricultural communities around the district and is a major processing centre of the Australian Taxation Office, and many other smaller secondary industries. Other large employers are: The Commercial Club Albury and Hume Bank. One of Albury's major employers was DSI Holdings. Originally the Kaitlers Road facility was opened as an expansion for Borg-Warner in 1971, manufacturing gearboxes for various manufacturers including Ford, Holden and even Maserati. At its peak in 1982 it employed 1251 people. The ownership of the plant changed several times \u2013 it was sold in 1987 to Nylex. It was sold again in 2002 to ION Ltd but the company collapsed in 2004 with debt to creditors of $550\u00a0million. Due to a failed deal with Holden the workforce was reduced to 750 people. Chinese car manufacturer Geely Group then purchased the bankrupt DSI company for $48\u00a0million in March 2009 and the plant then exported automatic transmissions to Geely, Ssangyong and Mahindra. In 2014 DSI Holdings closed the Lavington factory resulting in the loss of the remaining 142 jobs.\nThe Australian pizza chain Eagle Boys was founded in Albury but ceased operations in 2017 when it was purchased by Pizza Hut.\nThe Hume Power Station is a hydro-electric power station located at the Hume Dam on the Murray River, near Albury. The power station is operated by Eraring Energy and has two 29\u00a0MW turbines.\nTourism.\nThe region surrounding Albury provides a variety of tourist attractions, including the wine region centred on Rutherglen, the historic goldfield towns of Beechworth and Yackandandah, boating, fishing and canoe hire on the many rivers and lakes, including Lake Hume, the forests and mountains of the Great Dividing Range and slightly further afield the snowfields Falls Creek and Mount Hotham.\nWithin the city of Albury itself, Monument Hill, at the western end of the CBD is the location of the city's distinctive First World War Memorial and provides a good view of the city. Wonga Wetlands, west of the city and adjacent to the River Murray is a key feature of Albury's use of treated wastewater and consists of a series of lagoons and billabongs. Wonga Wetlands boasts more than 150 species of birdlife and is home to the Aquatic Environment Education Centre.\nThe Hume and Hovell Walking Track, that begins in Yass and follows the route of explorers Hamilton Hume and William Hovell on their 1824 expedition to Port Phillip, ends at the Hovell Tree in South Albury.\nEducation.\nAlbury is home to one of the campuses of Charles Sturt University. The original Albury campus was located in the northern part of the CBD between Kiewa and David streets. Charles Sturt University relocated to a new purpose-built campus at Thurgoona in 2009. CSU offers courses in Arts, Business, Education, Medicine and Science.\nThe Albury-Wodonga campus of La Trobe University is also a large and growing educational institution with several thousand undergraduates and postgraduates in its two colleges. Degrees in Business, Arts, Science, Bioscience, Nursing, and various Allied Health disciplines, are available. Riverina Institute of TAFE operates a campus in Albury. There is also a campus of the UNSW Rural Clinical School of Medicine adjacent to the Albury Base Hospital.\nAlbury is home to nine public primary schools (Albury Public School, Albury North Public School, Albury West Public School, Glenroy Public School, Hume Public School, Lavington Public School, Lavington East Public School, Springdale Heights Public School, and Thurgoona Public School) and three public high schools (Albury High School, James Fallon High School and Murray High School). Several non-government high schools operate in the area including Trinity Anglican College, Xavier High School, The Scots School Albury, Border Christian College, Aspect Riverina school, and St Paul's College. The city is the base for NSW Department of Education South West Riverina regional office.\nCulture.\nHotHouse Theatre is Albury's only professional theatre company, previously known as the Murray River Performance Group which formed in 1979. It spawned The Flying Fruit Fly Circus in 1979, and these days conducts many productions through the HotHouse Theatre located on Gateway Island between Albury and Wodonga, though still in Victoria rather than New South Wales.\nAlbury is home to a large number of amateur theatre companies presenting productions ranging from plays in intimate settings to major musicals in the Albury Entertainment Centre and Shakespeare and other events in the Albury Botanic Gardens. The oldest theatre company in Albury is the Albury Wodonga Theatre Company and its associated youth theatre company BYTESized Productions often presenting shows in its small theatre in Olive St, South Albury . Other companies and organisations producing theatre in Albury Wodonga are Livid Productions, The Other Theatre Company, Revolution Theatre, and Centre Stage Event Company.\nJazz Albury Wodonga also regularly hosts national and international artists at the Jazz Basement which is located on Gateway Island.\nThe 1993 film \"Lex and Rory\" was filmed in Albury-Wodonga.\nTouring productions and major music acts often perform at the Albury Entertainment Centre. Regent Cinemas on Dean Street have operated since 1929.\nSince 2007, the city has hosted the annual Albury City Short Story Award, curated by the Write Around the Murray Writers' Festival.\nIn 2015 Murray Art Museum Albury (MAMA) was opened, formerly known as Albury Regional Arts Centre. The art museum has 10 galleries with double the space of the former art centre. Canvas Eatery is also attached to MAMA, facing onto Queen Elizabeth II Square.\nIn 2003, a sister city relationship with Nanping in north western Fujian province, China, was formalised.\nMedia.\nPrint.\nAlbury serves as a regional media centre. A daily tabloid owned by Nine Entertainment, The \"Border Mail\", is printed in, and has offices in, Wodonga.\nTelevision.\nAlbury has access to all major TV networks, with channels available including Seven Network, WIN Television (an affiliate of the Nine Network), Network 10, as well as the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) and the Special Broadcasting Service, more commonly known as SBS.\nOf the three main commercial networks, Seven Network airs a half-hour local news bulletin at 6\u00a0pm each weeknight, produced from a newsroom in the city but broadcast from studios in Canberra.\nNetwork 10 (formerly Southern Cross 10) airs short local news updates from its Hobart studios throughout the day (on weekdays). The flagship bulletin aired on Network 10 in Albury/Wodonga is 10 News from Melbourne.\nWIN Television broadcasts a half-hour state-wide regional WIN News bulletin each weeknight at 5:30 pm, produced from studios in Wollongong. Previously a local edition was produced by WIN until the closure of its Albury newsroom in June 2019.\nOn 5 May 2011, analogue television transmissions ceased in most areas of regional Victoria and some border regions including Albury\u2013Wodonga. All local free-to-air television services are now broadcasting in digital transmission only. This was done as part of the Federal Government's plan for Digital terrestrial television in Australia where all analogue transmission systems are gradually turned off and replaced with modern DVB-T transmission systems.\nRadio.\nThere are three commercial radio stations in Albury \u2013 2AY on 1494 AM, Triple M The Border on 105.7 FM and Hit The Border on 104.9 FM. Hit 104.9 The Border's south eastern network is programmed out of the Albury/Wodonga Hub, going to centres in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia. Broadcasting out of the same building is Triple M 105.7 The Border, which is also networked to local stations around the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia.\nAlbury/Wodonga is one radio market, thus advertisements are directed to both sides of the border. The Albury/Wodonga market underwent significant change in 2005 when Macquarie Southern Cross Media bought 105.7 The River from RG Capital, and 2AY and Star FM from DMG Radio Australia. Due to cross-media ownership laws preventing the ownership of more than two stations in one market, Macquarie was required to sell one of these stations and in September 2005 sold 2AY to the Ace Radio network. 2AY takes much of its daytime and evening programming from 3AW in Melbourne. The ABC produces breakfast and morning radio programs through its local radio network, from the studios of ABC Goulburn Murray, 106.5 FM, located in Wodonga. Most of the rest its programming content is delivered from Melbourne. The ABC also has local transmitters for ABC Radio National, 990 AM; ABC News Radio, 100.9 FM; ABC Classic, 104.1 FM and Triple J, 103.3 FM\nThere is also a community radio station known as 2REM 107.3 FM. The Albury Wodonga Community Radio station broadcasts a large number of speciality programs including those for the retiree, racing enthusiast, ethnic and Aboriginal communities and a range of musical styles including underground and independent artists from 8:00\u00a0pm onwards. 2GHR 96.7 FM is another community radio station that plays classic hits. Oak 101.3 FM (from Wangaratta) can be heard clearly across the region. KIX 801 AM (on the narrowcast band) plays country music. Sky Radio is a sports and racing station which can be heard on 99.3 FM\nIn addition, the area is serviced by SBS Radio and Niche Radio, which provide national multicutural stations. SBS Radio 1 is available on 1701 AM, SBS Radio 2 is available on 89.5 FM, while Niche Radio broadcasts on 87.6 FM. 2APH 101.7 FM is a reading for the print handicapped station. TAFE FM is Wodonga's broadcasting and training station on 88.4 that also serves the area. Albury-Wodonga Christian Broadcasters transmits as 98.5 The Light. Other religious stations include Faith FM which broadcasts on 88.0 and Vision Christian Radio that airs on 1611 AM. The dance music station Raw FM airs on 107.9\nSport.\nFootball is a very popular code with more than 2,500 players registered from twelve local clubs (six from Albury) competing in the Albury Wodonga Football Association. Clubs have teams from U10s through to Senior Men and Women and play on Sundays with MiniRoos providing Football for ages 4\u201312 on Saturdays. Since 2016, Murray United Football Club, a team encompassing Albury, Wodonga and the wider region, has been competing in the National Premier Leagues Victoria, the highest level of Football in the area. On 9 February 2014, Melbourne City (then known as Melbourne Heart) triumphed 2\u20131 against Perth Glory in scorching conditions, where the temperature got as high as 41\u00a0\u00b0C, at the Lavington Sports Ground.\nThe Albury-Wodonga Steamers are the local rugby union club, playing in the Southern Inland Rugby Union competition. The Steamers have produced several players for the Australian Rugby Union National Talent Squad.\nCricket is the most popular summer sport in the region, with the local Cricket Albury Wodonga competition administered by Country Cricket New South Wales. In the 1992 Cricket World Cup, the Lavington Sports Ground hosted Albury's only international cricket match. It was a One Day International in which Zimbabwe defeated England in the biggest upset of the tournament. Albury also regularly hosts Big Bash League matches in both the pre-season and regular season, often involving the Sydney Thunder and Melbourne Stars.\nAlbury has a strong rugby league community, with three senior teams based in the city, the Albury Thunder, Border Bears and CSU Mud Dogs. The Thunder compete in the strong, Riverina-based Group 9 Rugby League competition, while the Bears and Mud Dogs compete in the Goulburn Murray Rugby League run under the banner of the Victorian Rugby League. Albury Thunder Juniors is one of the largest junior rugby league clubs outside of metropolitan areas, offering rugby league and league tag to the Border's young men and women from 5 years to 16 years. Albury has produced many great rugby league players, with the two most famous exports being former Canberra and Penrith flyer Adrian Purtell and Australian fullback Dylan Edwards.\nDespite being located in New South Wales, Albury is a stronghold of Australian rules. There are five Australian rules clubs in Albury, the Albury Football Club, the Lavington Panthers Football Club, the Murray Magpies Football Club, the North Albury Football Club, and the Thurgoona Football Club. Albury, Lavington Panthers and North Albury compete in the Ovens &amp; Murray Football League (OMFNL), while the Murray Magpies compete in the Hume Football League and Thurgoona compete in the Tallangatta &amp; District Football League. The OMFNL is one of the strongest regional leagues in the nation, with the Grand Final regularly drawing 15,000 spectators. Many players from Albury have moved on to play in the Australian Football League, including Haydn Bunton Senior, who won three Brownlow Medals and was an inaugural \"legend\" of the Australian Football Hall of Fame; Fitzroy 1936 Brownlow medallist Denis \"Dinny\" Ryan; and South Melbourne Brownlow medallist Fred Goldsmith.\nThe Albury Gold Cup horse race is the major autumn event for the district. In 2005, it attracted a record crowd in excess of 18,600 racegoers.\nAlbury has lately become a stronghold of junior hockey, boasting one of the few synthetic fields in the area. The town also has the Albury Grass Tennis Courts. Supercars Championship team Brad Jones Racing is based in Albury, making it the only team in the championship to have its workshop in New South Wales.\nThe Albury Wodonga Bandits compete in the South East Australian Basketball League (SEABL) East Conference of the Australian Basketball Association (ABA), playing their home games at the Lauren Jackson Sports Centre (previously known as the Albury Sports Stadium). The Lady Bandits joined the women's SEABL in 2006.\nAlbury is the birthplace of former tennis player Margaret Court, winner of 62 Women's Grand Slam titles including eleven Australian titles, four Grand Slam singles titles played in one year (1970), four mixed doubles titles with Ken Fletcher in 1963 and many other titles around the world. WNBA MVP winner Lauren Jackson, NRL Player Adrian Purtell, and test cricketer Steve Rixon are among other champion sports people from the area.\nNotable crime.\nAlbury's most notorious crime is also one of Australia's most famous, the 'Pyjama Girl Murder' in 1934. Other notable crimes include the murders of Bronwynne Richardson who was abducted on Smollett Street on 12 October 1973. Her body was found in Horseshoe Lagoon two days later. The case has never been solved despite a coronial inquest in 2011 which resulted in an arrest. In another case, on 23 March 1996, Kim Meredith was murdered in Macauley Street while walking from Sodens Hotel to the Termo Hotel. A memorial to Kim was later placed in Queen Elizabeth II Square by the citizens of Albury.\nHeritage listings.\nThe following buildings, structures, and ephemera in Albury are listed in various heritage registers:\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59048", "revid": "1693063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59048", "title": "Albury-Wodonga, Australia", "text": ""}
{"id": "59049", "revid": "50609585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59049", "title": "Wodonga", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWodonga (pronounced ; ) is a city on the Victorian side of the border with New South Wales, north-east of Melbourne, Australia. It is part of the twin city of Albury\u2013Wodonga and is located all within the boundaries of the City of Wodonga LGA and is separated from its twin city in New South Wales, Albury, by the Murray River. As of 2024 Wodonga and its suburbs have a population of 44,824 and combined with Albury, the two cities form the urban area Albury\u2013Wodonga with a population of exactly 101,793 . There are multiple suburbs of Wodonga including Bandiana, Baranduda, Barnawartha, Bonegilla, Ebden, Huon Creek, Killara, Leneva and Staghorn.\nWodonga produces a gross domestic product of $2.57 billion per year on average.\nHistory.\nFounded as a customs post with its twin city Albury on the other side of the Murray River, the town grew subsequent to the opening of the first bridge across the Murray River in 1860. Originally named Wodonga, its name was changed to Belvoir then later back to its original name: Wodonga.\nThe Post Office opened 1 June 1856 although known as Belvoir until 26 July 1869. \nIt had previously been regarded as the smaller, less prosperous cousin of the two. Whilst still somewhat smaller than Albury, economic growth in both areas has ameliorated such distinctions.\nThe local Indigenous Waywurru name for the area, \"Wordonga\", refers to an edible plant or nut found in lagoons.\nGovernment and politics.\nWodonga is in the federal Division of Indi. Independent MP Helen Haines has represented Indi since the 2019 Australian federal election. Indi was held by the Liberal\u2013National Coalition from 1931 until 2013 when it was won by independent Cathy McGowan. When Helen Haines won the seat in 2019, succeeding Cathy McGowan, it was the first time in Australian history that one independent had succeeded another.\nWodonga is in the Victorian Electoral district of Benambra. Bill Tilley of the Liberal Party has represented the electoral district of Benambra since the 2006 Victorian state election. Benambra has been held by the Liberal\u2013National Coalition since the 1932 Benambra by-election, and has never been held by the Labor Party. In the 2018 and 2022 Victorian elections, the seat became a close race between Bill Tilley and independent candidate Jacqui Hawkins, with Tilley narrowly retaining the seat.\nWodonga is the largest population centre in both Indi and Benambra.\nThe local government area covering Wodonga is City of Wodonga, and as of 2025 the current mayor is Michael Gobel (independent).\nCulture.\nMuch of the arts and theatrical activity in the region is conducted in a cross-border fashion; for instance HotHouse Theatre is located almost equidistant from the Wodonga and Albury city centres.\nWodonga is served by the Apex Club of Wodonga, the Wodonga Lions Club and two Rotary Clubs \u2013 Belvoir Wodonga and Wodonga. Community Service is important to the Wodonga Community and activities such as the cities Australia Day Celebrations, Christmas Carols and the display of Santa's throughout the City over the festive season would not be possible without community service clubs. Recently Apexian Dean Freeman was awarded National Apexian of the Year for community service efforts throughout the area and overseas.\nPopular culture.\nLeonard Hubbard recorded the song \"Wodonga\" in 1924.\nThe World's Biggest Rolling Pin (listed in the Guinness Book of World Records) is located in Wodonga, atop \"Henri's Bakery\".\nSport.\nLike much of country Victoria, Wodonga has a large and valued sporting culture. There are many sporting grounds in, and around, the area, and they are often frequented by the public in a social manner, when not being used for organised sport.\nThere are three Australian rules football clubs in Wodonga, the Wodonga Football Club, the Wodonga Raiders Football Club and the Wodonga Saints Football Club. Wodonga and Wodonga Raiders compete in the Ovens &amp; Murray Football League, while the Wodonga Saints compete in the Tallangatta &amp; District Football League. There are many other sporting clubs in the region. Brisbane Lions dual-premiership player Daniel Bradshaw and St Kilda forward Fraser Gehrig are originally from Wodonga.\nWodonga is also home to a number of cricket clubs which compete in the Cricket Albury Wodonga (CAW) competition. These include the Belvoir Eagles, Wodonga Bulldogs and Wodonga Raiders.\nCyclists are catered for by the Albury Wodonga Cycling Club. The Albury Wodonga Cycling Club holds club races most weekends, is part of the Riverina Interclub and hosts the annual John Woodman Memorial Wagga to Albury Cycling Classic.\nGolfers play the course at SS&amp;A Wodonga on Parkers Road.\nWodonga has two rugby league clubs called the Wodonga Wombats and Bonegilla Gorillas that play in the Murray Cup. Former clubs include the Wodonga Storm and Wodonga Bears, both of whom were involved in Victorian Rugby League competitions.\nAustralian Socceroos Archie Thompson and Joshua Kennedy played for soccer team Twin City Wanderers as children. Wodonga Diamonds Football Club and Wodonga Heart Football Club are two other soccer clubs based in Wodonga. All three clubs compete in the Albury Wodonga Football Association, in which Wodonga Diamonds helped establish and is historically the most dominant club. In early 2014, a new club representing the region and playing its games in Wodonga was founded as Murray United F.C. Murray United's senior structure has since ceased to exists, and now the club only fields junior teams throughout various tiers of Junior NPL.\nWodonga's Tennis Centre is the largest inland tennis complex in Australia and incorporates not only tennis but also croquet and lawn bowls. The centre has 32 natural grass courts, 8 synthetic grass courts with lights for night use, and 10 plexicushion courts with lights for night use.\nWodonga has a horse racing club, the Wodonga &amp; District Turf Club, which schedules around seven race meetings a year including the Wodonga Cup meeting in November.\nThe Albury-Wodonga Motorcycle Club are located at Diamond Park on the southern part of Gateway Island, on the north side of the Murray River and organise motor cycle events. The motorcycle speedway track has hosted important events including the final of the 2024 Australian Speedway Championship.\nWodonga also has a BMX club, which is situated in a complex near the home ground of local AFL team, Wodonga Raiders.\nWodonga has a radio-controlled car site with both on-road and off-road tracks on the Lincoln Causeway, next to the speedway track.\nWodonga has a karting club for Karting Australia.\nClimate.\nThe city gets around 125.1 clear days annually, largely in the summer and early autumn. Winters are rainy and cloudy, however, with breaks of sunny days during periods of high pressure systems.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nIndustry.\nMajor secondary industries based in Wodonga include a logistics distributions hub (LOGIC), a large cattle market, a pet food factory (Mars Petcare), a can factory (Visy), a cardboard box factory (Opal) and (Visy Board), a hydraulic hose manufacturer (Parker Hannifin), an abattoir, a foundry (Bradken), a polypropylene film manufacturer (Taghleef Industries (formerly Shorko) a concrete pipe &amp; pole manufacturer (Rocla) and a transformer manufacturer (Wilson Transformer Company) as well as a variety of other smaller enterprises. It also serves as a central point for the delivery of government services to the surrounding region. Albury Wodonga is a major transport hub between Melbourne and Sydney, with over 20 transport companies in the area. \nIt houses the Australian corporate headquarters for Mars. Wodonga is the site of an Australian Army logistics base and a training centre for Army technical apprentices, the Army Logistic Training Centre, which is based at Latchford Barracks and Gaza Ridge Barracks. It is also the home of a campus of La Trobe University and Wodonga Institute of TAFE.\nv2food is set to open a manufacturing plant, that will use locally-grown ingredients, in Wodonga in the second quarter of 2020. However, the plant was closed in 2023.\nMedia.\nPrint.\nA daily tabloid owned by Australian Community Media, the \"Border Mail\", is printed in Wodonga. The Border Mail has offices in both Albury and Wodonga.\nTelevision.\nWodonga is part of the Albury-Wodonga/Murray/North-East Victoria television market and has access to all major TV networks. Channels available include Channel 7 (formerly Prime7 and part of the Seven Network), WIN Television (part of the Nine Network), 10 Regional Victoria (part of Network 10), as well as the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) and the Special Broadcasting Service, more commonly known as SBS. Several of these networks also offer additional digital-only channels, including ABC Family, ABC Entertains, ABC News, SBS Viceland, 7two, 7mate, 7bravo, 7flix, 10 Drama, 10 Comedy, Nickelodeon, Sky News Regional, 9Gem, 9Go! and 9Life.\nTwo television news bulletins featuring local content are offered in Albury\u2013Wodonga and the surrounding region. The Seven Network broadcasts its bulletin live at 6.00pm from studios in Canberra. WIN Television's bulletin is produced in Ballarat but features Albury\u2013Wodonga region based content, and airs on delay at 6.30pm. Network 10 also provides short local news updates which are produced in Hobart, Tasmania, however, these do not feature significant local content from the Albury\u2013Wodonga region.\nRadio.\nThere are three commercial radio stations broadcasting into Wodonga that are based over the border in Albury, namely 2AY, Triple M The Border and Hit104.9 The Border. Notably, Hit FM south eastern network is programmed out of the Albury/Wodonga Hub, going to centres around New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and into South Australia. Broadcast out of the same building as Triple M The Border, which is also networked to local stations around New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia.\nAlbury/Wodonga is one radio market, thus advertisements are directed to both sides of the border. The Albury/Wodonga market underwent significant change in 2005 when Macquarie Southern Cross Media bought 105.7 The River from RG Capital, and 2AY and Star FM from the DMG Radio Australia. Due to cross-media ownership laws preventing the ownership of more than two stations in one market, Macquarie was required to sell one of these stations and in September 2005 sold 2AY to the Ace Radio network. 2AY takes its night time programming from Nine Radio. Commercial radio stations from Wangaratta (3NE, Edge FM) can also be received in most parts of Wodonga.\nThe Australian Broadcasting Corporation produces breakfast and morning radio programs through its local radio network, from the studios of ABC Goulburn Murray located in Wodonga on 106.5FM. The rest of its content is delivered from Melbourne. The ABC also deliver Radio National on 990 AM, ABC Classic on 104.1 FM, ABC NewsRadio on 100.9 FM and Triple J on 103.3 FM.\nThere is also a community radio station known as 2REM 107.3 FM. The Albury-Wodonga Community Radio station plays a large number of speciality programs including those for the retiree, ethnic and aboriginal communities throughout the day and a range of musical styles including underground and independent artists from 8:00pm onwards.\nIn addition, the area is serviced by a Radio for the Print Handicapped station, 2APH, on 101.7 FM. Other stations include the Albury\u2013Wodonga Christian Broadcasters' 98.5 The Light, and the dance formatted narrowcaster RawFM on 87.6 FM.\nTransport.\nWodonga railway station lies on the North East railway line. A new line was opened in late 2010 bypassing the Wodonga CBD, for which the town held a celebratory day for the last commercial passenger train to pass through the town centre. This line took the rail line out of the centre of town (and removed all of the level crossings), and a new station was built and the line was diverted north of the town to Albury.\nWodonga is on the junction of the Hume Highway (the main route from Melbourne to Sydney) and the Murray Valley Highway (which follows the southern bank of the Murray River).\nLocal public transport is provided by Dysons (which took over Mylon Motorways) who run buses on a number of routes both within Wodonga and to Albury. Bus services are generally quite infrequent and public transport use in Wodonga is very low. There are also long-distance bus services to the capitals.\nThere is a comprehensive network of bicycle paths in Wodonga, including one across the Lincoln Causeway to Albury.\nAlbury Airport, which provides scheduled commuter flights to Melbourne and Sydney, is a short drive from Wodonga.\nEducation.\nFrom 2006, the three government high schools have merged to form a senior college for Years 10, 11 and 12, known as Wodonga Senior Secondary College, and a school for Years 7, 8 and 9, known as Wodonga Middle Years College, on two campuses; Felltimber and Huon Campus. The former 3 public high schools in Wodonga were Wodonga High School, Mitchell Secondary College and Wodonga West Secondary College. Wodonga High School celebrated its 50th birthday in 2005.\nPrivate schools in Wodonga include: Catholic College Wodonga, Trinity Anglican College, Victory Lutheran College, Mount Carmel Christian School, St Augustines Primary School, St Monicas Primary School and St Francis of Assisi Primary School (formerly Frayne College).\nHigher education is locally served by the Wodonga Institute of TAFE and La Trobe University. The regional Albury\u2013Wodonga campus of La Trobe University was established in 1991 and provides courses in education, health sciences, biology, and business. The Albury-based campuses of Charles Stuart University, TAFE NSW and the University of New South Wales Rural Clinical School of Medicine are also closely located to Wodonga.\nWodonga is also home to the Flying Fruit Fly Circus School, the educational arm of The Flying Fruit Fly Circus, that provides educational services with an emphasis on the performing arts and contemporary circus training. In 2003 a devastating fire destroyed the school's facilities at, then Wodonga High School, and the school relocated to Wodonga West Secondary College (now Wodonga Middle Years College Felltimber Campus).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59051", "revid": "2663551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59051", "title": "Queensland", "text": "Queensland ( , commonly abbreviated as QLD) is a state in northeastern Australia, the second-largest and third-most populous state in Australia. It is bordered by the Northern Territory, South Australia and New South Wales to the west, south-west and south, respectively. To the east, Queensland is bordered by the Coral Sea and the Pacific Ocean; to the state's north is the Torres Strait, separating the Australian mainland from Papua New Guinea, and the Gulf of Carpentaria to the north-west. With an area of , Queensland is the world's sixth-largest subdivision of any country on earth; it is larger than all but 16 countries. Due to its size, Queensland's geographical features and climates are diverse, and include tropical rainforests, rivers, coral reefs, mountain ranges and white sandy beaches in its tropical and sub-tropical coastal regions, as well as deserts and savanna in the semi-arid and desert climatic regions of its interior.\nQueensland has a population of over 5.5 million, concentrated in South East Queensland, where nearly three in four reside. The capital and largest city in the state is Brisbane, Australia's third-largest city and comprising fully half of the state's population. Ten of Australia's thirty largest cities are located in Queensland, the largest outside Brisbane being the Gold Coast, the Sunshine Coast, Townsville, Cairns, Ipswich, and Toowoomba. 24.2% of the state's population were born overseas. The state has the highest inter-state net migration in Australia.\nQueensland was first inhabited by Aboriginal Australians, with the Torres Strait Islands inhabited by Torres Strait Islanders. Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon, the first European to land in Australia, explored the west coast of the Cape York Peninsula in 1606. In 1770, James Cook claimed the east coast of Australia for the Kingdom of Great Britain. In 1788, Arthur Phillip founded the colony of New South Wales, which included all of what is now Queensland. Queensland was explored in subsequent decades, and the Moreton Bay Penal Settlement was established at Brisbane in 1824 by John Oxley. During the Australian frontier wars of the 19th century, colonists killed tens of thousands of Aboriginal people in Queensland while consolidating their control over the territory.\nOn 6 June 1859 (now commemorated as Queensland Day), Queen Victoria signed the letters patent to establish the colony of Queensland, separating it from New South Wales and thereby establishing Queensland as a self-governing Crown colony with responsible government. A large part of colonial Queensland's economy relied on blackbirded South Sea Islander slavery.\nQueensland was among the six colonies which became the founding states of Australia with Federation on 1 January 1901. Since the Bjelke-Petersen era of the late 20th century, Queensland has received a high level of internal migration from the other states and territories of Australia and remains a popular destination for interstate migration.\nQueensland has the third-largest economy among Australian states, with strengths in mining, agriculture, transportation, international education, insurance, and banking. Nicknamed the \"Sunshine State\" for its tropical and sub-tropical climates, Great Barrier Reef, and numerous beaches, tourism is also important to the state's economy.\nHistory.\nPre-European contact.\nQueensland was one of the largest regions of pre-colonial Aboriginal population in Australia. The Aboriginal ownership of Queensland is thought to predate 50,000\u00a0BC, and early migrants are believed to have arrived via boat or land bridge across Torres Strait. Through time, their descendants developed into more than 90 different language and cultural groups.\nDuring the last ice age, Queensland's landscape became more arid and largely desolate, making food and other supplies scarce. The people developed the world's first seed-grinding technology. The end of the glacial period brought about a warming climate, making the land more hospitable. It brought high rainfall along the eastern coast, stimulating the growth of the state's tropical rainforests.\nThe Torres Strait Islands is home to the Torres Strait Islander peoples. Torres Strait Islanders are ethnically and culturally distinct from mainland Aboriginal peoples. They have a long history of interaction with both Aboriginal peoples of what is now Australia and the peoples of New Guinea.\nEuropean colonisation.\nIn February 1606, Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon landed near the site of what is now Weipa, on the western shore of Cape York. This was the first recorded landing of a European in Australia, and it also marked the first reported contact between Europeans and the Aboriginal people of Australia. The region was also explored by French and Spanish explorers (commanded by Louis Antoine de Bougainville and Lu\u00eds Vaez de Torres, respectively) before the arrival of Lieutenant James Cook in 1770. Cook claimed the east coast under instruction from King George III of the Kingdom of Great Britain on 22 August 1770 at Possession Island, naming eastern Australia, including Queensland, \"New South Wales\".\nThe Aboriginal population declined significantly after a smallpox epidemic during the late 18th century and massacres by the European settlers.\nIn 1823, John Oxley, a British explorer, sailed north from what is now Sydney to scout possible penal colony sites in Gladstone (then Port Curtis) and Moreton Bay. At Moreton Bay, he found the Brisbane River. He returned in 1824 and established a penal settlement at what is now Redcliffe. The settlement, initially known as Edenglassie, was then transferred to the current location of the Brisbane city centre. Edmund Lockyer discovered outcrops of coal along the banks of the upper Brisbane River in 1825. In 1839 transportation of convicts was ceased, culminating in the closure of the Brisbane penal settlement. In 1842 free settlement, which had already commenced, was officially permitted. In 1847, the Port of Maryborough was opened as a wool port. While most early immigrants came from New South Wales, the first free immigrant ship to arrive in Moreton Bay from Europe was the \"Artemisia\", in 1848.\nEarlier than this immigrant ship was the arrival of the Irish famine orphan girls to Queensland. Devised by the then British Secretary of State for the Colonies, The Earl Grey Scheme established a special emigration scheme which was designed to resettle destitute girls from the workhouses of Ireland during the Great Famine. The first ship, the \"Earl Grey\", departed Ireland for a 124-day sail to Sydney. After controversy developed upon their arrival in Australia, a small group of 37 young orphans, sometimes referred to as The Belfast Girls or the Feisty Colleens, never set foot on Sydney soil, and instead sailed up to Brisbane (then Moreton Bay) on 21 October 1848 on board the \"Ann Mary\". This scheme continued until 1852.\nIn 1857, Queensland's first lighthouse was built at Cape Moreton.\nFrontier wars and massacres.\nThe frontier wars fought between European settlers and Aboriginal tribes in Queensland were the bloodiest and most brutal in colonial Australia. Many of these conflicts are now seen as acts of genocide.\nThe wars featured the most frequent massacres of First Nations people, the three deadliest massacres on white settlers, the most disreputable frontier police force, and the highest number of white victims to frontier violence on record in any Australian colony. Across at least 644 collisions at least 66,680 were killed \u2014 with Aboriginal fatalities alone comprising no less than 65,180. Of these deaths, around 24,000 Aboriginal men, women and children were killed by the Native Police between 1859 and 1897.\nThe military force of the Queensland Government in this war was the Native Police, who operated from 1849 to the 1920s. The Native Police was a body of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander troopers that operated under the command of white officers. The Native Police were often recruited forcefully from far-away communities. \nConflict spread quickly with free settlement in 1838, with settlement rapidly expanding in a great rush to take up the surrounding land in the Darling Downs, Logan and Brisbane Valley and South Burnett onwards from 1840, in many cases leading to widespread fighting and heavy loss of life. The conflict later spread north to the Wide Bay and Burnett River and Hervey Bay region, and at one stage the settlement of Maryborough was virtually under siege.\nThe largest reasonably well-documented massacres in southeast Queensland were the Kilcoy and Whiteside poisonings, each of which was said to have taken up to 70 Aboriginal lives by use of a gift of flour laced with strychnine. At the Battle of One Tree Hill in September 1843, Multuggerah and his group of warriors ambushed one group of settlers, routing them and subsequently others in the skirmishes which followed, starting in retaliation for the Kilcoy poisoning.\nCentral Queensland was particularly hard hit during the 1860s and 1870s, several contemporary writers mention the Skull Hole, Bladensburg, or Mistake Creek massacre on Bladensburg Station near Winton, which in 1901 was said to have taken up to 200 Aboriginal lives. First Nations warriors killed 19 settlers during the Cullin-La-Ringo massacre on 17 October 1861. In the weeks afterwards, police, native police and civilians killed up to 370 members of the Gayiri Aboriginal people in response.\nFrontier violence peaked on the northern mining frontier during the 1870s, most notably in Cook district and on the Palmer and Hodgkinson River goldfields, with heavy loss of Aboriginal lives and several well-known massacres. Raids conducted by the Kalkadoon held settlers out of Western Queensland for ten years until September 1884 when they attacked a force of settlers and native police at Battle Mountain near modern Cloncurry. The subsequent battle of Battle Mountain ended in disaster for the Kalkadoon, who suffered heavy losses. Fighting continued in North Queensland, however, with First Nations raiders attacking sheep and cattle while Native Police mounted heavy retaliatory massacres.\nBlackbirding.\nTens of thousands of South Sea Islanders were forced, deceived or coerced into indentured servitude and slavery on Australia's agricultural plantations, despite slavery being outlawed in Australia and other parts of the British Empire by the Slavery Abolition Act 1833. This process was known as blackbirding. This trade in what were then known as Kanakas was in operation from 1863 to 1908, a period of 45 years. Some 55,000 to 62,500 were brought to Australia, most being recruited or blackbirded from islands in Melanesia, such as the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu), the Solomon Islands and the islands around New Guinea.\nThe majority of those taken were male and around one quarter were under the age of sixteen. In total, approximately 15,000 South Sea Islanders (30%) died while labouring in Queensland \u2013 excluding those who died in transit or were killed in the recruitment process \u2013 mostly during three-year contracts. This is similar to the estimated 33% death rate among enslaved Africans in the first three years of arriving in America, Brazil, and the Caribbean; the conditions were often comparable to those of the Atlantic slave trade.\nThe trade was legally sanctioned and regulated under Queensland law, and prominent men such as Robert Towns made massive fortunes through blackbirding, helping to establish some of the major cities in Queensland today. Towns' agent claimed that blackbirded labourers were \"savages who did not know the use of money\" and therefore did not deserve cash wages.\nFollowing Federation in 1901, the White Australia policy came into effect, which saw most foreign workers in Australia deported under the \"Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901\", which saw the Pacific Islander population of the state decrease rapidly.\nIndependent governance.\nA public meeting was held in 1851 to consider the proposed separation of Queensland from New South Wales. On 6 June 1859, Queen Victoria signed letters patent to form the separate colony of Queensland as a self-governing Crown colony with responsible government. Brisbane was selected as the capital city. On 10 December 1859, a proclamation was read by George Bowen, the first Governor of Queensland, formally establishing Queensland as a separate colony from New South Wales. On 22 May 1860 the first Queensland election was held and Robert Herbert, Bowen's private secretary, was appointed as the first Premier of Queensland.\nIn 1865, the first rail line in the state opened between Ipswich and Grandchester. Queensland's economy expanded rapidly in 1867 after James Nash discovered gold on the Mary River near the town of Gympie, sparking a gold rush and saving the Colony of Queensland from near economic collapse. While still significant, they were on a much smaller scale than the gold rushes of Victoria and New South Wales.\nImmigration to Australia and Queensland, in particular, began in the 1850s to support the state economy. During the period from the 1860s until the early 20th century, many labourers, known at the time as Kanakas, were brought to Queensland from neighbouring Pacific Island nations to work in the state's sugar cane fields. Some of these people had been kidnapped under a process known as blackbirding or press-ganging, and their employment conditions constituted an allegedly exploitative form of indentured labour. Italian immigrants entered the sugar cane industry from the 1890s.\nDuring the 1890s, the six Australian colonies, including Queensland, held a series of referendums which culminated in the Federation of Australia on 1 January 1901. During this time, Queensland had a population of half a million people. Since then, Queensland has remained a federated state within Australia, and its population has significantly grown.\n20th century.\nIn 1905 women voted in state elections for the first time. The state's first university, the University of Queensland, was established in Brisbane in 1909. In 1911, the first alternative treatments for polio were pioneered in Queensland and remain in use across the world today.\nWorld War I had a major impact on Queensland. Over 58,000 Queenslanders fought in World War I and over 10,000 of them died.\nAustralia's first major airline, Qantas (originally standing for \"Queensland and Northern Territory Aerial Services\"), was founded in Winton in 1920 to serve outback Queensland.\nIn 1922 Queensland abolished the Queensland Legislative Council, becoming the only Australian state with a unicameral parliament.\nIn 1935 cane toads were deliberately introduced to Queensland from Hawaii in an unsuccessful attempt to reduce the number of French's cane and greyback cane beetles that were destroying the roots of sugar cane plants, which are integral to Queensland's economy. The toads have remained an environmental pest since that time. In 1962, the first commercial production of oil in Queensland and Australia began at Moonie.\nDuring World War II Brisbane became central to the Allied campaign when the AMP Building (now called MacArthur Central) was used as the South West Pacific headquarters for General Douglas MacArthur, chief of the Allied Pacific forces, until his headquarters were moved to Hollandia in August 1944. In 1942, during the war, Brisbane was the site of a violent clash between visiting US military personnel and Australian servicemen and civilians, which resulted in one death and hundreds of injuries. This incident became known colloquially as the Battle of Brisbane.\nThe end of World War II saw a wave of immigration from across Europe, with many more immigrants coming from southern and eastern Europe than in previous decades.\nIn the later decades of the 20th century, the humid subtropical climate\u2014regulated by the availability of air conditioning\u2014saw Queensland become a popular destination for migrants from interstate. Since that time, Queensland has continuously seen high levels of migration from the other states and territories of Australia.\nIn 1966, Lyndon B. Johnson became the first U.S. president to visit Queensland. During his visit, he met with Australia prime minister Harold Holt.\nThe end of the White Australia policy in 1973 saw the beginning of a wave of immigration from around the world, and most prominently from Asia, which continues to the present.\nIn 1981 the Great Barrier Reef off Queensland's northeast coast, one of the world's largest coral reef systems, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\n21st century.\nIn 2003 Queensland adopted maroon as the state's official colour. The announcement was made as a result of an informal tradition to use maroon to represent the state in association with sporting events.\nAfter three decades of record population growth, Queensland was impacted by major floods between late 2010 and early 2011, causing extensive damage and disruption across the state.\nIn 2020, Queensland was impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite a low number and abrupt decline in cases from April 2020 onward, social distancing requirements were implemented from March 2020 including the closure of the state borders.\nGeography.\nWith a total area of 1,729,742 square kilometres (715,309 square miles), Queensland is an expansive state with a highly diverse range of climates and geographical features. If Queensland were an independent nation, it would be the world's 16th largest in terms of area.\nQueensland's eastern coastline borders the Coral Sea, an arm of the Pacific Ocean. The state is bordered by the Torres Strait to the north, with Boigu Island off the coast of New Guinea representing the northern extreme of its territory. The triangular Cape York Peninsula, which points toward New Guinea, is the northernmost part of the state's mainland. West of the peninsula's tip, northern Queensland is bordered by the Gulf of Carpentaria. To the west, Queensland is bordered by the Northern Territory, at the 138th meridian east, and to the southwest by northeastern South Australia. The state's southern border with New South Wales is constituted in the east by the watershed from Point Danger to the Dumaresq River, and the Dumaresq, Macintyre and Barwon rivers. The west of the southern border is defined by the 29th parallel south (including some minor historical encroachments) until it reaches South Australia.\nLike much of eastern Australia, the Great Dividing Range runs roughly parallel with, and inland from, the coast, and areas west of the range are more arid than the humid coastal regions. The Great Barrier Reef, which is the world's largest coral reef system, runs parallel to the state's Coral Sea coast between the Torres Strait and K'gari (Fraser Island). Queensland's coastline includes the world's three largest sand islands: K'gari (Fraser Island), Moreton, and North Stradbroke.\nThe state contains six World Heritage-listed preservation areas: the Great Barrier Reef along the Coral Sea coast, K'gari (Fraser Island) on the Wide Bay\u2013Burnett region's coastline, the wet tropics in Far North Queensland including the Daintree Rainforest, Lamington National Park in South East Queensland, the Riversleigh fossil sites in North West Queensland, and the Gondwana Rainforests in South East Queensland.\nThe state is divided into several unofficial regions which are commonly used to refer to large areas of the state's vast geography. These include:\nClimate.\nBecause of its size, there is significant variation in climate across the state. There is ample rainfall along the coastline, with a monsoonal wet season in the tropical north, and humid sub-tropical conditions along the southern coastline. Low rainfall and hot humid summers are typical for the inland and west. Elevated areas in the south-eastern inland can experience temperatures well below freezing in mid-winter providing frost and, rarely, snowfall. The climate of the coastal regions is influenced by warm ocean waters, keeping the region free from extremes of temperature and providing moisture for rainfall.\nThere are six predominant climatic zones in Queensland, based on temperature and humidity:\nThe annual average climatic statistics for selected Queensland cities are shown below:\nThe coastal far north of the state is the wettest region in Australia, with Mount Bellenden Ker, south of Cairns, holding many Australian rainfall records with its annual average rainfall of over . Snow is rare in Queensland, although it does fall with some regularity along the far southern border with New South Wales, predominantly in the Stanthorpe district although on rare occasions further north and west. The most northerly snow ever recorded in Australia occurred near Mackay; however, this was exceptional.\nNatural disasters are often a threat in Queensland: severe tropical cyclones can impact the central and northern coastlines and cause severe damage, with recent examples including Larry, Yasi, Ita and Debbie. Flooding from rain-bearing systems can also be severe and can occur anywhere in Queensland. One of the deadliest and most damaging floods in the history of the state occurred in early 2011. Severe springtime thunderstorms generally affect the south-east and inland of the state and can bring damaging winds, torrential rain, large hail and even tornadoes. The strongest tornado ever recorded in Australia occurred in Queensland near Bundaberg in November 1992. Droughts and bushfires can also occur; however, the latter are generally less severe than those that occur in southern states.\nThe highest official maximum temperature recorded in the state was at Birdsville Police Station on 24 December 1972. The lowest recorded minimum temperature is at Stanthorpe on 23 June 1961 and at The Hermitage (near Warwick) on 12 July 1965.\nDemographics.\nIn December 2021, Queensland had an estimated population of 5,265,043. Approximately half of the state's population lives in Brisbane, and over 70% live in South East Queensland. Nonetheless, Queensland is the second most decentralised state in Australia after Tasmania. Since the 1980s, Queensland has consistently been the fastest-growing state in Australia, as it receives high levels of both international immigration and migration from interstate. There have however been short periods where Victoria and Western Australia have grown faster.\nCities.\nTen of Australia's thirty largest cities are located in Queensland. In 2019, the largest cities in the state by population of their Greater Capital City Statistical Area or Significant Urban Area (metropolitan areas) as defined by the Australian Bureau of Statistics were:\nAncestry and immigration.\nEarly settlers during the 19th century were largely English, Irish, Scottish and German, while there was a wave of immigration from southern and eastern Europe (most notably Italy) in the decades following the second world war. In the 21st century, Asia (most notably China and India) has been the primary source of immigration.\nAt the 2016 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \nThe 2016 census showed that 28.9% of Queensland's inhabitants were born overseas. Only 54.8% of inhabitants had both parents born in Australia, with the next most common birthplaces being New Zealand, England, India, Mainland China and South Africa. Brisbane has the 26th largest immigrant population among world metropolitan areas.\n4% of the population, or 186,482 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2016.\nLanguage.\nAt the 2016 census, 81.2% of inhabitants spoke only English at home, with the next most common languages being Mandarin (1.5%), Vietnamese (0.6%), Cantonese (0.5%), Spanish (0.4%) and Italian (0.4%).\nAt the 2021 census, 80.5% of inhabitants spoke only English at home, with the next most common languages being Mandarin (1.6%), Vietnamese (0.6%), Punjabi (0.6%) and Spanish (0.6%).\nReligion.\nAt the 2016 census, the most commonly cited religious affiliations were 'No religion' (29.2%), Catholicism (21.7%) and Anglicanism (15.3%). In the 2016 Census the majority of Queenslanders were identified as Christian, most of which were of various Protestant denominations.\nAccording to the 2021 census, 45.7% of the population follows Christianity, and 41.2% identified as having No religion About 5% of people are affiliated with a non-Christian religion, mainly Buddhism (1.4%), Hinduism (1.3%) and Islam (1.2%). The 2021 census found that Protestants of various denominations outnumbered Catholics in Queensland.\nEducation.\nQueensland is home to numerous universities. The state's oldest university, the University of Queensland, was established in 1909 and frequently ranks among the world's top 50. Other major universities include Queensland University of Technology, Griffith University, the University of Southern Queensland, the University of the Sunshine Coast, James Cook University (which was the state's first university outside of South East Queensland), Central Queensland University and Bond University (which was Australia's first private university).\nInternational education is an important industry, with 134,312 international students enrolled in the state in 2018, largely focused on Brisbane. Most of the state's international students are from Asia.\nAt the primary and secondary levels, Queensland is home to numerous state and private schools.\nQueensland has a public library system which is managed by the State Library of Queensland. Some university libraries are also open to the public.\nEconomy.\nIn 2019, Queensland had a gross state product of A$357,044\u00a0million, the third-highest in the nation after New South Wales and Victoria. The construction of sea ports and railways along Queensland's coast in the 19th century set up the foundations for the state's export-oriented mining and agricultural sectors. Since the 1980s, a sizeable influx of interstate and overseas migrants, large amounts of federal government investment, increased mining of vast mineral deposits and an expanding aerospace sector have contributed to the state's economic growth.\nPrimary industries include bananas, pineapples, peanuts, a wide variety of other tropical and temperate fruit and vegetables, grain crops, wineries, cattle raising, cotton, sugarcane, and wool. The mining industry includes bauxite, coal, silver, lead, zinc, gold and copper.\nSecondary industries are mostly further processing of the above-mentioned primary produce. For example, bauxite is shipped by sea from Weipa and converted to alumina at Gladstone. There is also copper refining and the refining of sugar cane to sugar at a number of mills along the eastern coastline.\nMajor tertiary industries are retail, tourism, and international education. In 2018, there were 134,312 international students enrolled in the state, largely focused on Brisbane. Most of the state's international students are from Asia.\nBrisbane is categorised as a global city, and is among Asia-Pacific cities with largest GDPs. It has strengths in mining, banking, insurance, transportation, information technology, real estate and food. Some of the largest companies headquartered in Brisbane, all among Australia's largest, include Suncorp Group, Virgin Australia, Aurizon, Bank of Queensland, Flight Centre, CUA, Sunsuper, QSuper, Domino's Pizza Enterprises, Star Entertainment Group, ALS, TechnologyOne, NEXTDC, Super Retail Group, New Hope Coal, Jumbo Interactive, National Storage, Collins Foods and Boeing Australia.\nTourism.\nAs a result of its varied landscapes, warm climate, and abundant natural environment, tourism is Queensland's leading tertiary industry with millions of interstate and international visitors visiting the state each year. The industry generates $8.8\u00a0billion annually, accounting for 4.5% of Queensland's Gross State Product. It has an annual export of $4.0\u00a0billion annually. The sector directly employs about 5.7% of Queensland citizens. Accommodation in Queensland caters for nearly 22% of the total expenditure, followed by restaurants/meals (15%), airfares (11%), fuel (11%) and shopping/gifts (11%).\nThe most visited tourist destinations of Queensland include Brisbane (including Moreton and South Stradbroke islands and the Gold Coast) as well as the Sunshine Coast, the Great Barrier Reef, Cairns, Port Douglas, the Daintree Rainforest, K'gari and the Whitsunday Islands.\nBrisbane is the third most popular destination in Australia following Sydney and Melbourne. Major attractions in its metropolitan area include South Bank Parklands, the Queensland Cultural Centre (including the Queensland Museum, Queensland Art Gallery, Gallery of Modern Art, Queensland Performing Arts Centre and State Library of Queensland), City Hall, the Story Bridge, the Howard Smith Wharves, ANZAC Square, St John's Cathedral, Fortitude Valley (including James Street and Chinatown), West End, the Teneriffe woolstores precinct, the Brisbane River and its Riverwalk network, the City Botanic Gardens, Roma Street Parkland, New Farm Park (including the Brisbane Powerhouse), the Kangaroo Point Cliffs and park, the Lone Pine Koala Sanctuary, the Mount Coot-tha Reserve (including Mount Coot-tha Lookout and Mount Coot-tha Botanic Gardens), the D'Aguilar Range and National Park, as well as Moreton Bay (including Moreton, North Stradbroke and Bribie islands, and coastal suburbs such as Shorncliffe, Wynnum and those on the Redcliffe Peninsula).\nThe Gold Coast is home to numerous popular surf beaches such as those at Surfers Paradise and Burleigh Heads. It also includes the largest concentration of amusement parks in Australia, including Dreamworld, Movie World, Sea World, Wet 'n' Wild and WhiteWater World, as well as the Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary. The Gold Coast's hinterland includes Lamington National Park in the McPherson Range.\nThe Sunshine Coast includes popular surfing and beach destinations including Noosa Heads and Mooloolaba. It is also home to UnderWater World and Steve Irwin's Australia Zoo. Its hinterland includes the Glass House Mountains National Park.\nCairns is renowned as the gateway to the Great Barrier Reef, Far North Queensland (including Port Douglas) and the Daintree Rainforest. The Whitsunday Islands off the coast of North Queensland are a popular tourist destinations for their resort facilities and access to the Great Barrier Reef.\nPolitics and government.\nOne of the six founding states of Australia, Queensland has been a federated state subject to the Australian Constitution since 1 January 1901. It may legislate on all matters not ceded in the Australian Constitution to the federal government. It is a parliamentary constitutional monarchy. The Constitution of Queensland sets out the operation of the state's government. The state's constitution contains several entrenched provisions which cannot be changed in the absence of a referendum. There is also a statutory charter of rights, the \"Queensland Human Rights Act 2019\". Queensland's system of government is influenced by the Westminster system and Australia's federal system of government.\nThe government power can be divided into three groups:\nExecutive authority is nominally vested in the Governor of Queensland (currently Jeannette Young) who represents and is appointed by the Monarch (currently Charles III) on the advice of the Premier of Queensland. The Premier, who is the state's Head of government, along with the Cabinet of Queensland (whose decisions are formalised by the Executive Council), exercise executive authority in practice. The Premier is appointed by the Governor and must have support of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland. The Premier is in practice a leading member of the Legislative Assembly and parliamentary leader of his or her political party, or coalition of parties, and members of the Cabinet will be drawn from the same party or coalition. The current Premier and Deputy Premier are David Crisafulli and Jarrod Bleijie of the Liberal National Party respectively. Government House at Paddington in Brisbane is the seat of the Governor, having replaced Old Government House at Gardens Point in Brisbane's CBD in the early 20th century. The executive branch is simply referred to as the Queensland Government.\nLegislative authority is exercised by the Queensland Parliament which uniquely for Australian states is unicameral, containing only one house, the Legislative Assembly. The Parliament was bicameral until 1922 when the Legislative Council was abolished by the Labor \"suicide squad\", so called because they were appointed for the purpose of voting to abolish their own offices. Bills receive royal assent from the Governor before being passed into law. The Parliament's seat is at Parliament House at Gardens Point in Brisbane's CBD. Members of the Legislative Assembly represent 93 electoral districts. Elections in Queensland are held at the end of each fixed four-year parliamentary term and are determined by full preferential voting.\nThe state's judiciary consists of the Supreme Court of Queensland and the District Court of Queensland, established by the Queensland Constitution, as well as the Magistrates Court of Queensland and other courts and tribunals established by legislation. Cases may be appealed to the High Court of Australia. As with all Australian states and territories, Queensland has a common law legal system. The Supreme and District courts are headquartered at the Queen Elizabeth II Courts of Law in Brisbane's CBD.\nThe state's politics are traditionally regarded as being conservative relative to other states. Historically, the lack of an upper house, the \"Bjelkemander\" (a malapportion favouring rural electoral districts) has meant that Queensland had a long tradition of domination by strong-willed, populist premiers, often accused of authoritarian tendencies, holding office for long periods. This tendency was exemplified by the government of the state's longest-serving Premier Joh Bjelke-Petersen.\nLocal government.\nLocal government is the mechanism by which local government areas can manage their own affairs to the extent permitted by the Local Government Act 2009. Queensland is divided into 77 local government areas, which are created by the state government under the legislation. Each local government area has a council responsible for providing a range of local services and utilities. Local councils derive their income from both rates and charges on resident ratepayers, and grants and subsidies from the state and federal governments.\nFederal representation.\nIn the federal Parliament, Queensland accounts for 30 of the 151 electoral divisions in the House of Representatives (based on population size) and 12 of the 76 seats in the Senate (based on equality between the states).\nThe current partisan makeup of Queensland's House of Representatives delegation is 16 Liberal National, 12 Labor, 1 Australian Greens, and 1 Katter's Australian Party.\nThe current partisan makeup of Queensland's Senate delegation is 4 Liberal National, 4 Labor, 2 One Nation, and 2 Green.\nCulture.\nQueensland is home to major art galleries including the Queensland Art Gallery and the Queensland Gallery of Modern Art as well as cultural institutions such as the Queensland Ballet, Opera Queensland, Queensland Theatre Company, and Queensland Symphony Orchestra, all based at the Queensland Cultural Centre in Brisbane. The state is the origin of musicians such as the Bee Gees, the Go-Betweens, the Veronicas, the Saints, Savage Garden, and Sheppard as well as writers such as David Malouf, Nick Earls and Li Cunxin.\nMajor annual cultural events include the Royal Queensland Exhibition (known locally as the Ekka), an agricultural exhibition held each August at the Brisbane Showgrounds as well as the Brisbane Festival, which includes one of the nation's largest annual fireworks displays called 'Riverfire', and which is held each September.\nSport.\nThe state of Queensland is represented in all of Australia's national sporting competitions and it is also host to a number of domestic and international sporting events. The most popular winter and summer team sports are rugby league and cricket, respectively.\nIn the National Rugby League, the Brisbane Broncos, North Queensland Cowboys, The Dolphins and Gold Coast Titans are based in the state. Rugby league's annual State of Origin series is a major event in the Queensland sporting calendar, with the Queensland Maroons representing the state.\nIn cricket, the Queensland Bulls represent the state in the Sheffield Shield and the Ryobi One Day Cup, while the Brisbane Heat compete in the Big Bash League.\nQueensland is also home to the Brisbane Lions and the Gold Coast Suns in the Australian Football League (Australian rules football), and the Brisbane Roar FC in the A-League (soccer). In netball, the Queensland Firebirds went undefeated in the 2011 season as they went on to win the Grand Final. Other sports teams are the Brisbane Bullets and the Cairns Taipans, who compete in the National Basketball League.\nThe state is represented by the Queensland Reds in the Super Rugby (rugby union).\nSwimming is also a popular sport in Queensland, with many Australian team members and international medalists hailing from the state.\nBrisbane will host the 2032 Summer Olympics, marking the third time Australia hosted the Olympic Games following Melbourne 1956 and Sydney 2000. Major recurring sporting events hosted in Queensland include: the Gold Coast 600 (motorsport; since 1994), the Gold Coast Marathon (athletics; since 1979), the NRL All Stars Game (rugby league; since 2010), the Townsville 400 (motorsport; since 2009), the Quicksilver Pro and Roxy Pro (surfing) and Australian PGA Championship (golf; since 2000).\nSymbols and emblems.\nThe official state emblems of Queensland are prescribed in the Emblems of Queensland Act 2005.\nQueen Victoria granted the Queensland Coat of Arms to the Colony of Queensland in 1893, making it the oldest State Arms in Australia. It depicts Queensland's primary industries in the 19th century with a sheaf of wheat, the heads of a bull and a ram, and a column of gold rising from a heap of quartz. Two stalks of sugar cane which surround the state badge at the top, and below is Queensland's state motto, \"Audax at Fidelis\", which means \"Bold but Faithful\". In 1977, Queen Elizabeth II granted the supporting animals, the brolga and the red deer.\nIn November 2003 maroon was officially named Queensland's state colour, after many years of association with Queensland sporting teams. In 2025, Queensland Government branding changed to blue, with not yet an impact on the official state colour.\nThe koala was officially named the animal or faunal, emblem of Queensland in 1971 after a newspaper poll showed strong public support. The Queensland Government introduced the poll due to a proposal by state tourism ministers for all states to adopt a faunal emblem. In January 1986, the brolga was announced as the official bird emblem of Queensland, after many years on the Coat of Arms.\nThe Cooktown orchid became known as Queensland's floral emblem in 1959, during celebrations to mark the state's centenary, and the Barrier Reef Anemone Fish was officially named as Queensland's aquatic emblem in March 2005.\nThe sapphire was named the official state gem for Queensland in August 1985.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nQueensland is served by several National Highways and, particularly in South East Queensland, a network of freeways such as the M1. The Department of Transport &amp; Main Roads oversees the development and operation of main roads and public transport, including taxis and local aviation.\nPrincipal rail services are provided by Queensland Rail, predominantly between the major centres east of the Great Dividing Range. Freight rail services in Queensland have been provided mostly by Aurizon and Pacific National, with interstate intermodal services provided by Pacific National and SCT Logistics. Major seaports include the Port of Brisbane, Australia's third busiest by value of goods, as well as those at Gladstone, Townsville, and Bundaberg. There are large coal export facilities at Hay Point, Gladstone, and Abbot Point. Major sugar export facilities are located at Lucinda and Mackay.\nBrisbane Airport is the main international and domestic gateway serving the state, and is the third busiest in Australia. Other international airports include the Gold Coast Airport, Cairns International Airport, and Townsville Airport. Regional airports with scheduled domestic flights include Toowoomba Wellcamp Airport, Great Barrier Reef Airport, Hervey Bay Airport, Bundaberg Airport, Mackay Airport, Mount Isa Airport, Proserpine / Whitsunday Coast Airport, Rockhampton Airport, and Sunshine Coast Airport.\nSouth East Queensland has an integrated public transport system operated by Translink, which provides services bus, rail, and Brisbane's ferry services through Queensland Rail and contracted operators. The region is divided into seven Fare zones radiating outwards from the Brisbane central business district, which is the central hub for the system. The Queensland Rail City network consists of 152 train stations along 13 suburban rail lines and across the region, and predominantly within Brisbane's metropolitan area. There is also a large bus network including Brisbane's large dedicated bus rapid transit network, the Brisbane busway network. Brisbane's popular ferry services include the CityCat, Cross River, and CityHopper services which have dedicated wharves along the Brisbane River. The , Queensland's only light rail network, operates on the Gold Coast.\nThe new Queensland Cross River Rail is a metro network that is currently under development within Brisbane and is part of infrastructure to prepare the city for the 2032 Olympic games.\nOther utilities.\nQueensland Health operates and administers the state's public health system. There are sixteen regional Health and Hospital Services corresponding to geographical regions which are responsible for delivering public health services within their regions. Major public hospitals include the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Princess Alexandra Hospital, the Mater Hospital, the Queen Elizabeth II Jubilee Hospital, and the Queensland Children's Hospital in Brisbane, as well as the Townsville University Hospital, Cairns Hospital, Gold Coast Hospital and Gold Coast University Hospital in the regional cities. There are smaller public hospitals, as well as private hospitals, around the state.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59052", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59052", "title": "Ensemble (mathematical physics)", "text": "Idealization of a large number of atomic-sized systems\nIn physics, specifically statistical mechanics, an ensemble (also statistical ensemble) is an idealization consisting of a large number of virtual copies (sometimes infinitely many) of a system, considered all at once, each of which represents a possible state that the real system might be in. In other words, a statistical ensemble is a set of systems of particles used in statistical mechanics to describe a single\nsystem. The concept of an ensemble was introduced by J. Willard Gibbs in 1902.\nA thermodynamic ensemble is a specific variety of statistical ensemble that, among other properties, is in statistical equilibrium (defined below), and is used to derive the properties of thermodynamic systems from the laws of classical or quantum mechanics.\nPhysical considerations.\nThe ensemble formalises the notion that an experimenter repeating an experiment again and again under the same macroscopic conditions, but unable to control the microscopic details, may expect to observe a range of different outcomes.\nThe notional size of ensembles in thermodynamics, statistical mechanics and quantum statistical mechanics can be very large, including every possible microscopic state the system could be in, consistent with its observed macroscopic properties. For many important physical cases, it is possible to calculate averages directly over the whole of the thermodynamic ensemble, to obtain explicit formulas for many of the thermodynamic quantities of interest, often in terms of the appropriate partition function.\nThe concept of an equilibrium or stationary ensemble is crucial to many applications of statistical ensembles. Although a mechanical system certainly evolves over time, the ensemble does not necessarily have to evolve. In fact, the ensemble will not evolve if it contains all past and future phases of the system. Such a statistical ensemble, one that does not change over time, is called \"stationary\" and can be said to be in \"statistical equilibrium\".\nMain types.\nThe study of thermodynamics is concerned with systems that appear to human perception to be \"static\" (despite the motion of their internal parts), and which can be described simply by a set of macroscopically observable variables. These systems can be described by statistical ensembles that depend on a few observable parameters, and which are in statistical equilibrium. Gibbs noted that different macroscopic constraints lead to different types of ensembles, with particular statistical characteristics.\n\"\"We may imagine a great number of systems of the same nature, but differing in the configurations and velocities which they have at a given instant, and differing in not merely infinitesimally, but it may be so as to embrace every conceivable combination of configuration and velocities...\" J. W. Gibbs\" (1903)\nThree important thermodynamic ensembles were defined by Gibbs:\nThe calculations that can be made using each of these ensembles are explored further in their respective articles.\nOther thermodynamic ensembles can be also defined, corresponding to different physical requirements, for which analogous formulae can often similarly be derived.\nFor example, in the reaction ensemble, particle number fluctuations are only allowed to occur according to the stoichiometry of the chemical reactions which are present in the system. \nEquivalence.\nIn thermodynamic limit all ensembles should produce identical observables due to Legendre transforms, deviations to this rule occurs under conditions that state-variables are non-convex, such as small molecular measurements.\nRepresentations.\nThe precise mathematical expression for a statistical ensemble has a distinct form depending on the type of mechanics under consideration (quantum or classical). In the classical case, the ensemble is a probability distribution over the microstates. In quantum mechanics, this notion, due to von Neumann, is a way of assigning a probability distribution over the results of each complete set of commuting observables. \nIn classical mechanics, the ensemble is instead written as a probability distribution in phase space; the microstates are the result of partitioning phase space into equal-sized units, although the size of these units can be chosen somewhat arbitrarily.\nRequirements for representations.\nPutting aside for the moment the question of how statistical ensembles are generated operationally, we should be able to perform the following two operations on ensembles \"A\", \"B\" of the same system:\nUnder certain conditions, therefore, equivalence classes of statistical ensembles have the structure of a convex set.\nQuantum mechanical.\nA statistical ensemble in quantum mechanics (also known as a mixed state) is most often represented by a density matrix, denoted by formula_1. The density matrix provides a fully general tool that can incorporate both quantum uncertainties (present even if the state of the system were completely known) and classical uncertainties (due to a lack of knowledge) in a unified manner. Any physical observable X in quantum mechanics can be written as an operator, formula_2. The expectation value of this operator on the statistical ensemble formula_3 is given by the following trace:\nformula_4\nThis can be used to evaluate averages (operator formula_2), variances (using operator formula_6), covariances (using operator formula_7), etc. The density matrix must always have a trace of 1: formula_8 (this essentially is the condition that the probabilities must add up to one).\nIn general, the ensemble evolves over time according to the von Neumann equation.\nEquilibrium ensembles (those that do not evolve over time, formula_9) can be written solely as a function of conserved variables. For example, the microcanonical ensemble and canonical ensemble are strictly functions of the total energy, which is measured by the total energy operator formula_10 (Hamiltonian). The grand canonical ensemble is additionally a function of the particle number, measured by the total particle number operator formula_11. Such equilibrium ensembles are a diagonal matrix in the orthogonal basis of states that simultaneously diagonalize each conserved variable. In bra\u2013ket notation, the density matrix is\nformula_12\nwhere the , indexed by i, are the elements of a complete and orthogonal basis. (Note that in other bases, the density matrix is not necessarily diagonal.)\nClassical mechanical.\nIn classical mechanics, an ensemble is represented by a probability density function defined over the system's phase space. While an individual system evolves according to Hamilton's equations, the density function (the ensemble) evolves over time according to Liouville's equation.\nIn a mechanical system with a defined number of parts, the phase space has \"n\" generalized coordinates called \"q\"1, ... \"q\"\"n\", and \"n\" associated canonical momenta called \"p\"1, ... \"p\"\"n\". The ensemble is then represented by a joint probability density function \"\u03c1\"(\"p\"1, ... \"p\"\"n\", \"q\"1, ... \"q\"\"n\").\nIf the number of parts in the system is allowed to vary among the systems in the ensemble (as in a grand ensemble where the number of particles is a random quantity), then it is a probability distribution over an extended phase space that includes further variables such as particle numbers \"N\"1 (first kind of particle), \"N\"2 (second kind of particle), and so on up to \"N\"\"s\" (the last kind of particle; \"s\" is how many different kinds of particles there are). The ensemble is then represented by a joint probability density function \"\u03c1\"(\"N\"1, ... \"N\"\"s\", \"p\"1, ... \"p\"\"n\", \"q\"1, ... \"q\"\"n\"). The number of coordinates \"n\" varies with the numbers of particles.\nAny mechanical quantity \"X\" can be written as a function of the system's phase. The expectation value of any such quantity is given by an integral over the entire phase space of this quantity weighted by \"\u03c1\":\nformula_13\nThe condition of probability normalization applies, requiring\nformula_14\nPhase space is a continuous space containing an infinite number of distinct physical states within any small region. In order to connect the probability \"density\" in phase space to a probability \"distribution\" over microstates, it is necessary to somehow partition the phase space into blocks that are distributed representing the different states of the system in a fair way. It turns out that the correct way to do this simply results in equal-sized blocks of canonical phase space, and so a microstate in classical mechanics is an extended region in the phase space of canonical coordinates that has a particular volume. In particular, the probability density function in phase space, \"\u03c1\", is related to the probability distribution over microstates, \"P\" by a factor\nformula_15\nwhere\nSince \"h\" can be chosen arbitrarily, the notional size of a microstate is also arbitrary. Still, the value of \"h\" influences the offsets of quantities such as entropy and chemical potential, and so it is important to be consistent with the value of \"h\" when comparing different systems.\nCorrecting overcounting in phase space.\nTypically, the phase space contains duplicates of the same physical state in multiple distinct locations. This is a consequence of the way that a physical state is encoded into mathematical coordinates; the simplest choice of coordinate system often allows a state to be encoded in multiple ways. An example of this is a gas of identical particles whose state is written in terms of the particles' individual positions and momenta: when two particles are exchanged, the resulting point in phase space is different, and yet it corresponds to an identical physical state of the system. It is important in statistical mechanics (a theory about physical states) to recognize that the phase space is just a mathematical construction, and to not naively overcount actual physical states when integrating over phase space. Overcounting can cause serious problems:\nIt is in general difficult to find a coordinate system that uniquely encodes each physical state. As a result, it is usually necessary to use a coordinate system with multiple copies of each state, and then to recognize and remove the overcounting.\nA crude way to remove the overcounting would be to manually define a subregion of phase space that includes each physical state only once and then exclude all other parts of phase space. In a gas, for example, one could include only those phases where the particles' \"x\" coordinates are sorted in ascending order. While this would solve the problem, the resulting integral over phase space would be tedious to perform due to its unusual boundary shape. (In this case, the factor \"C\" introduced above would be set to \"C\" \n 1, and the integral would be restricted to the selected subregion of phase space.)\nA simpler way to correct the overcounting is to integrate over all of phase space but to reduce the weight of each phase in order to exactly compensate the overcounting. This is accomplished by the factor \"C\" introduced above, which is a whole number that represents how many ways a physical state can be represented in phase space. Its value does not vary with the continuous canonical coordinates, so overcounting can be corrected simply by integrating over the full range of canonical coordinates, then dividing the result by the overcounting factor. However, \"C\" does vary strongly with discrete variables such as numbers of particles, and so it must be applied before summing over particle numbers.\nAs mentioned above, the classic example of this overcounting is for a fluid system containing various kinds of particles, where any two particles of the same kind are indistinguishable and exchangeable. When the state is written in terms of the particles' individual positions and momenta, then the overcounting related to the exchange of identical particles is corrected by using\nformula_16\nThis is known as \"correct Boltzmann counting\".\nEnsembles in statistics.\nThe formulation of statistical ensembles used in physics has now been widely adopted in other fields, in part because it has been recognized that the canonical ensemble or Gibbs measure serves to maximize the entropy of a system, subject to a set of constraints: this is the principle of maximum entropy. This principle has now been widely applied to problems in linguistics, robotics, and the like.\nIn addition, statistical ensembles in physics are often built on a principle of locality: that all interactions are only between neighboring atoms or nearby molecules. Thus, for example, lattice models, such as the Ising model, model ferromagnetic materials by means of nearest-neighbor interactions between spins. The statistical formulation of the principle of locality is now seen to be a form of the Markov property in the broad sense; nearest neighbors are now Markov blankets. Thus, the general notion of a statistical ensemble with nearest-neighbor interactions leads to Markov random fields, which again find broad applicability; for example in Hopfield networks.\nEnsemble average.\nIn statistical mechanics, the ensemble average is defined as the mean of a quantity that is a function of the microstate of a system, according to the distribution of the system on its micro-states in this ensemble.\nSince the ensemble average is dependent on the ensemble chosen, its mathematical expression varies from ensemble to ensemble. However, the mean obtained for a given physical quantity does not depend on the ensemble chosen at the thermodynamic limit.\nThe grand canonical ensemble is an example of an open system.\nClassical statistical mechanics.\nFor a classical system in thermal equilibrium with its environment, the \"ensemble average\" takes the form of an integral over the phase space of the system:\nformula_17\nwhere\nThe denominator in this expression is known as the partition function and is denoted by the letter \"Z\".\nQuantum statistical mechanics.\nIn quantum statistical mechanics, for a quantum system in thermal equilibrium with its environment, the weighted average takes the form of a sum over quantum energy states, rather than a continuous integral:\nformula_24\nCanonical ensemble average.\nThe generalized version of the partition function provides the complete framework for working with ensemble averages in thermodynamics, information theory, statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics.\nThe microcanonical ensemble represents an isolated system in which energy (\"E\"), volume (\"V\") and the number of particles (\"N\") are all constant. The canonical ensemble represents a closed system which can exchange energy (\"E\") with its surroundings (usually a heat bath), but the volume (\"V\") and the number of particles (\"N\") are all constant. The grand canonical ensemble represents an open system which can exchange energy (\"E\") and particles (\"N\") with its surroundings, but the volume (\"V\") is kept constant.\nOperational interpretation.\nIn the discussion given so far, while rigorous, we have taken for granted that the notion of an ensemble is valid a priori, as is commonly done in physical context. What has not been shown is that the ensemble \"itself\" (not the consequent results) is a precisely defined object mathematically. For instance,\nIn this section, we attempt to partially answer this question.\nSuppose we have a \"preparation procedure\" for a system in a physics lab: For example, the procedure might involve a physical apparatus and some protocols for manipulating the apparatus. As a result of this preparation procedure, some system is produced and maintained in isolation for some small period of time. By repeating this laboratory preparation procedure we obtain a sequence of systems \"X\"1, \"X\"2, ...,\"X\"\"k\", which in our mathematical idealization, we assume is an infinite sequence of systems. The systems are similar in that they were all produced in the same way. This infinite sequence is an ensemble.\nIn a laboratory setting, each one of these prepped systems might be used as input for \"one\" subsequent \"testing procedure\". Again, the testing procedure involves a physical apparatus and some protocols; as a result of the testing procedure we obtain a \"yes\" or \"no\" answer. Given a testing procedure \"E\" applied to each prepared system, we obtain a sequence of values Meas (\"E\", \"X\"1), Meas (\"E\", \"X\"2), ..., Meas (\"E\", \"X\"\"k\"). Each one of these values is a 0 (or no) or a 1 (yes).\nAssume the following time average exists:\nformula_25\nFor quantum mechanical systems, an important assumption made in the quantum logic approach to quantum mechanics is the identification of \"yes\u2013no\" questions to the lattice of closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. With some additional technical assumptions one can then infer that states are given by density operators \"S\" so that:\nformula_26\nWe see this reflects the definition of quantum states in general: A quantum state is a mapping from the observables to their expectation values.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59056", "revid": "18481282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59056", "title": "Kobe", "text": "City in Kansai region, Japan\nKobe ( ; , ), officially , is the capital city of Hy\u014dgo Prefecture, Japan. With a population of around 1.5 million, Kobe is Japan's seventh-largest city and the third-largest port city after Tokyo and Yokohama. It is located in the Kansai region, which makes up the southern side of the main island of Honsh\u016b, on the north shore of Osaka Bay. It is part of the Keihanshin metropolitan area along with Osaka and Kyoto. The Kobe city centre is located about west of Osaka and southwest of Kyoto.\nThe earliest written records regarding the region come from the , which describes the founding of the Ikuta Shrine by Empress Jing\u016b in AD 201. For most of its history, the area was never a single political entity, even during the Tokugawa period, when the port was controlled directly by the Tokugawa shogunate. Kobe did not exist in its current form until its founding in 1889. Its name comes from . Kobe became one of Japan's designated cities in 1956.\nKobe was one of the cities to open for trade with the West following the 1853 end of the policy of seclusion and has retained its cosmopolitan character ever since with a rich architectural heritage dating back to the Meiji era. While the 1995 Great Hanshin earthquake diminished some of Kobe's prominence as a port city, it remains Japan's fourth-busiest container port. Companies headquartered in Kobe include ASICS, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, and Kobe Steel, while over 100 international corporations have their Asian or Japanese headquarters in the city, including Eli Lilly and Company, Procter &amp; Gamble, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Nestl\u00e9. The city is the point of origin and namesake of Kobe beef, the home of Kobe University, and the site of one of Japan's most famous hot spring resorts, Arima Onsen.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nTools found in western Kobe demonstrate that the area was populated at least from the J\u014dmon period.\nThe natural geography of the area, particularly of Wada Cape in Hy\u014dgo-ku, led to the development of a port, which has remained the economic center of the city. Some of the earliest written documents mentioning the region include the , which describes the founding of the Ikuta Shrine by Empress Jing\u016b in AD 201.\nNara and Heian periods.\nDuring the Nara and Heian periods, the port was known by the name and was one of the ports from which imperial embassies to China were dispatched. \nThe city was briefly the capital of Japan in 1180, when Taira no Kiyomori moved his grandson Emperor Antoku to Fukuhara-ky\u014d in present-day Hy\u014dgo-ku. The Emperor returned to Kyoto after about five months.\nShortly thereafter in 1184, the Taira fortress in Hy\u014dgo-ku and the nearby Ikuta Shrine became the sites of the Genpei War battle of Ichi-no-Tani between the Taira and Minamoto clans. The Minamoto prevailed, forcing Taira remnants to flee to Shikoku.\nKamakura period.\nAs the port grew during the Kamakura period, it became an important hub for trade with China and other countries. In the 13th century, the city came to be known by the name . During this time, Hy\u014dgo Port, along with northern Osaka, composed the province of Settsu (most of today's Kobe belonged to Settsu except Nishi Ward and Tarumi Ward, which belonged to Harima).\nEdo period.\nLater, during the Edo period, the eastern parts of present-day Kobe came under the jurisdiction of the Amagasaki Domain and the western parts under that of the Akashi Domain, while the center was controlled directly by the Tokugawa shogunate.\nIt was not until the abolition of the han system in 1871 and the establishment of the current prefecture system that the area became politically distinct.\nMeiji period.\nHy\u014dgo Port was opened to foreign trade by the Shogunal government at the same time as Osaka on January\u00a01, 1868, just before the advent of the Boshin War and the Meiji Restoration. At the time of the opening of the city for foreign trade, the area saw intense fighting resulting from the civil war in progress. Shortly after the opening of Kobe to trade, the Kobe Incident occurred, where several western soldiers sustained wounds from gunfire by troops from Bizen. The region has since been identified with the West and many foreign residences from the period remain in Kobe's Kitano area.\nModern era.\nKobe, as it is known today, was founded on April\u00a01, 1889, and was designated on September\u00a01, 1956 by government ordinance. The history of the city is closely tied to that of the Ikuta Shrine, and the name \"Kobe\" derives from , an archaic name for those who supported the shrine.\nDuring World War II, Kobe was lightly bombed in the Doolittle Raid on April 18, 1942, along with Tokyo and a few other cities. Eventually, it was bombed again with incendiary bombs by B-29 Superfortress bombers on March\u00a016 and 17,\u00a01945, causing the death of 8,841 residents and the destruction of 21% of Kobe's urban area. This incident inspired the well-known Studio Ghibli film \"Grave of the Fireflies\" and the book by Akiyuki Nosaka on which the film was based. It also features in the motion picture \"A Boy Called H\".\nFollowing continuous pressure from citizens, on March\u00a018, 1975, the Kobe City Council passed an ordinance banning vessels carrying nuclear weapons from Kobe Port. This effectively prevented any U.S. warships from entering the port, because U.S. policy is to never disclose whether any given warship is carrying nuclear weapons. This nonproliferation policy has been termed the \"Kobe formula\".\nOn January 17, 1995, a magnitude 6.9 earthquake occurred at 5:46 am JST near the city. About 6,434 people in the city were killed, 212,443 were made homeless, and large parts of the port facilities and other parts of the city were destroyed. The earthquake destroyed portions of the Hanshin Expressway, an elevated freeway that dramatically toppled over. In Japan, this earthquake is known as the Great Hanshin earthquake (or the Hanshin-Awaji earthquake). To commemorate Kobe's recovery from it, the city holds an event every December called the Luminarie, where the city center is decorated with illuminated metal archways.\nThe Port of Kobe was Japan's busiest port and one of Asia's top ports until the Great Hanshin earthquake. Kobe later dropped to fourth in Japan and, as of 2025, was the 72nd-busiest container port worldwide, as ranked by Lloyds.\nGeography.\nWedged between the coast and the mountains, the city of Kobe is long and narrow. To the east is the city of Ashiya, while the city of Akashi lies to its west. Other adjacent cities include Takarazuka and Nishinomiya to the east and Sanda and Miki to the north.\nThe landmark of the port area is the red steel Port Tower. A ferris wheel sits in nearby Harborland, a notable tourist promenade. Two artificial islands, Port Island and Rokk\u014d Island, have been constructed to give the city room to expand.\nAway from the seaside at the heart of Kobe lie the Motomachi and Sannomiya districts, as well as Kobe's Chinatown, Nankin-machi, all well-known retail areas. A multitude of train lines cross the city from east to west. The main transport hub is Sannomiya Station, with the eponymous Kobe Station located to the west and the Shinkansen Shin-Kobe Station to the north.\nMount Rokk\u014d overlooks Kobe at an elevation of . During autumn, it is famous for the rich change in colors of its forests.\nWards.\nKobe has nine wards (\"ku\"):\nClimate.\nKobe has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\") with hot summers and cool to cold winters. Precipitation is significantly higher in summer than in winter, though on the whole lower than most parts of Honsh\u016b, and there is no significant snowfall. The average annual temperature in Kobe is . The average annual rainfall is with July as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in August, at around , and lowest in January, at around . The highest temperature ever recorded in Kobe was on August 5, 1994; the coldest temperature ever recorded was on February 27, 1981.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of September 2007, Kobe had an estimated population of 1,530,295 making up 658,876 households. This was an increase of 1,347 persons or approximately 0.1% over the previous year. The population density was approximately 2,768 persons per square kilometre, while there are about 90.2 males to every 100 females. About thirteen percent of the population are between the ages of 0 and 14, sixty-seven percent are between 15 and 64, and twenty percent are over the age of 65.\nApproximately 44,000 registered foreign nationals live in Kobe. The four most common nationalities are Korean (22,237), Chinese (12,516), Vietnamese (1,301), and American (1,280).\nEconomy.\nThe Port of Kobe is both an important port and manufacturing center within the Hanshin Industrial Region. Kobe is the busiest container port in the region, surpassing even Osaka, and the fourth-busiest in Japan.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], the city's total real GDP was \u00a56.3 trillion, which amounts to thirty-four percent of the GDP for Hy\u014dgo Prefecture and approximately eight percent for the whole Kansai region. Per capita income for the year was approximately \u00a52.7 million. Broken down by sector, about one percent of those employed work in the primary sector (agriculture, fishing and mining), twenty-one percent work in the secondary sector (manufacturing and industry), and seventy-eight percent work in the service sector.\nThe value of manufactured goods produced and exported from Kobe for 2004 was \u00a52.5 trillion. The four largest sectors in terms of value of goods produced are small appliances, food products, transportation equipment, and communication equipment making up over fifty percent of Kobe's manufactured goods. In terms of numbers of employees, food products, small appliances, and transportation equipment make up the three largest sectors.\nThe GDP in Kobe Metropolitan Employment Area (2.4 million people) is US$96.0 billion in 2010.\nMajor companies and institutes.\nJapanese companies which have their headquarters in Kobe include ASICS, a shoe manufacturer; Daiei, a department store chain; Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Kawasaki Shipbuilding Co., Kinki Sharyo, Mitsubishi Motors, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (ship manufacturer), Mitsubishi Electric, Kobe Steel, Sumitomo Rubber Industries, Sysmex Corporation (medical devices manufacturer) and TOA Corporation. Other companies include the confectionery manufacturers Konigs-Krone and Morozoff Ltd., Sun Television Japan and UCC Ueshima Coffee Co.\nThere are over 100 international corporations that have their East Asian or Japanese headquarters in Kobe. Of these, twenty-four are from China, eighteen from the United States, and nine from Switzerland. Some prominent corporations include Eli Lilly and Company, Nestl\u00e9, Procter &amp; Gamble, Tempur-Pedic, Boehringer-Ingelheim, and Toys \"R\" Us. In 2018, April, Swift Engineering USA, an American aerospace engineering firm established their joint venture in Kobe called Swift Xi Inc.\nKobe is the site of a number of research institutes, such as the RIKEN Kobe Institute Center for developmental biology and medical imaging techniques, and Center for Computational Science (R-CCS, home of the Fugaku supercomputer), the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT) Advanced ICT Research Institute, the National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention, and the Asian Disaster Reduction Center.\nInternational organizations include the WHO Centre for Health Development, an intergovernmental agency forming part of the World Health Organization. The Consulate-General of Panama in Kobe is located on the eighth floor of the Moriyama Building in Ch\u016b\u014d-ku, Kobe.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nItami Airport, in nearby Itami, serves primarily domestic flights throughout Japan, Kobe Airport, built on a reclaimed island south of Port Island, also offers mostly domestic and charter flights, while Kansai International Airport in Osaka mainly serves international flights in the area.\nRail.\nThe JR West Sany\u014d Shinkansen stops at Shin-Kobe Station. Sannomiya Station is the main commuter hub in Kobe, serving as the transfer point for major intercity rail services: the JR Kobe Line connects Kobe to Osaka and Himeji, while both the Hanky\u016b Kobe Line and the Hanshin Main Line run from Kobe to Umeda Station in Osaka. Sany\u014d Electric Railway trains from Himeji reach Sannomiya via the K\u014dbe Rapid Transit Railway. K\u014dbe Electric Railway runs north to Sanda and Arima Onsen. \nKobe Municipal Subway provides connections to Shin-Kobe and Sannomiya stations from Kobe's western and eastern suburbs. Additionally, Kobe New Transit runs two lines serving Kobe Airport and Rokko Island.\nRopeway.\nOver Mount Rokk\u014d, the city has two funicular lines and three aerial lifts as well, namely Maya Cablecar, Rokk\u014d Cable Line, Rokk\u014d Arima Ropeway, Maya Ropeway, and Shin-Kobe Ropeway.\nRoad.\nKobe is a transportation hub for a number of expressways, including the Meishin Expressway (Nagoya \u2013 Kobe) and the Hanshin Expressway (Osaka \u2013 Kobe). Other expressways include the Sany\u014d Expressway (Kobe \u2013 Yamaguchi) and the Ch\u016bgoku Expressway (Osaka \u2013 Yamaguchi).\nThe Kobe-Awaji-Naruto Expressway runs from Kobe to Naruto via Awaji Island and includes the Akashi Kaiky\u014d Bridge, the second longest suspension bridge in the world.\nMaritime.\nThe Port of Kobe is one of Japan's busiest container ports and also offers ferry services to Kansai International Airport, Shikoku and Kyushu. Sub Area Activity Hanshin of the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Forces provides monitoring across Osaka Bay and Harima Sea.\nEducation.\nThe city of Kobe directly administers 169 elementary and 81 middle schools, with enrollments of approximately 80,200 and 36,000 students, respectively. If the city's four private elementary schools and fourteen private middle schools are included, these figures jump to a total 82,000 elementary school students and 42,300 junior high students enrolled for the 2006 school year.\nKobe also directly controls six of the city's twenty-five full-time public high schools including Fukiai High School and Rokk\u014d Island High School. The remainder are administered by the Hyogo Prefectural Board of Education. In addition, twenty-five high schools are run privately within the city. The total enrollment for high schools in 2006 was 43,400.\nKobe is home to eighteen public and private universities, including Kobe University, Kobe Institute of Computing and Konan University, and eight junior colleges. Students enrolled for 2006 reached 67,000 and 4,100, respectively. Kobe is also home to 17 Japanese language schools for international students, including the international training group Lexis Japan.\nInternational schools serve both long-term foreign residents and expatriates living in Kobe and the Kansai region. The schools offer instruction in English, German, Chinese, and Korean. There are three English-language international schools: Canadian Academy, Marist Brothers International School, and St. Michael's International School.\nCulture.\nKobe is most famous for its Kobe beef (which is raised in the surrounding Hy\u014dgo Prefecture) and Arima Onsen (hot springs). Notable buildings include the Ikuta Shrine as well as the Kobe Port Tower. Nearby mountains such as Mount Rokk\u014d and Mount Maya overlook the city. The city is recognized as a \"Design City\" by UNESCO.\nThe city is widely associated with cosmopolitanism and fashion, encapsulated in the Japanese saying, \"If you can't go to Paris, go to Kobe.\" The biannual fashion event Kobe Fashion Week, featuring the Kobe Collection, is held in Kobe. The jazz festival \"Kobe Jazz Street\" has been held every October at jazz clubs and hotels since 1981. It also hosts both a Festival, as well as a statue of Elvis Presley, the unveiling of which was heralded by the presence of former Prime Minister of Japan Junichiro Koizumi. Kobe is well known in Japan as being a city for the affluent, as many high-end stores and mansions line its streets.\nKobe is the site of Japan's first golf course, Kobe Golf Club, established by Arthur Hesketh Groom in 1903, and Japan's first mosque, Kobe Mosque, built in 1935. The city hosts the Kobe Regatta &amp; Athletic Club, founded in 1870 by Alexander Cameron Sim, and a prominent foreign cemetery. A number of Western-style residences \u2013 \u2013 from the 19th century still stand in Kitano and elsewhere in Kobe. Museums include the Kobe City Museum and Museum of Literature.\nThe city headquarters the professional wrestling promotion Dragongate, established in 2004 as an offshoot of \u00daltimo Drag\u00f3n's original Toryumon system.\nThe dialect spoken in Kobe is called \"Kobe-ben\", a sub-dialect of Kansai dialect.\nSports.\nKobe hosted the 1985 Summer Universiade as well as the 1991 Men's Asian Basketball Championship, which was the qualifier for the 1992 Summer Olympics Basketball Tournament.\nKobe was one of the host cities of the 2002 FIFA World Cup, hosting matches at Noevir Stadium Kobe (then known as Wing Stadium Kobe), which was renovated to increase its capacity to 40,000 for the event. \nKobe was one of the host cities for the official 2006 Women's Volleyball World Championship.\nKobe also hosted the World Darts Federation World Cup in October 2017. The event was held in the Exhibition Hall in Port Island with over 50 countries competing.\nInternational relations.\nSister cities\nKobe's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendship and cooperation cities\nKobe also cooperates with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA memorandum of understanding on the possible establishment of sister city relations in the future was concluded in 2019 with Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India.\nSister ports\nThe Port of Kobe's sister ports are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59057", "revid": "15449111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59057", "title": "Honshu", "text": "Largest island of Japan\n, historically known as , is the largest of Japan's four main islands. It lies between the Pacific Ocean (east) and the Sea of Japan (west). It is the seventh-largest island in the world, and the second-most populous after the Indonesian island of Java.\nHonshu had a population of 104 million as of 2017[ [update]], constituting 81.3% of the entire population of Japan, and mostly concentrated in the coastal areas and plains. Approximately 30% of the total population resides in the Greater Tokyo Area on the Kant\u014d Plain. As the historical center of Japanese cultural and political power, the island includes several past Japanese capitals, including Kyoto, Nara, and Kamakura. Much of the island's southern shore forms part of the Taiheiy\u014d Belt, a megalopolis that spans several of the Japanese islands. Honshu also contains Japan's highest mountain, Mount Fuji, and its largest lake, Lake Biwa.\nMost of Japan's industry is located in a belt running along Honshu's southern coast, from Tokyo to Nagoya, Kyoto, Osaka, Kobe, and Hiroshima. The island is linked to the other three major Japanese islands by a number of bridges and tunnels. The island primarily shares two climates, with Northern Honshu having four seasons with largely varying temperatures while the south experiences long, hot summers and cool to mild winters.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the island, , stems from Middle Chinese. It directly translates to \"main province\" or \"home land\" in English.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nHumans first arrived in Honshu at least approximately 37,000 years ago. The first humans to arrive in Honshu were Stone Age hunter-gatherers from Northeast Asia, likely following the migration of ice age megafauna. Surviving artifacts from this period include finely crafted stone blades, similar to those found in Siberia.\nAfter the initial arrival of hunter-gatherers, the island saw the emergence of the J\u014dmon period (c. 14,000\u2013300 BCE), one of the earliest known eras of prehistoric Japanese culture. The J\u014dmon people were known for their distinctive cord-marked pottery and dog\u016b clay figurines, many of which have been excavated at archaeological sites across Honshu. These artifacts reflect a complex spiritual life and early forms of sedentary communities, particularly along the coasts and river valleys.\nMeiji Restoration.\nThe Meiji Restoration, in Japanese history, is the political revolution in 1868 that brought the final demise of the Tokugawa shogunate (which is a military government). It ended the Edo (Tokugawa) Period (1603\u20131867) and at least nominally returned control of the country to direct imperial rule under Mutsuhito (the Emperor Meiji). One of the main leaders of the restoration (who were mostly young samurai) was Ch\u014dsh\u016b in far western Honshu, which was one of the feudal areas, hostile to Tokugawa authority domains.\nGeography.\nThe island is roughly long and ranges from wide, and its total area is . It is slightly larger than Britain. Its land area has been increasing with land reclamation and coastal uplift in the north due to plate tectonics with a convergent boundary. Honshu has of coastline.\nMountainous and volcanic, Honshu experiences frequent earthquakes (such as the Great Kant\u014d earthquake, which heavily damaged Tokyo in September 1923; and the earthquake of March 2011, which moved the northeastern part of the island by varying amounts of as much as while causing devastating tsunamis). The highest peak is the active volcano Mount Fuji at , which makes Honshu the world's 7th highest island. There are many rivers, including the Shinano River, Japan's longest. The Japanese Alps span the width of Honshu, from the 'Sea of Japan' coast to the Pacific shore. Western Japan experiences a temperate climate with hot summers and cool to mild winters.\nIn addition to the general climate patterns, central Honshu, particularly the regions surrounding the Japanese Alps, experiences heavy snowfall in winter. Areas such as Niigata, Toyama, and Nagano prefectures are renowned for their snow accumulation, making them popular destinations for skiing and winter sports. These regions are among the snowiest inhabited places in the world, due to the humid air masses from the Sea of Japan colliding with the mountainous terrain.\nPopulation.\nHonshu has a total population of 104 million people, according to a 2017 estimate, 81.3% of the entire population of Japan. The largest city is Tokyo (population: 13,988,129), the capital of Japan and part of the Greater Tokyo Area, the most populous metropolitan area in the world.\nExtreme points.\nBridges and tunnels.\nHonshu is connected to the islands of Hokkaido, Kyushu and Shikoku by tunnels and bridges. Three bridge systems have been built across the islands of the Inland Sea between Honshu and Shikoku (Akashi Kaikyo Bridge and the \u014cnaruto Bridge; Shin-Onomichi Bridge, Innoshima Bridge, Ikuchi Bridge, Tatara Bridge, \u014cmishima Bridge, Hakata\u2013\u014cshima Bridge, and the Kurushima Kaiky\u014d Bridge; Shimotsui-Seto Bridge, Hitsuishijima Bridge, Iwakurojima Bridge, Yoshima Bridge, Kita Bisan-Seto Bridge, and the Minami Bisan-Seto Bridge), the Seikan Tunnel connects Honshu with Hokkaido, and the Kanmonkyo Bridge and Kanmon Tunnel connect Honshu with Kyushu.\nFlora and fauna.\nThese are notable flora and fauna of Honshu.\nGeologic activity.\nBeing on the Ring of Fire, the island of Honshu is seismically active, and is home to 40 active volcanoes.\nIn 2011, an earthquake of magnitude 9.0\u20139.1 occurred off the coast of Honshu, generating tsunami waves up to 40.5 meters (133 ft) high and killing 19,747. It was the most powerful earthquake ever recorded in Japan, and the fourth most powerful earthquake in the world since modern record-keeping began in 1900. The tsunami subsequently led to the meltdown of 3 nuclear reactors at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, leading to the Fukushima nuclear disaster.\nEconomy.\nHonshu island generates around US$3.5 trillion or more than 80% of Japan's GDP.\nAgriculture.\nFruit, vegetables, grains, rice and cotton make up the main produce grown in Honshu. The T\u014dhoku region, spanning the north-eastern part of the island, is notable for its rice production, with 65% of cultivated land being rice paddy fields \u2013 almost a quarter of all paddy fields in Japan. Chiba Prefecture is famous for its peanuts, also being the largest producer in Japan. Rare species of the lichen genus Menegazzia are found only in Honshu.\nIndustry.\nMost of Japan's tea and silk is from Honshu. Japan's three largest industrial regions are all located on Honshu: the Keihin region, the Hanshin Industrial Region, and the Ch\u016bky\u014d Industrial Area.\nMinerals and fuels.\nHonshu is home to a large portion of Japan's minimal mineral reserves, including small oil and coal deposits. Several coal deposits are located in the northern part of the island, concentrated in Fukushima Prefecture and Niigata Prefecture, though Honshu's coal production is negligible in comparison to Hokkaido and Kyushu. Most of Japan's oil reserves are also located in northern Honshu, along the west coast, spanning Niigata, Yamagata, and Akita Prefectures.\nMost of Japan's copper, lead, zinc and chromite is located on Honshu, along with smaller, scattered deposits of gold, silver, arsenic, sulfur and pyrite.\nTransportation.\nThe Tokaido Shinkansen, opened in 1964 between Tokyo and Shin-\u014csaka, is Japan's first high-speed rail line. It is the world's oldest high-speed rail line and one of the most heavily used. The San'y\u014d Shinkansen connects stations in the two largest cities in western Japan, Shin-Osaka in Osaka with Hakata Station in Fukuoka. Both the Tokaido Shinkansen and the Sanyo Shinkansen help form a continuous high-speed railway through the Taiheiy\u014d Belt megalopolis.\nThe island is served by Japan's 4 major airports which are:\nAdministrative regions and prefectures.\nThe island is divided into five nominal regions and contains 34 prefectures, including metropolitan Tokyo. Administratively, some smaller islands are included within these prefectures, notably including the Ogasawara Islands, Sado Island, Izu \u014cshima, and Awaji Island.\nThe regions and their prefectures are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59058", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59058", "title": "Philologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "59062", "revid": "50514431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59062", "title": "Hiroshima", "text": "City in Ch\u016bgoku, Japan\n is the capital of Hiroshima Prefecture in Japan. As of \u00a01, 2019[ [update]], the city had an estimated population of 1,199,391. The gross domestic product (GDP) in Greater Hiroshima, Hiroshima Urban Employment Area, was US$61.3 billion as of 2010. Kazumi Matsui has been the city's mayor since April 2011. The Hiroshima metropolitan area is the second largest urban area in the Chugoku Region of Japan, following the Okayama metropolitan area.\nHiroshima was founded in 1589 as a castle town on the \u014cta River delta. Following the Meiji Restoration in 1868, Hiroshima rapidly transformed into a major urban center and industrial hub. In 1889, Hiroshima officially gained city status. The city was a center of military activities during the imperial era, playing significant roles such as in the First Sino-Japanese War, the Russo-Japanese War, and the two world wars.\nHiroshima was the first military target of a nuclear weapon in history. This occurred on August 6, 1945, in the Pacific theatre of World War II, at 8:15\u00a0a.m., when the United States Army Air Forces dropped the atomic bomb \"Little Boy\" on the city. Most of Hiroshima was destroyed, and by the end of the year between 90,000 and 166,000 had died as a result of the blast and its effects. The Hiroshima Peace Memorial (a UNESCO World Heritage Site) serves as a memorial of the bombing.\nSince being rebuilt after the war, Hiroshima has become the largest city in the Ch\u016bgoku region of western Honshu.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe region where Hiroshima stands today was originally a small fishing village along the shores of Hiroshima Bay. From the 12th century, the village was rather prosperous and was economically attached to a Zen Buddhist temple called \"Mitaki-Ji\". This new prosperity was partly caused by the increase of trade with the rest of Japan under the auspices of the Taira clan.\nSengoku and Edo periods (1589\u20131871).\nHiroshima was established on the delta coastline of the Seto Inland Sea in 1589 by powerful warlord M\u014dri Terumoto. Hiroshima Castle was quickly built, and in 1593 M\u014dri moved in. The name Hiroshima means wide island in Japanese. Terumoto was on the losing side at the Battle of Sekigahara. The winner of the battle, Tokugawa Ieyasu, deprived M\u014dri Terumoto of most of his fiefs, including Hiroshima and gave Aki Province to Masanori Fukushima, a \"daimy\u014d\" (Feudal Lord) who had supported Tokugawa. From 1619 until 1871, Hiroshima was ruled by the Asano clan.\nMeiji and Showa periods (1871\u20131939).\nAfter the Han was abolished in 1871, the city became the capital of Hiroshima Prefecture. Hiroshima became a major urban center during the imperial period, as the Japanese economy shifted from primarily rural to urban industries. During the 1870s, one of the seven government-sponsored English language schools was established in Hiroshima. Ujina Harbor was constructed through the efforts of Hiroshima Governor Sadaaki Senda in the 1880s, allowing Hiroshima to become an important port city.\nThe San'y\u014d Railway was extended to Hiroshima in 1894, and a rail line from the main station to the harbor was constructed for military transportation during the First Sino-Japanese War. During that war, the Japanese government moved temporarily to Hiroshima, and Emperor Meiji maintained his headquarters at Hiroshima Castle from September 15, 1894, to April 27, 1895. The significance of Hiroshima for the Japanese government can be discerned from the fact that the first round of talks between Chinese and Japanese representatives to end the Sino-Japanese War was held in Hiroshima, from February 1 to 4, 1895. New industrial plants, including cotton mills, were established in Hiroshima in the late 19th century. Further industrialization in Hiroshima was stimulated during the Russo-Japanese War in 1904, which required development and production of military supplies. The Hiroshima Prefectural Commercial Exhibition Hall was constructed in 1915 as a center for trade and the exhibition of new products. Later, its name was changed to Hiroshima Prefectural Product Exhibition Hall, and again to Hiroshima Prefectural Industrial Promotion Hall. The building, now known as the A-Bomb Dome, part of the Hiroshima Peace Memorial, a World Heritage Site since 1996, permanently remains the only structure still standing and is a state of preserved ruin.\nDuring World War I, Hiroshima became a focal point of military activity, as the Japanese government joined the Allies at war. About 500 German POWs were held in Ninoshima Island in Hiroshima Bay. The growth of Hiroshima as a city continued after the First World War, as the city now attracted the attention of the Catholic Church, and on May 4, 1923, an Apostolic Vicar was appointed for that city.\nWorld War II and the atomic bombing (1939\u20131945).\nDuring World War II, the Second General Army and Ch\u016bgoku Regional Army was headquartered in Hiroshima, and the Army Marine Headquarters was located at Ujina port. The city also had large depots of military supplies, and was a key center for shipping.\nThe bombing of Tokyo and other cities in Japan during World War II caused widespread destruction and hundreds of thousands of civilian deaths. There were no such air raids on Hiroshima. However, a real threat existed and was recognized. To protect against potential firebombings in Hiroshima, school children aged 11\u201314 years were mobilized to demolish houses and create firebreaks.\nOn Monday, August 6, 1945, at 8:15\u00a0a.m. (Hiroshima time), the American Boeing B-29 Superfortress, the \"Enola Gay\", flown by Paul Tibbets (23 February 1915 \u2013 1 November 2007), dropped the nuclear weapon \"Little Boy\" on Hiroshima, directly killing at least 70,000 people, including thousands of Korean slave laborers. Fewer than 10% of the casualties were military. By the end of the year, injury and radiation brought the total number of deaths to 90,000\u2013140,000. The population before the bombing was around 345,000. About 70% of the city's buildings were destroyed, and another 7% severely damaged.\nThe public release of film footage of the city following the attack, and some of the Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission research on the human effects of the attack, were restricted during the occupation of Japan, and much of this information was censored until the signing of the Treaty of San Francisco in 1951, restoring control to the Japanese.\nAs Ian Buruma observed: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;News of the amazing explosion of the atom bomb attacks on Japan was deliberately withheld from the Japanese public by US military censors during the Allied occupation\u2014even as they sought to teach the natives the virtues of a free press. Casualty statistics were suppressed. Film shot by Japanese cameramen in Hiroshima and Nagasaki after the bombings was confiscated. \"Hiroshima\", the account written by John Hersey for \"The New Yorker\", had a huge impact in the US, but was banned in Japan. As [John] Dower says: \"In the localities themselves, suffering was compounded not merely by the unprecedented nature of the catastrophe\u00a0... but also by the fact that public struggle with this traumatic experience was not permitted.\"\nThe book \"Hiroshima\" by John Hersey was originally published in article form in the magazine \"The New Yorker\", on August 31, 1946. It is reported to have reached Tokyo, in English, at least by January 1947 and the translated version was released in Japan in 1949. Although the article was planned to be published over four issues, \"Hiroshima\" made up the entire contents of one issue of the magazine. \"Hiroshima\" narrates the stories of six bomb survivors immediately before and four months after the dropping of the Little Boy bomb.\nOleander (\"Nerium\") is the official flower of the city of Hiroshima because it was the first to bloom again after the explosion of the atomic bomb in 1945.\nPostwar period (1945\u2013present).\nOn September 17, 1945, Hiroshima was struck by the Makurazaki Typhoon (Typhoon Ida). Hiroshima Prefecture suffered more than 3,000 deaths and injuries, about half the national total. More than half the bridges in the city were destroyed, along with heavy damage to roads and railroads, further devastating the city.\nFrom 1945 to 1952, Hiroshima came under occupation from the British Empire.\nHiroshima was rebuilt after the war, with help from the national government through the Hiroshima Peace Memorial City Construction Law passed in 1949. It provided financial assistance for reconstruction, along with land donated that was previously owned by the national government and used by the Imperial military.\nIn 1949, a design was selected for the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park. Hiroshima Prefectural Industrial Promotion Hall, the closest surviving building to the location of the bomb's detonation, was designated the Genbaku Dome (\u539f\u7206\u30c9\u30fc\u30e0) or \"Atomic Dome\", a part of the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park. The Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum was opened in 1955 in the Peace Park. The historic castle of Hiroshima was rebuilt in 1958.\nHiroshima also contains a Peace Pagoda, built in 1966 by Nipponzan-My\u014dh\u014dji. Uniquely, the pagoda is made of steel, rather than the usual stone.\nHiroshima was proclaimed a City of Peace by the Japanese parliament in 1949, at the initiative of its mayor, Shinzo Hamai (1905\u20131968). As a result, the city of Hiroshima received more international attention as a desirable location for holding international conferences on peace as well as social issues. As part of that effort, the Hiroshima Interpreters' and Guide's Association (HIGA) was established in 1992 to facilitate interpretation for conferences, and the Hiroshima Peace Institute was established in 1998 within the Hiroshima University. The city government continues to advocate the abolition of all nuclear weapons and the Mayor of Hiroshima is the president of Mayors for Peace, an international Mayoral organization mobilizing cities and citizens worldwide to abolish and eliminate nuclear weapons by 2020.\nOn May 27, 2016, Barack Obama became the first sitting United States president to visit Hiroshima since the atomic bombing. The 49th annual G7 summit was held in Hiroshima in May 2023.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nHiroshima has a humid subtropical climate characterized by cool to mild winters and hot, humid summers. Like much of Japan, Hiroshima experiences a seasonal temperature lag in summer, with August rather than July being the warmest month of the year. Precipitation occurs year-round, although winter is the driest season. Rainfall peaks in June and July, with August experiencing sunnier and drier conditions.\nWards.\nHiroshima has eight wards (\"ku\"):\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 2017, the city had an estimated population of 1,195,327. The total area of the city is , with a population density of 1321 persons per km2. As of 2023, the city has a population of 1,183,696.\nThe population around 1910 was 143,000. Before World War II, Hiroshima's population had grown to 360,000, and peaked at 419,182 in 1942. Following the atomic bombing in 1945, the population dropped to 137,197. By 1955, the city's population had returned to pre-war levels.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nHiroshima has six sister cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWithin Japan, Hiroshima has a similar relationship with Nagasaki.\nMedia.\nThe \"Ch\u016bgoku Shimbun\" is the local newspaper serving Hiroshima. It publishes both morning and evening editions. Television stations include Hiroshima Home Television, Hiroshima Telecasting, Shinhiroshima Telecasting, and the RCC Broadcasting. Radio stations include Hiroshima FM, Chugoku Communication Network, FM Fukuyama, FM Nanami, and Onomichi FM. Hiroshima is also served by NHK, Japan's public broadcaster, with television and radio broadcasting.\nEducation.\nUniversity.\nHiroshima University was established in 1949, as part of a national restructuring of the education system. One national university was set up in each prefecture, including Hiroshima University, which combined eight existing institutions (Hiroshima University of Literature and Science, Hiroshima School of Secondary Education, Hiroshima School of Education, Hiroshima Women's School of Secondary Education, Hiroshima School of Education for Youth, Hiroshima Higher School, Hiroshima Higher Technical School, and Hiroshima Municipal Higher Technical School), with the Hiroshima Prefectural Medical College added in 1953. In 1972, Hiroshima University moved from Hiroshima City to a larger campus in Higashihiroshima City. By 1995, almost all campuses were relocated to Higashihiroshima. The schools of medicine, dentistry, pharmaceutical sciences, and the graduate schools in these fields on the Kasumi Campus and the law school and Center for Research on Regional Economic System on the Higashi-Senda Campus are still in Hiroshima City.\nNotable art institutions include the Elisabeth University of Music and Actor's School Hiroshima.\nTransportation.\nAirways.\nAirport.\nHiroshima is served by Hiroshima Airport (), located east of the city, with regular flights to Tokyo, Sapporo, Sendai, Okinawa, and also to China, Taiwan and South Korea.\nThe other nearest airport is Iwakuni Kintaikyo Airport, located south-west of Hiroshima, re-instated commercial flights on December 13, 2012.\nRailways.\nTrains.\nHiroshima Rapid Transit\nSkyrail Service\nTramways.\nHiroshima is notable, in Japan, for its light rail system, nicknamed \"Hiroden\", and the \"Moving Streetcar Museum\". Streetcar service started in 1912, was interrupted by the atomic bomb, and was restored as soon as was practical. (Service between Koi/Nishi Hiroshima and Tenma-cho was started up three days after the bombing.)\nStreetcars and light rail vehicles are still rolling down Hiroshima's streets, including streetcars 651 and 652, which survived the atomic blast and are among the older streetcars in the system. When Kyoto and Fukuoka discontinued their trolley systems, Hiroshima bought them up at discounted prices, and, by 2011, the city had 298 streetcars, more than any other city in Japan.\nRoads.\nJapan National Route.\nHiroshima is served by Japan National Route 2, Japan National Route 54, Japan National Route 183, Japan National Route 261, Japan National Route 433, Japan National Route 487, Japan National Route 488.\nPrefectural Route.\nHiroshima Prefectural Route 37 (Hiroshima-Miyoshi Route), Hiroshima Prefectural Route 70 (Hiroshima-Nakashima Route), Hiroshima Prefectural Route 84 (Higashi Kaita Hiroshima Route), Hiroshima Prefectural Route 164 (Hiroshima-Kaita Route), and Hiroshima Prefectural Route 264 (Nakayama-Onaga Route).\nCulture.\nHiroshima has a professional symphony orchestra, which has performed at Wel City Hiroshima since 1963. There are also many museums in Hiroshima, including the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum, along with several art museums. The Hiroshima Museum of Art, which has a large collection of French renaissance art, opened in 1978. The Hiroshima Prefectural Art Museum opened in 1968 and is located near Shukkei-en gardens. The Hiroshima City Museum of Contemporary Art, which opened in 1989, is located near Hijiyama Park. \nFestivals include Hiroshima Flower Festival and Hiroshima International Film Festival. The Hiroshima International Animation Festival was held biennially from 1985 until 2020.\nHiroshima Peace Memorial Park, which includes the Hiroshima Peace Memorial, draws many visitors from around the world, especially for the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Ceremony, an annual commemoration held on the date of the atomic bombing. The park also contains a large collection of monuments, including the Children's Peace Monument, the Hiroshima National Peace Memorial Hall for the Atomic Bomb Victims and many others.\nHiroshima's rebuilt castle (nicknamed \"Rij\u014d\", meaning \"Koi Castle\") houses a museum of life in the Edo period. Hiroshima Gokoku Shrine is within the walls of the castle. Other attractions in Hiroshima include Shukkei-en, Fud\u014din, Mitaki-dera, Hiroshima T\u014dsh\u014d-g\u016b, and Hijiyama Park.\nCuisine.\nHiroshima is known for okonomiyaki, a savory (umami) pancake cooked on an iron plate, usually in front of the customer. It is cooked with various ingredients, which are layered rather than mixed as done with the Osaka version of okonomiyaki. The layers are typically egg, cabbage, bean sprouts (moyashi), sliced pork/bacon with optional items (mayonnaise, fried squid, octopus, cheese, mochi, kimchi, etc.), and noodles (soba, udon) topped with another layer of egg and a generous dollop of okonomiyaki sauce (Carp and Otafuku are two popular brands). The amount of cabbage used is usually 3 to 4 times the amount used in the Osaka style. It starts piled very high and is generally pushed down as the cabbage cooks. The order of the layers may vary slightly depending on the chef's style and preference, and ingredients will vary depending on the preference of the customer.\nSports.\nHiroshima has several professional sports clubs.\nFootball.\nThe city's main association football club is Sanfrecce Hiroshima, who play at the Edion Peace Wing Hiroshima. As Toyo Kogyo Soccer Club, they won the Japan Soccer League five times between 1965 and 1970 and the Emperor's Cup in 1965, 1967 and 1969. After adopting their current name in 1992, the club won the J.League in 2012, 2013 and 2015. \nThe city's main women's football club is Angeviolet Hiroshima. Defunct clubs include Rijo Shukyu FC, who won the Emperor's Cup in 1924 and 1925, and \u1ebcfini Hiroshima SC.\nBaseball.\nHiroshima Toyo Carp are the city's major baseball club, and play at the Mazda Zoom-Zoom Stadium Hiroshima. Members of the Central League, the club won the Central League in 1975, 1979, 1980, 1984, 1986, 1991, 2016, 2017 and 2018, the club won the Japan Series in 1979, 1980 and 1984.\nBasketball.\nHiroshima Dragonflies (basketball).\nHandball.\nHiroshima Maple Reds (handball).\nVolleyball.\nJT Thunders (volleyball).\nOther sports.\nThe Woodone Open Hiroshima was part of the Japan Golf Tour between 1973 and 2007. The city also hosted the 1994 Asian Games, using the Big Arch stadium, which is now used for the annual Mikio Oda Memorial International Amateur Athletic Game. The now-called Hiroshima Prefectural Sports Center was one of the host arenas of the 2006 FIBA World Championship (basketball).\nTourism.\nThe Japanese city and the Prefecture of Hiroshima may have been devastated by the atomic bomb , but today, this site of the destruction is one of the top tourist destinations in the entire country. Statistics released by the nation's tourist agency revealed that around 363,000 visitors went to the metropolis during 2012, with Americans making up the vast majority of that figure, followed by Australians and Chinese. In 2016, some 1.18 million foreigners visited Hiroshima, a 3.2-fold jump from about 360,000 in 2012. Americans were the largest group, accounting for 16%, followed by Australians at 15%, Italians at 8% and Britons at 6%. The numbers of Chinese and South Korean visitors were small, representing only 1% and 0.2% of the total.\nPlaces of interest.\nThere are many popular tourist destinations near Hiroshima. A popular destination outside the city is Itsukushima Island, also known as Miyajima, which is a sacred island with many temples and shrines. But inside Hiroshima there are many popular destinations as well, and according to online guidebooks, these are the most popular tourist destinations in Hiroshima:\nOther popular places in the city include the Hond\u014dri shopping arcade.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59064", "revid": "50673617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59064", "title": "Akita (dog breed)", "text": "The is a Japanese dog breed of large size. Originating from the mountains of northern Japan, the Akita has a short double coat similar to that of many other northern spitz breeds. The breed traces its roots to the Matagi Inu, a \"ch\u016bgata ken\" (medium-sized dog) historically used by the Matagi\u2014traditional hunters of the T\u014dhoku region\u2014for tracking and subduing large game such as \"tsukinowaguma\" (Japanese black bear), \"inoshishi\" (wild boar) and \"kamoshika\" (Japanese serow) in snow-covered mountain terrain.\nThe Akita is a powerful, dominant, and loyal breed, commonly aloof with strangers, but affectionate and deeply loyal to its family. As a breed, Akitas are generally hardy. However, it is subject to debate as to whether the Akita strains are distinct, or if they constitute one breed.\nBreed name.\nOutside of Japan, debate exists among fanciers whether these are two separate breeds of Akitas. As of 2020, the American Kennel Club now considers American and Japanese Akitas to be two separate breeds, no longer allowing free breeding between the two. The United Kennel Club, the Federation Cynologique Internationale (FCI), The Kennel Club, the Australian National Kennel Council, the New Zealand Kennel Club, and the Japan Kennel Club consider Japanese and American Akitas as separate breeds. Some countries refer to the American Akita as simply the Akita and not the American Akita. The issue is especially controversial in Japan. For the FCI's 84 countries, the breed split formally occurred in June 1999, when the FCI decided that the American type would be called the Great Japanese Dog, later renamed the American Akita in January 2006.\nHistory.\nJapanese history.\nThe direct ancestor of the Akita Inu was a dog kept as a guard dog and fighting dog by samurai and wealthy farmers in the \u014cdate area, and was known as the until 1931 when it was renamed the Akita Inu. Since ancient times, hunting dogs called were kept in the T\u014dhoku region of northern Japan. The word \"matagi\" means hunter. The main targets of hunting were Asian black bears, Japanese serows, Japanese macaques, and rabbits. In Akita Prefecture, there was also a matagi dog called the , which is a medium-sized dog and is distinguished from the Akita Inu. \nDuring the Edo period (1603\u20131867), the Akita region was ruled by the Satake clan of the Kubota Domain. The , the castle keeper of \u014cdate Castle, is said to have nurtured the fighting spirit of its vassals through dogfighting.\nIt is not known exactly how Akita Inu became larger, but according to a \"discussion on dogs by old people\" held in 1931 in the then \u014cdate Town, a famous dog named \"Moku\" was kept at the in \u014cdate, commonly known as , in the late Edo period (1603\u20131867). Moku was a dog born at the end of the Ansei era (1854\u20131860), lived through the fires of the Boshin War (1868\u20131869), and lived until 1871 or 1872. Moku was about 85\u00a0cm tall at the shoulder and was large enough to carry an adult on its back. Moku was a purely Japanese dog with erect ears and a curly tail, sesame (\"goma\") in color, and long hair. If this theory is to be believed, Akita Inu had become larger by the end of the Edo period at the latest.\nIn 1931, the Akita was officially declared a Japanese natural monument. The mayor of Odate City in Akita Prefecture organized the Akita Inu Hozonkai to preserve the original Akita as a Japanese natural treasure through careful breeding.\nIn 1933, Heishiro Takaku (Takahisa), one of the early members of Nippo in Tokyo and later of the Nipponinu Kyokai (Nikkyo) in Osaka and Katsuichi (Shoichi) each published articles on a proposed Japanese dog standard, which Included the Akita dog. Akita dogs revealed the most non-uniformity at that time, when compared to medium and small Japanese dogs, due to being outcrossed to the Tosa fighting dog, and other Imported foreign dogs. In 1934, the first Japanese breed standard for the Akita Inu was listed, following the breed's declaration as a natural monument of Japan.\nThe Akita breed was used during the Russo-Japanese War to track prisoners of war and lost sailors. During World War II, the Akita was considered a non-military breed and was crossed with German Shepherds in an attempt to save them from the wartime government order for all non-military dogs to be culled. Some were used as scouts and guards during the war.\nA native Japanese breed known as Matagi Inu (hunting dog) was used along with the Hokkaido Inu breed to mix back into the remaining Akita dogs to restore the breed. There were many lines of Akita, but the most influential were the Dewa and Ichinoseki. Both lines contributed to the foundation stock for both Akita types, and many exported dogs were a combination of these lines. According to one Japanese judge, the greatest difference between Japanese- and American-bred Akitas is that the latter still show much evidence of the Dewa strain. In the early 1900s, Dewa-line Akitas were heavily favoured and did well in show. Kongo-go (from the Heirakudo Kennel of Eikichi Hiraizumi) is considered to be the most influential dog of that line.\nHowever, the Dewa-line later went into a decline because Japanese breeders felt that the Akita did not give the impression of a Japanese dog, so began to breed towards an ideal type reminiscent of other Nihon-ken. The Dewa line was stereotyped as the \u201cGerman Shepherd\u201d type, while the Ichinoseki line was referred to as the \u201cMastiff\u201d type. Thus, the Ichinoseki-line rose in popularity. Goromaru-Go was regarded as the most influential Akita of that line who, although did not perform well in show, produced outstanding Akita dogs when bred to Taihei and Nikkei lines from Southern Akita.\nDuring the occupation years following the war, the breed began to thrive again through the efforts of Sawataishi and others. Morie Sawataishi and his efforts to breed the Akita is a major reason this breed exists today. For the first time, Akitas were bred for a standardized appearance. Akita fanciers in Japan began gathering and exhibiting the remaining Akitas and producing litters to restore the breed to sustainable numbers and to accentuate the ideal characteristics of the breed muddied by crosses to other breeds. It was not until the 1960\u20131970s where the foxier Japanese type started to diverge from the typical American type.\nThe story of Hachik\u014d helped push the Akita into the international dog world. Hachik\u014d was born in 1923 and owned by Professor Hidesabur\u014d Ueno of Tokyo. Professor Ueno lived near the Shibuya Train Station in a suburb of the city, and commuted to work every day on the train. Hachik\u014d accompanied his master to and from the station each day. On May 25, 1925, when the dog was 18 months old, he waited for his master's arrival on the four o'clock train, but Professor Ueno had suffered a fatal brain haemorrhage at work. Hachik\u014d continued to wait for his master's return. He travelled to and from the station each day for the next nine years. He allowed the professor's relatives to care for him, but he never gave up the vigil at the station for his master. His vigil became world-renowned when, in 1934, shortly before his death, a bronze statue was erected at the Shibuya train station in his honor. This statue was melted down for munitions during the war, but a new one was commissioned after the war. Each year on March 8 since 1936, Hachik\u014d's devotion has been honoured with a solemn ceremony of remembrance at Tokyo's Shibuya railroad station. Eventually, Hachik\u014d's legendary faithfulness became a national symbol of loyalty, particularly to the person and institution of the Emperor.\nIn 1967, commemorating the 50th anniversary of the founding of Akita Inu Hozonkai (AKIHO, Akita Dog Preservation Society), the Akita Dog Museum was built to house information, documents and photos. \nIn 1937, Helen Keller travelled to Japan. She expressed a keen interest in the breed and was presented with the first two Akitas to enter the US. The first dog, presented to her by Mr. Ogasawara and named Kamikaze-go, died at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20442 months of age from distemper, one month after her return to the States. A second Akita was arranged to be sent to Keller: Kamikaze's litter brother, Kenzan-go. Keller nicknamed the dog Go-Go and they were great companions from day one. Go-Go even spent his first night at Keller's home sleeping at the foot of her bed. Kenzan-go died in the mid-1940s. By 1939, a breed standard had been established and dog shows had been held, but such activities stopped after World War II began. Keller wrote in the \"Akita Journal\":\nAmerican history.\nThe Japanese Akita and American Akita began to diverge in type post-World War II due to America and Europe preserving the Akitas that fell out of favour in Japan, particularly the Dewa-types and dogs with the signature black mask or pinto marking. American Akitas are typically considered mixed by Japanese breeders (and not true Akitas by the Japanese standard). However, their phenotype predates the Japanese Akita by a few decades, and they are closer to pre-war Akitas like Hachiko.\nHelen Keller is credited with bringing the Akita to America after being given two Akitas by the Japanese government in 1938. By 1939, a breed standard was established, and dog shows began to be held, but this development was interrupted by World War II. During this time, US servicemen serving as part of the occupation force in Japan first came into contact with the Akita. The breed so impressed them that many service members chose to bring an Akita back home with them upon completion of their tour.\nAlthough both types derive from common ancestry, marked differences are seen between the two. American Akitas generally are heavier boned and larger, with a more bear-like head, whereas Japanese Akitas tend to be lighter and more finely featured with a fox-like head. Additionally, while American Akitas are acceptable in all colors, Japanese Akitas are only permitted to be red, white, or brindle. Additionally, American Akitas may be pinto and/or have black masks, unlike Japanese Akitas, where these are considered disqualifications and are not permitted in the breed standards.\nRecognized by the American Kennel Club in 1955, the Akita was placed in the Miscellaneous class. The AKC did not approve the Akita standard until 1972, and it was moved to the Working Dog class. As such, the Akita is a rather new breed in the United States. Foundation stock in America continued to be imported from Japan until 1974, when the AKC cut off registration to any further Japanese imports until 1992, when it recognized the Japan Kennel Club standards. This decision set the stage for the divergence in type between the American Akita and Japanese Akita Inu that is present today.\nElsewhere in the world, one American Akita was first introduced to the UK in 1937. He was a Canadian import, owned by a Mrs. Jenson; the descendants of Mrs. Jenson live on today breeding American Akitas. The most widely known of these is Joseph Felton, an award-winning Akita breeder, but the breed was not itself widely known until the early 1980s. The breed was introduced in Australia in 1982 with an American import and to New Zealand in 1986 with an import from the UK.\nGallery.\nAppearance.\nAs a spitz breed, the appearance of the Akita reflects cold-weather adaptations essential to their original function. The Akita is a substantial breed for its height with heavy bones. Characteristic physical traits of the breed include a large, bear-like head with erect, triangular ears set at a slight angle following the arch of the neck. Additionally, the eyes of the Akita are small, dark, deeply set, and triangular in shape. Akitas have thick double coats, and tight, well-knuckled, cat-like feet. Their tails are carried over the tops of their backs in a gentle or double curl down the loin.\nMature American-type males measure typically 26-28\u00a0in (66\u201371\u00a0cm) at the withers and weigh between 100 and 130\u00a0lb (45\u201359\u00a0kg). Mature females typically measure 24-26\u00a0in (61\u201366\u00a0cm) and weigh between 70 and 100\u00a0lb (32\u201345\u00a0kg). The Japanese type, as stated in the breed standards, is a little smaller and lighter.\nBreed standards state that all dog breed coat colors and patterns are allowable in the American Akita. This includes the common Shiba Inu coloring pattern known as \"urajiro\". The Japanese Akitas, as per the breed standards, are restricted to red, fawn, sesame, brindle, and pure white, all with \"urajiro\" markings - whitish coat on the sides of the muzzle, on the cheeks, on the underside of jaw, neck, chest, body, and tail, and on the inside of the legs.\nCoat types.\nThe two coat types in the Akita are the standard coat length and the long coat. The long coat is considered a fault in the show ring, however. The long coat, also known as \"moku\", is the result of an autosomal recessive gene and may occur phenotypically only if both sire and dam are carriers. They have longer (about 3-4\u00a0in long) and softer coats and are known to have sweeter temperaments. This gene is thought to come from the Karafuto Ken dog.\nTemperament.\nThe Akita is generally seen as territorial about its property, and can be reserved with strangers.\nThe breed has been defined in some countries' breed-specific legislation as a dangerous dog. The Akita is a large, strong, independent, and dominant dog. A well-trained Akita should be accepting of nonthreatening strangers, otherwise they treat all strangers in an aggressive manner.\nA survey on canine behaviour in five 'ancient' breeds in Poland found the Akita to be the most aggressive towards other dogs with 59% of Akitas being reported to display aggression towards other dogs and animals. They were the second most likely to be aggressive towards humans with 13% of Akitas being reported to display aggression towards humans. Stereotypic behaviour was reported in 27% of Akitas, ranking it second out of the five breeds surveyed. Excessive vocalisation was only reported at 17% for the Akita, lower than the other breeds. Less than 10% of Akitas were reported to have separation anxiety, the lowest amount. 70% of all human directed aggression involved a visitor on the Akita's territory, highlighting the defensive nature of the breed.\nA Japanese study found that the CAG repeat polymorphism in the AR gene in the Akita Inu was correlated with increased reports of aggression in male Akita dogs, but not females.\nHealth.\nAutoimmune diseases.\nMany autoimmune diseases are known to occur in the Akita, including:\nImmune-mediated endocrine diseases.\nIn addition to these, some immune-mediated endocrine diseases with a heritable factor can occur, such as:\nNonimmune-specific conditions.\nOther nonimmune-specific conditions known to have occurred in the Akita include:\nBreed-specific conditions.\nThese breed-specific conditions are mentioned in veterinary literature:\nLife expectancy.\nA UK study found a life expectancy of 11.4 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nWorking life.\nPredecessors of the modern Akita were used for hunting bear, wild boar, and deer in Japan as late as 1957. They would be used to flush out the boar and keep it at bay until the hunter could come and kill it. Today, the breed is used primarily as a companion dog, but is currently also known to be used as therapy dogs, and compete in all dog competitions, including conformation showing, obedience trials, canine good-citizen program, tracking trials, and agility competition, as well as weight pulling, hunting, and \"Schutzhunde\" (personal protection dogs).\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59068", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59068", "title": "Ascension of Jesus", "text": "Biblical episode\nThe Ascension of Jesus (anglicized from the Vulgate ) is the Christian and Islamic belief that Jesus ascended to Heaven. Christian doctrine, as reflected in the major Christian creeds and confessional statements, holds that Jesus ascended after his resurrection, where he was exalted as Lord and Christ, sitting at the right hand of God. Islamic doctrine holds that Jesus directly ascended to heaven without dying or resurrecting.\nThe Gospels and other New Testament writings imply resurrection and exaltation as a single event. The ascension is \"more assumed than described\", and only Luke and Acts contain direct accounts of it, but with different chronologies.\nIn Christian art, the ascending Jesus is often shown blessing an earthly group below him, signifying the entire Church. The Feast of the Ascension is celebrated on the 40th day of Easter, always a Thursday; some Orthodox traditions have a different calendar up to a month later than in the Western tradition. The Lutheran Churches and the Anglican Communion continue to observe the Feast of the Ascension. Certain Nonconformist churches, such as the Plymouth Brethren, do not observe the feast.\nBiblical accounts.\nAlthough the ascension is an important article of faith in Christianity, only Luke and Acts contain direct accounts of it. In the shorter ending of Mark, in Matthew, and in John, it is only implied or alluded to. The Gospels do not picture resurrection and ascension as clearly separated in time. Other New Testament writings also imply resurrection and exaltation as a single event.\nVarious epistles (, , , , , and ) refer to an ascension without specifying details, seeming, like Luke\u2013Acts and John, to equate it with the post-resurrection \"exaltation\" of Jesus to the right hand of God.\nThe ascension is detailed in both Luke and Acts, a pair of works ascribed to the same author, Luke the Evangelist: \nLuke and Acts appear to describe the same event but present quite different chronologies, the gospel placing it on the same day as the resurrection and Acts forty days afterwards; various proposals have been put forward to resolve the contradiction, but none have been found satisfactory. According to Dunn, the author of Acts separated the resurrection and ascension to put a limit on the number of resurrection appearances, effectively excluding Paul's conversion experience from the \"bona fide\" resurrection appearances. Zwiep argues that Jesus was originally believed to have been exalted with his ascension to heaven and seated at the right hand of God with his resurrection until the late first century where he argues the exaltation had been separated from the resurrection, and moved to a final ascension into heaven after his appearances on earth. Other scholars note that the biblical authors tended to conflate or compress different events and narrate them as one which was a literary theme seen in other ancient biographies to improve the narrative flow. Such scholars caution against a strictly chronological reading.\nJohn's Gospel has three references to ascension in Jesus' own words: \"No one has ascended into heaven but he who descended from heaven, the Son of Man\" (); \"What if you [the disciples] were to see the Son of Man ascending where he was before?\" (); and to Mary Magdalene after his resurrection, \"Do not hold me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father...\" (). In the first and second Jesus is claiming to be the apocalyptic \"one like a Son of Man\" of Daniel 7; the last has mystified commentators \u2013 why should Mary be prohibited from touching the risen but not yet ascended Christ, while Thomas is later invited to do so? \nThe longer ending of Mark describes an ascension, but is a later addition to the original version of that gospel.\nViews on the Ascension.\nBackground.\nAscension stories were fairly common around the time of Jesus and the evangelists, signifying the deification of a noteworthy person (usually a Roman Emperor), and in Judaism as an indication of divine approval. Another function of heavenly ascent was as a mode of divine revelation reflected in Greco-Roman, early Jewish, and early Christian literary sources, in which particular individuals with prophetic or revelatory gifts are said to have experienced a heavenly journey during which they learned cosmic and divine secrets. \nFigures familiar to Jews would have included Enoch (from the Book of Genesis and a popular non-Biblical work called 1 Enoch); the 5th-century sage Ezra; Baruch the companion of the prophet Jeremiah (from a work called 2 Baruch, in which Baruch is promised he will ascend to heaven after forty days); Levi the ancestor of priests; the Teacher of Righteousness from the Qumran community; the prophet Elijah (from 2 Kings); Moses, who was deified on entering heaven; and the children of Job, who according to the Testament of Job ascended heaven following their resurrection from the dead. \nNon-Jewish readers would have been familiar with the case of the emperor Augustus, whose ascent was witnessed by Senators; Romulus the founder of Rome, who, like Jesus, was taken to heaven in a cloud; the Greek hero Heracles (Hercules); and others.\nChristian theology.\nIn Christian theology, the death, resurrection, and exaltation of Jesus are the most important events, and a foundation of the Christian faith. The early followers of Jesus believed that God had vindicated Jesus after his death, as reflected in the stories about his resurrection, ascension, and exaltation. The early followers of Jesus soon believed that Jesus was raised as first of the dead, taken into Heaven, and exalted, taking the seat at the right hand of God in Heaven, as stated in the Apostles' Creed: \"He ascended into heaven, and is seated at the right hand of God the Father almighty.\" Psalm 110 () played an essential role in this interpretation of Jesus' death and the resurrection appearances: \"The Lord said to my Lord, \"Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies your footstool.\" It provided an interpretative frame for Jesus' followers to make sense of his death and the resurrection appearances.\nThis understanding is summarized by the theologian Justus Knecht who wrote: \"Our Lord went up Body and Soul into heaven in the sight of His apostles, by His own power, to take possession of His glory, and to be our Advocate and Mediator in heaven with the Father. He ascended as Man, as Head of the redeemed, and has prepared a dwelling in heaven for all those who follow in His steps (Sixth article of the Creed).\"\nCosmology.\nThe cosmology of the author of Luke\u2013Acts reflects the beliefs of his age, which envisioned a three-part cosmos with the heavens above, an Earth centered on Jerusalem in the middle, and the underworld below. Heaven was separated from the Earth by the firmament, the visible sky, a solid inverted bowl where God's palace sat on pillars in the celestial sea. Humans looking up from Earth saw the floor of Heaven, made of clear blue lapis-lazuli (), as was God's throne (). According to Dunn, \"the typical mind-set and worldview of the time conditioned what was actually seen and how the recording of such seeings was conceptualized,\" and \"departure into heaven could only be conceived in terms of 'being taken up ', a literal ascension.\" \nIn modern times, a literal reading of the ascension-stories has become problematic, due to the differences between the pre-scientific cosmology of the times of Jesus, and the scientific worldview that leaves no place for a Heaven above earth. Theologian James Dunn describes the Ascension as at best a puzzle and at worst an embarrassment for an age that no longer conceives of a physical Heaven located above the Earth. Similarly, in the words of McGill University's Douglas Farrow, in modern times the ascension is seen less as the climax of the mystery of Christ than as \"something of an embarrassment in the age of the telescope and the space probe,\" an \"idea [that] conjures up an outdated cosmology.\" \nYet, according to Dunn, a sole focus on this disparity is beside the real importance of Jesus' ascension, namely the resurrection and subsequent exaltation of Jesus. Farrow notes that, already in the third century, the ascension-story was read by Origen in a mystical way, as an \"ascension of the mind rather than of the body,\" representing one of two basic ascension theologies. The real problem is the fact that Jesus is both present and absent, an ambiguity which points to a \"something more\" to which the Eucharist gives entry.\nIslam.\nThe same doctrine takes on another meaning for Muslims: most Islamic scholars hold that Jesus, the penultimate prophet of Islam, was not crucified or resurrected but his body directly ascended.\nLiturgy: Feast of the Ascension.\nThe Feast of the Ascension is a major feast day of the Christian liturgical year, along with the Passion, Easter, Pentecost, and Christmas. Ascension Day is traditionally celebrated on the sixth Thursday after Easter Sunday, the fortieth day from Easter day, although some Catholic provinces have moved the observance to the following Sunday to facilitate the obligation to attend Mass. Saint Jerome held that it was of apostolic origin, but in fact the Ascension was originally part of Pentecost (the coming of the Holy Spirit), and developed as a separate celebration only slowly from the late 4th century onward. In the Catholic tradition it begins with a three-day \"rogation\" to ask for God's mercy, and the feast itself includes a procession of torches and banners symbolising Christ's journey to the Mount of Olives and entry into Heaven, the extinguishing of the Paschal candle, and an all-night vigil; white is the liturgical colour. The feast was retained at the Protestant Reformation. It continues to be observed in Lutheran, Anglican, Methodist, and most Reformed churches. Most of the Eastern Christian tradition (Eastern and Oriental Orthodox and some Eastern Catholic Churches, and the Church of the East), based on the Julian calendar, has a slightly different computation, up to a month later than in the Western tradition. Other denominations, such as the Plymouth Brethren and Quakers, do not celebrate it as they do not adhere to the traditional Christian calendar of feasts.\nOne of the Ascension hymns is Christ fuhr gen Himmel.\nIn Christian art.\nThe Ascension of Jesus has been a frequent subject in Christian art. By the 6th century, the iconography of the Ascension had been established and by the 9th century, ascension scenes were being depicted on domes of churches. The Rabbula Gospels (c. 586) include some of the earliest images of the ascension. Many ascension scenes have two parts, an upper (Heavenly) part and a lower (earthly) part. The ascending Christ may be carrying a resurrection cross-banner or make a sign of benediction with his right hand. The blessing gesture by Christ with his right hand is directed towards the earthly group below him and signifies that he is blessing the entire Church. In the left hand, he may be holding a Gospel or a scroll, signifying teaching and preaching.\nThe Eastern Orthodox portrayal of the ascension is a major metaphor for the mystical nature of the Church. In many Eastern icons, the Virgin Mary is placed at the center of the scene in the earthly part of the depiction, with her hands raised towards Heaven, often accompanied by various Apostles. The upwards-looking depiction of the earthly group matches the Eastern liturgy on the Feast of the Ascension: \"Come, let us rise and turn our eyes and thoughts high\u00a0...\"\nOlivet and the Chapel of the Ascension.\nThe traditional site of the ascension is the Mount of Olives, on which the village of Bethany sits. Before the conversion of Constantine the Great in 312 AD, early Christians honoured the ascension of Christ in a cave on the Mount, and by 384 the ascension was venerated on the present site, uphill from the cave.\nAround the year 390 a wealthy Roman woman named Poimenia financed construction of the original church called \"Eleona Basilica\" (\"elaion\" in Greek means \"olive garden\", from \"elaia\" \"olive tree\", and has an oft-mentioned similarity to \"eleos\" meaning \"mercy\"). This church was destroyed by Sassanid Persians in 614. It was subsequently rebuilt, destroyed, and rebuilt again by the Crusaders. This final church was later destroyed by Muslims, leaving only a 12\u00d712 metre octagonal structure (called a \"martyrium\" \u2013 \"memorial\" \u2013 or \"aedicule\") that remains to this day. The site was ultimately acquired by two emissaries of Saladin in the year 1198 and has remained in the possession of the Islamic Waqf of Jerusalem ever since. The Russian Orthodox Church also maintains a convent of the ascension on the top of the Mount of Olives.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59070", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59070", "title": "Melkor", "text": ""}
{"id": "59073", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59073", "title": "German submarine U-691", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-691\" was a Type VIIC/41 U-boat of Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" during World War II. Her construction by Howaldtswerke of Hamburg was ordered on 2 April 1942, suspended on 30 September 1943, and cancelled on 22 July 1944. The new Elektro Boat XXI design had made the Type VIIs obsolete.\nIn fiction.\nNeal Stephenson's novel \"Cryptonomicon\" includes a fictitious \"U-691\", a Type IXD/42, launched at Wilhelmshaven on 19 September 1940 (four years before IXD/42s were actually developed) and fitted with an experimental \"schnorkel\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59076", "revid": "3000221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59076", "title": "German submarine U-553", "text": "German World War II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-553\" was a Type VIIC U-boat built for Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" for service during World War II.\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-553\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Brown, Boveri &amp; Cie GG UB 720/8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-553\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), fourteen torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and a C/30 anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of between forty-four and sixty.\nService history.\n\"U-553\" was one of eight Type VIIC submarines ordered from Blohm &amp; Voss on 25 September 1939. Her keel was laid down on 21 November 1939, by Blohm &amp; Voss at their Hamburg shipyard, as yard number 529. She was launched on 7 November 1940 and commissioned on 23 December, with \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Karl Thurmann in command. He was captain for her entire career.\nHer service began with training under the 7th U-boat Flotilla and moved on to operations on 1 April 1941. She then transferred to the 3rd flotilla on 1 December 1942. She was a member of ten wolfpacks. She moved from Kiel in Germany to Bergen in Norway in April 1941.\nFirst patrol.\nThe boat departed Bergen on 19 April 1941 and headed for the Atlantic via the gap between the Faeroe and Shetland Islands. She arrived at her new base of St. Nazaire in occupied France on 2 May 1941 after suffering serious engine trouble.\nSecond patrol.\nDeparting St. Nazaire on 7 June, she achieved success north of the Azores, by sinking the \"Susan Maersk\" (she went down in 90 seconds) and the \"Ranella\" (she broke in two) both on 12 June 1941.\nThird, fourth and fifth patrols.\nHer next three sorties met with mixed fortune; her third patrol saw no success, despite ranging far and wide over the north Atlantic.\n\"U-553\"'s next foray saw her attack merchantmen such as the \"Silvercedar\", (sunk on 15 October 1941) and (sunk on 17 October).\nThe boat's fifth patrol took her toward the eastern Canadian/US coast where she succeeded in damaging the \"Diala\" on 15 January 1942 and sinking the \"Inner\u00f8y\" on 22 January.\nSixth and seventh patrols.\nThe boat's sixth patrol took her from St. Nazaire as far north as the Faeroe Islands. It was unsuccessful.\nOuting number seven saw the submarine penetrate the Gulf of St. Lawrence where she sank two ships; the \"Leto\" and the \"Nicoya\". The \"Mattawin\" was sent to the bottom of the Atlantic.\nEighth patrol.\nThe boat's eighth patrol began with her departure from St. Nazaire on 19 July and to which she returned on 17 September after 61 days at sea, her longest. In that time, she damaged the \"Belgian Soldier\" off Newfoundland and attacked three other ships near Cuba. one of which, the \"Empire Bede\", was sunk by gunfire from .\nNinth patrol.\nHer last full patrol commenced on 23 November 1942; she sank the \"Charles L D\" on 9 December 1942. She returned to France, but this time La Pallice on 18 December.\nLoss.\nHer tenth and final sortie began with her departure from La Pallice on 16 January 1943. On the 20th, she sent a radio message: \"Sehrohr unklar\" (periscope unready for action), and was never heard from again. She had suffered no casualties to her crew until lost with all hands. She most probably sank because of technical problems and was officially declared missing on 28 January 1943.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-553\" took part in ten wolfpacks, namely:\nU-553 in fiction.\nNeal Stephenson's novel Cryptonomicon includes a fictitious U-553 which runs aground about ten miles north of Qwghlm, a fictional pair of islands, Inner Qwghlm and Outer Qwghlm, off the northwestern coast of Great Britain.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59077", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59077", "title": "Consumer education", "text": "Information given to the consumer about goods and services\nConsumer education is the preparation of an individual to be capable of making informed decisions when it comes to purchasing products in a consumer culture. It generally covers various consumer goods and services, prices, what the consumer can expect, standard trade practices, etc. While consumer education can help consumers to make more informed decisions, some researchers have found that its effects can drop off over time, suggesting the need for continual education. New dimensions of consumer education are also beginning to emerge as people become more aware of the need for ethical consumerism and sustainable consumer behaviour in our increasingly globalized society.\nBackground.\nConsumer education is an education that can be found in several areas of study in the formal school curriculum and incorporated knowledge from many disciplines, including: economics, game theory, information theory, law, mathematics, and psychology. The goal of teaching the subject is to help people understand in what ways we, as humans, traditionally make oversights in decision-making, so that we can be more self-aware and try to use that information to make more critical and useful decisions. It is especially important in a consumerist society, where many options are available, but rarely ever of equal quality, and where many options take advantage of our biases when we lack complete information, are in need of something urgently (like food while grocery shopping), our preference for familiar and common things, or when we have uneasy feelings. Training for teachers also include instruction regarding different branches of consumerism.\nConsumer education focuses on both functional skills and rights. These two elements are inseparable in the sense that awareness of several rights leads to functional skills. There are also instances when consumer education is conducted for the purpose of changing consumer perceptions, such as the educational drive to increase consumer confidence in for example e-commerce.\nSubject matter.\nTraditionally, the subject matter taught in consumer education would be found under the label home economics. Beginning in the late 20th century, however, with the rise of consumerism, the need for an individual to manage a budget, make informed purchases, and save for the future have become paramount. The outcomes of consumer education include not only the improved understanding of consumer goods and services, but also increased awareness of the consumer's rights in the consumer market and better capability to take actions to improve consumer well-being.\nSubjects included in consumer education also vary from country to country. For instance, in the United Kingdom the focus is on the protection of children from the effects of exploitative consumer society, while in the Philippines the emphasis is more on issues related to the more immediate public interest (e.g., boiling water before drinking it, examining sugar for impurities).\nConsumer education for families.\nConsumer education helps families gain information to make cost effective choices in child care. The goal for consumer education for families is to reduce the financial burden to quality child care by reviewing trusted information to become their own advocates. This is done by providing education to parents on the awareness of early education and childcare as well as the financial assistance that may be needed by low income families to attend public or private pre-K facilities. The National Center for Children in Poverty (NCCP) defines consumer education for families as raising awareness on child care that meets the familial demands through a continuum of skills to expand knowledge, increase variety, and an increase in resources that families can use.\nConsumer education around the world.\nIn multiple countries home economists have contributed in strengthening these programs aimed at women, families, and children. These programs aim to teach women formally and informally education, increase understanding and appreciation of other cultures, improving public health, and improving the process of introducing change.\nA few professional organizations have facilitated international involvement. Some of these include the International Federation of Home Economics (IFHE), American Home Economics Association now the American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences (AAFCS), and the American Association of State Universities and Land Grant Colleges (AASULGC) now the National Association of State Universities and Land-Grant Colleges (NASULGC).\nEconomists in the United States become more involved outside their country around the twentieth century when mission boards hired graduates to assist in establishing home economics departments in other countries to improve living conditions of the people. In the United States, a few states have set up consumer education programs that aim at educating future populations. Texas Office of Consumer Credit Consumer aims to educate Texans to be financially literate and to make good decisions as a consumer.\nIn Australia, consumer education starts in years 9 and 10 as an elective course during their educational career.\nHealth and nutrition in consumerism.\nThe Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is responsible for protecting the public health by assuring the safety, efficacy, and security of human and veterinary drugs, biological products, medical devices, our nation's food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation. The FDA also provides accurate, science-based health information to the public. Making any health claims without the FDA reviewing it first is illegal. This is not the case for structural or functional claims on conventional food.\nConsumers are becoming increasingly health-conscious and most agree that eating healthy is a better way to prevent illness than using medication. An increased consciousness of eating healthy among consumers has led to more consumers buying functional foods who are marketed with scientifically substantiated claims to improve health and well-being. The American dietetic Association supports the use of health claims that have previously been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) but stresses the importance of health claims on food being supported by a program of health and nutrition. Multiple sources have to support these claims to make sure there are no unbalanced messages received by the consumer.\nCommon findings from studies on health and nutrition in consumerism were:\nTo make sure consumers are being influenced by the claims that are made, it is important that consumers are being exposed and pay attention to the claim, that they have an understanding of the claim and that they have a change in their attitude and belief. after that it is important to maintain this behavior change.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59079", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59079", "title": "Electrical conductivity", "text": ""}
{"id": "59080", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59080", "title": "U-691", "text": ""}
{"id": "59081", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59081", "title": "U-553", "text": ""}
{"id": "59082", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59082", "title": "U-74", "text": ""}
{"id": "59083", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59083", "title": "U-81", "text": ""}
{"id": "59084", "revid": "48535834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59084", "title": "Arena Football League", "text": "Professional American football league\nThe Arena Football League (AFL) was a professional arena football league in the United States. It was founded in 1986, but played its first official games in the 1987 season, making it the third longest-running professional football league in North America after the Canadian Football League (CFL) and the National Football League (NFL) until the AFL closed in 2019. \nThe AFL played a formerly proprietary code known as arena football, a form of American football played indoors on a 66-by-28 yard field (about a quarter of the surface area of an NFL field), with rules encouraging offensive performance, resulting in a typically faster-paced and higher-scoring game compared to NFL games. The sport was invented in the early 1980s and patented by Jim Foster, a former executive of the United States Football League (USFL) and the NFL. Each of the league's 32 seasons culminated in the ArenaBowl, with the winner being crowned the league's champion for that season.\nFrom 2000 to 2009, the AFL had its own developmental league, the AF2. The AFL played 22 seasons from 1987 to 2008; internal issues caused the league to cancel its 2009 season, though the af2 did play. Later that year both the AFL and af2 were dissolved and reorganized as a new corporation comprising teams from both leagues, and the AFL returned in 2010. The league's average game attendance after returning in 2010 was approximately 9,500.\nThe league historically had a nationwide footprint, and was recognized as the most prominent professional indoor football league in North America, offering higher payment, more widespread media exposure, and a longer history than competing leagues. From a high of 19 teams in 2007, the league contracted to a low of four teams in 2018, all in the northeastern United States. There were six teams playing in 2019, the league's final season.\nOn October 29, 2019, league commissioner Randall Boe confirmed reports that the league had discontinued operating teams in local markets for the 2020 season. Four weeks later on November 27, league commissioner Boe announced via Twitter that the league as a whole had filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy, dissolving the league for the second time.\nHistory.\nCreation.\nJim Foster, a promotions manager with the National Football League, conceived of indoor football while watching an indoor soccer match at Madison Square Garden in 1981. While at the game, he wrote his idea on a 9 x 12 envelope, with sketches of the field and notes on gameplay. He presented the idea to a few friends at the NFL offices, where he received praise and encouragement for his concept. After solidifying the rules and a business plan, and supplemented with sketches by a professional artist, Foster presented his idea to various television networks. He reached an agreement with NBC for a \"test game\".\nPlans for arena football were put on hold in 1982 as the United States Football League was launched. Foster left the NFL to accept a position in the USFL. He eventually became executive vice-president with the Chicago Blitz, where he returned to his concept of arena football. In 1983, he began organizing the test game in his spare time from his job with the Blitz. By 1985, the USFL had ceased football operations and he began devoting all his time to arena football, and on April 27, 1986, his concept was realized when the test game was played.\nTest games.\nThe test game was played in Rockford, Illinois, on April 27, 1986, at the Rockford MetroCentre. Sponsors were secured, and players and coaches from local colleges were recruited to volunteer to play for the teams, the Chicago Politicians and Rockford Metros, with the guarantee of a tryout should the league take off. Interest was high enough following the initial test game that Foster decided to put on a second, \"showcase\" game. The second game was held on February 27, 1987, at the Rosemont Horizon in Chicago with a budget of $20,000, quintuple the $4,000 for the test game. Foster also invited ESPN to send a film crew to the game; a highlights package aired on \"SportsCenter\".\nInaugural season.\nFollowing the successes of his trial-run games, Foster moved ahead with his idea for arena football. He founded the Arena Football League with four teams: the Pittsburgh Gladiators, Denver Dynamite, Washington Commandos, and Chicago Bruisers. Foster appointed legendary Darrel \"Mouse\" Davis, godfather of the \"run and shoot\" and modern pro offenses, as executive director of football operations. Davis hired the original coaches and was the architect of the league's original wide-open offensive playbooks.\nThe first game in Arena Football League history was played on June 19, 1987, between the Gladiators and Commandos at Pittsburgh Civic Arena in front of 12,117 fans. The game was deliberately not televised so that it could be analyzed and any follies and failures would not be subject to national public scrutiny. Following the inaugural game, tweaks and adjustments were made, and the first season continued. The Dynamite and Bruisers played in the first-ever televised AFL game the next night, on June 20, 1987, at the Rosemont Horizon in suburban Chicago on ESPN with Bob Rathbun and Lee Corso calling the play-by-play. The broadcast showed a short clip of the Commandos-Gladiators game. Each team played six games, two against each other team. The top two teams, Denver and Pittsburgh, then competed in the first-ever AFL championship game, ArenaBowl I.\nOn September 30, 1987, Foster filed an application with the United States Patent and Trademark Office to patent his invented sport. The patent application covered the rules of the game, specifically detailing the goalposts and rebound netting and their impact on gameplay. Foster's application was granted on March 27, 1990. The patent expired on March 27, 2007.\nEarly years (1987\u20131999).\nFrom its inception, the AFL operated in a state of semi-obscurity; many Americans had heard the term \"arena football\" but knew little to nothing about the league itself.\nFrom the 1987 season until the late 1990s, the most exposure the league would receive was on ESPN, which aired tape-delayed games, often well after midnight, and often edited to match the allotted time slot. The league received its first taste of wide exposure in 1998, when Arena Bowl XII was televised nationally as part of ABC's old \"Wide World of Sports\".\nOn July 23, 1989, much of America learned of the AFL for an unintended reason, when the Pittsburgh Gladiators' head coach, Joe Haering, made football history by punching commissioner Jim Foster during a game with the Chicago Bruisers. The national media ran with the story, including a photo in \"USA Today\". The game was played between the two teams in Sacramento's ARCO Arena, as part of the AFL's 'Barnstorming America' tour. Foster had walked onto the field of play to mediate an altercation between the two teams when Haering, a former NFL assistant, punched him in the jaw. Haering was suspended without pay.\nOne of the league's early success stories was the Detroit Drive. A primary team for some of the AFL's most highly regarded players, including George LaFrance and Gary and Alvin Rettig, as well as being a second career chance for quarterback Art Schlichter, the Drive regularly played before sold-out crowds at Joe Louis Arena, and went to the ArenaBowl every year of their existence (1988\u20131993). The AFL's first dynasty came to an end when their owner, Mike Ilitch (who also owned Little Caesars Pizza and the Detroit Red Wings) bought the Detroit Tigers and sold the AFL team.\nAlthough the Drive moved to Massachusetts, becoming the Massachusetts Marauders for the 1994 season, the AFL had a number of other teams which it considered \"dynasties\" between 1994 and 2016. The most successful of these were the Tampa Bay Storm and their arch-rival the Orlando Predators, as well as the San Jose SaberCats and their rivals, the Arizona Rattlers. Among those four teams, they won 14 of 22 ArenaBowls in that time span and appeared in all but two.\nIn 1993, the league staged its first All-Star Game in Des Moines, Iowa, the future home of the long-running Iowa Barnstormers, as a fundraiser for flood victims in the area. The National Conference defeated the American Conference 64\u201340 in front of a crowd of 7,189. The second All-Star event was in October 2013, with two games, the first in Honolulu, Hawai'i, the second being in Beijing, China.\nWhile some teams have enjoyed considerable on-field and even financial success, many teams in the history of the league have enjoyed little success either on or off of the field of play. There were a number of franchises which existed in the form of a series of largely-unrelated teams with little to no continuity of either coaching staffs or players under numerous management groups until they folded. One example of several which could be cited is the New York CityHawks, whose owners transferred the team from New York City to Hartford to become the New England Sea Wolves after two seasons, then after another two seasons were sold and became the Toronto Phantoms, which lasted another two seasons until folding. There are a number of reasons why these teams failed, including financially weak ownership groups, lack of deep financial support from some owners otherwise capable of providing it, lack of media exposure, and the host city's evident lack of interest in its team or the sport as a whole.\nThe new millennium (2000\u20132008).\nThe year 2000 brought heightened interest in the AFL. Then-St. Louis Rams quarterback Kurt Warner, who was MVP of Super Bowl XXXIV, was first noticed because he played quarterback for the AFL's Iowa Barnstormers. While many sports commentators and fans continued to ridicule the league, Warner's story gave the league positive exposure, and it brought the league a new television deal with TNN, which, unlike ESPN, televised regular season games live. While it was not financially lucrative, it helped set the stage for what the league would become in the new millennium. The year also brought a spin-off league, the af2, intended to be a developmental league, comparable to the National Football League's NFL Europe. There was a lot of expansion in the 2000s. Expansion teams included the Austin Wranglers, Carolina Cobras, Los Angeles Avengers, Chicago Rush, Detroit Fury, Dallas Desperados, Colorado Crush, New Orleans VooDoo, Philadelphia Soul, Nashville Kats, Kansas City Brigade, New York Dragons and Utah Blaze. Some of these teams, including the Crush, Desperados, Kats, and VooDoo, were owned for at least part of their existence by the same group which owned the NFL teams in their host cities, after NFL resolution to allow league owners to own the individual AFL clubs. Also, on February 8, 1999, the NFL purchased, but never exercised, an option to buy a major interest in the AFL (49.9%). Of all of these teams, only the Philadelphia Soul were still playing in the AFL in their last season before folding.\nIn 2003, the season expanded to 16 games. There were also several rule changes in this period. In 2005, players were no longer allowed to run out of bounds. The only way for a player to go out of bounds presently is if he is tackled into or deliberately contacts the side boards. This was also the first year the ArenaBowl was played at a neutral site. In 2007, free substitution was allowed, ending the \"iron man\" era of one-platoon football; also, games ending in ties were abolished. The next season, in 2008, the \"jack\" linebacker was allowed to go sideboard to sideboard without being penalized for \"illegal defense\".\nDecline (2008\u20132009).\nAfter 12 years as commissioner of the AFL, David Baker retired unexpectedly on July 25, 2008, just two days before ArenaBowl XXII; deputy commissioner Ed Policy was named interim commissioner until Baker's replacement was found. Baker explained, \"When I took over as commissioner, I thought it would be for one year. It turned into 12. But now it's time.\"\nIn October 2008, Tom Benson announced that the New Orleans VooDoo were ceasing operations and folding \"based on circumstances currently affecting the league and the team\". Shortly thereafter, an article in \"Sports Business Journal\" announced that the AFL had a tentative agreement to sell a $100 million stake in the league to Platinum Equity; in exchange, Platinum Equity would create a centralized, single-entity business model that would streamline league and team operations and allow the league to be more profitable. Benson's move to shut down the VooDoo came during the Platinum Equity conference call, leading to speculation that he had folded because of the deal.\nBecause of the sudden loss of the New Orleans franchise, the league announced in October that the beginning of the free agency period would be delayed in order to accommodate a dispersal draft. Dates were eventually announced as December 2 for the dispersal draft and December 4 for free agency, but shortly before the draft the league issued a press release announcing the draft had been postponed one day to December 3. Shortly thereafter, another press release announced that the draft would be held on December 9 and free agency would commence on December 11. However, the draft still never took place, and instead another press release was issued stating that both the draft and free agency had been postponed indefinitely. Rumors began circulating that the league was in trouble and on the verge of folding, but owners denied those claims. It was soon revealed the players' union had agreed to cut the salary cap for the 2009 season to prevent a total cessation of operations. However, the announced Platinum Equity investment never materialized.\nCanceled 2009 season/first bankruptcy.\nAlthough the af2 played its tenth season in 2009, a conference call in December 2008 resulted in enough votes from owners and cooperation from the AFLPA for the AFL to suspend the entire 2009 season in order to create \"a long-term plan to improve its economic model.\" In doing so, the AFL became the second sports league to cancel an entire season, after the National Hockey League cancelled the 2004\u201305 season because of a lockout. The AFL also became the third sports league to lose its postseason (the first being Major League Baseball, which lost its postseason in 1994 because of a strike). Efforts to reformat the league's business model were placed under the leadership of Columbus Destroyers owner Jim Renacci and interim commissioner Policy.\nHigh hopes for the AFL waned when interim commissioner Ed Policy announced his resignation, citing the obsolescence of his position in the reformatted league. Two weeks later, the Los Angeles Avengers announced that they were formally folding the franchise. One month later, the league missed the deadline to formally ratify the new collective bargaining agreement and announced that it was eliminating health insurance for the players. Progress on the return stalled, and no announcements were made regarding the future of the league.\nOn July 20, 2009, \"Sports Business Journal\" reported that the AFL owed approximately $14 million to its creditors and was considering filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. In early August 2009, numerous media outlets began reporting that the AFL was folding permanently and would file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The league released a statement on August 4 to the effect that while the league was not folding, it was suspending league operations indefinitely. Despite this, several of the league's creditors filed papers to force a Chapter 7 liquidation if the league did not do so voluntarily. This request was granted on August 7, though converted to a Chapter 11 reorganization on August 26.\nRelaunch and rock star owners (2010\u20132014).\nFollowing the suspension of the AFL's 2009 season, league officials and owners of af2 (which had played its season as scheduled) began discussing the future of arena football and the two leagues. With its 50.1 percent ownership of af2, the AFL's bankruptcy and dissolution prompted the dissolution of af2 as well. That league was formally considered disbanded on September 8, 2009, when no owner committed his or her team to the league's eleventh season by that deadline. For legal reasons, af2 league officials and owners agreed to form a new legal entity, Arena Football 1 (AF1), with former AFL teams the Arizona Rattlers and Orlando Predators joining the former af2.\nAll assets of the Arena Football League were put up for auction. On November 11, 2009, the new league announced its intention to purchase the entire assets of the former AFL; the assets included the team names and logos of all but one of the former AFL and af2 teams. The lone exception was that of the Dallas Desperados; Desperados owner Jerry Jones had purposely designed the Desperados' properties around those of the Dallas Cowboys, making the two inseparable. The auction occurred on November 25, 2009. The assets were awarded to Arena Football 1 on December 7, 2009, with a winning bid of $6.1 million.\nOn February 17, 2010, AF1 announced it would use the \"Arena Football League\" name. The league announced plans for the upcoming season and details of its contract with NFL Network to broadcast AFL games in 2010. AF1 teams were given the option of restoring historical names to their teams. In addition to the historical teams, the league added two new expansion franchises, the Dallas Vigilantes and the Jacksonville Sharks.\nFor the 2011 season, the Philadelphia Soul, Kansas City Brigade, San Jose SaberCats, New Orleans VooDoo, and the Georgia Force returned to the AFL after having last played in 2008. However, the Grand Rapids Rampage, Colorado Crush, Columbus Destroyers, Los Angeles Avengers, and the New York Dragons did not return. The league added one expansion team, the Pittsburgh Power. Former Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Lynn Swann was one of the team's owners. It was the first time the AFL returned to Pittsburgh since the Pittsburgh Gladiators were an original franchise in 1987 before becoming the Tampa Bay Storm. The Brigade changed its name to the Command, becoming the Kansas City Command. Even though they were returning teams, the former af2 Bossier\u2013Shreveport Battle Wings moved to New Orleans as the Voodoo, the identity formerly owned by New Orleans Saints owner Tom Benson. The former af2 Alabama Vipers moved to Duluth, Georgia, to become the new Georgia Force (the earlier franchise of that name having been a continuation of the first Nashville Kats franchise). On October 25, 2010, lt was announced that the Oklahoma City Yard Dawgz would not return. The Milwaukee Iron also changed names to the Milwaukee Mustangs, the name of Milwaukee's original AFL team that had existed from 1994 to 2001.\nIn 2012, the AFL celebrated its silver anniversary for its 25th season of operations. The season kicked off on March 9, 2012. The Tulsa Talons moved to San Antonio, Texas, and Jeffrey Vinik became owner of the Tampa Bay Storm. The Dallas Vigilantes were left off the schedule for the 2012 season with no announcement from the management, and the team was subsequently quietly folded with no formal announcement ever being released. The AFL postponed the free agency period to October 31 due to Hurricane Sandy, noting that the National Football League was simultaneously doing the same thing with regard to its trade deadline.\nIt was announced on December 12, 2012, that the AFL had reached a partnership agreement with NET10 Wireless to be the first non-motorsports-related professional sports league in the United States to have a title sponsor, renaming it the NET10 Wireless Arena Football League. The redesigned website showed the new logo which incorporated the current AFL logo with the one from NET10 Wireless. The title sponsorship agreement ended in 2014 after a two-year partnership.\nIn 2013, the league expanded with the addition of two new franchises to play in 2014, the Los Angeles Kiss, owned by Gene Simmons and Paul Stanley of the rock band Kiss, and the Portland Thunder.\nIn 2014, the league announced the granting of a new franchise to M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce frontman Vince Neil, previously part-owner of the Jacksonville Sharks. That franchise, the Las Vegas Outlaws, played their home games at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center, previously home to the Las Vegas Sting and Las Vegas Gladiators. After 20 years as a familiar name to the league, an AFL mainstay, the Iowa Barnstormers, departed the league to join the Indoor Football League. The San Antonio Talons folded on October 13, 2014, after the league (which owned the team) failed to find a new owner. On November 16, 2014, despite a successful season record-wise, the Pittsburgh Power became the second team to cease operations after the 2014 season. This resulted from poor attendance. It was later announced by the league that the Power would go dormant for 2015 and were looking for new ownership. No new ownership group ever materialized, however.\nContraction (2015\u20132017).\nJerry Kurz also stepped down as commissioner of the AFL as he was promoted to be the AFL's first president. Former Foxwoods CEO Scott Butera was hired as his successor as commissioner.\nOn August 9, 2015, ESPN reported that the New Orleans VooDoo and Las Vegas Outlaws had ceased operations. On September 1, 2015, the Spokane Shock officially left the AFL and joined the IFL under the new name Spokane Empire, becoming the fifth active AFL/af2 franchise to leave for the IFL since the 2009 AFL bankruptcy (Iowa Barnstormers, Tri-Cities Fever, Green Bay Blizzard, and Arkansas Twisters left previously).\nOn November 12, the league announced the defending champion San Jose SaberCats would be ceasing operations due to \"reasons unrelated to league operations\". A statement from the league indicated that the AFL was working to secure new, long-term owners for the franchise. This left the AFL with eight teams for 2016.\nOn January 6, 2016, the league took over \"ownership and operational control\" of the Portland Thunder from its previous owners. The AFL stated this move was made after months of trying to work out an arrangement \"to provide financial and operational support.\" On February 3, 2016, it was announced that the franchise would start from scratch and no longer be called the \"Thunder\" as the name and trademarks belong to former franchise owner Terry Emmert (similar to the Jerry Jones move with the Desperados). AFL commissioner Scott Butera announced that a new identity would be announced at a later date. On February 24, 2016, the Thunder were rebranded as the Portland Steel.\nThe league's 2016 schedule, announced on the league's website on December 10, 2015, showed an eight-team league playing a 16-game regular season over 18 weeks, with two bye weeks for each team, one on a rotational basis and the other a \"universal bye\" for all teams during the Independence Day weekend, the first weekend in July. All teams qualified for the postseason, meaning that the regular season served only to establish seeding.\nOn February 10, 2016, \"The Washington Post\" and radio station WTOP-FM first broke the story that Monumental Sports &amp; Entertainment (Ted Leonsis, chairman), which also owns the NHL's Washington Capitals, NBA's Washington Wizards, and WNBA's Washington Mystics, were \"close to a deal\" to bring a new expansion franchise to the Verizon Center. On March 10, 2016, AFL commissioner Scott Butera announced that the deal was finalized and that the new Washington, D.C., team would begin play in 2017. On July 14, 2016, the team name was revealed as the Washington Valor. There was also talk for franchises to return to San Antonio and St. Louis as well as a potential new team for Sacramento. However, when the 2017 schedule was announced, there was no mention of any San Antonio, St. Louis, or Sacramento teams.\nOn October 12, 2016, both the Orlando Predators and Jacksonville Sharks announced their departure from the league, with Jacksonville establishing the National Arena League and the Predators, after a period of dormancy, being reclaimed by some of its former players and also joining the NAL in 2019. The next day, it was reported that the Arizona Rattlers were in the planning stages to also leave the AFL for the Indoor Football League for 2017. In the same report, it was stated the Los Angeles Kiss and Portland Steel had apparently folded after both teams failed to return calls or respond to inquiries into 2017 season ticket purchases. Later on October 13, the league held a teleconference with the remaining team owners and issued a statement the next morning declaring that the league would continue in the long-term, although the league did not expressly commit to playing in 2017 at that time. On October 14, the AFL held a dispersal draft with the five teams selecting players from the Jacksonville, Los Angeles, Orlando, and Portland rosters. The Rattlers then officially left the AFL for the IFL on October 17, leaving the AFL with four teams. They were the sixth AFL team to leave for the IFL since the 2010 relaunch. On November 14, the AFL announced that it had granted a second franchise to Washington Valor owner Ted Leonsis to be based out of Baltimore for the 2017 season, the Baltimore Brigade, bringing the league up to five teams.\nOn August 23, 2017, the week of ArenaBowl XXX, multiple sources revealed that the AFL planned to expand to Albany, New York, and Newark, New Jersey, for 2018. The Albany Empire was confirmed October 24, with the team owned by Hearst Communications executive George Randolph Hearst III and sharing non-football management with the Philadelphia Soul. There was never another mention of a Newark team in the offseason. On November 28, the Cleveland Gladiators announced that they would have to take a two-year leave of absence while their arena, shared with its primary tenant the NBA's Cleveland Cavaliers, was undergoing construction during the basketball offseason. The next month, the longest-tenured AFL team, with franchise roots to the inaugural AFL season, the Tampa Bay Storm, also suspended operations citing financial problems.\nReorganization and second bankruptcy (2018\u20132019).\n In February 2018, the 2018 season schedule was finalized with only the four remaining teams, matching the size of the league in the original \"demonstration season\" in 1987. However, the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) between the AFL and Arena Football League Players' Union (AFLPU) had expired after the 2017 season. A new agreement had not been made despite several proposals and supposed ultimatums between the two parties leading to rumors that the season and league's existence were in jeopardy. On March 16, 2018, a new deal on a four-year CBA was reached, nearly doubling player compensation and granting expanded health insurance benefits.\nOn March 27, 2018, the AFL announced that commissioner Scott Butera would be replaced by former AOL counsel Randall Boe prior to the 2018 season. The AFL also partnered with DraftKings to bring back AFL Fantasy Football. The league continued organizational changes for the 2019 season with Philadelphia Soul owner Ron Jaworski taking over as chairman of the executive committee, moving the league's headquarters from Las Vegas to Philadelphia, and naming John Adams as president and chief operating officer.\nOn December 27, 2018, the AFL introduced a new set of logos to be used beginning with the 2019 season. The league announced an expansion team in Atlantic City, New Jersey, on January 22, 2019, that was to be operated by the same ownership group as the Albany Empire. On February 7, 2019, the league re-added the Columbus Destroyers as another expansion team to bring the league back to six teams. On May 3, 2019, the AFL and ESPN Inc. announced a new media rights agreement to broadcast all games on ESPN3 with ArenaBowl XXXII to be broadcast on ESPN2.\nAfter the season, league commissioner Boe announced the closure of all six of the league's teams. The closure came as the league re-evaluated its business model and worked to respond to a lawsuit filed against the league by its former worker's compensation insurance provider. Boe also stated that they had not made the decision to suspend operations for the entire league at that time (raising the possibility that if the league did return, it would do so under a touring model similar to the Premier Lacrosse League or basketball's BIG3) and that a decision on the league's future would most likely be announced near the end of 2019.\nApproximately a month after the announcement of the closure of teams, on November 27, 2019, commissioner Boe announced via the league's Twitter account that the league would be filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and fully cease operations, citing a lack of capital and unresolved liabilities.\nThird incarnation (2024).\nOn February 1, 2023, G6 Sports Group (based in Toronto, Ontario), a new ownership group that had acquired the league's trademarks and social media accounts, announced another revival of the league which began play in 2024. This league is not directly related to the previous league. The league lasted one season before all of its remaining teams left to form Arena Football One prior to 2025.\nSeason format and ArenaBowl.\nThe second iteration's final 2019 season consisted of a 13-week schedule during which each team played 12 games and had one bye week. Each of the six teams played each opponent at least once. At the end of the regular season, the top four teams participated in the ArenaBowl playoffs, in which the top seed faced the 4th seed while the 2nd seed faced the 3rd seed in a home and home series. The team in each series with the higher aggregate score advanced to the ArenaBowl. While the semifinals had two games for each pair of teams, the ArenaBowl was still one game.\nFrom the league's inception through ArenaBowl XVIII, the championship game was played at the home of the higher-seeded remaining team. The AFL then switched to a neutral-site championship, with ArenaBowls XIX and XX in Las Vegas. New Orleans Arena, home of the New Orleans VooDoo, served as the site of ArenaBowl XXI on July 29, 2007. This was the first professional sports championship to be staged in the city since Hurricane Katrina struck in August 2005. ArenaBowl XXI in New Orleans was deemed a success, and the city was chosen to host ArenaBowl XXII. In 2010, the location returned to being decided by which of the two participating teams was seeded higher. ArenaBowl XXV (2012) returned to a neutral site and was once again played in New Orleans. From 2014 to 2017 and 2019, the ArenaBowl was played at the venue of the higher-seeded team, thus reverting to the original format. With one week remaining in the 2018 season, it was announced that the ArenaBowl would be awarded to the semifinal winner with the higher regular season average attendance. This rule was then not used in 2018 after the Washington Valor's home field, Capital One Arena, already had scheduled renovations starting at the end of the Valor's season; the championship would then be played in Baltimore despite the Valor's higher attendance. In 2019, the ArenaBowl was hosted by the higher seed.\nGrowth of the league.\nSeason format changes.\nThe practice of playing one or two preseason exhibition games by each team before the start of the regular season was discontinued when the NBC contract was initiated, and the regular season was extended from 14 games during the 1996 to 2000 seasons to 16 from 2001 to 2010. From 2011 to 2015, the regular season league expanded to 18 games, with each team having two bye weeks and the option of two preseason games. Since the 2015 season and the decreasing league membership, the season length also decreased, first to 16 games in 2016, then to 14 games in 2017, and 12 games in 2018.\nChina Arena Football League and AFL Global.\nIn August 2012, Ganlan Media International received exclusive rights from the AFL to establish a new Chinese arena football league. The league was eventually named the China Arena Football League (CAFL). The CAFL project is headed up by Martin E. Judge Jr. and Ron Jaworski, who were both part of the Philadelphia Soul's ownership group. The original plans were to establish a six-team league that would play a 10-week schedule that was slated to start in October 2014. The AFL coaches and trainers were to travel to China to help teach the rules of the sport to squads made up of Chinese and American players with the goal of starting an official Chinese arena league. Following delays, the league began its first full season in 2016; however, subsequent play was postponed until a heavily abbreviated tournament was played in 2019.\nThe CAFL is not directly affiliated with the AFL and is instead owned by AFL Global, LLC, an entity that was created by Martin E. Judge Jr.\nHall of Fame.\nThe AFL had its own Hall of Fame consisting of players, coaches, and contributors who have significantly impacted the league. The AFL Hall of Fame solely existed to honor various AFL affiliates. This was the highest honor for any personnel who have been involved with the AFL. It had no physical location and existed solely as a list of players and contributors maintained by the league itself.\nThe Arena Football Hall of Fame was not affiliated with the Pro Football Hall of Fame.\nMedia.\nTelevision.\n2000s.\nIn 2000 the AFL had a television deal with TNN, ESPN, ESPN2 and ABC worth more than $25 million. Beginning with the 2003 season, the AFL made a deal with NBC to televise league games, which was renewed for another two years in 2005. In conjunction with this, the league moved the beginning of the season from May to February (the week after the NFL's Super Bowl) and scheduled most of its games on Sunday instead of Friday or Saturday as it had in the past. In 2006, because of the XX Winter Olympic Games, the Stanley Cup playoffs and the Daytona 500, NBC scaled back from weekly coverage to scattered coverage during the regular season, but committed to a full playoff schedule ending with the 20th ArenaBowl. NBC and the Arena Football League officially severed ties on June 30, 2006, having failed to reach a new broadcast deal. Las Vegas owner Jim Ferraro stated during a radio interview that the reason efforts to make a deal failed was that ESPN refused to show highlights or scores or even mention Arena football as long as it was being aired on NBC.\nFor the 2006 season only, the AFL added a national cable deal with OLN (later the now-defunct NBC Sports Network) for eleven regular-season games and one playoff game.\nOn December 19, 2006, ESPN announced the purchase of a minority stake in the AFL. This deal included television rights for the ESPN family of networks. ESPN would televise a minimum of 17 regular season games, most on Monday nights, and nine playoff games, including ArenaBowl XXI on ABC. The deal resulted in added exposure on ESPN's \"SportsCenter\". However, after the original AFL filed for bankruptcy, this arrangement did not carry over to the new AFL, which was a separate legal entity. The AFL also had a regional-cable deal with FSN, where FSN regional affiliates in AFL markets carried local team games.\n2010s.\nAfter its return in 2010, the AFL had its national television deal with the NFL Network for a weekly Friday night game. All AFL games not on the NFL Network could be seen for free online, provided by Ustream.\nThe NFL Network ceased airing live Arena Football League games partway through the 2012 season as a result of ongoing labor problems within the league. Briefly, the games were broadcast on a tape delay to prevent the embarrassment that would result should the players stage a work stoppage immediately prior to a scheduled broadcast. (In at least once incidence this actually happened, resulting in a non-competitive game being played with replacement players, and further such incidents were threatened.) Once the labor issues were resolved, the NFL Network resumed the practice of broadcasting a live Friday night game. NFL Network dropped the league at the end of the 2012 season.\nFor the 2013 season, the league's new national broadcast partner was the CBS Sports Network. CBSSN would air 19 regular season games and two playoff games. CBS would also air the ArenaBowl, marking the first time since 2008 that the league's finale aired on network television. Regular season CBSSN broadcast games were usually on Saturday nights. As the games were shown live, the start times were not uniform as with most football broadcast packages, but varied with the time zone in which the home team was located. This meant that the AFL may have appeared either prior to or following the CBSSN's featured Major League Lacrosse game.\nIn 2014, ESPN returned to the AFL as broadcast partners, with weekly games being shown on CBS Sports Network, ESPN, ESPN2 and ESPNEWS along with all games being broadcast on ESPN3 for free live on WatchESPN and the ESPN app. ArenaBowl XXVII and XXVIII were also broadcast on ESPN. Most teams also had a local TV station broadcast their games locally and all games were available on local radio. In 2016, Univision Deportes began airing select AFL games during the regular season. For the 2017 season, one AFL game per week was broadcast live nationally over CBS Sports Network. In 2017, the AFL also began streaming some games on Twitter and AFLNow, the league's streaming service. For the 2018 season, the AFL's sole national English language telecast partner was the CBS Sports Network, but all games were streamed free online and Brigade and Valor games were available over their owner Ted Leonsis' Monumental Sports Network. In 2019, all games were available via streaming on ESPN3, except for ArenaBowl 32, which was aired over ESPN2.\nVideo games.\nThe first video game based on the AFL was \"Arena Football\" for the C-64 released in 1988. On May 18, 2000, \"Kurt Warner's Arena Football Unleashed\" was released by Midway Games for the PlayStation game console. On February 7, 2006, EA Sports released \"Arena Football\" for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox. EA Sports released another AFL video game, titled \"\", on February 21, 2007, for the PlayStation 2.\nLiterature.\nIn 2001, Jeff Foley published \"War on the Floor: An Average Guy Plays in the Arena Football League and Lives to Write About It\". The book details a journalist's two preseasons (1999 and 2000) as an offensive specialist/writer with the now-defunct Albany Firebirds. The 5-foot-6 (170\u00a0cm), self-described \"unathletic writer\" played in three preseason games and had one catch for \u22122 yards.\nLeague finances.\nFor its second iteration from 2010 to 2019, the AFL ran under a single-entity model, with the league owning the rights to the teams, players, and coaches. The single-entity model was adopted in 2010 when the league emerged from bankruptcy. Prior to that, the league followed the franchise model more common in North American professional sports leagues; each team essentially operated as its own business with different owners and the league itself was a separate entity which in exchange for franchise fees paid by the team owners provided rules, officials, scheduling and the other elements of organizational structure, while a pool of money was allotted to teams to aid in travel costs. Expansion fees increased from $250,000 in 1993 to $16.2 million by 2003. In 2005 the Kansas City Brigade owners paid an $18 million franchise fee, a league record.\nIn 2019, at the time the AFL filed for bankruptcy, it was operated on a $20 million budget.\nPlayers compensation.\nFor most of the 1990s, the average annual salary for an arena football player was around $22,000 plus additional bonuses for victories and postseason awards, without injury benefits. In 2000, a group of players filed a class-action antitrust suit against the AFL claiming \"price-fixed salaries\" by league teams and requesting injury compensation, which led to the league owners threatening to cancel the upcoming season, and requested to negotiate a collective bargaining agreement (CBA) in order to elude United States antitrust laws. To avoid season cancellation, a new group called the \"Arena Football League Players' Organizing Committee\" (which later became the \"Arena Football League Players Association\") was formed, which represented the majority of AFL players, and negotiated the AFL's first CBA with league owners as the acting labor union. The union negotiated reduced free agent eligibility (from eight years to four), year-round health care for players and their immediate families, improved safety measures (including replacement of playing fields), raising the average player's salary to $35,000 (and average team payroll to $700,000 from $540,000 in 1999 season) and a 401(k) retirement plan, in exchange for a \"hard\" salary cap of $1,375,000 per team for the 2001 season (but with a salary cap exception for \"Franchise Players\"), which included player salaries, win bonuses, player health and insurance coverage and a player housing allowance.\nIn 2003, the league agreed to \"freeze\" the salary cap in a new CBA at $1,643,000 for 2003 season, with increases for the following years: $1,684,075 (2004), $1,743,018 (2005), $1,821,453 (2006), $1,921,633 (2007), $2,036,931 (2008), $2,179,517 (2009) and $2,332,083 (2010). The CBA also stated that the owners would not be able to lower the cap until the agreement expires. Players were also eligible for housing stipend if they resided year-round within 75 miles of the team's home arena. By 2009, the league minimum salary was $31,000 and $80,000 on average ($125,000 for quarterbacks), while the highest-paid player was Tony Graziani, with a salary of over $200,000, including bonuses.\nThe increased salaries were a major factor in the decision to go dormant for the 2009 season, after failed attempts by the owners to cancel the CBA, as several teams reported losing $2 million a year. It was believed that they were hoping for a plan similar to one used by the af2, which operated as a single-tax entity, or launching a new 11-man outdoor development league called the United National Gridiron League to replace the recently defunct NFL Europe. When the af2 took over as the new AFL and relaunched in 2010, players were paid $400 per game, similar to the af2. Three players on each team were eligible for designation as a \"franchise\" player, and received a salary of $1,000 per game. The league also offered financial aid for housing and meal expenses.\nIn 2012, the players formed a new union called the \"Arena Football League Players Union\" (AFLPU), and signed a new CBA that stated that all players would be paid equally: $830 per game for a \"veteran\" player and $775 for \"rookies\" plus a housing plan and three meals a day, with quarterbacks earning an extra $250 per start. The salary would increase gradually to $925 and $870 (respectively) until 2017, the last year of the CBA. In the last CBA, a new salary cap was put in place ($438,480) with a salary \"floor\" of $340,000 for a 14-game season, and a $501,120 cap with a $388,576 floor for a 16-game season. Players signed one-year contracts, as veteran \"compensation range\" was $1,100\u20131,455 per game, while rookies earned between $650 and $1,000 a game. In addition, player could earn up to $1,000 every year for local business appearances, while per-diem allowance were $41-a-day. In case of a mid-season trade players would have got $500 for moving costs.\nAccusation of mismanagement and unpaid bills.\nIn the late 2010s the AFL's entity ownership, Arena Football One, LLC, had been at the center of much controversy over mismanagement of franchises, unpaid bills and several lawsuits against them.\nJerry Kurz lawsuit.\nOn July 21, 2016, league co-founder, former commissioner and president Jerry Kurz filed a class action lawsuit against Arena Football One, LLC, and his successor as commissioner, Scott Butera, for what was deemed \"breach of contract\" after his effective demotion and subsequent firing following the 2015 season. In August 2018, that lawsuit was dismissed, a new action was filed and ultimately settled. Kurz left for the IFL as Director of Business Development. Kurz now serves as general counsel for the new Arena Football One in 2025.\nLeague progression.\nAverage attendance for AFL games were around 10,000\u201311,000 per game in the 1990s, though during the recession connected to the dot-com bubble and the September 11 attacks average attendance dropped below 10,000 for several years. From the start of the 2004 season until the final season of the original league in 2008, average attendance was above 12,000, with 12,392 in 2007. Eleven of the seventeen teams in operation in 2007 had average attendance figures over 13,000. In 2008, the overall attendance average increased to 12,957 (the highest count achieved by the league), with eight teams exceeding 13,000 per game.\nIn 2010, the first year of the reconstituted league following bankruptcy, the overall attendance average decreased to 8,135, with only one team (Tampa Bay) exceeding 13,000 per game. The 2019 average per game attendance of 7,195 was the second-lowest attendance average in league history, only exceeded by 1989's per-game average of 5,705.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59085", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59085", "title": "U-556", "text": ""}
{"id": "59086", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59086", "title": "U-155", "text": ""}
{"id": "59088", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59088", "title": "U-20", "text": ""}
{"id": "59089", "revid": "35107032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59089", "title": "World War One", "text": ""}
{"id": "59090", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59090", "title": "U-110", "text": ""}
{"id": "59091", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59091", "title": "AF2", "text": "Former Arena Football League's developmental league\nThe AF2 (styled as af2, and short for arenafootball2) was the Arena Football League's developmental league; it was founded in 1999 and played its first season in 2000. Like its parent AFL, the af2 played using the same arena football rules and style of play. League seasons ran from April through July with the postseason and ArenaCup championship in August. The af2 continued to operate while the AFL suspended operations for its 2009 season. The league was effectively disbanded in September 2009 when no team committed to playing in 2010, but several of the stronger franchises transferred into the reconstituted AFL.\nLike most other minor sports leagues, the af2 existed to develop football players and also to help players adapt to the style and pace of arena football. In addition, the af2 was similar to other minor leagues because af2 teams played in smaller cities and smaller venues. While the AFL was played in cities like Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago, the af2 fielded teams in cities which are part of metropolitan statistical areas ranging in size from Milwaukee (with 1,739,497 residents) to Albany, Georgia (with 164,000 residents). Also in common with other minor professional sports leagues, players also earned less than in the AFL, with each player making $200-$500 per game, with a minimum $50 victory bonus.\nHistory.\nThe af2 was founded in 1999 by the Arena Football League in an attempt to bring the game to mid-sized markets following the success of AFL on the national level. The af2 was not intended to be a farm system for the AFL like the American Hockey League and Minor League Baseball are to the National Hockey League and Major League Baseball, respectively. The league was instead designed as a league that would develop the players in the interest of the higher league as a whole. The lack of AFL\u2013af2 team affiliations would prevent the AFL from \"stashing\" players in the lower league for later use. Players in the af2 were signed to one-year contracts, after the expiration of which they essentially became free agents to sign with whichever league and team they would prefer. The 16-week contracts with the individual af2 teams also prevented players from leaving for the parent league mid-season; this preserved the quality of play in the lower league and did not destroy team dynamics with players coming and going throughout the season as they do in the NHL and MLB.\nThe foundation of the af2 was a response to the launch of several small-market indoor football leagues in the mid-to-late 1990s, including the Professional Indoor Football League, Indoor Professional Football League, and Indoor Football League. Each of these leagues, though they would eventually fold, managed to last for multiple seasons, proving that the game had some traction in the smaller cities. With Jim Foster's patent on arena football, the af2 had the advantage of being the same game as was being seen on the national level with the use of the rebound nets. Working on a smaller scale, the af2 would try to capitalize on local and regional rivalries.\nThe Xtreme Football League was another upstart league trying to capitalize on the arena football phenomenon. Founded in Birmingham, Alabama, with the intent to begin play in 2000, this XFL (which was not related to the WWE-backed outdoor league) used East Coast Hockey League ownership to keep team costs low while providing established ownership and arenas for play. The cities that were to take part in the Xtreme Football League were: Birmingham, Alabama (Birmingham Steeldogs), Greenville, South Carolina (Carolina Rhinos), Huntsville, Alabama (Tennessee Valley Vipers), Jacksonville, Florida (Jacksonville Tomcats), Norfolk, Virginia (Norfolk Nighthawks), Pensacola, Florida (Pensacola Barracudas), Richmond, Virginia (Richmond Speed), Roanoke, Virginia (Roanoke Steam), and Tallahassee, Florida (Tallahassee Thunder). Although a logo was developed and venues had begun to be lined up, the league and its nine teams were purchased by the af2 on July 29, 1999, and the Xtreme Football League never played a single game.\nThe af2 finally took the field in March 2000 in a game between the Birmingham Steeldogs and Tennessee Valley Vipers (two of the acquired XFL teams). Fifteen teams were fielded in 2000 with the rights for several more cities quickly secured. The Orlando Predators also purchased the competitor Indoor Football League; several teams would be absorbed into the af2 for the 2001 season.\nThe first season concluded with over 868,000 people attending af2 games, averaging over 7,200 per game; several teams ended with average attendances over 10,000 fans. In addition over 9,200 fans attended ArenaCup I between the Tennessee Valley Vipers and Quad City Steamwheelers in Moline, Illinois. Deemed a success, the league returned for a second season and returned all 15 original teams as well as 13 expansion teams.\nDissolution.\nFor legal purposes, the league was effectively dissolved on September 8, 2009, when no team submitted the paperwork to return in 2010. Since the original AFL had suspended 2009 operations and later suspended all operations indefinitely after declaring bankruptcy, the minority owners (as the AFL owned 50.1%) of af2 were wary of being owned by and paying money owed to the bankrupt league's creditors.\nThe remaining teams and Board of Directors of af2, and some former members of the AFL joined to create a new league, originally called \"Arena Football One\", which was announced at a press conference on September 28, 2009. Legally, Arena Football One, later doing business as the Arena Football League, was an entity independent of the original Arena Football League and af2 and was made up of former AFL and af2 teams with several new (expansion) teams and one team from another league. After acquiring the assets of the former Arena Football League in a bankruptcy court sale, the new entity formally became the \"new\" Arena Football League. Unlike the previous Arena Football League and af2, the new AFL was an entity-model league in which the league owned the individual teams and hired local management groups to operate them, rather than the traditional North American sports league model where each team is a separate business and the league is a non-profit association formed and controlled by the various team owners in order to co-ordinate and govern operations.\nRumors of a return.\nThere had been rumors of a possible return of af2, after Arena Football League commissioner Jerry Kurz had stated a return of the league for 2013, but that did not materialize. Kurz had also mentioned af2 in an interview on The AFL Podcast in 2024.\nArenaCup.\nThe ArenaCup was the af2's championship game, held annually in August. For the league's first five years, it was held at the home arena of the higher-seeded remaining team. However, as the old AFL has changed, the af2 also changed. In the same year that ArenaBowl XIX was played at a neutral site in Las Vegas, ArenaCup VI was the first af2 championship to be played at a neutral site in Bossier City, Louisiana. The practice continued the following year when ArenaCup VII was played in Coliseo de Puerto Rico in San Juan; the title game returned to Bossier City in ArenaCup VIII. Citing lower attendances at the neutral site ArenaCup games, the league returned to the original arena arrangement for the 2008 season.\nWith the exception of ArenaCup V, all af2 championships were televised either nationally or locally. The inaugural and second ArenaCups were broadcast on TNN Motor Sports/TNN Sports, which carried AFL games on Sunday afternoons at the time. However, when the AFL broadcast rights were purchased by NBC, the ArenaCup national telecast was lost. The 2002 ArenaCup was televised by the Vision Network, and ArenaCup IV was televised by KWHB, a local station in Tulsa, Oklahoma. After having no television coverage in 2004, the national telecasts returned to the airwaves with Fox Sports Net in 2005 and Comcast Sports Net in 2006, 2007, and 2008.\nArenaCup IX, as well as the season in its entirety, was broadcast online via NiFTy TV.\nHall of Fame.\nShortly before folding, the af2 announced its inaugural (and only) Hall of Fame class. Inductees included\nTeams.\nThe league's teams were divided into two conferences, the American and National Conferences. The conferences were further subdivided into three divisions each. Each division represented a region of the country in which teams played. Unlike most sports leagues, the alignment of teams into divisions was not even; in 2009, the Central division featured three teams while the West featured five teams. Teams were placed in divisions based on geographic rivalries to reduce travel costs as teams played division opponents more often than non-divisional opponents. Alignment was subject to change each year as new teams joined the league and others dropped out.\nBecause of legal issues regarding the bankruptcy and subsequent dissolution of the original Arena Football League, no team committed to continue with arenafootball2 operations. This list is the final alignment of af2 at the end of the 2009 season.\nLeague expansion.\nIn a June 2003 interview with \"Sports Illustrated\", AFL commissioner David Baker briefly mentioned the af2, saying how one day he envisioned the league growing to 100 teams. The af2 started off with 15 teams in 2000, then expanded to 28 teams in 2001, and finally to 34 in 2002. The number of teams the league fielded dropped every year from there on after, until the 2006 season; 27 teams were fielded in 2003, 25 in 2004, and 20 in 2005. Finally, in 2006, the af2 saw its first expansion in four years, fielding 23 teams, and continued that into 2007 with 30 teams.\nThe drop in teams between 2002 and 2006 could be partially attributed to the league expanding too rapidly in its first three seasons. Many teams were financially unstable and folded. This could have been at least in large measure due to higher expenses, even compared to those of similar leagues. Franchise fees in the league ranged from $600,000 to $1 million. Historically, massive sports league expansions have had little success, either in indoor football or other sports. For instance, the National Indoor Football League, a rival indoor league, saw large numbers of expansion teams after beginning play in 2001 but many struggled financially and played only briefly, incurring considerable financial losses before folding. In more recent years, the American Basketball Association has exhibited the same situation to an even greater degree.\nNine new expansion teams were approved for 2007 in the af2: the Boise Burn, the Cincinnati Jungle Kats, the Fort Wayne Fusion, the Laredo Lobos, the Lubbock Renegades, the Mahoning Valley Thunder, the Texas Copperheads, the Tri-Cities Fever, and the Corpus Christi Sharks. The Texas, Laredo, and Tri-Cities teams moved to the af2 from other indoor football leagues. For the 2007 season, the league fielded 30 teams. After the 2007 season, three of those teams folded, the Fort Wayne Fusion, the Cincinnati Jungle Kats, and the Laredo Lobos. The Everett Hawks, Alabama Steeldogs, and the Bakersfield Blitz also ceased operations.\nFor 2008, the league fielded one team fewer, at 29. Two teams were reactivated: the Iowa Barnstormers and the Peoria Pirates, and the league admitted three new teams that were transferring from other leagues. The Lexington Horsemen came from UIF; the Daytona Beach ThunderBirds, from the WIFL, and the Austin Wranglers moved down from the AFL. After the season, Austin and Daytona Beach folded, along with Louisville, Lubbock, and Texas. The league was expected to expand to Toledo, Ohio and Worcester, Massachusetts by 2011.\nContinuing teams.\nWhen af2 folded, some teams joined the af2 Board of Directors in forming the new \"Arena Football 1\" that soon became the new Arena Football League. Iowa, Milwaukee, Tennessee Valley (which changed its name to Alabama to reflect the state, rather than the region), Oklahoma City, Tulsa, Bossier-Shreveport, and Spokane all moved to the new AFL to join \"old\" AFL teams Arizona, Orlando, Tampa Bay, Chicago, and Cleveland, along with expansion teams in Dallas and Jacksonville, and the American Indoor Football team in Utah that had also been in the old AFL. Kentucky, Tri-Cities, and Arkansas also committed to the new league, but Kentucky folded, and Tri-Cities and Arkansas followed Green Bay and Amarillo to the Indoor Football League. Albany did not play in 2010 while seeking an expansion into the \"new\" AFL in 2011, along with a planned addition in Toledo.\nBy the conclusion of the 2015 AFL Season, none of the seven af2 franchises that moved into the AFL remained in the league. The Oklahoma City Yard Dawgz ceased operations after the 2010 season. In the 2011 season, the Alabama Vipers relocated to suburban Atlanta and assumed the identity and history of the former Georgia Force before folding after the 2012 season, while the Bossier-Shreveport Battle Wings moved to New Orleans and became a continuation of the VooDoo and then ceased operations after the 2015 season. The Milwaukee Iron rebranded itself in 2011 as the Mustangs, adopting the name of a previous Milwaukee team. Tulsa relocated to San Antonio before the start of the 2012 season, retaining the Talons' name and history and folded after the 2014 season. Milwaukee suspended operations for the 2013 season, and the team relocated to Portland, Oregon for the 2014 season, becoming the Portland Thunder, later renamed the Steel before ultimately folding after the 2016 AFL season. After the 2014 AFL season, the Iowa Barnstormers changed leagues from the AFL to the Indoor Football League. After the conclusion of the 2015 season, the last af2 team remaining in the AFL, the Spokane Shock, joined the Barnstormers in the IFL as the Spokane Empire, and then also folded in 2017.\nAfter the conclusion of the 2019 AFL season, the Arena Football League filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy and ceased operations in November 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59092", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59092", "title": "U-552", "text": ""}
{"id": "59093", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59093", "title": "U-96", "text": ""}
{"id": "59094", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59094", "title": "U-2511", "text": ""}
{"id": "59097", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59097", "title": "Health maintenance organization", "text": "Medical insurance group that provides health services for a fixed annual fee\nIn the United States, a health maintenance organization (HMO) is a medical insurance group that provides health services for a fixed annual fee. It is an organization that provides or arranges managed care for health insurance, self-funded health care benefit plans, individuals, and other entities, acting as a liaison with health care providers (hospitals, doctors, etc.) on a prepaid basis. The US Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973 required employers with 25 or more employees to offer federally certified HMO options if the employer offers traditional healthcare options. Unlike traditional indemnity insurance, an HMO covers care rendered by those doctors and other professionals who have agreed by contract to treat patients in accordance with the HMO's guidelines and restrictions in exchange for a steady stream of customers. HMOs cover emergency care regardless of the health care provider's contracted status.\nOperation.\nHMOs often require members to select a primary care physician (PCP), a doctor who acts as a gatekeeper to direct access to medical services, but this is not always the case. PCPs are usually internists, pediatricians, family doctors, geriatricians, or general practitioners (GPs). Except in medical emergency situations, patients need a referral from the PCP in order to see a specialist or other doctor, and the gatekeeper cannot authorize that referral unless the HMO guidelines deem it necessary. Some HMOs pay gatekeeper PCPs set fees for each defined medical procedure they provide to insured patients (fee-for-service) and then capitate specialists (that is, pay a set fee for each insured person's care, irrespective of which medical procedures the specialists performs to achieve that care), while others use the reverse arrangement.\nOpen-access and point-of-service (POS) products are a combination of an HMO and traditional indemnity plan. The member(s) are not required to use a gatekeeper or obtain a referral before seeing a specialist. In that case, the traditional benefits are applicable. If the member uses a gatekeeper, the HMO benefits are applied. However, the beneficiary cost sharing (e.g., co-payment or coinsurance) may be higher for specialist care. HMOs also manage care through utilization review. That means they monitor doctors to see if they are performing more services for their patients than other doctors, or fewer. HMOs often provide preventive care for a lower copayment or for free, in order to keep members from developing a preventable condition that would require a great deal of medical services. When HMOs were coming into existence, indemnity plans often did not cover preventive services, such as immunizations, well-baby checkups, mammograms, or physicals. It is this inclusion of services intended to maintain a member's health that gave the HMO its name. Some services, such as outpatient mental health care, are limited, and more costly forms of care, diagnosis, or treatment may not be covered. Experimental treatments and elective services that are not medically necessary (such as elective plastic surgery) are almost never covered.\nOther choices for managing care are case management, in which patients with catastrophic cases are identified, or disease management, in which patients with certain chronic diseases like diabetes, asthma, or some forms of cancer are identified. In either case, the HMO takes a greater level of involvement in the patient's care, assigning a case manager to the patient or a group of patients to ensure that no two providers provide overlapping care, and to ensure that the patient is receiving appropriate treatment, so that the condition does not worsen beyond what can be helped.\nCost containment.\nAlthough businesses pursued the HMO model for its alleged cost containment benefits, some research indicates that private HMO plans do not achieve any significant cost savings over non-HMO plans. Although out-of-pocket costs are reduced for consumers, controlling for other factors, the plans do not affect total expenditures and payments by insurers. A possible reason for this failure is that consumers might increase utilization in response to less cost sharing under HMOs. Some have asserted that HMOs (especially those run for profit) actually increase administrative costs and tend to cherry-pick healthier patients.\nHistory.\nThough some forms of group \"managed care\" did exist prior to the 1970s, in the US they came about chiefly through the influence of President Richard Nixon and his friend Edgar Kaiser. In discussion in the White House on February 17, 1971, Nixon expressed his support for the essential philosophy of the HMO, which John Ehrlichman explained thus: \"All the incentives are toward less medical care, because the less care they give them, the more money they make.\" \nThe earliest form of HMOs can be seen in a number of \"prepaid health plans\". In 1910, the Western Clinic in Tacoma, Washington offered lumber mill owners and their employees certain medical services from its providers for a premium of $0.50 per member per month. This is considered by some to be the first example of an HMO. However, Ross-Loos Medical Group, established in 1929, is considered to be the first HMO in the United States; it was headquartered in Los Angeles and initially provided services for Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (DWP) and Los Angeles County employees. 200 DWP employees enrolled at a cost of $1.50 each per month. Within a year, the Los Angeles Fire Department signed up, then the Los Angeles Police Department, then the Southern California Telephone Company (now AT&amp;T Inc.), and more. By 1951, enrollment stood at 35,000 and included teachers, county and city employees. In 1982 through the merger of the Insurance Company of North America (INA) founded in 1792 and Connecticut General (CG) founded in 1865 came together to become CIGNA. Also in 1929 Dr. Michael Shadid created a health plan in Elk City, Oklahoma in which farmers bought shares for $50 to raise the money to build a hospital. The medical community did not like this arrangement and threatened to suspend Shadid's licence. The Farmer's Union took control of the hospital and the health plan in 1934. Also in 1929, Baylor Hospital provided approximately 1,500 teachers with prepaid care. This was the origin of Blue Cross. Around 1939, state medical societies created Blue Shield plans to cover physician services, as Blue Cross covered only hospital services. These prepaid plans burgeoned during the Great Depression as a method for providers to ensure constant and steady revenue.\nIn 1970, the number of HMOs declined to fewer than 40. Paul M. Ellwood Jr., often called the \"father\" of the HMO, began having discussions with what is today the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services that led to the enactment of the Health Maintenance Organization Act of 1973. This act had three main provisions:\nThis last provision, called the dual choice provision, was the most important, as it gave HMOs access to the critical employer-based market that had often been blocked in the past. The federal government was slow to issue regulations and certify plans until 1977, when HMOs began to grow rapidly. The dual choice provision expired in 1995.\nIn 1971, Gordon K. MacLeod developed and became the director of the United States' first federal HMO program. He was recruited by Elliot Richardson, the secretary of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare.\nTypes.\nHMOs operate in a variety of forms. Most HMOs today do not fit neatly into one form; they can have multiple divisions, each operating under a different model, or blend two or more models together.\nIn the staff model, physicians are salaried and have offices in HMO buildings. In this case, physicians are direct employees of the HMOs. This model is an example of a closed-panel HMO, meaning that contracted physicians may only see HMO patients. Previously this type of HMO was common, although currently it is nearly inactive. In the group model, the HMO does not employ the physicians directly, but contracts with a multi-specialty physician group practice. Individual physicians are employed by the group practice, rather than by the HMO. The group practice may be established by the HMO and only serve HMO members (\"captive group model\"). Kaiser Permanente is an example of a captive group model HMO rather than a staff model HMO, as is commonly believed. An HMO may also contract with an existing, independent group practice (\"independent group model\"), which will generally continue to treat non-HMO patients. Group model HMOs are also considered closed-panel, because doctors must be part of the group practice to participate in the HMO - the HMO panel is closed to other physicians in the community.\nIf not already part of a group medical practice, physicians may contract with an independent practice association (IPA), which in turn contracts with the HMO. This model is an example of an open-panel HMO, where a physician may maintain their own office and may see non-HMO members.\nIn the network model, an HMO will contract with any combination of groups, IPAs (Independent Practice Associations), and individual physicians. Since 1990, most HMOs run by managed care organizations with other lines of business (such as PPO, POS and indemnity) use the network model.\nRegulation.\nHMOs in the United States are regulated at both the state and federal levels. They are licensed by the states, under a license that is known as a certificate of authority (COA) rather than under an insurance license. State and federal regulators also issue \"mandates\", requirements for health maintenance organizations to provide particular products. In 1972 the National Association of Insurance Commissioners adopted the HMO Model Act, which was intended to provide a model regulatory structure for states to use in authorizing the establishment of HMOs and in monitoring their operation.\nLegal responsibilities.\nHMOs often have a negative public image due to their restrictive appearance. HMOs have been the target of lawsuits claiming that the restrictions of the HMO prevented necessary care. Whether an HMO can be held responsible for a physician's negligence partially depends on the HMO's screening process. If an HMO only contracts with providers meeting certain quality criteria and advertises this to its members, a court may be more likely to find that the HMO is responsible, just as hospitals can be liable for negligence in selecting physicians. However, an HMO is often insulated from malpractice lawsuits. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) can be held to preempt negligence claims as well. In this case, the deciding factor is whether the harm results from the plan's administration or the provider's actions. ERISA does not preempt or insulate HMOs from breach of contract or state law claims asserted by an independent, third-party provider of medical services.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59098", "revid": "3000221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59098", "title": "German submarine U-413", "text": "German type VII C world war II submarine\nGerman submarine \"U-413\" was a Type VIIC U-boat built for Nazi Germany's \"Kriegsmarine\" for service during World War II.\nShe was laid down on 25 April 1941 at the Danziger Werft (as yard number 114), launched on 15 January 1942 and commissioned on 3 June, with \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Gustav Poel in command. Poel commanded her (receiving promotion to \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\"), until 19 April 1944, when he was relieved by \"Oberleutnant zur See\" Dietrich Sachse who commanded her until her loss. She conducted seven patrols in World War II, sinking six ships totalling \u00a0gross register tons\u00a0(GRT) and 1,100 tons.\nDesign.\nGerman Type VIIC submarines were preceded by the shorter Type VIIB submarines. \"U-413\" had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. She had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . The submarine was powered by two Germaniawerft F46 four-stroke, six-cylinder supercharged diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert GU 343/38\u20138 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. She had two shafts and two propellers. The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to .\nThe submarine had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boat could operate for at ; when surfaced, she could travel at . \"U-413\" was fitted with five torpedo tubes (four fitted at the bow and one at the stern), fourteen torpedoes, one SK C/35 naval gun, 220 rounds, and one C/30 anti-aircraft gun. The boat had a complement of between forty-four and sixty.\nService history.\n\"U-413\" was one of four Type VIIV submarines ordered from Danziger Werft on 15 August 1940. The submarine was laid down as yard number 114 at Danziger Werft's Danzig shipyard on 25 April 1941, was launched on 15 January 1942 and commissioned on 3 June 1942. \"U-413\", under the command of \"Kapit\u00e4nleutnant\" Gustav Poel, joined the 8th U-boat Flotilla for training, transferring to the operational 1st Flotilla in October 1942.\nFirst and second patrols.\nThe U-boat departed Kiel on 22 October 1942, on her first patrol, bound for the North Atlantic. On 8 November 1942, Britain and the United States launched Operation Torch, the invasion of French North Africa. In response, all available U-boats in the Atlantic, including \"U-413\", which was still outward bound, were ordered to divert to an area off the Strait of Gibraltar and the coast of Morocco. On 14 November 1942, \"U-413\" encountered a convoy of troopships returning to Britain following \"Torch\", and torpedoed and sank the 20,107 GRT troopship MV \"Warwick Castle\". 114 of \"Warwick Castle\"'s passengers and crew were killed, with survivors rescued by the destroyers , , the corvette and the merchant ship . On 19 November 1942, \"U-413\" was in pursuit of another convoy when she was caught on the surface by a Lockheed Hudson patrol aircraft of 608 Squadron RAF. The submarine crash dived but the Hudson dropped four depth charges where \"U-413\" had submerged. These wrecked the submarine's periscopes, forcing the patrol to be aborted. \"U-413\" arrived at her new port, Brest in occupied France, on 25 November 1942.\nOn 27 December 1942, \"U-413\" left Brest on her next patrol. \"U-413\" was ordered to join patrol group \"Jaguar\" north east of Newfoundland, arriving on station on 12 January 1943. On 22 January, \"U-413\" spotted Convoy SC 117, south south west of Cape Farewell, sinking the Greek \"Mount Mycale\", a straggler from that convoy, later that day. Radio problems prevented the direction of the rest of group \"Jaguar\" against the convoy. The \"Jaguar\" group was disbanded on 27 January, with \"U-413\" joining the new group \"Pfeil\". On 4 February, spotted Convoy SC 118, and sent out a radio contact report that allowed other submarines of group \"Pfeil\" to be directed against the convoy. The signal was also detected by escorts from the convoy, resulting in \"U-187\" being sunk. On 5 February, \"U-413\" sank a straggler from the convoy, the American \"West Portal\" with all hands. \"U-413\" returned to Brest on 17 February 1943.\nThird and fourth patrols.\n\"U-413\"'s third patrol saw her leave Brest on 29 March 1943, once more for the Atlantic. She joined group \"Miese\", patrolling east of Newfoundland, which was positioned to intercept Convoy SC 126, but the convoy evaded the patrol line. The line was then positioned to find Convoy HX 234, which was found by on 21 April. The group was ordered to attack the convoy, but poor weather and the efforts of the convoys escorts meant that the submarines had little success. On 25 April, \"U-413\" attacked a ship with two torpedoes, hearing what were believed to be the torpedoes detonating at the end of their run. \"U-413\" then joined patrol group \"Star\" and then from 3 May, group \"Fink\", both of which were deployed against Convoy ONS 5, but while the convoy was heavily engaged, with 13 merchant ships sunk for the loss of six U-Boats, \"U-413\" did not claim any successes. After refuelling from the tanker submarine , \"U-413\" joined patrol group \"Donau 2\", south east of Cape Farewell, and was ordered against Convoy SC 130, which was found by on 18 May, but the strong escort drove off all attacks, with three U-boats sunk with no merchant ships sunk. On 24 May, Admiral Karl D\u00f6nitz, commander of the German Navy, ordered the suspension of U-Boat operations against convoys in the North Atlantic owing to high losses with little success. \"U-413\" was one of a number of submarines ordered to remain in the Atlantic, broadcasting radio signals in an attempt to hide the withdrawal of the U-Boats. She returned to Brest on 13 June 1943. \n\"U-413\" left Brest on 4 September 1943, bound for the North Atlantic, but returned on 18 September after suffering mechanical problems. She left Brest again on 27 September, returning to port the next day. The submarine left on her next patrol on 2 October 1943. She was fitted with new radio receivers and direction finding gear, with the intention of detecting convoy course changes. \"U-413\" joined \"Schlieffen\" group, operating south west of Iceland, and when the group was ordered against Convoys ONS 20 and ON 206, attempted to use her direction-finding gear to track the convoys, but her reports conflicted with direct contact reports, and the convoy escaped, with six U-boats sunk by the convoy's escorts and air attacks. On 24 October \"U-413\" joined \"Siegfried\" group, operating east of Newfoundland, but the group found no success, and was spilt into smaller groups, but they still failed to find any convoys, with operations severely restricted by the presence of allied escort carriers. \"U-413\" returned to Brest on 21 November 1943.\nFifth and sixth patrols.\nOn 26 January 1944, \"U-413\" left Brest on another patrol. On 11 February, the submarine attacked escorts of Convoy KMS 41, but had no success, and used anti-radar decoys to help escape the response. She then patrolled off the north coast of Cornwall, and after she was sighted by a fishing boat, the British destroyers and were ordered to hunt the submarine. On 20 February 1944, \"U-413\" torpedoed and sank \"Warwick\" southwest of Trevose Head, Cornwall. In March, \"U-413\" operated south of Ireland, unsuccessfully attacking a convoy on 21 March. She returned to Brest on 27 March. Poel was awarded Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross on arrival. This was Poel's last patrol, with him transferring to the Naval Academy M\u00fcrwik in Flensburg. He was replaced by \"Oberleutnant zur See Dietrich Sachse.\nOn 6 June 1944, on hearing news of the Allied invasion of Normandy, Hans-Rudolf R\u00f6sing, commander of the U-Boats based in France, ordered all available submarines, including \"U-413\", to put out to sea to oppose the invasion. U-Boats like \"U-413\", that were not equipped with schnorkels and so were less able to survive in the face of Allied anti-submarine operations, were ordered to patrol between The Lizard and Hartland Point at the western end of the English Channel. \"U-413\" was attacked by a Handley Page Halifax of 502 Squadron RAF. While anti-aircraft fire from \"U-413\" knocked out one of the Halifax's engines, the Halifax's bombs caused sufficient damage to force \"U-413\" to return to port, reaching Brest on 9 June.\nSeventh patrol and sinking.\nOn 2 August 1944, \"U-413\", now equipped with a schnorkel, set out from Brest to attack invasion shipping between Portsmouth and Beachy Head. On 19 August, the submarine found Convoy ETC 72 off the Isle of Wight, and attacked with acoustic torpedoes, sinking the British steamer \"Saint Enogat\". On 20 August, \"U-413\" was detected by the British destroyer , which together with the destroyers and , attacked the submarine, with a Hedgehog attack from \"Vidette\" causing fatal damage to \"U-413\". One man escaped from \"U-413\", the submarine's chief engineer, Karl H\u00fctterer, who escaped via the submarine's forward torpedo loading hatch, and was picked by \"Wensleydale\". The other 45 of \"U-413\"'s crew were killed.\nThe wreck of \"U-413\" was located and identified by marine archaeologist Innes McCartney in 2000 close to the official sinking position.\nWolfpacks.\n\"U-413\" took part in 15 wolfpacks, namely:\nTrivia.\nNeal Stephenson's novel \"Cryptonomicon\" features a fictitious \"U-413\", a milchkuh (supply boat).\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59099", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59099", "title": "U-413", "text": ""}
{"id": "59101", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59101", "title": "Milchcow", "text": ""}
{"id": "59102", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59102", "title": "Lipschitz-continuous", "text": ""}
{"id": "59103", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59103", "title": "Conscious", "text": ""}
{"id": "59104", "revid": "1312646835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59104", "title": "Type XIV submarine", "text": "Class of resupply U-boats\nThe Type XIV U-boat was designed to supply other U-boats, being the only submarine tenders built which were not surface ships. It was nicknamed in German the \"Milchkuh/Milchk\u00fche (pl.)\" (English: milk cows).\nDesign.\nThe Type XIV was based on the Type IXD long-range U-boat design, but with a shorter and deeper hull. The boats had a displacement of when at the surface and while submerged. The U-boats had a total length of , a pressure hull length of , a beam of , a height of , and a draught of . \nThe Type XIV received the same powerplants as the Type VIIC : two Germaniawerft F46 supercharged four-stroke, six-cylinder diesel engines producing a total of for use while surfaced, two Siemens-Schuckert 2 GU 345/38-8 double-acting electric motors producing a total of for use while submerged. They had two shafts and two propellers.\nSince the cargo of Type XIV was mainly lightweight fuel, it was possible to assign more weight to the pressure hull, and instead of the usual thick steel, was used which resulted in a higher maximum diving depth of .\nThe submarines had a maximum surface speed of and a maximum submerged speed of . When submerged, the boats could operate for at ; when surfaced, they could travel at .\nThe boats were not fitted with torpedo tubes nor deck guns. The only armament carried was for defense, consisting of two SK C/30 anti-aircraft guns with 2500 rounds as well as a C/30 gun with 3,000 rounds.\nThe boats had a complement of fifty-three.\nOperation.\nDue to its large size, the Type XIV could resupply other boats with of fuel, of motor oil, four torpedoes, and fresh food that was preserved in refrigerator units. In addition, the boats were equipped with a small bakery in order to provide the luxury of fresh bread for crews being resupplied. The Type XIV also had a doctor and medical facility for injured sailors, and even had a two-man brig to imprison sailors awaiting discipline back at home. Type IXC boats otherwise only carried 12 weeks of food supplies, and Type VIIC U-boat carried about 114 tons of diesel fuel.\nCargo was transported by means of a inflatable boat and portable cranes. The flat main deck with cargo hatches and davits was designed in theory to facilitate the transfer of bulk supplies, however its low freeboard made this work extremely hazardous in typical North Atlantic swells that made the deck awash, so often supplies had to be hand-lifted through the smaller but drier conning tower hatches to avoid flooding the boat. Resupply and refueling operations often took hours, putting both the milk cow and the submarine it was servicing at risk.\nIf the Germans came under Allied attack during a resupply operation, the milk cow would dive first while the attack submarine might fight it out on the surface for a while, as the Type XIV's bulk and flat deck made it slower to maneuver and submerge, although it could dive deeper than Type VIICs or IX. The Type XIV had no torpedo tubes or deck guns, only defensive armament of anti-aircraft guns.\nThe milk cows operated off the North American mainland in the so-called mid-Atlantic gap, far enough from Allied anti-submarine patrols and land-based aircraft while still close enough to provide logistical support to U-boats. In 1942, the milk cows enabled Type VIIC boats to remain on station for a couple more weeks off of the American coast during the \"Second Happy Time\" raids of the Battle of the Atlantic.\nThe milk cows were priority targets for Allied forces, as sinking one milk cow would effectively curtail the patrols of a dozen attack U-boats and force them to return home for supplies. Ultra intercepts provided information concerning sailing and routing of the milk cows. This intelligence, coupled with improved Allied radar, air coverage, and hunter-killer groups in the North Atlantic, eliminated most of the milk cows during 1943 including four lost in the month of July alone. By the end of the war all ten had been sunk. Milk cow duty was especially hazardous; 289 sailors were killed out of an estimated complement of 530\u2013576 men.\nLosses during 1943.\nOn 24 July, U-tanker was destroyed two days out of Bordeaux. \nOn 30 July, three U-boats, two of them Type XIVs, were attacked and destroyed by aircraft of the RAF and ships of FJ Walker's 2nd Support Group.\nOn 4 August, \"U-489\" was sunk south of Iceland.\nThis led to the diversion of provisional tankers and to refuel boats returning from North America. \nOn 7 August, \"U-117\" was destroyed, leaving \"U-230\" and others in difficult straits.\nOn 24 August \"U-847\", under \"Kptlt.\" Herbert Kuppisch, refueled several boats, including . Her commander found Kuppisch too casual about the threat of air attack, an observation repeated by Werner in his book.\nWerner relates he asked them; \"What's the matter with you people, don't you have any respect for aircraft?\".\nKuppisch replied: \"We haven't seen any since we passed Greenland.\"\nSix U-boats re-fueled from \"U-847\" on the morning of 27 August, \"U-230\" included, but just hours later \"U-847\" was sunk by aircraft from the escort carrier .\nList of Type XIV submarines.\nTen boats of this type were commissioned:\nFourteen planned Type XIVs were cancelled. Three of them (\"U-491\", \"U-492\", \"U-493\") were about 75% complete when work was stopped in 1944. The other eleven boats had not been laid down when they were cancelled on 27 May 1944. On that same day Karl D\u00f6nitz stopped construction on the Type XX U-boats, large transport boats that would not have been ready until mid-1945.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59105", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59105", "title": "Milchkuh", "text": ""}
{"id": "59106", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59106", "title": "Syst\u00e8me International d'Unit\u00e9s", "text": ""}
{"id": "59107", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59107", "title": "Syst\u00e8me International", "text": ""}
{"id": "59108", "revid": "37878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59108", "title": "Systeme International", "text": ""}
{"id": "59109", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59109", "title": "Locally compact", "text": ""}
{"id": "59111", "revid": "50428975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59111", "title": "Socialized medicine", "text": "Government-run health care system\nSocialized medicine is a term used in the United States to describe and discuss systems of universal health care\u2014medical and hospital care for all by means of government regulation of health care and subsidies derived from taxation. Because of historically negative associations with socialism in American culture, the term is usually used pejoratively in American political discourse. The term was first widely used in the United States by advocates of the American Medical Association in opposition to President Harry S. Truman's 1947 health care initiative. It was later used in opposition to Medicare. The Affordable Care Act has been described in terms of socialized medicine, but the act's objective is rather socialized insurance, not government ownership of hospitals and other facilities as is common in other nations.\nBackground.\nThe original meaning was confined to systems in which the government operates health care facilities and employs health care professionals. This narrower usage would apply to the British National Health Service hospital trusts and health systems that operate in other countries as diverse as Finland, Spain, Israel, and Cuba. The United States Veterans Health Administration and the medical departments of the U.S. Army, Navy, and Air Force, would also fall under this narrow definition. When used in that way, the narrow definition permits a clear distinction from single payer health insurance systems, in which the government finances health care but is not involved in care delivery.\nMore recently, American conservative critics of health care reform have attempted to broaden the term by applying it to any publicly funded system. Canada's Medicare system and most of the UK's NHS general practitioner and dental services, which are systems where health care is delivered by private business with partial or total government funding, fit the broader definition, as do the health care systems of most of Western Europe. In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and the US military's TRICARE fall under that definition. In specific regard to military benefits of a (currently) volunteer military, such care is an owed benefit to a specific group as part of an economic exchange, which muddies the definition yet further.\nMost industrialized countries and many developing countries operate some form of publicly funded health care with universal coverage as the goal. According to the Institute of Medicine and others, the United States is the only wealthy, industrialized nation that does not provide universal health care.\nJonathan Oberlander, a professor of health policy at the University of North Carolina, maintains that the term is merely a political pejorative that has been defined to mean different levels of government involvement in health care, depending on what the speaker was arguing against at the time.\nThe term is often used by conservatives in the U.S. to imply that the privately run health care system would become controlled by the government, thereby associating it with socialism, which has negative connotations to some people in American political culture. As such, its usage is controversial, and at odds with the views of conservatives in other countries prepared to defend socialized medicine such as Margaret Thatcher. According to a 2018 Gallup poll, 37% of American adults have a positive view of socialism, including 57% of Democrat-leaning voters and 16% of Republican-leaning voters.\nHistory of term.\nWhen the term \"socialized medicine\" first appeared in the United States in the early 20th century, it bore no negative connotations. Otto P. Geier, chairman of the Preventive Medicine Section of the American Medical Association, was quoted in \"The New York Times\" in 1917 as praising socialized medicine as a way to \"discover disease in its incipiency\", help end \"venereal diseases, alcoholism, tuberculosis\", and \"make a fundamental contribution to social welfare\". However, by the 1930s, the term socialized medicine was routinely used negatively by conservative opponents of publicly funded health care who wished to imply it represented socialism, and by extension, communism. Universal health care and national health insurance were first proposed by U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt. President Franklin D. Roosevelt later championed it, as did Harry S. Truman as part of his Fair Deal and many others. Truman announced before describing his proposal that: \"This is not socialized medicine\".\nGovernment involvement in health care was ardently opposed by the AMA, which distributed posters to doctors with slogans such as \"Socialized medicine\u00a0... will undermine the democratic form of government.\" According to T.R. Reid (\"The Healing of America\", 2009): &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The term [\"socialized medicine\"] was popularized by a public relations firm [Whitaker and Baxter] working for the American Medical Association in 1947 to disparage President Truman's proposal for a national health care system. It was a label, at the dawn of the cold war, meant to suggest that anybody advocating universal access to health care must be a communist. And the phrase has retained its political power for six decades.\nThe AMA conducted a nationwide campaign called Operation Coffee Cup during the late 1950s and early 1960s in opposition to the Democrats' plans to extend Social Security to include health insurance for the elderly, later known as Medicare. As part of the plan, doctors' wives would organize coffee meetings in an attempt to convince acquaintances to write letters to Congress opposing the program. In 1961, Ronald Reagan recorded a disc entitled \"Ronald Reagan Speaks Out Against Socialized Medicine\" warning its audience the \"dangers\" that socialized medicine could bring. The recording was widely played at Operation Coffee Cup meetings. Other pressure groups began to extend the definition from state managed health care to any form of state finance in health care. President Dwight Eisenhower opposed plans to expand government role in healthcare during his time in office.\nIn more recent times, the term was brought up again by Republicans in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. In July 2007, one month after the release of Michael Moore's film \"Sicko\", Rudy Giuliani, the front-runner for the 2008 Republican presidential nomination, attacked the health care plans of Democratic presidential candidates as socialized medicine that was European and socialist, Giuliani claimed that he had a better chance of surviving prostate cancer in the US than he would have had in England and went on to repeat the claim in campaign speeches for three months before making them in a radio advertisement. After the radio ad began running, the use of the statistic was widely criticized by FactCheck.org, PolitiFact.com, by \"The Washington Post\", and others who consulted leading cancer experts and found that Giuliani's cancer survival statistics to be false, misleading or \"flat wrong\", the numbers having been reported to have been obtained from an opinion article by Giuliani health care advisor David Gratzer, a Canadian psychiatrist in the Manhattan Institute's \"City Journal\" where Gratzer was a senior fellow. \"The Times\" reported that the British Health Secretary pleaded with Giuliani to stop using the NHS as a political football in American presidential politics. The article reported that not only the figures were five years out of date and wrong but also that US health experts disputed both the accuracy of Giuliani's figures and questioned whether it was fair to make a direct comparison. The \"St. Petersburg Times\" said that Giuliani's tactic of \"injecting a little fear\" exploited cancer, which was \"apparently not beneath a survivor with presidential aspirations\". Giuliani's repetition of the error even after it had been pointed out to him earned him more criticism and was awarded four \"Pinocchios\" by the \"Washington Post\" for recidivism.\nHealth care professionals have tended to avoid the term because of its pejorative nature, but if they use it, they do not include publicly funded private medical schemes such as Medicaid. Opponents of state involvement in health care tend to use the looser definition.\nThe term is widely used by the American media and pressure groups. Some have even stretched use of the term to cover any regulation of health care, publicly financed or not. The term is often used to criticize publicly provided health care outside the US, but rarely to describe similar health care programs there, such as the Veterans Administration clinics and hospitals, military health care, or the single payer programs such as Medicaid and Medicare. Many conservatives use the term to evoke negative sentiment toward health care reform that would involve increasing government involvement in the US health care system.\nMedical staff, academics and most professionals in the field and international bodies such as the World Health Organization tend to avoid use of the term. Outside the US, the terms most commonly used are universal health care or public health care. According to health economist Uwe Reinhardt, \"strictly speaking, the term \"socialized medicine\" should be reserved for health systems in which the government operates the production of health care and provides its financing.\" Still others say the term has no meaning at all.\nIn more recent times, the term has gained a more positive reappraisal. Documentary movie maker Michael Moore in his documentary \"Sicko\" pointed out that Americans do not talk about public libraries or the police or the fire department as being \"socialized\" and do not have negative opinions of these. Media personalities such as Oprah Winfrey have also weighed in behind the concept of public involvement in healthcare. A 2008 poll indicates that Americans are sharply divided when asked about their views of the expression \"socialized medicine\", with a large percentage of Democrats holding favorable views, while a large percentage of Republicans holding unfavorable views. Independents tend to somewhat favor it.\nHistory in United States.\nThe Veterans Health Administration, the Military Health System, and the Indian Health Service are examples of socialized medicine in the stricter sense of government administered care, but they are for limited populations.\nMedicare and Medicaid are forms of publicly funded health care, which fits the looser definition of socialized medicine. Part B coverage (Medical) requires a monthly premium of $96.40 (and possibly higher) and the first $135 of costs per year also fall to the senior, not the government.\nA poll released in February 2008, conducted by the Harvard School of Public Health and Harris Interactive, indicated that Americans are currently divided in their opinions of socialized medicine, and this split correlates strongly with their political party affiliation.\nTwo thirds of those polled said they understood the term \"socialized medicine\" very well or somewhat well. When offered descriptions of what such a system could mean, strong majorities believed that it means \"the government makes sure everyone has health insurance\" (79%) and \"the government pays most of the cost of health care\" (73%). One third (32%) felt that socialized medicine is a system in which \"the government tells doctors what to do\". The poll showed \"striking differences\" by party affiliation. Among Republicans polled, 70% said that socialized medicine would be worse than the current system. The same percentage of Democrats (70%) said that a socialized medical system would be better than the current system. Independents were more evenly split, with 43% saying socialized medicine would be better and 38% worse.\nAccording to Robert J. Blendon, professor of health policy and political analysis at the Harvard School of Public Health, \"The phrase 'socialized medicine' really resonates as a pejorative with Republicans. However, that so many Democrats believe that socialized medicine would be an improvement is an indication of their dissatisfaction with our current system.\" Physicians' opinions have become more favorable toward \"socialized medicine\".\nA 2008 survey of doctors, published in \"Annals of Internal Medicine\", shows that physicians support universal health care and national health insurance by almost 2 to 1.\nPolitics.\nWhile the United States is an exception among high-income countries in lacking an universal healthcare system, the politics of healthcare should not be thought of as entirely uncontentious in countries which have adopted it. In the aftermath the 2008 financial crisis and the resulting austerity, welfare systems in Europe are seen as less reslilant against political pressure as previously thought. There are also countries, such as post-Soviet states in economic crises during the dissolution and Chile, which adopted and subsequently lost universal healthcare. However, as the policy is generally popular, there are obstacles to convincing the majority of the population to vote against their own interests, whereas vested interests have thus far been successful in blocking expansion to health coverage.\nIn the United States, neither of the main parties favors a socialized system that puts the government in charge of hospitals or doctors, but they do have different approaches to financing and access. Democrats tend to be favorably inclined towards reform that involves more government control over health care financing and citizens' right of access to health care. Republicans are broadly in favor of the status quo, or a reform of the financing system that gives more power to the citizen, often through tax credits.\nSupporters of government involvement in health care argue that government involvement ensures access, quality, and addresses market failures specific to the health care markets. When the government covers the cost of health care, there is no need for individuals or their employers to pay for private insurance.\nOpponents also claim that the absence of a market mechanism may slow innovation in treatment and research.\nCost of care.\nSocialized medicine amongst industrialized countries tends to be more affordable than in systems where there is little government involvement. A 2003 study examined costs and outputs in the U.S. and other industrialized countries and broadly concluded that the U.S. spends so much because its health care system is more costly. It noted that \"the United States spent considerably more on health care than any other country\u00a0... [yet] most measures of aggregate utilization such as physician visits per capita and hospital days per capita were below the OECD median. Since spending is a product of both the goods and services used and their prices, this implies that much higher prices are paid in the United States than in other countries. The researchers examined possible reasons and concluded that input costs were high (salaries, cost of pharmaceutical), and that the complex payment system in the U.S. added higher administrative costs. Comparison countries in Canada and Europe were much more willing to exert monopsony power to drive down prices, whilst the highly fragmented buy side of the U.S. health system was one factor that could explain the relatively high prices in the United States of America. The current fee-for-service payment system also stimulates expensive care by promoting procedures over visits through financially rewarding the former ($1,500 \u2013 for doing a 10-minute procedure) vs. the latter ($50 \u2013 for a 30\u201345 minute visit). This causes the proliferation of specialists (more expensive care) and creating, what Don Berwick refers to as, \"the world's best healthcare system for rescue care\".\nOther studies have found no consistent and systematic relationship between the type of financing of health care and cost containment; the efficiency of operation of the health care system itself appears to depend much more on how providers are paid and how the delivery of care is organized than on the method used to raise these funds.\nSome supporters argue that government involvement in health care would reduce costs not just because of the exercise of monopsony power, e.g. in drug purchasing, but also because it eliminates profit margins and administrative overhead associated with private insurance, and because it can make use of economies of scale in administration. In certain circumstances, a volume purchaser may be able to guarantee sufficient volume to reduce overall prices while providing greater profitability to the seller, such as in so-called \"purchase commitment\" programs. Economist Arnold Kling attributes the present cost crisis mainly to the practice of what he calls \"premium medicine\", which overuses expensive forms of technology that is of marginal or no proven benefit.\nMilton Friedman has argued that government has weak incentives to reduce costs because \"nobody spends somebody else's money as wisely or as frugally as he spends his own\". Others contend that health care consumption is not like other consumer consumption. Firstly there is a negative utility of consumption (consuming more health care does not make one better off) and secondly there is an information asymmetry between consumer and supplier.\nPaul Krugman and Robin Wells argue that all of the evidence indicates that public insurance of the kind available in several European countries achieves equal or better results at much lower cost, a conclusion that also applies within the United States. In terms of actual administrative costs, Medicare spent less than 2% of its resources on administration, while private insurance companies spent more than 13%. The Cato Institute argues that the 2% Medicare cost figure ignores all costs shifted to doctors and hospitals, and alleges that Medicare is not very efficient at all when those costs are incorporated. Some studies have found that the U.S. wastes more on bureaucracy (compared to the Canadian level), and that this excess administrative cost would be sufficient to provide health care to the uninsured population in the U.S.\nNotwithstanding the arguments about Medicare, there is overall less bureaucracy in socialized systems than in the present mixed U.S. system. Spending on administration in Finland is 2.1% of all health care costs, and in the UK the figure is 3.3% whereas the U.S. spends 7.3% of all expenditures on administration.\nQuality of care.\nSome in the U.S. claim that socialized medicine would reduce health care quality. The quantitative evidence for this claim is not clear. The WHO has used Disability Adjusted Life Expectancy (the number of years an average person can expect to live in good health) as a measure of a nation's health achievement, and has ranked its member nations by this measure. The U.S. ranking was 24th, worse than similar industrial countries with high public funding of health such as Canada (ranked 5th), the UK (12th), Sweden (4th), France (3rd) and Japan (1st). But the U.S. ranking was better than some other European countries such as Ireland, Denmark and Portugal, which came 27th, 28th and 29th respectively. Finland, with its relatively high death rate from guns and renowned high suicide rate came above the U.S. in 20th place. The British have a Care Quality Commission that commissions independent surveys of the quality of care given in its health institutions and these are publicly accessible over the internet. These determine whether health organizations are meeting public standards for quality set by government and allows regional comparisons. Whether these results indicate a better or worse situation to that in other countries such as the U.S. is hard to tell because these countries tend to lack a similar set of standards.\nTaxation.\nOpponents claim that socialized medicine would require higher taxes but international comparisons do not support this; the ratio of public to private spending on health is lower in the U.S. than that of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, or any EU country, yet the per capita tax funding of health in those countries is already lower than that of the United States.\nTaxation is not necessarily an unpopular form of funding for health care. In England, a survey for the British Medical Association of the general public showed overwhelming support for the tax funding of health care. Nine out of ten people agreed or strongly agreed with a statement that the NHS should be funded from taxation with care being free at the point of use.\nAn opinion piece in \"The Wall Street Journal\" by two conservative Republicans argues that government sponsored health care will legitimatize support for government services generally, and make an activist government acceptable. \"Once a large number of citizens get their health care from the state, it dramatically alters their attachment to government. Every time a tax cut is proposed, the guardians of the new medical-welfare state will argue that tax cuts would come at the expense of health care -- an argument that would resonate with middle-class families entirely dependent on the government for access to doctors and hospitals.\"\nInnovation.\nSome in the U.S. argue that if government were to use its size to bargain down health care prices, this would undermine American leadership in medical innovation. It is argued that the high level of spending in the U.S. health care system and its tolerance of waste is actually beneficial because it underpins American leadership in medical innovation, which is crucial not just for Americans, but for the entire world.\nOthers point out that the American health care system spends more on state-of-the-art treatment for people who have good insurance, and spending is reduced on those lacking it and question the costs and benefits of some medical innovations, noting, for example, that \"rising spending on new medical technologies designed to address heart disease has not meant that more patients have survived\".\nAccess.\nOne of the goals of socialized medicine systems is ensuring universal access to health care. Opponents of socialized medicine say that access for low-income individuals can be achieved by means other than socialized medicine, for example, income-related subsidies can function without public provision of either insurance or medical services. Economist Milton Friedman said the role of the government in health care should be restricted to financing hard cases. Universal coverage can also be achieved by making purchase of insurance compulsory. For example, European countries with socialized medicine in the broader sense, such as Germany and The Netherlands, operate in this way. A legal obligation to purchase health insurance is akin to a mandated health tax, and the use of public subsidies is a form of directed income redistribution via the tax system. Such systems give the consumer a free choice amongst competing insurers whilst achieving universality to a government directed minimum standard.\nCompulsory health insurance or savings are not limited to so-called socialized medicine, however. Singapore's health care system, which is often referred to as a free-market or mixed system, makes use of a combination of compulsory participation and state price controls to achieve the same goals.\nRationing (access, coverage, price, and time).\nPart of the current debate about health care in the United States revolves around whether the Affordable Care Act as part of health care reform will result in a more systematic and logical allocation of health care. Opponents tend to believe that the law will eventually result in a government takeover of health care and ultimately to socialized medicine and rationing based not on being able to afford the care you want but on whether a third party other than the patient and the doctor decides whether the procedure or the cost is justifiable. Supporters of reform point out that health care rationing already exists in the United States through insurance companies issuing denial for reimbursement on the grounds that the insurance company believes the procedure is experimental or will not assist even though the doctor has recommended it. A public insurance plan was not included in the Affordable Care Act but some argue that it would have added to health care access choices, and others argue that the central issue is whether health care is rationed sensibly.\nOpponents of reform invoke the term socialized medicine because they say it will lead to health care rationing by denial of coverage, denial of access, and use of waiting lists, but often do so without acknowledging coverage denial, lack of access and waiting lists exist in the U.S. health care system currently or that waiting lists in the U.S. are sometimes longer than the waiting lists in countries with socialized medicine. Proponents of the reform proposal point out a public insurer is not akin to a socialized medicine system because it will have to negotiate rates with the medical industry just as other insurers do and cover its cost with premiums charged to policyholders just as other insurers do without any form of subsidy.\nThere is a frequent misunderstanding to think that waiting happens in places like the United Kingdom and Canada but does not happen in the United States. For instance it is not uncommon even for emergency cases in some U.S. hospitals to be boarded on beds in hallways for 48 hours or more due to lack of inpatient beds and people in the U.S. rationed out by being unable to afford their care are simply never counted and may never receive the care they need, a factor that is often overlooked. Statistics about waiting times in national systems are an honest approach to the issue of those waiting for access to care. Everyone waiting for care is reflected in the data, which, in the UK for example, are used to inform debate, decision-making and research within the government and the wider community. Some people in the U.S. are rationed out of care by unaffordable care or denial of access by HMOs and insurers or simply because they cannot afford co-pays or deductibles even if they have insurance. These people wait an indefinitely long period and may never get care they need, but actual numbers are simply unknown because they are not recorded in official statistics.\nOpponents of the current reform care proposals fear that U.S. comparative effective research (a plan introduced in the stimulus bill) will be used to curtail spending and ration treatments, which is one function of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), arguing that rationing by market pricing rather by government is the best way for care to be rationed. However, when defining any group scheme, the same rules must apply to everyone in the scheme so some coverage rules had to be established. Britain has a national budget for public funded health care, and recognizes there has to be a logical trade off between spending on expensive treatments for some against, for example, caring for sick children. NICE is therefore applying the same market pricing principles to make the hard job of deciding between funding some treatments and not funding others on behalf of everyone in the insured pool. This rationing does not preclude choice of obtaining insurance coverage for excluded treatment as insured persons do having the choice to take out supplemental health insurance for drugs and treatments that the NHS does not cover (at least one private insurer offers such a plan) or from meeting treatment costs out-of-pocket.\nThe debate in the U.S. over rationing has enraged some in the UK and statements made by politicians such as Sarah Palin and Chuck Grassley resulted in a mass Internet protest on websites such as Twitter and Facebook under the banner title \"welovetheNHS\" with positive stories of NHS experiences to counter the negative ones being expressed by these politicians and others and by certain media outlets such as \"Investor's Business Daily\" and Fox News. In the UK, it is private health insurers that ration care (in the sense of not covering the most common services such as access to a primary care physician or excluding pre-existing conditions) rather than the NHS. Free access to a general practitioner is a core right in the NHS, but private insurers in the UK will not pay for payments to a private primary care physician. Private insurers exclude many of the most common services as well as many of the most expensive treatments, whereas the vast majority of these are not excluded from the NHS but are obtainable at no cost to the patient. According to the Association of British Insurers (ABI), a typical policy will exclude the following: going to a general practitioner; going to accident and emergency; drug abuse; HIV/AIDS; normal pregnancy; gender reassignment; mobility aids, such as wheelchairs; organ transplant; injuries arising from dangerous hobbies (often called hazardous pursuits); pre-existing conditions; dental services; outpatient drugs and dressings; deliberately self-inflicted injuries; infertility; cosmetic treatment; experimental or unproven treatment or drugs; and war risks. Chronic illnesses, such as diabetes and end stage renal disease requiring dialysis are also excluded from coverage. Insurers do not cover these because they feel they do not need to since the NHS already provides coverage and to provide the choice of a private provider would make the insurance prohibitively expensive. Thus in the UK there is cost shifting from the private sector to the public sector, which again is the \"opposite\" of the allegation of cost shifting in the U.S. from public providers such as Medicare and Medicaid to the private sector.\nPalin had alleged that America will create rationing \"death panels\" to decide whether old people could live or die, again widely taken to be a reference to NICE. U.S. Senator Chuck Grassley alleged that he was told that Senator Edward Kennedy would have been refused the brain tumor treatment he was receiving in the United States had he instead lived a country with government run health care. This, he alleged, would have been due to rationing because of Kennedy's age (77 years) and the high cost of treatment. The UK Department of Health said that Grassley's claims were \"just wrong\" and reiterated health service in Britain provides health care on the basis of clinical need regardless of age or ability to pay. The chairman of the British Medical Association, Hamish Meldrum, said he was dismayed by the \"jaw-droppingly untruthful attacks\" made by American critics. The chief executive of the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE), told \"The Guardian\" newspaper that \"it is neither true, nor is it anything you could extrapolate from anything we've ever recommended\" that Kennedy would be denied treatment by the NHS. The business journal \"Investor's Business Daily\" claimed mathematician and astrophysicist Stephen Hawking, who had ALS and spoke with the aid of an American-accented voice synthesizer, would not have survived if he had been treated in the British National Health Service. Hawking was British and was treated throughout his life (67 years) by the NHS and issued a statement to the effect he owed his life to the quality of care he has received from the NHS.\nSome argue that countries with national health care may use waiting lists as a form of rationing compared to countries that ration by price, such as the United States, according to several commentators and healthcare experts. \"The Washington Post\" columnist Ezra Klein compared 27% of Canadians reportedly waiting four months or more for elective surgery with 26% of Americans reporting that they did not fulfill a prescription due to cost (compared to only 6% of Canadians). Britain's former age-based policy that once prevented the use of kidney dialysis as treatment for older patients with renal problems, even to those who can privately afford the costs, has been cited as another example. A 1999 study in the \"Journal of Public Economics\" analyzed the British National Health Service and found that its waiting times function as an effective market disincentive, with a low elasticity of demand with respect to time.\nSupporters of private price rationing over waiting time rationing, such as \"The Atlantic\" columnist Megan McArdle, argue time rationing leaves patients worse off since their time (measured as an opportunity cost) is worth much more than the price they would pay. Opponents also state categorizing patients based on factors such as social value to the community or age will not work in a heterogeneous society without a common ethical consensus such as the U.S. Doug Bandow of the CATO Institute wrote that government decision making would \"override the differences in preferences and circumstances\" for individuals and that it is a matter of personal liberty to be able to buy as much or as little care as one wants. Neither argument recognizes the fact that in most countries with socialized medicine, a parallel system of private health care allows people to pay extra to reduce their waiting time. The exception is that some provinces in Canada disallow the right to bypass queuing unless the matter is one in which the rights of the person under the constitution.\nA 1999 article in the \"British Medical Journal\", stated \"there is much merit in using waiting lists as a rationing mechanism for elective health care if the waiting lists are managed efficiently and fairly\". Arthur Kellermann, associate dean for health policy at Emory University, stated rationing by ability to pay rather than by anticipated medical benefits in the U.S. makes its system more unproductive, with poor people avoiding preventive care and eventually using expensive emergency treatment. Ethicist Daniel Callahan has written that U.S. culture overly emphasizes individual autonomy rather than communitarian morals and that stops beneficial rationing by social value, which benefits everyone.\nSome argue that waiting lists result in great pain and suffering, but again evidence for this is unclear. In a recent survey of patients admitted to hospital in the UK from a waiting list or by planned appointment, only 10% reported they felt they should have been admitted sooner than they were. 72% reported the admission was as timely as they felt necessary. Medical facilities in the U.S. do not report waiting times in national statistics as is done in other countries and it is a myth to believe there is no waiting for care in the U.S. Some argue that wait times in the U.S. could actually be as long as or longer than in other countries with universal health care.\nThere is considerable argument about whether any of the health bills currently before congress will introduce rationing. Howard Dean for example contested in an interview that they do not. However, \"Politico\" has pointed out that all health systems contain elements of rationing (such as coverage rules) and the public health care plan will therefore implicitly involve some element of rationing.\nPolitical interference and targeting.\nIn the UK, where government employees or government-employed sub-contractors deliver most health care, political interference is quite hard to discern. Most supply-side decisions are in practice under the control of medical practitioners and of boards comprising the medical profession. There is some antipathy towards the target-setting by politicians in the UK. Even the NICE criteria for public funding of medical treatments were never set by politicians. Nevertheless, politicians have set targets, for instance to reduce waiting times and to improve choice. Academics have pointed out that the claims of success of the targeting are statistically flawed.\nThe veracity and significance of the claims of targeting interfering with clinical priorities are often hard to judge. For example, some UK ambulance crews have complained that hospitals would deliberately leave patients with ambulance crews to prevent an accident and emergency department (A&amp;E, or emergency room) target-time for treatment from starting to run. The Department of Health vehemently denied the claim, because the A&amp;E time begins when the ambulance arrives at the hospital and not after the handover. It defended the A&amp;E target by pointing out that the percentage of people waiting four hours or more in A&amp;E had dropped from just under 25% in 2004 to less than 2% in 2008. The original \"Observer\" article reported that in London, 14,700 ambulance turnarounds were longer than an hour and 332 were more than two hours when the target turnaround time is 15 minutes. However, in the context of the total number of emergency ambulance attendances by the London Ambulance Service each year (approximately 865,000), these represent just 1.6% and 0.03% of all ambulance calls. The proportion of these attributable to patients left with ambulance crews is not recorded. At least one junior doctor has complained that the four-hour A&amp;E target is too high and leads to unwarranted actions that are not in the best interests of patients.\nPolitical targeting of waiting-times in Britain has had dramatic effects. The National Health Service reports that the median admission wait-time for elective inpatient treatment (non-urgent hospital treatment) in England at the end of August 2007, was just under 6 weeks, and 87.5% of patients were admitted within 13 weeks. Reported waiting times in England also overstate the true waiting-time. This is because the clock starts ticking when the patient has been referred to a specialist by the GP and it only stops when the medical procedure is completed. The 18-week maximum waiting period target thus includes all the time taken for the patient to attend the first appointment with the specialist, time for any tests called for by the specialist to determine precisely the root of the patient's problem and the best way to treat it. It excludes time for any intervening steps deemed necessary prior to treatment, such as recovery from some other illness or the losing of excessive weight.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59113", "revid": "43283639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59113", "title": "Hemant Kumar", "text": "Indian singer and music director (1920\u20131989)\nHemanta Mukhopadhyay (16 June 1920 \u2013 26 September 1989), known professionally as Hemanta Mukherjee and Hemant Kumar, was an Indian music director and a playback singer who primarily sang in Bengali and Hindi, along with several other Indian languages, including Marathi, Gujarati, Odia, Assamese, Tamil, Punjabi, Bhojpuri, Konkani, Sanskrit and Urdu. He was a artist in Bengali and Hindi film music, Rabindra Sangeet, and various other genres. He was the recipient of two National Awards for Best Male Playback Singer and was popularly known as the \"Voice of God\".\nEarly life and education.\nHemanta was born in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, at his maternal grandfather's residence, where his grandfather served as a physician. His paternal family originated from Jaynagar Majilpur and had migrated to Kolkata in the early 1900s. Growing up in Kolkata, he received his early education at Nasiruddin School before transferring to Mitra Institution School in Bhowanipore. During his school years, he formed lasting friendships with Subhash Mukhopadhyay, who would later become a celebrated poet, and writer Santosh Kumar Ghosh.\nHemanta enrolled in the Bengal Technical Institute at Jadavpur (now Jadavpur University) to pursue an engineering diploma. However, he left academics due to health issues and to pursue a career in music, despite his father's disapproval. He briefly experimented with literature and published a short story in the Bengali magazine \"Desh\", but by the late 1930s, he had decided to dedicate himself entirely to music.\nEarly career.\nHemanta's debut as a playback singer came in 1940 with the Bengali film \"Rajkumarer Nirbbasan\", where he sang under the musical direction of S.D. Burman. This was followed by \"Nimai Sanyas\" (1941), scored by Hariprasanna Das. In 1943, he composed his first original songs, \"Katha Kayonako Shudhu Shono\" and \"Amar Biraha Akashe Priya\", with lyrics by Amiya Bagchi. His entry into Hindi cinema occurred in 1942 with the film \"Meenakshi\", followed by \"Irada\" (1944), under composer Amar Nath's direction.\nHemanta established himself as a prominent exponent of Rabindra Sangeet with his first recorded piece in the genre appearing in the Bengali film \"Priya Bandhabi\" (1944). The song \"Pather Sesh Kothaye\" marked the beginning of his journey with Tagore's compositions. That same year, he recorded his first non-film Rabindra Sangeet album under the Columbia label, featuring \"Aamar Aar Habe Na Deri\" and \"Keno Pantha E Chanchalata\". An earlier recording of \"Aamaar mallikabone\" for All India Radio/Akashvani has been lost to time.\nHis directorial debut as a music director came with the Bengali film \"Abhiyatri\" in 1947. During this period, he worked alongside contemporary male vocalists including Jaganmay Mitra, Robin Majumdar, Satya Chowdhury, Dhananjay Bhattacharya, Sudhirlal Chakraborty, Bechu Dutta and Talat Mahmood. While his early recordings garnered critical acclaim, major commercial success eluded him until 1947.\nEmergence as a national artist.\nIn the mid-1940s, Hemanta became actively involved with the Indian People's Theatre Association (IPTA), where he formed a significant collaboration with fellow member and composer Salil Chowdhury. The devastating Bengal famine of 1943 and the inaction of both British authorities and wealthy Indians had been instrumental in IPTA's formation.\nHis 1947 recording of \"Ganyer Badhu\" (\"The rural bride\"), composed and written by Salil Chowdhury, marked a turning point in his career. This unconventional six-minute composition, recorded on both sides of a 78 rpm disc, departed from traditional Bengali song structure and romantic themes. Instead, it portrayed the tragic transformation of an idyllic rural life devastated by famine and poverty. The song's unprecedented success established Hemanta as a leading voice in eastern India, elevating him above his male contemporaries. This successful partnership with Salil Chowdhury continued through numerous popular collaborations in subsequent years.\nDuring this period, Hemanta received increasing opportunities as a music composer for Bengali films, notably working with director Hemen Gupta. When Gupta relocated to Mumbai, he invited Hemanta to compose for his Hindi directorial debut \"Anandmath\" under the Filmistan banner. This led to Hemanta's migration to Mumbai in 1951, where he joined Filmistan Studios. He named his Mumbai residence in Khar after Rabindranath Tagore's Gitanjali. \"Anand Math\" (1952) achieved moderate success, with its standout contribution being Lata Mangeshkar's rendition of 'Vande mataram', which Hemanta set to a stirring martial tune.\nFollowing \"Anandamath\", Hemanta composed for several Filmistan productions, including \"Shart\", gaining modest popularity. Simultaneously, he established himself as a prominent playback singer in Mumbai. His collaborations with S. D. Burman for Bollywood actors produced numerous hits, like Dev Anand for (\"Yeh Raat Yeh Chandni Phir Kahan\" from \"Jaal\", \"Chup Hai Dharti\" and \"Teri Duniya Mein Jeene Se\" from \"House No. 44\", \"Hai Apna Dil To Awara\" from \"Solva Saal\", and \"Na Tum Humen Jano\" from \"Baat Ek Raat Ki\"). Pradeep Kumar for (\"Nagin\", \"Detective\"), Sunil Dutt for (\"Savle Salone Aaye Din\" from \"Ek Hi Rasta\", \"O Neend Na Mujhko\" from \"Post Box 999\", \"Ghumsum Sa Yeh Jahan\" from \"Duniya Jhukti Hain\") and Biswajeet for (\"Bekarar Karke Hume\" from \"Bees Saal Baad\", \"Ek Baar Zara Phir\" from \"Bin Badal Barsaat\", \"Ye Nayan Dare Dare\" from \"Kohra\") and Dharmendra for \"Anupama\". He also served as the music composer for these films.\nCareer rise.\nBy the mid-1950s, Hemanta had consolidated his position as a prominent singer and composer. In Bengal, he was one of the foremost exponents of Rabindra Sangeet and perhaps the most sought-after male singer. In a ceremony organized by Hemanta Mukherjee to honor Debabrata Biswas (1911\u20131980), the legendary Rabindra Sangeet exponent, in Calcutta in March 1980, Debabrata Biswas unhesitatingly mentioned Hemanta as \"the second hero\" to popularise Rabindra Sangeet, the first being the legendary Pankaj Kumar Mullick. In Mumbai, along with playback singing, Hemanta carved a niche as a composer. He composed music for a Hindi film called \"Nagin\" (1954) which became a major success owing largely to its music. Songs of \"Nagin\" remained chart-toppers continuously for two years and culminated in Hemanta receiving the prestigious Filmfare Best Music Director Award in 1955. The very same year, he scored music for a Bengali movie \"Shap Mochan\" in which he played back four songs for the Bengali actor Uttam Kumar. This started a long partnership between Hemanta and Uttam as a playback singer-actor pair. They were the most popular singer-actor duo in Bengali cinema over the next decade.\nIn the latter part of the 1950s, Hemanta composed music and sang for several Bengali and Hindi films and recorded several Rabindra Sangeet and Bengali non-film songs. Almost all of these, especially his Bengali songs, became very popular. This period can be seen as the zenith of his career and lasted for almost a decade. Salil Chowdhury and Lata Mangeshkar stated Hemanta as the Voice Of God. He sang songs composed by the major music directors in Bengal such as Nachiketa Ghosh, Robin Chatterjee and Salil Chowdhury. Some of the notable films Hemanta himself composed music for during this period include \"Harano Sur\", \"Marutirtha Hinglaj\", \"Neel Akasher Neechey\", \"Lukochuri\", \"Swaralipi\", \"Deep Jwele Jaai\", \"Shesh Parjanta\", \"Kuhak\", \"Dui Bhai\", and \"Saptapadi\" in Bengali, and \"Jagriti\" and \"Ek Hi Raasta\" in Hindi.\nProduction.\nIn the late 1950s, Hemanta ventured into movie production under his own banner: Hemanta-Bela Productions. The first movie under this banner was a Bengali film directed by Mrinal Sen, titled Neel Akasher Neechey (1959). The story was based on the travails of a Chinese street hawker in\nCalcutta in the backdrop of India's freedom struggle. The movie went on to win the President's Gold Medal \u2014 the highest honour for a movie from the Government of India. In the next decade, Hemanta's production company was renamed Geetanjali productions and it produced several Hindi movies such as Bees Saal Baad, Kohraa, Biwi Aur Makaan, Faraar, Rahgir and Khamoshi all of which had music by Hemanta. Only Bees Saal Baad and Khamoshi were major commercial successes.\nBack in Bengal, Hemanta scored music for a movie titled Palatak in 1963 where he experimented with merging Bengal folk music and light music. This proved to be a major success and Hemanta's composition style changed noticeably for many of his future films in Bengal such as Baghini, and Balika Badhu. In Bengali films Manihar and Adwitiya, both of which were major musical as well as commercial successes, his compositions had a light classical tinge. In 1961, for commemorating Rabindranath Tagore's birth centenary, the Gramophone Company of India\nfeatured Rabindrasangeet by Hemanta in a large portion of its commemorative output. This too proved to be a major commercial success. Hemanta went on several overseas concert tours including his trip to the West Indies. Overall, in the 1960s decade, he retained his position as the major male singer in Bengal and as a composer and singer to be reckoned with in Hindi films.\nIn the 1960s he was the predominant and lead male voice in many of Tagore's musical dramas like Valmiki Pratibha, Shyama, Sapmochan, Chitrangada and Chandalika. With Kanika Bandopadhyay (1924\u20132000) and Suchitra Mitra (1924\u20132010), who were the lead female voices in these, he was part of the Rabindra Sangeet triumvirate that was popular and respected. It was referred to as 'Hemanta-Kanika-Suchitra' and, with Debabrata Biswas, this quartet was and continues to be the most heard exponents of Tagore compositions. Asoktaru Bandopadhyay, Chinmoy Chattopadhyay, Sagar Sen, Sumitra Sen, and Ritu Guha were the other leading exponents of Rabindra Sangeet at that time.\nLater career.\nIn the 1970s, Hemanta's contribution to Hindi films was nominal. He scored music for a handful of his home productions, but none of these movies nor their music were successful. In Bengal, however, he remained the foremost exponent of Rabindra Sangeet, film and non-film songs. His output continued to be popular for most of the decade. Some of them are \"Jodi Jante Chao Tumi\" (1972), \"Ek Gochha Rajanigandha\", \"Aamay Prasno Kore Nil Dhrubatara\", \"Sedin Tomay Dekhechilam\" (1974), \"Khirki Theke Singho Duar\" (Stree, 1971), \"Ke Jane Ko Ghonta\" (Sonar Khancha, 1974), \"Jeona Daraon Bandhu\" (Phuleswari, 1975) and popularised Rabindra sangeet using them beautifully in films as per situations. A very popular and classic example is the song \"Chorono Dhorite Diyogo Amare\" in Dadar Kirti (1980). In 1971, Hemanta debuted as a film director in for his self-produced Bengali movie Anindita. It didn't fare exceedingly well at the box office. However, his rendition \"Diner Seshe Ghumer Deshe\" was one of his best and most popular Rabindra Sangeet renditions. In the same year, Hemanta went to Hollywood by responding to film director Conrad Rooks and score the music of Conrad's Siddhartha and played back \"O Nadire\" (composed and sung by him earlier in Neel Akasher Neechey (1959) in that film. He was the first Indian singer to playback in Hollywood. The US government honored Hemanta by conferring him with the citizenship of Baltimore, Maryland; the first-ever singer of India to get US citizenship. In the early to mid-1970s, two major music composers in Bengal, Nachiketa Ghosh and Robin Chatterjee, who had worked closely with Hemanta, since the early 1950s, died. Simultaneously, music composed by Hemanta for Bengali films like \"Phuleswari\", \"Raag Anurag\", \"Ganadebata\" and \"Dadar Kirti\" established him as the major film music composer in the Bengal movie scene. In 1979, Hemanta re-recorded some of his earlier works with composer Salil Chowdhury from the 1940s and 1950s. This album, titled \"Legend of Glory, vol. 2\", was a major commercial success.\nIn 1980, Hemanta had a heart attack that severely affected his vocal capabilities, especially his breath control. He continued to record songs in the early eighties, but his voice was a shade of its rich baritone past. In 1984, Hemanta was felicitated by different organizations, most notably by the Gramophone Company of India, for completing 50 years in music. That very year Hemanta released his last album with Gramophone Company of India \u2014 a 45 rpm extended play disc with four non-film songs. Over the next few years, Hemanta released a few non-film songs for small-time companies that had cropped up in the nascent cassette-based music industry. Only a few of these were commercially successful. He composed music for a handful of Bengali movies and one Bengali and one Hindi tele-series. However, by this time he had become an institution, a beloved and revered personality who was a courteous and friendly gentleman. His philanthropic activities included running a homeopathic hospital in memory of his late father in their native village in Baharu, in the South 24 Parganas district of West Bengal. He continued to feature regularly on All India Radio, Doordarshan (TV), and live programs/concerts during this period.\nIn a television interview, recorded in the early 1990s, to noted elocutionist Gauri Ghosh, his wife Bela Mukherjee recalled that she never knew during his lifetime the number of families and persons he helped to put up financially or otherwise; it was only after his departure that this truth gradually unveiled.\nIn 1987, he was nominated for Padma Bhushan which he refused, having already turned down a previous offer to receive Padma Shri in the 1970s. In this year, he was publicly felicitated in Netaji Indoor Stadium in Calcutta for completing 50 years in the musical journey, where, Lata Mangeshkar presented him with the memento on behalf of his fans and admirers. Despite his aging voice, he became the Best Male Singer in 1988 for his rendition in the film \"Lalan Fakir\".\nIn September 1989 he traveled to Dhaka, Bangladesh to receive the Michael Madhusudan Award, as well as to perform a concert. Immediately after returning from this trip he suffered another heart attack on 26 September 1989 and died at 11:15 pm in a nursing home in South Calcutta.\nPersonal life.\nHemanta had three brothers and a sister Nilima. His younger brother Tarajyoti was a Bengali short story writer. His youngest brother Amal composed music as well as sang for some Bengali movies, most notably for Abak Prithibi and \"Hospital\". Amal recorded a few songs in the 1960s as well with Hemant as music director, most notably the song \"Jiboner Anekta Path Eklai\". In 1945, Hemanta married Bela Mukherjee, a singer from Bengal. Although she had sung some popular songs in the movie \"Kashinath\", she did not actively pursue her musical career after marriage. They had two children, a son Jayant, and a daughter Ranu. Ranu also pursued a music career in the late 1960s and early 1970s, with somewhat limited success. Jayant is married to Moushumi Chatterjee, a Bengali film actress.\nDeath and legacy.\nOn 26 September 1989, Hemant fell ill after returning from a concert in Dhaka. He died shortly after, due to a massive cardiac arrest. According to his daughter-in-law Moushumi Chatterjee, his last words were \"Ki koshto, ki koshto ('such pain, such pain').\"\nHemant's legacy still lives on through the songs that he has recorded during his lifetime, as well as the music he has composed. Due to the commercial viability of his songs, the Gramophone Company of India (or Saregama) still releases at least one album of his every year, repackaging his older songs. The Kolkata Metro's Hemanta Mukhopadhyay metro station is named after him. A Mumbai square is also named after him as Hemant Kumar Square.\nDiscography.\nBengali discography (as composer).\nTotal number of films: 147\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59114", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59114", "title": "Packet analyzer", "text": "Computer network equipment or software that analyzes network traffic\nA packet analyzer (also packet sniffer or network analyzer) is a computer program or computer hardware such as a packet capture appliance that can analyze and log traffic that passes over a computer network or part of a network. Packet capture is the process of intercepting and logging traffic. As data streams flow across the network, the analyzer captures each packet and, if needed, decodes the packet's raw data, showing the values of various fields in the packet, and analyzes its content according to the appropriate RFC or other specifications.\nA packet analyzer used for intercepting traffic on wireless networks is known as a wireless analyzer - those designed specifically for Wi-Fi networks are Wi-Fi analyzers. While a packet analyzer can also be referred to as a network analyzer or protocol analyzer, these terms can also have other meanings. A protocol analyzer can technically be a broader, more general class that includes packet analyzers and sniffers. However, the terms are frequently used interchangeably.\nCapabilities.\nOn wired shared-medium networks, such as Ethernet, Token Ring, and FDDI, depending on the network structure (hub or switch), it may be possible to capture all traffic on the network from a single machine. On modern networks, traffic can be captured using a network switch using port mirroring, which mirrors all packets that pass through designated ports of the switch to another port, if the switch supports port mirroring. A network tap is an even more reliable solution than using a monitoring port since taps are less likely to drop packets during high traffic loads.\nOn wireless LANs, traffic can be captured on one channel at a time, or by using multiple adapters, on several channels simultaneously.\nOn wired broadcast and wireless LANs, to capture unicast traffic between other machines, the network adapter capturing the traffic must be in promiscuous mode. On wireless LANs, even if the adapter is in promiscuous mode, packets not for the service set the adapter is configured for are usually ignored. To see those packets, the adapter must be in monitor mode. No special provisions are required to capture multicast traffic to a multicast group the packet analyzer is already monitoring, or broadcast traffic.\nWhen traffic is captured, either the entire contents of packets or just the headers are recorded. Recording just headers reduces storage requirements and avoids some privacy legal issues, yet often provides sufficient information to diagnose problems.\nCaptured information is decoded from raw digital form into a human-readable format that lets engineers review exchanged information. Protocol analyzers vary in their abilities to display and analyze data.\nSome protocol analyzers can also generate traffic. These can act as protocol testers. Such testers generate protocol-correct traffic for functional testing, and may also have the ability to deliberately introduce errors to test the device under test's ability to handle errors.\nProtocol analyzers can also be hardware-based, either in probe format or, as is increasingly common, combined with a disk array. These devices record packets or packet headers to a disk array.\nUses.\nPacket analyzers can:\nPacket capture can be used to fulfill a warrant from a law enforcement agency to wiretap all network traffic generated by an individual. Internet service providers and VoIP providers in the United States must comply with Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act regulations. Using packet capture and storage, telecommunications carriers can provide the legally required secure and separate access to targeted network traffic and can use the same device for internal security purposes. Collecting data from a carrier system without a warrant is illegal due to laws about interception. By using end-to-end encryption, communications can be kept confidential from telecommunication carriers and legal authorities.\nNotable packet analyzers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59115", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59115", "title": "New World (disambiguation)", "text": "The New World is a reference to the Americas and Oceania.\nIt may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59117", "revid": "42412221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59117", "title": "Rote Armee Fraktion", "text": ""}
{"id": "59118", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59118", "title": "Abacus arithmetic", "text": ""}
{"id": "59119", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59119", "title": "Abacus architecture", "text": ""}
{"id": "59120", "revid": "23551833", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59120", "title": "Strait of Tartary", "text": "Strait dividing Sakhalin from mainland Asia\nThe Strait of Tartary or Gulf of Tartary (; ; ) or Mamiya Strait () is a strait in the Pacific Ocean dividing the Russian island of Sakhalin from mainland Asia (South-East Russia), connecting the Sea of Okhotsk (Nevelskoy Strait) on the north with the Sea of Japan on the south. It is long, wide, and only deep at its shallowest point.\nHistory.\nYuan dynasty.\nDuring the Yuan dynasty, the Yuan armies crossed the strait in the Mongol invasions of Sakhalin. Alleged remnants of a Chinese fort dating back to the Mongol Yuan era can be found in Sakhalin today.\n\"Tartary\" is an older name used by Europeans to refer to a vast region covering Inner Asia, Central Asia and North Asia. The toponym is derived from the medieval ethnonym Tartars, which was applied to various Turkic and Mongol semi-nomadic empires, including the Yuan dynasty that ruled over China and the straits of Northeast Asia.\nQing dynasty.\nDuring the destruction of the Ming dynasty and rise of the Qing dynasty in 1644, the name \"Tartars\" became applied to the Manchus as well, and Manchuria (and Mongolia) became known to the Europeans as the \"Chinese Tartary\". Accordingly, when La P\u00e9rouse charted most of the strait between Sakhalin and the mainland \"Chinese Tartary\" in 1787, the body of water received the name of the Strait (or Channel, or Gulf) of Tartary.\nIn Japan, the strait is named after Mamiya Rinz\u014d, who traveled to the strait in 1808 whereof the name was introduced by Philipp Franz von Siebold in his book \"Nippon: Archiv zur Beschreibung von Japan\" (1832\u201354).\nOn Russian maps, the short narrowest section of the strait (south of the mouth of the Amur) is called Nevelskoy Strait, after Admiral Gennady Nevelskoy, who explored the area in 1848; the body of water north of there, into which the Amur River flows, is the Amur Liman; and the name of \"Strait of Tartary\" is reserved for the largest section of the body of water, south of Nevelskoy Strait.\nThe Tartar Strait was a puzzle to European explorers since, when approached from the south, it becomes increasingly shallow and looks like the head of a bay. In 1787 La Perouse decided not to risk it and turned south even though locals had told him that Sakhalin was an island. In 1797 William Broughton also decided that the Gulf of Tartary was a bay and turned south. In 1805 Adam Johann von Krusenstern failed to penetrate the strait from the north. Mamiya Rinz\u014d's journey of 1808 was little known to Europeans. Gennady Nevelskoy passed the strait from the north in 1848. The Russians kept this a secret and used it to evade a British fleet during the Crimean War.\nRecent history.\n\"S-117\" was a Soviet Shchuka class submarine that was lost on or about December 15, 1952, due to unknown causes in the Strait of Tartary in the Sea of Japan. The boat may have collided with a surface ship or struck a mine. All forty-seven crewmen died in the incident.\nThe southeastern part of the Strait of Tartary was the site of one of the tensest incidents of the Cold War, when on September 1, 1983, Korean Air Lines Flight 007, carrying 269 people including a sitting U.S. congressman, Larry McDonald, strayed into the Soviet air space and was attacked by a Soviet Su-15 interceptor just west of Sakhalin Island. The plane came down on the waters off the strait's only land mass, Moneron Island. An intensive naval search by the U.S. with assistance of Japanese and Korean vessels was carried on in a area of the strait just north of Moneron Island.\n1956 causeway proposal.\nIn 1956 the Soviet government proposed that a causeway be built at the Tartar Strait to block cold water from flowing into the Sea of Japan therefore raising the temperature in areas around the Sea of Japan. The Russians claimed it would raise the temperature of the Sea of Japan by an average of .\nTransportation.\nSince 1973, Vanino-Kholmsk train ferry operates across the strait, connecting the port of Vanino, Khabarovsk Krai on the mainland with Kholmsk on Sakhalin Island.\nLooking at the map, one could think that the Strait of Tartary would provide a convenient connection for boats sailing from the Sea of Japan to the Sea of Okhotsk, e.g. from Vanino to Magadan. However, according to the SASCO that operates that shipping line, their ships rarely travel that way. The usual winter route from Vanino to Magadan is via Tsugaru Strait, and around Hokkaido; the usual summer route, is via La P\u00e9rouse Strait and around Sakhalin. Only when coming back from Magadan to Vanino with a low load and in good weather would the ships travel along the shortest route, i.e., via the Amur Liman, Nevelskoy Strait, and the Strait of Tartary proper (which SASCO calls the \"Strait of Sakhalin\" \u2013 \"Sakhalinsky Proliv\").\nA tunnel under the strait, to provide a road and/or rail connection between Sakhalin and the mainland, was begun under Joseph Stalin, but abandoned incomplete after his death. Renewed calls for either a tunnel or a bridge have been made by politicians in recent years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59121", "revid": "11677590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59121", "title": "Logical abacus", "text": ""}
{"id": "59122", "revid": "49927768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59122", "title": "Sea of Japan", "text": "Marginal sea between Japan, Russia and Korea\nThe Sea of Japan &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt; is the marginal sea between the Japanese archipelago, Sakhalin, the Korean Peninsula, and the mainland of the Russian Far East. The Japanese archipelago separates the sea from the Pacific Ocean. Like the Mediterranean Sea, it has almost no tides due to its nearly complete enclosure from the Pacific Ocean. This isolation also affects faunal diversity and salinity, both of which are lower than in the open ocean. The sea has no large islands, bays or capes. Its water balance is mostly determined by the inflow and outflow through the straits connecting it to the neighboring seas and the Pacific Ocean. Few rivers discharge into the sea and their total contribution to the water exchange is within 1%.\nThe seawater has an elevated concentration of dissolved oxygen that results in high biological productivity. Therefore, fishing is the dominant economic activity in the region. The intensity of shipments across the sea has been moderate owing to political issues, but it is steadily increasing as a result of the growth of East Asian economies.\nNames.\n\"Sea of Japan\" is the dominant term used in English for the sea. The sea is called (, literally 'Japan Sea') in Japan, (, 'Japan Sea') or originally (, 'Whale Sea') in China, (, 'Japanese Sea') in Russia, (, literally 'Korean East Sea') in North Korea, and (, literally 'East Sea') in South Korea.\nNaming dispute.\nThe naming of the sea is the subject of an ongoing dispute. Japan uses the name \"Sea of Japan\" and asserts that it has been the internationally accepted term since the early 19th century. In contrast, South Korea contends that the \"East Sea\" was historically used before Japanese colonial rule, and officially requests that it be used alongside \"Sea of Japan\". North Korea advocates for the name \"East Sea of Korea\".\n\"Limits of Oceans and Seas\" (S-23), published by the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), had been using the name \"Japan Sea\" since it was first published in 1928. It has not been updated since 1953 and is not able to effectively serve as an international standard in today's digital environment. In 2020, the IHO decided to develop a new digital standard, S-130, to meet modern Geographic Information System (GIS) requirements and replace the geographic names in S-23 with unique identifiers for each maritime area in S-130. The IHO Secretary-General stated that S-23, the previous version of the nautical chart made in 1953 will be kept publicly available simply to demonstrate the evolutionary process from the analogue to the digital era.\nHistory.\nFor centuries, the sea had protected Japan from land invasions, particularly by the Mongols. It had long been navigated by Asian and, from the 18th century, by European ships. Russian expeditions of 1733\u20131743 mapped Sakhalin and the Japanese islands. In the 1780s, the Frenchman Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse, traveled northward across the sea through the strait later named after him. In 1796, a British naval officer, William Robert Broughton, explored the Strait of Tartary, the eastern coast of the Russian Far East and the Korean Peninsula.\nIn 1803\u20131806, the Russian navigator Adam Johann von Krusenstern while sailing across the globe in the ship \"Nadezhda\" also explored, in passing, the Sea of Japan and the eastern shores of Japanese islands. In 1849, another Russian explorer Gennady Nevelskoy discovered the strait between the continent and Sakhalin and mapped the northern part of the Strait of Tartary. Russian expeditions were made in 1853\u20131854 and 1886\u20131889 to measure the surface temperatures and record the tides. They also documented the cyclonal character of the sea currents.\nOther notable expeditions of the 19th century include the American North Pacific Exploring and Surveying Expedition (1853\u20131856) and British Challenger expedition (1872\u20131876). The aquatic life was described by V. K. Brazhnikov in 1899\u20131902 and P. Yu. Schmidt in 1903\u20131904. The Japanese scientific studies of the sea began only in 1915 and became systematic since the 1920s.\nAmerican, Canadian and French whaleships cruised for whales in the sea between 1847 and 1892. Most entered the sea via Korea Strait and left via La P\u00e9rouse Strait, but some entered and exited via Tsugaru Strait. They primarily targeted right whales, but began catching humpbacks as right whale catches declined. They also made attempts to catch blue and fin whales, but these species invariably sank after being killed. Right whales were caught from March to September, with peak catches in May and June. During the peak years of 1848 and 1849 a total of over 170 vessels (over 60 in 1848, and over 110 in 1849) cruised in the Sea of Japan, with significantly lesser numbers in following years.\nGeography and geology.\nThe Sea of Japan was landlocked when the land bridge of East Asia existed. The Japan Arc started to form in the Early Miocene. In the Early Miocene the Japan Sea started to open, and the northern and southern parts of the Japanese archipelago separated from each other. During the Miocene, the Sea of Japan expanded.\nThe north part of the Japanese archipelago was further fragmented later until orogenesis of the north-eastern Japanese archipelago began in the later Late Miocene. The south part of the Japanese archipelago remained as a relatively large landmass. The land area had expanded northward in the Late Miocene. The orogenesis of high mountain ranges in north-eastern Japan started in Late Miocene and lasted in Pliocene also. The eastern margin of the sea may host an incipient subduction zone responsible for large earthquakes in 1940, 1964, 1983 and 1993.\nNowadays the Sea of Japan is bounded by the Russian mainland and Sakhalin island to the north, the Korean Peninsula to the west, and the Japanese islands of Hokkaid\u014d, Honsh\u016b and Ky\u016bsh\u016b to the east and south. It is connected to other seas by five straits: the Strait of Tartary between the Asian mainland and Sakhalin; La P\u00e9rouse Strait between Sakhalin and Hokkaid\u014d; the Tsugaru Strait between Hokkaid\u014d and Honsh\u016b; the Kanmon Straits between Honsh\u016b and Ky\u016bsh\u016b; and the Korea Strait between the Korean Peninsula and Ky\u016bsh\u016b.\nThe Korea Strait is composed of the Western Channel and the Tsushima Strait, on either side of Tsushima Island. The straits were formed in recent geologic periods. The oldest of them are the Tsugaru and Tsushima straits. Their formation had interrupted the migration of elephants into the Japanese islands at the end of the Neogene Period (about 2.6\u00a0million years ago). The most recent is La Perouse Strait, which formed about 60,000 to 11,000 years ago closing the path used by mammoths which had earlier moved to northern Hokkaid\u014d. All the straits are rather shallow, with a minimal depth of the order of 100 meters or less. This hinders water exchange, thereby isolating the water and aquatic life of the Sea of Japan from the neighboring seas and oceans.\nThe sea has a surface area of about , a mean depth of and a maximum depth of . It has a carrot-like shape, with the major axis extending from south-west to north-east and a wide southern part narrowing toward the north. The coastal length is about with the largest part () belonging to Russia. The sea extends from north to south for more than and has a maximum width of about .\nIt has three major basins: the \"Yamato Basin\" in the south-east, the \"Japan Basin\" in the north and the \"Tsushima Basin (Ulleung Basin)\" in the south-west. The Japan Basin is of oceanic origin and is the deepest part of the sea, whereas the Tsushima Basin is the shallowest with the depths below . On the eastern shores, the continental shelves of the sea are wide, but on the western shores, particularly along the Korean coast, they are narrow, averaging about .\nThere are three distinct continental shelves in the northern part (above 44\u00b0\u00a0N). They form a staircase-like structure with the steps slightly inclined southwards and submerged to the depths of , and . The last step sharply drops to the depths of about toward the central (deepest) part of the sea. The bottom of this part is relatively flat, but has a few plateaus. In addition, an underwater ridge rising up to runs from north to south through the middle of the central part.\nThe Japanese coastal area of the sea consists of Okujiri Ridge, Sado Ridge, Hakusan Banks, Wakasa Ridge and Oki Ridge. Yamato Ridge is of continental origin and is composed of granite, rhyolite, andesite and basalt. It has an uneven bottom covered with boulders of volcanic rock. Most other areas of the sea are of oceanic origin. Seabed down to is of continental nature and is covered with a mixture of mud, sand, gravel and fragments of rock. The depths between are covered in hemipelagic sediments (i.e., of semi-oceanic origin); these sediments are composed of blue mud rich in organic matter. Pelagic sediments of red mud dominate the deeper regions.\nThere are no large islands in the sea. Most of the smaller ones are near the eastern coast, except for Ulleungdo (South Korea). The most significant islands are Moneron, Rebun, Rishiri, Okushiri, \u014cshima, Sado, Okinoshima, Ulleungdo, Askold, Russky and Putyatin. The shorelines are relatively straight and lack large bays and capes; the coastal shapes are simplest in Sakhalin and are more winding in the Japanese islands.\nThe largest bays are Peter the Great Gulf, Sovetskaya Gavan; Vladimira Bay, Olga; Posyet Bay in Russia; East Korea Bay in North Korea; and Ishikari (Hokkaid\u014d), Toyama (Honsh\u016b), and Wakasa (Honsh\u016b) Bays in Japan. Prominent capes include Lazareva, Peschanyi (sandy), Povorotny, Gromova, Pogibi, Tyk, and Korsakova in Russia; Crillon on Sakhalin; S\u014dya, Nosappu, Tappi, Nyuda, Rebun, Rishiri, Okushiri, Daso and Oki in Japan; and Musu Dan in North Korea.\nAs world sea level dropped during the ice cap advances of the last Ice Age, the exit straits of the Sea of Japan one by one dried and closed. There is controversy as to whether or not in each ice cap advance the world sea level fell low enough for the deepest, the western channel of the Korea Strait, to dry and close, turning the Sea of Japan into a huge cold inland lake with a surface layer of fresh water, freezing over in the winters.\nClimate.\nThe sea climate has warm waters and monsoons. This combination results in strong evaporation, which is especially noticeable between October and March when the strong ( or higher) north-western monsoon wind brings cold and dry continental air. The evaporation is blown further south, causing snowfall in the mountainous western coasts of Japan. This winter monsoon brings typhoons and storms, with the waves reaching which erode the western coasts of Japan. Tsunami waves have also been recorded in the sea. In addition, the monsoon enhances the surface water convection, down to the depths of .\nThe coldest months are January and February, with an average air temperature of in the north and in the south. The northern one-quarter of the sea, particularly the Siberian coast and the Strait of Tartary, freezes for about 4\u22125 months. The timing and extent of freezing vary from year to year, so ice may start forming in the bays as early as October and its remains may be seen even in June. Ice cover is continuous only in the bays and forms floating patches in the open sea. Ice melting in spring results in cold currents in the northern areas.\nIn summer the wind weakens to and reverses its direction, blowing warm and humid air from the North Pacific onto the Asian mainland. The warmest month is August, with an average air temperature of in the north and in the south. Annual precipitation increases from in the north-west to in the south-east.\nA peculiar turbulent cloud pattern, named von K\u00e1rm\u00e1n vortices, is sometimes observed over the Sea of Japan. It requires a stable field of low clouds driven by the wind over a small (isolated) and tall obstacle, and usually forms over small mountainous islands. The Sea of Japan meets these conditions as it has frequent winds and cloudy skies, as well as compact, tall islands such as Rishiri (), Ulleungdo () and \u014cshima ().\nExtent.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the \"Japan Sea\" as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"On the Southwest.\" The Northeastern limit of the Eastern China Sea [From Nomo Saki (32\u00b035\u2032\u00a0N) in Kyusyu to the South point of Hukae Sima (Goto Retto) and on through this island to Ose Saki (Cape Goto) and to Hunan Kan, the South point of Saisyu To (Quelpart), through this island to its Western extreme and thence along the parallel of 33\u00b017\u2032\u00a0North to the mainland] and the Western limit of the Inland Sea [defined circuitously as \"The Southeastern limit of the Japan Sea\"].\n\"On the Southeast.\" In Simonoseki Kaikyo. A line running from Nagoya Saki (130\u00b049\u2032,5\u00a0E) in Ky\u00fbsy\u00fb through the islands of Uma Sima and Muture Sima (33\u00b058\u2032,5\u00a0N) to Murasaki Hana (34\u00b001\u2032\u00a0N) in Honsy\u00fb.\n\"On the East.\" In the Tsugaru Kaik\u00f4. From the extremity of Siriya Saki (141\u00b028\u2032\u00a0E) to the extremity of Esan Saki (41\u00b048\u2032\u00a0N).\n\"On the Northeast.\" In La Perouse Strait (S\u00f4ya Kaiky\u00f4). A line joining S\u00f4ni Misaki and Nishi Notoro Misaki (45\u00b055\u2032\u00a0N).\n\"On the North.\" From Cape Tuik (51\u00b045\u2032\u00a0N) to Cape Sushcheva.\nHydrology.\nThe sea currents circulate in the counterclockwise direction. The Kuroshio (Japan Current), the Tsushima Current and the East Korea Warm Current bring warmer and more saline water to the north. There they merge into the Tsugaru Current and flow into the Pacific Ocean through the Tsugaru Strait. They also feed the S\u014dya Current and exit through the La Perouse Strait to the Sea of Okhotsk. The returning branch is composed of the Liman, North Korea and Central (or Mid-) Japan Sea currents which bring fresh and cold water along the Asian coast to the south.\nWater temperature is mostly affected by exchange with the atmosphere in the northern part of the sea and by the currents in the southern part. Winter temperatures are or below in the north and in the south. In this season, there is a significant temperature difference between the western and eastern parts owing to the circular currents. So at the latitude of Peter the Great Gulf, the water temperature is about in the west and in the east. This east-west difference drops to in summer, and the temperatures rise to in the north and in the south.\nBecause the sea is enclosed, its waters form clearly separated layers which may show seasonal and spatial dependence. In winter, the temperature is almost constant with the depth in the northern part of the sea. However, in central-southern parts, it may be down to , at , at and then remain at about until the bottom. Heating by the sun and tropical monsoons increases the depth gradient in spring\u2013summer.\nIn the north the surface layer (down to ) may heat up to . The temperature would drop sharply to at , then slowly decrease to at and remain so down to the seabed. On the contrary, the temperature in the south could gradually decrease to at , then to at and to at , but then it would rise to about near the bottom. This cold layer at about is formed by sinking of cold water in the northern part of the sea in winter and is brought south by the sea currents; it is rather stable and is observed all through the year.\nThe hydrological isolation of the Sea of Japan also results in slightly lower average water salinity (34.09\u2030, where \u2030 means parts per thousand) compared with the Pacific Ocean. In winter, the highest salinity at 34.5\u2030 is observed in the south where evaporation dominates over precipitation. It is the lowest at 33.8\u2030 in the south-east and south-west because of frequent rains, and remains at about 34.09\u2030 in most other parts.\nThawing of ice in spring reduces water salinity in the north, but it remains high at 34.60\u201334.70\u2030 in the south, partly because of the inflow of salty water through the Korea Strait. A typical variation of salinity across the sea in summer is 31.5\u2030 to 34.5\u2030 from north to south. The depth distribution of salinity is relatively constant. The surface layer tends to be more fresh in the sea parts which experience ice melting and rains. The average water density is 1.0270\u00a0g/cm3 in the north and 1.0255\u00a0g/cm3 in the south in winter. It lowers in summer to 1.0253 and 1.0215\u00a0g/cm3, respectively.\nFew rivers flow into the Sea of Japan from mainland Asia, the largest being Tumen, Rudnaya, Samarga, Partizanskaya and Tumnin; all of them have a mountainous character. In contrast, numerous large rivers flow from Honsh\u016b and Hokkaid\u014d into the sea, including Japan's four largest rivers: the Shinano, Ishikari, Agano and Mogami. The total annual river discharge into the sea is and is relatively constant through the year, except for a minor increase in July. Most water (97% or ) flows into the sea through the Korea Strait and discharges through the Tsugaru (64% or , La P\u00e9rouse ) and Korea straits. Rainfall, evaporation and riverine inflow make only 1% of the water balance. Between October and April, the outflow exceeds the inflow due to the lower income through the Korea Strait; this balance reverses between May and September.\nThe sea has complex tides, which are induced by the tidal wave of the Pacific Ocean penetrating through the Korea Strait and Tsugaru strait. The tides are semi-diurnal (rise twice a day) in the Korea Strait and in the northern part of the Strait of Tartary. They are diurnal at the eastern shore of Korea, Russian Far East and the Japanese islands of Honsh\u016b and Hokkaid\u014d. Mixed tides occur in Peter the Great Gulf and Korea strait. The tidal waves have a speed of in the open sea. They accelerate in the Korea Strait (), La P\u00e9rouse Strait () and especially in the Tsugaru Strait ().\nThe amplitude of the tides is relatively low and varies strongly across the sea. It reaches 3 meters in the south near the Korea Strait, but quickly drops northwards to at the southern tip of Korean Peninsula and to at the North Korean shores. Similar low tides are observed in Hokkaid\u014d, Honsh\u016b and south Sakhalin. The amplitude however increases to toward the north of the Strait of Tartary due to its funnel-like shape. Apart from tides, the water level also displays seasonal, monsoon-related variations across the entire sea with the highest levels observed in summer and lowest in winter. Wind may also locally change the water level by ; for example, it is higher in summer at the Korean and lower at the Japanese coasts.\nThe sea waters have blue to green-blue color and a transparency of about . They are rich in dissolved oxygen, especially in the western and northern parts, which are colder and have more phytoplankton than the eastern and southern areas. The oxygen concentration is 95% of the saturation point near the surface; it decreases with the depth to about 70% at .\nFlora and fauna.\nThe high concentration of dissolved oxygen results in the rich aquatic life of the Sea of Japan \u2013 there are more than 800 species of aquatic plants and more than 3,500 animal species, including more than 900 species of crustaceans, about 1,000 of fish and 26 of mammals. The coastal areas contain several kg/m2 of biomass. Pelagic (oceanic) fishes include saury, mackerel, Jack mackerels, sardines, anchovies, herring, sea bream, squid and various species of salmon and trout. The demersal (sea-bottom) fishes include cod, pollock and Atka mackerel.\nMammals are represented by seals and whales (ancient name for the basin in Chinese was \"Sea of Whales\"), and the crustaceans by shrimps and crabs. Because of the shallow straits connecting the sea with Pacific Ocean, the Sea of Japan has no characteristic oceanic deep-water fauna. Flora and fauna unique to the region near the Sea of Japan are known as \"Japan Sea elements\".\nEconomy.\nFishery had long been the main economic activity on the Sea of Japan. It is mainly carried out on and near the continental shelves and focuses on herring, sardines and bluefin tuna. These species are however depleted from after World War II. Squid is mostly caught near the sea center and salmon near the northern and south-western shores. There is also a well-developed seaweed production.\nThe importance of the fishery in the sea is illustrated by the territorial disputes between Japan and South Korea over Liancourt Rocks and between Japan and Russia over the Kuril Islands. It is also reflected in various legends, such as the legend of the Heishi rock, which says that once when herring vanished, an old fairy threw a bottle with magic water into the sea, and the herring returned. The bottle got stuck to the seabed and turned into a rock, which became a representation of the God of the Sea of Japan.\nVladivostok is a base for the Russian whaling fleet. Although it operates in the northern seas, its production is processed and partly distributed in the Vladivostok area. Vladivostok is also a terminal point of the Trans-Siberian Railway which brings many goods to and from this major port. There is a regular ferry service across the Strait of Tartary between the Russian continental port of Vanino and Kholmsk in Sakhalin.\nThe sea has magnetite sands as well as natural gas and petroleum fields near the northern part of Japan and Sakhalin Island. The intensity of shipments across the sea is moderate, owing to the cold relations between many bordering countries. As a result, the largest Japanese ports are on the Pacific coast, and the significant ports on the Sea of Japan are Niigata, Tsuruta and Maizuru. Major South Korean ports are Busan, Ulsan, and Pohang situated on the south-eastern coast of the Korean Peninsula, but they also mainly target countries not bordering the Sea of Japan.\nThe major Russian port of Vladivostok mainly serves inland cargos, whereas Nakhodka and Vostochny are more international and have a busy exchange with Japan and South Korea. Other prominent Russian ports are Sovetskaya Gavan, Alexandrovsk-Sakhalinsky and Kholmsk, and the major ports of North Korea are Wonsan, Hamhung and Chongjin. The intensity of shipments across the Sea of Japan is steadily increasing as a result of the growth of East Asian economies.\nReferences.\nThis article incorporates CC-BY-2.0 text from this reference:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59123", "revid": "1631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59123", "title": "Mamiya Strait", "text": ""}
{"id": "59124", "revid": "1631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59124", "title": "Japanese Sea", "text": ""}
{"id": "59125", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59125", "title": "Comma", "text": "Punctuation mark (,)\nThe comma , is a punctuation mark that appears in several variants in different languages. Some typefaces render it as a small line, slightly curved or straight, but inclined from the vertical; others give it the appearance of a miniature filled-in figure 9 placed on the baseline. In many typefaces it is the same shape as an apostrophe or single closing quotation mark \u2019.\nThe comma is used in many contexts and languages, mainly to separate parts of a sentence such as clauses, and items in lists mainly when there are three or more items listed. The word \"comma\" comes from the Greek (), which originally meant a cut-off piece, specifically in grammar, a short clause.\nA comma-shaped mark is used as a diacritic in several writing systems and is considered distinct from the cedilla. In Byzantine and modern copies of Ancient Greek, the \"rough\" and \"smooth breathings\" () appear above the letter. In Latvian, Romanian, and Livonian, the comma diacritic appears below the letter, as in \u0219.\nIn spoken language, a common rule of thumb is that the function of a comma is generally performed by a pause.\n\"In this article,\" \u27e8x\u27e9 \"denotes a grapheme (writing) and\" /x/ \"denotes a phoneme (sound).\"\nHistory.\nThe development of punctuation is much more recent than the alphabet.\nIn the 3rd century BC, Aristophanes of Byzantium invented a system of single dots () at varying levels, which separated verses and indicated the amount of breath needed to complete each fragment of the text when reading aloud. The different lengths were signified by a dot at the bottom, middle, or top of the line. For a short passage, a in the form of a dot \u27e8\u00b7\u27e9 was placed mid-level. This is the origin of the concept of a comma, although the name came to be used for the mark itself instead of the clause it separated.\nThe mark used today is descended from a /, a diagonal slash known as , used from the 13th to 17th centuries to represent a pause. The modern comma was first used by Aldus Manutius.\nUses in English.\nIn general, the comma shows that the words immediately before the comma are less closely or exclusively linked grammatically to those immediately after the comma than they might be otherwise. The comma performs a number of functions in English writing. It is used in generally similar ways in other languages, particularly European ones, although the rules on comma usage \u2013 and their rigidity \u2013 vary from language to language.\nList separator and the serial (Oxford) comma.\nCommas are placed between items in lists, as in \"They own a cat, a dog, two rabbits, and seven mice.\"\nWhether the final conjunction, most frequently \"and\", should be preceded by a comma, called the \"serial comma\", is one of the most disputed linguistic or stylistic questions in English:\nThe serial comma is used much more often, usually routinely, in the United States. A majority of American style guides mandate its use, including \"The Chicago Manual of Style\", Strunk and White's classic \"The Elements of Style\", and the U.S. Government Publishing Office's \"Style Manual\". Conversely, the \"AP Stylebook\" for journalistic writing advises against it.\nThe serial comma is also known as the Oxford comma, Harvard comma, or series comma. Although less common in British English, its usage occurs within both American and British English. It is called the Oxford comma because of its long history of use by Oxford University Press.\nAccording to \"New Hart's Rules\", \"house style will dictate\" whether to use the serial comma. \"The general rule is that one style or the other should be used consistently.\" No association with region or dialect is suggested, other than that its use has been strongly advocated by Oxford University Press. Its use is preferred by Fowler's \"Modern English Usage\". It is recommended by the United States Government Printing Office, Harvard University Press, and the classic \"Elements of Style\" of Strunk and White.\nUse of a comma may prevent ambiguity:\nThe serial comma does not eliminate all confusion. Consider the following sentence:\nAs a rule of thumb, \"The Guardian Style Guide\" suggests that straightforward lists (\"he ate ham, eggs and chips\") do not need a comma before the final \"and\", but sometimes it can help the reader (\"he ate cereal, kippers, bacon, eggs, toast and marmalade, and tea\"). \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" and other academic writing guides require the serial comma: all lists must have a comma before the \"and\" prefacing the last item in a series &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nIf the individual items of a list are long, complex, affixed with description, or themselves contain commas, semicolons may be preferred as separators, and the list may be introduced with a colon.\nIn news headlines, a comma might replace the word \"and\", even if there are only two items, in order to save space, as in this headline from Reuters:\nSeparation of clauses.\nCommas are often used to separate clauses. In English, a comma is often used to separate a dependent clause from the independent clause if the dependent clause comes first: \"After I fed the cat, I brushed my clothes.\" (Compare this with \"I brushed my clothes after I fed the cat.\") A relative clause takes commas if it is non-restrictive, as in \"I cut down all the trees, which were over six feet tall.\" (Without the comma, this would mean that only the trees more than six feet tall were cut down.) Some style guides prescribe that two independent clauses joined by a coordinating conjunction (\"for\", \"and\", \"nor\", \"but\", \"or\", \"yet\", \"so\") must be separated by a comma placed before the conjunction. In the following sentences, where the second clause is independent (because it can stand alone as a sentence), the comma is considered by those guides to be necessary:\nIn the following sentences, where the second half of the sentence is a dependent clause (because it does not contain an explicit subject), those guides prescribe that the comma be omitted:\nHowever, such guides permit the comma to be omitted if the second independent clause is very short, typically when the second independent clause is an imperative, as in:\nThe above guidance is not universally accepted or applied. Long coordinate clauses, particularly when separated by \"but\", are often separated by commas:\nIn some languages, such as German and Polish, stricter rules apply on comma use between clauses, with dependent clauses always being set off with commas, and commas being generally proscribed before certain coordinating conjunctions.\nThe joining of two independent sentences with a comma and no conjunction (as in \"It is nearly half past five, we cannot reach town before dark.\") is known as a \"comma splice\" and is sometimes considered an error in English; in most cases a semicolon should be used instead. A comma splice should not be confused, though, with the literary device called \"asyndeton\", in which coordinating conjunctions are purposely omitted for a specific stylistic effect.\nA much debated comma is the one in the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution, which says \"A well regulated Militia being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.\" but ratified by several states as \"A well regulated Militia being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms shall not be infringed.\" which has caused much debate on its interpretation.\nCertain adverbs.\nCommas are always used to set off certain adverbs at the beginning of a sentence, including \"however\", \"in fact\", \"therefore\", \"nevertheless\", \"moreover\", \"furthermore\", and \"still\".\nIf these adverbs appear in the middle of a sentence, they are followed and preceded by a comma. As in the second of the two examples below, if a semicolon separates the two sentences and the second sentence starts with an adverb, this adverb is preceded by a semicolon and followed by a comma.\nUsing commas to offset certain adverbs is optional, including \"then\", \"so\", \"yet\", \"instead\", and \"too\" (meaning \"also\").\nParenthetical phrases.\nCommas are often used to enclose parenthetical words and phrases within a sentence (i.e., information that is not essential to the meaning of the sentence). Such phrases are both preceded and followed by a comma, unless that would result in a doubling of punctuation marks or the parenthetical is at the start or end of the sentence. The following are examples of types of parenthetical phrases:\nThe parenthesization of phrases may change the connotation, reducing or eliminating\nambiguity. In the following example, the thing in the first sentence that\nis relaxing is the cool day, whereas in the second sentence, it is the walk since the introduction of commas makes \"on a cool day\" parenthetical:\n\"They took a walk on a cool day that was relaxing.\"\n\"They took a walk, on a cool day, that was relaxing.\"\nAs more phrases are introduced, ambiguity accumulates, but when commas separate\neach phrase, the phrases clearly become modifiers of just one thing. In the\nsecond sentence below, that thing is \"the walk\":\n\"They took a walk in the park on a cool day that was relaxing.\"\n\"They took a walk, in the park, on a cool day, that was relaxing.\"\nBetween adjectives.\nA comma is used to separate \"coordinate adjectives\" (i.e., adjectives that directly and equally modify the following noun). Adjectives are considered coordinate if the meaning would be the same if their order were reversed or if \"and\" were placed between them. For example:\nBefore quotations.\nSome writers precede quoted material that is the grammatical object of an active verb of speaking or writing with a comma, as in, \"Mr. Kershner says, 'You should know how to use a comma.'\" Quotations that follow and support an assertion are often preceded by a colon rather than a comma.\nOther writers do not put a comma before quotations unless one would occur anyway. Thus, they would write \"Mr. Kershner says 'You should know how to use a comma.'\"\nIn dates.\nMonth day, year.\nWhen a date is written as a month followed by a day followed by a year, a comma separates the day from the year: December 19, 1941. This style is common in American English. The comma is used to avoid confusing consecutive numbers: December 19\u00a01941.\nMost style manuals, including \"The Chicago Manual of Style\"\nand the \"AP Stylebook\",\nalso recommend that the year be treated as a parenthetical, requiring a second comma after it: \"Feb. 14, 1987, was the target date.\"\nIf just the month and year are given, no commas are used: \"Her daughter may return in June 2009 for the reunion.\"\nDay month year.\nWhen the day precedes the month, the month name separates the numeric day and year, so commas are not necessary to separate them: \"The Raid on Alexandria was carried out on 19\u00a0December\u00a01941.\"\nIn geographical names.\nCommas are used to separate parts of geographical references, such as city and state (\"Dallas, Texas\") or city and country (\"Kampala, Uganda\"). Additionally, most style manuals, including \"The Chicago Manual of Style\"\nand the \"AP Stylebook\",\nrecommend that the second element be treated as a parenthetical, requiring a second comma after: \"The plane landed in Kampala, Uganda, that evening.\"\nThe United States Postal Service and Royal Mail recommend leaving out punctuation when writing addresses on actual letters and packages, as the marks hinder optical character recognition. Canada Post has similar guidelines, making only very limited use of hyphens.\nIn mathematics.\nSimilar to the case in natural languages, commas are often used to delineate the boundary between multiple mathematical objects in a list (e.g., formula_1). Commas are also used to indicate the comma derivative of a tensor.\nIn numbers.\nIn representing large numbers, from the right side to the left, English texts usually use commas to separate each group of three digits in front of the decimal. This is almost always done for numbers of six or more digits, and often for four or five digits but not in front of the number itself. However, in much of Europe, Southern Africa and Latin America, periods or spaces are used instead; the comma is used as a decimal separator, equivalent to the use in English of the decimal point. In India, the groups are two digits, except for the rightmost group, which is of three digits. In some styles, the comma may not be used for this purpose at all (e.g. in the SI writing style); a space may be used to separate groups of three digits instead.\nIn names.\nCommas are used when rewriting names to present the surname first, generally in instances of alphabetization by surname: \"Smith, John\". They are also used before many titles that follow a name: \"John Smith, Ph.D.\"\nIt can also be used in regnal names followed by their occupation: \"Louis XIII, king of France and Navarre\".\nSimilarly in lists that are presented with an inversion: \"socks, green: 3 pairs; socks, red: 2 pairs; tie, regimental: 1\".\nEllipsis.\nCommas may be used to indicate that a word, or a group of words, has been omitted, as in \"The cat was white; the dog, brown.\" (Here the comma replaces \"was\".)\nVocative.\nCommas are placed before, after, or around a noun or pronoun used independently in speaking to some person, place, or thing:\nBetween the subject and predicate.\nIn his 1785 essay \"An Essay on Punctuation\", Joseph Robertson advocated a comma between the subject and predicate of long sentences for clarity; however, this usage is regarded as an error in modern times.\nDifferences between American and British usage in placement of commas and quotation marks.\nThe comma and the quotation mark can be paired in several ways.\nIn Great Britain and many other parts of the world, punctuation is usually placed within quotation marks only if it is part of what is being quoted or referred to:\nIn American English, the comma was commonly included inside a quotation mark:\nDuring the Second World War, the British carried the comma over into abbreviations. Specifically, \"Special Operations, Executive\" was written \"S.O.,E.\". Nowadays, even the full stops are frequently discarded in British usage.\nLanguages other than English.\nWestern Europe.\nWestern European languages like German, French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese use the same comma as English, with similar spacing, though usage may be somewhat different. For instance, in Standard German, subordinate clauses are always preceded by commas.\nComma variants.\nThe basic comma is defined in Unicode as , and many variants by typography or language are also defined.\n\nSome languages use a completely different sort of character for the purpose of the comma.\nThere are also a number of comma-like diacritics with \"COMMA\" in their Unicode names that are not intended for use as punctuation. A comma-like low quotation mark is also available (shown below; corresponding sets of raised single quotation marks and double-quotation marks are not shown).\nThere are various other Unicode characters that include commas or comma-like figures with other characters or marks, that are not shown in these tables.\nGreece.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Modern Greek uses the same Unicode comma for its () and it is officially romanized as a Latin comma, but it has additional roles owing to its conflation with the former hypodiastole, a curved interpunct used to disambiguate certain homonyms. As such, the comma functions as a silent letter in a handful of Greek words, principally distinguishing (, 'whatever') from (, 'that').\nEast Asia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;The enumeration or ideographic comma () is used in Chinese,20 Japanese punctuation, and somewhat in Korean punctuation. In China and Korea, this comma () is usually only used to separate items in lists, while it is the more common form of comma in Japan (, lit.\u2009'clause mark').\nIn documents that mix Japanese and Latin scripts, the full-width comma () is used; this is the standard form of comma () in China. Since East Asian typography permits commas to join dependent clauses dealing with certain topics or lines of thought, commas may be used in ways that would be considered comma splices in English.\nKorean punctuation uses both commas and interpuncts for lists.\nIn Unicode 5.2.0, \"numbers with commas\" ( through ) were added to the Enclosed Alphanumeric Supplement block for compatibility with the ARIB STD B24 character set.\nWest Asia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;The comma in the Arabic script used by languages including Arabic, Urdu, and Persian, is \"upside-down\" \u27e8\u27e9 (), in order to distinguish it from the Arabic diacritic \u27e8\u27e9 representing the vowel , which is similarly shaped. In Arabic texts, the Western-styled comma () is used as a decimal point.\nHebrew script is also written from right to left. However, Hebrew punctuation includes only a regular comma \u27e8\u27e9.\nSouth Asia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Reversed comma () is used in Sindhi when written in Arabic script. It is distinct from the standard Arabic comma.\nDravidian languages such as Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, and Malayalam also use the punctuation mark in similar usage to that of European languages with similar spacing.\nComputing.\nIn the common character encoding systems Unicode and ASCII, character 44 (0x2C) corresponds to the comma symbol. The HTML numeric character reference is codice_1.\nIn many computer languages commas are used as a field delimiter to separate arguments to a function, to separate elements in a list, and to perform data designation on multiple variables at once.\nIn the C programming language the comma symbol is an operator which evaluates its first argument (which may have side-effects) and then returns the value of its evaluated second argument. This is useful in \"for\" statements and macros.\nIn Smalltalk and APL, the comma operator is used to concatenate collections, including strings. In APL, it is also used monadically to rearrange the items of an array into a list.\nIn Prolog, the comma is used to denote Logical Conjunction (\"and\").\nThe comma-separated values (CSV) format is very commonly used in exchanging text data between database and spreadsheet formats.\nDiacritical usage.\nThe comma is used as a diacritic mark in Romanian under \u27e8s\u27e9 (\u27e8\u0218\u27e9, \u27e8\u0219\u27e9), and under \u27e8t\u27e9 (\u27e8\u021a\u27e9, \u27e8\u021b\u27e9). A cedilla is occasionally used instead of it, but this is technically incorrect. The symbol \u27e8d\u0326\u27e9 ('d with comma below') was used as part of the Romanian transitional alphabet (19th century) to indicate the sounds denoted by the Latin letter \u27e8z\u27e9 or letters \u27e8dz\u27e9, where derived from a Cyrillic \u0455 (\u27e8\u0455\u27e9, ). The comma and the cedilla are both derivative of \u27e8\u0292\u27e9 (a small cursive \u27e8z\u27e9) placed below the letter. From this standpoint alone, \u27e8\u0219\u27e9, \u27e8\u021b\u27e9, and \u27e8d\u0326\u27e9 could potentially be regarded as stand-ins for /sz/, /tz/, and /dz/ respectively.\nIn Latvian, the comma is used on the letters \u27e8\u0123\u27e9, \u27e8\u0137\u27e9, \u27e8\u013c\u27e9, \u27e8\u0146\u27e9, and historically also \u27e8\u0157\u27e9, to indicate palatalization. Because the lowercase letter \u27e8g\u27e9 has a descender, the comma is rotated 180\u00b0 and placed over the letter. Although their Adobe glyph names are 'letter with comma', their names in the Unicode Standard are 'letter with a cedilla'. They were introduced to the Unicode standard before 1992 and, per Unicode Consortium policy, their names cannot be altered. In the late 1920s and 1930s, the Latgalian orthography used in Siberia used additional letters with comma: .\nIn Livonian, whose alphabet is based on a mixture of Latvian and Estonian alphabets, the comma is used on the letters \u27e8\u1e11\u27e9, \u27e8\u013c\u27e9, \u27e8\u0146\u27e9, \u27e8\u0157\u27e9, \u27e8\u021b\u27e9 to indicate palatalization in the same fashion as Latvian, except that Livonian uses \u27e8\u1e11\u27e9 and \u27e8\u021b\u27e9 to represent the same palatal plosive phonemes which Latvian writes as \u27e8\u0123\u27e9 and \u27e8\u0137\u27e9 respectively.\nIn Czech and Slovak, the diacritic in the characters \u27e8\u010f\u27e9, \u27e8\u0165\u27e9, and \u27e8\u013e\u27e9 resembles a superscript comma, but it is used instead of a caron because the letter has an ascender. Other ascender letters with carons, such as letters \u27e8\u021f\u27e9 (used in Finnish Romani and Lakota) and \u27e8\u01e9\u27e9 (used in Skolt Sami), did not modify their carons to superscript commas.\nIn 16th-century Guatemala, the archaic letter cuatrillo with a comma (\u27e8\ua72e\u27e9 and \u27e8\ua72f\u27e9) was used to write Mayan languages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59126", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59126", "title": "Apostrophe", "text": "Punctuation or diacritical mark (')\nThe apostrophe (, ) is a punctuation mark, and sometimes a diacritical mark, in languages that use the Latin alphabet and some other alphabets. In English, the apostrophe is used for two basic purposes:\nIt is also used in a few exceptional cases for the marking of plurals, e.g., \"p's and q's\" or Oakland A's.\nThe same mark is used as a single quotation mark. It is also substituted informally for other marks\u00a0\u2013 for example instead of the prime symbol to indicate the units of foot or minutes of arc.\nThe word \"apostrophe\" comes from the Greek (h\u0113 ap\u00f3strophos [pros\u014did\u00eda], '[the accent of] turning away or elision'), through Latin and French.\nUsage in English.\nHistorical development.\nThe apostrophe was first used by Pietro Bembo in his edition of \"De Aetna\" (1496). It was introduced into English in the 16th century in imitation of French practice.\nFrench practice.\nIntroduced by Geoffroy Tory (1529), the apostrophe was used in place of a vowel letter to indicate elision (as in in place of ). It was also frequently used in place of a final \u27e8e\u27e9 (which was still pronounced at the time) when it was elided before a vowel, as in . Modern French orthography has restored the spelling .\nEarly English practice.\nFrom the 16th century, following French practice, the apostrophe was used when a vowel letter was omitted either because of incidental elision (\"I'm\" for \"I am\") or because the letter no longer represented a sound (\"lov'd\" for \"loved\"). English spelling retained many inflections that were not pronounced as syllables, notably verb endings (\"-est\", \"-eth\", \"-es\", \"-ed\") and the noun ending \"-es\", which marked either plurals or possessives, also known as genitives &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. An apostrophe followed by \u27e8s\u27e9 was often used to mark a plural; specifically, the \"Oxford Companion to the English Language\" notes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStandardisation.\nThe use of elision has continued to the present day, but significant changes have been made to the possessive and plural uses. By the 18th century, an apostrophe with the addition of an \u27e8s\u27e9 was regularly used for all possessive singular forms, even when the letter \u27e8e\u27e9 was not omitted (as in \"the gate's height\"). This was regarded as representing not the elision of the \u27e8e\u27e9 in the \"-e\" or \"-es\" ending of the word being pluralized, but the elision of the \u27e8e\u27e9 from the Old English genitive singular inflection \"-es\".\nThe plural genitive did not use the \"-es\" inflection, and since many plural forms already consisted of the \"-s\" or \"-es\" ending, using the apostrophe in place of the elisioned \u27e8e\u27e9 could lead to singular and plural possessives of a given word having the exact same spelling. The solution was to use an apostrophe after the plural \u27e8s\u27e9 (as in \"girls' dresses\"). However, this was not universally accepted until the mid-19th century. Plurals not ending in -s keep the -'s marker, such as \"children's toys, the men's toilet\", since there was no risk of ambiguity.\nPossessive apostrophe.\nThe apostrophe is used in English to indicate what is, for historical reasons, misleadingly called the possessive case in the English language. This case was called the genitive until the 18th century and, like the genitive case in other languages, expresses relationships other than possession. For example, in the expressions \"the school's headmaster\", \"the men's department\", and \"tomorrow's weather\", the school does not own/possess the headmaster, men do not own/possess the department, and tomorrow does not/will not own the weather. In the words of Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The argument is a case of fooling oneself with one's own terminology. After the 18th-century grammarians began to refer to the genitive case as the possessive case, grammarians and other commentators got it into their heads that the only use of the case was to show possession[...] Simply changing the name of the genitive does not change or eliminate any of its multiple functions.\nThat dictionary also cites a study that found that only 40% of the possessive forms were used to indicate actual possession.\nThe modern spelling convention distinguishes possessive singular forms (\"Bernadette's\", \"flower's\", \"glass's\", \"one's\") from simple plural forms (\"Bernadettes\", \"flowers\", \"glasses\", \"ones\"), and both of those from possessive plural forms (\"Bernadettes'\", \"flowers'\", \"glasses'\", \"ones'\"). For example, the word \"glass's\" is the singular possessive form of the noun \"glass\". The plural form of \"glass\" is \"glasses\" and the plural possessive form is, therefore, \"glasses'\". One would therefore say \"I drank the glass's contents\" to indicate drinking from one glass, but \"I drank the glasses' contents\" after also drinking from another glass.\nFor singular forms, the modern possessive or genitive inflection is a survival from certain genitive inflections in Old English, for which the apostrophe originally marked the loss of the old \u27e8e\u27e9 (for example, became ). Its use for indicating plural \"possessive\" forms was not standard before the middle of the 19th century.\nGeneral principles for the possessive apostrophe.\nBasic rule (singular nouns).\nFor most singular nouns, the ending \"'s\" is added; e.g., \"the cat's whiskers\".\nBasic rule (plural nouns).\nWhen the noun is a normal plural, with an added \u27e8s\u27e9, no extra \u27e8s\u27e9 is added in the possessive, and it is pronounced accordingly; so \"the neighbours' garden\" (there is more than one neighbour owning the garden) is standard rather than \"the neighbours's garden\".\nBasic rule (compound nouns).\nCompound nouns have their singular possessives formed with an apostrophe and an added \u27e8s\u27e9, in accordance with the rules given above: \"the Attorney-General's husband\"; \"the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports's prerogative\"; \"this Minister for Justice's intervention\"; \"her father-in-law's new wife\".\nJoint or separate possession.\nFor two nouns (or noun phrases) joined by \"and\", there are several ways of expressing possession, including:\n1. marking of the last noun (e.g. \"Jack and Jill's children\")\n2. marking of both nouns (e.g. \"Jack's and Jill's children\").\nSome grammars make no distinction in meaning between the two forms. Some publishers' style guides, however, make a distinction, assigning the \"segregatory\" (or \"distributive\") meaning to the form \"John's and Mary's\" and the \"combinatorial\" (or \"joint\") meaning to the form \"John and Mary's\". A third alternative is a construction of the form \"Jack's children and Jill's\", which is always distributive, i.e. it designates the combined set of Jack's children and Jill's children.\nWhen a coordinate possessive construction has two personal pronouns, the normal possessive inflection is used, and there is no apostrophe (e.g., \"his and her children\"). The issue of the use of the apostrophe arises when the coordinate construction includes a noun (phrase) and a pronoun. In this case, the inflection of only the last item may sometimes be, at least marginally, acceptable (\"you and your spouse's bank account\"). The inflection of both is normally preferred (e.g. Jack's and your dogs), but there is a tendency to avoid this construction, too, in favour of a construction that does not use a coordinate possessive (e.g. by using \"Jack's letters and yours\"). Where a construction like \"Jack's and your dogs\" is used, the interpretation is usually \"segregatory\" (i.e. not joint possession).\nWith other punctuation; compounds with pronouns.\nIf the word or compound includes, or ends with, a punctuation mark, an apostrophe and an \u27e8s\u27e9 are still added in the usual way: \"Westward Ho!'s railway station\"; \"\"Awaye!\"'s Paulette Whitten recorded Bob Wilson's story\"; \"Washington, D.C.'s museums\". (assuming that the prevailing style requires full stops in \"D.C.\").\nFor complications with foreign phrases and titles, see below.\nTime, money, and similar.\nAn apostrophe is used in time and money references in constructions such as \"one hour's respite\", \"two weeks' holiday\", \"a dollar's worth\", \"five pounds' worth\", \"one mile's drive from here\". This is like an ordinary possessive use. For example, \"one hour's respite\" means \"a respite of one hour\" (exactly as \"the cat's whiskers\" means \"the whiskers of the cat\").\nPossessive pronouns and adjectives.\nNo apostrophe is used in the following possessive pronouns and adjectives: \"hers\", \"his\", \"its\", \"my\", \"mine\", \"ours\", \"theirs\", \"whose\", and \"yours\". All other possessive pronouns do end with an apostrophe and an \u27e8s\u27e9. In singular forms, the apostrophe comes first, e.g. \"one's\"; \"everyone's\"; \"somebody's\", \"nobody else's\", etc., while the apostrophe follows the \u27e8s\u27e9 in plural forms as with nouns: \"the others' complaints\".\nThe possessive of \"it\" was originally \"it's\", in contrast to the modern \"its\". The apostrophe was dropped by the early 19th century. Authorities are now unanimous that \"it's\" can be only a contraction of \"it is\" or \"it has\". Despite this, using \"it's\" as a possessive pronoun is a common grammatical error in present times.\nImportance for disambiguation.\nEach of these four phrases (listed in Steven Pinker's \"The Language Instinct\") has a distinct meaning:\nKingsley Amis, on being challenged to produce a sentence whose meaning depended on a possessive apostrophe, came up with:\nSingular nouns ending with an \u27e8s\u27e9 or \u27e8z\u27e9 sound.\nSome singular nouns are pronounced with a sibilant sound at the end: or . The spelling of these ends with \"-s\", \"-se\", \"-z\", \"-ze\", \"-ce\", \"-x\", or \"-xe\".\nMost respected authorities recommend that practically all singular nouns, including those ending with a sibilant sound, have possessive forms with an extra \u27e8s\u27e9 after the apostrophe so that the spelling reflects the underlying pronunciation. Examples include Oxford University Press, the Modern Language Association, the BBC and \"The Economist\". Such authorities demand possessive singulars like these: \"Bridget Jones's Diary\"; \"Tony Adams's friend; my boss's job; the US's economy\". Rules that modify or extend the standard principle have included the following:\nAlthough less common, some contemporary writers still follow the older practice of omitting the second \"'s\" in some cases ending with a sibilant, but usually not when written \"-x\" or \"-xe\". The Associated Press Stylebook recommends or allows the practice of omitting the additional \u27e8s\u27e9 in proper nouns ending with an \u27e8s\u27e9, but not in words ending with other sibilants (\u27e8z\u27e9 and \u27e8x\u27e9). The 15th edition of \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" had recommended the traditional practice, which included providing for several exceptions to accommodate spoken usage such as the omission of the extra \u27e8s\u27e9 after a polysyllabic word ending in a sibilant, but the 16th edition no longer recommends omitting the possessive \u27e8s\u27e9.\nSimilar examples of notable names ending in an \u27e8s\u27e9 that are often given a possessive apostrophe with no additional \u27e8s\u27e9 include \"Dickens\" and \"Williams\". There is often a policy of leaving off the additional \u27e8s\u27e9 on any such name, but this can prove problematic when specific names are contradictory (for example, \"St James' Park\" in Newcastle [the football ground] and the area of \"St James's Park\" in London). However, debate has been going on regarding the punctuation of St James' Park (Newcastle) for some time, unlike St James's Park (London) which is the less contentious version. For more details on practice with geographic names, see the relevant section below.\nSome writers like to reflect standard spoken practice in cases like these with \"sake\": \"for convenience' sake\", \"for goodness' sake\", \"for appearance' sake\", \"for compromise' sake\", etc. This punctuation is preferred in major style guides. Others prefer to add \"'s\": \"for convenience's sake\". Still others prefer to omit the apostrophe when there is an \u27e8s\u27e9 sound before \"sake\": \"for morality's sake\", but \"for convenience sake\".\nNouns ending with silent \u27e8s\u27e9, \u27e8x\u27e9, or \u27e8z\u27e9.\nThe English possessive of French nouns ending in a silent \u27e8s\u27e9, \u27e8x\u27e9, or \u27e8z\u27e9 is addressed by various style guides. Certainly a sibilant is pronounced in examples like \"Descartes's\" and \"Dumas's\"; the question addressed here is whether \u27e8s\u27e9 needs to be added. Similar examples with \u27e8x\u27e9 or \u27e8z\u27e9: \"'s main ingredient is truffle\"; \"His 's loss went unnoticed\"; \"Verreaux('s) eagle, a large, predominantly black eagle, \"Aquila verreauxi\"...\" (OED, entry for \"Verreaux\", with silent \u27e8x\u27e9; see Verreaux's eagle); in each of these some writers might omit the added \u27e8s\u27e9. The same principles and residual uncertainties apply with \"naturalised\" English words, like \"Illinois\" and \"Arkansas\".\nFor possessive \"plurals\" of words ending in a silent \u27e8x\u27e9, \u27e8z\u27e9 or \u27e8s\u27e9, the few authorities that address the issue at all typically call for an added \u27e8s\u27e9 and suggest that the apostrophe precede the \u27e8s\u27e9: \"The Loucheux's homeland is in the Yukon\"; \"Compare the two Dumas's literary achievements\". The possessive of a cited French title with a silent plural ending is uncertain: \"'s long and complicated publication history\", but \"' singular effect was 'exotic primitive' ...\" (with nearby sibilants \"-ce-\" in \"noces\" and \"s-\" in \"singular\"). Compare treatment of other titles, above.\nGuides typically seek a principle that will yield uniformity, even for foreign words that fit awkwardly with standard English punctuation.\nPossessives in geographic names.\nPlace names in the United States do not use the possessive apostrophe on federal maps and signs. The United States Board on Geographic Names, which has responsibility for formal naming of municipalities and geographic features, has deprecated the use of possessive apostrophes since 1890 so as not to show ownership of the place. Only five names of natural features in the US are officially spelled with a genitive apostrophe: Martha's Vineyard; Ike's Point, New Jersey; John E's Pond, Rhode Island; Carlos Elmer's Joshua View, Arizona; and Clark's Mountain, Oregon. Some municipalities, originally incorporated using the apostrophe, have dropped it in accordance with this policy; Taylors Falls in Minnesota, for example, was originally incorporated as \"Taylor's Falls\". On the state level, the federal policy is not always followed: Vermont's official state website has a page on Camel's Hump State Forest.\nAustralia's Intergovernmental Committee on Surveying and Mapping also has a no-apostrophe policy, a practice it says goes back to the 1900s and which is generally followed around the country.\nOn the other hand, the United Kingdom has Bishop's Stortford, Bishop's Castle and King's Lynn (among many others) but St Albans, St Andrews and St Helens. London Underground's Piccadilly line has the adjacent stations of Earl's Court in Earl's Court and Barons Court. These names were mainly fixed in form many years before grammatical rules were fully standardised. While Newcastle United play football at a stadium called St James' Park, and Exeter City at St James Park, London has a St James's Park (this whole area of London is named after the parish of St James's Church, Piccadilly).\nModern usage has been influenced by considerations of technological convenience including the economy of typewriter ribbons and films, and similar computer character \"disallowance\" which tend to ignore past standards. Practice in the United Kingdom and Canada is not so uniform.\nPossessives in names of organizations.\nSometimes the apostrophe is omitted in the names of clubs, societies, and other organizations, even though the standard principles seem to require it: \"Country Women's Association\", but \"International Aviation Womens Association\"; \"Magistrates' Court of Victoria\", but \"Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union\". Usage is variable and inconsistent. Style guides typically advise consulting an official source for the standard form of the name (as one would do if uncertain about other aspects of the spelling of the name); some tend towards greater prescriptiveness, for or against such an apostrophe. As the case of \"womens\" shows, it is not possible to analyze these forms simply as non-possessive plurals, since \"women\" is the only correct plural form of \"woman\".\nPossessives in business names.\nWhere a business name is based on a family name it should in theory take an apostrophe, but many leave it out (contrast \"Sainsbury's\" with \"Harrods\"). In recent times there has been an increasing tendency to drop the apostrophe. Names based on a first name are more likely to take an apostrophe, but this is not always the case. Some business names may inadvertently spell a different name if the name with an \u27e8s\u27e9 at the end is also a name, such as Parson. A small activist group called the Apostrophe Protection Society has campaigned for large retailers such as Harrods, Currys, and Selfridges to reinstate their missing punctuation. A spokesperson for Barclays PLC stated, \"It has just disappeared over the years. Barclays is no longer associated with the family name.\" Further confusion can be caused by businesses whose names look as if they should be pronounced differently without an apostrophe, such as Paulos Circus, and other companies that leave the apostrophe out of their logos but include it in written text, such as Cadwalader's.\nApostrophe showing omission.\nAn apostrophe is commonly used to indicate omitted characters, normally letters:\nUse in forming some plurals.\nFollowing an evolution in usage in the 20th century, today \"the apostrophe of plurality continues in at least five areas\": abbreviations, letters of the alphabet/small words, numbers, family names, and in non-standard use.\nAbbreviations.\nFor abbreviations, including acronyms, the use of \"s\" without an apostrophe is now more common than its use with an apostrophe. Most modern style guides disparage the use of apostrophes in all plural abbreviations.\nSome references continue to condone their use, or even recommend their use in some abbreviations. For example, \"The Canadian Style\" states \"Add an\u00a0apostrophe\u00a0and\u00a0\"s\"\u00a0to form the plural of abbreviations containing more than one period\", so \"G.M.'s\" is preferred to \"G.M.s\". The \"Oxford Companion to the English Language\" condones \"V.I.P.'s\", \"VIP's\", and \"VIPs\" equally.\nLetters of the alphabet, and small words.\nFor single lowercase letters, pluralization with \"'s\" is usual. Many guides recommend apostrophes whether the single letters are lowercase (as in \"minding your p's and q's\") or uppercase (as in \"A's and S's\"). \"The Chicago Manual of Style\" recommends the apostrophe of plurality only for lowercase letters. Sometimes, adding just \"s\" rather than \"'s\" may leave meaning ambiguous or presentation inelegant. However, an apostrophe is not always the preferred solution. APA style requires the use of italics instead of an apostrophe: \"p\"s, \"n\"s, etc.\nIn the phrase \"dos and don'ts\", most modern style guides disparage spelling the first word as \"do's\". However, there is a lack of consensus and certainly the use of an apostrophe continues, legitimately, in which \"the apostrophe of plurality occurs in the first word but not the second\".\nNumbers and symbols.\nThe \"Oxford Companion to the English Language\" notes that \"a plural \"s\" after a set of numbers is often preceded by an apostrophe, as in \"3's and 4's\"..., but many housestyles and individuals now favour \"3s and 4s\"\". Most style guides prefer the lack of apostrophe for groups of years (e.g. \"1980s\") and will prefer \"90s\" or \"'90s\" over \"90's\" or \"'90's\".\nWhile many guides discourage using an apostrophe in all numbers/dates, many other guides \"encourage\" using an apostrophe for numbers or are divided on the issue; for example, the \"Australian Government Style Manual\" recommends \"Binary code uses 0\u2019s and 1\u2019s\" but recommends \"the 2020s\". Still other guides take a laissez-faire approach. For example, the University of Sussex's online guide notes regional variation in the use of apostrophes in dates, and slightly prefers \"1's and 7's\" over \"1s and 7s\" but condones both.\nThe apostrophe is very often used in plurals of symbols, for example \"that page has too many &amp;'s and #'s on it\". Some style guides state that the apostrophe is unnecessary since there is no ambiguity but that some editors and teachers prefer this usage. The addition of an \"s\" without an apostrophe may make the text difficult to read.\nFor many numbers and symbols, a useful alternative is to write out the numbers as words (e.g. \"thousands\" instead of \"1000s\" or \"1000's\", and \"ampersands\" instead of \"&amp;s\" or \"&amp;'s\").\nFamily names.\nThe vast majority of English references published from the late 20th century onwards disparage the use of apostrophes in family-name plurals, for example identifying \"Joneses\" as correct and \"Jones's\" as incorrect. As an exception, the \"Oxford Companion to the English Language\" (2018) reports that, in addition to \"Joneses\" etc., standard apostrophe usage does continue \"in family names, especially if they end in \"-s\", as in \"keeping up with the Jones's\"\".\nNonstandard use.\nSee , below.\nUse in non-English names.\nNames that are not strictly native to English sometimes have an apostrophe substituted to represent other characters (see also As a mark of elision, below).\nUse in transliteration.\nIn transliterated foreign words, an apostrophe may be used to separate letters or syllables that otherwise would likely be interpreted incorrectly. For example:\nFurthermore, an apostrophe may be used to indicate a glottal stop in transliterations. For example:\nRather than \u02bf (modifier letter left half ring), the apostrophe is sometimes used to indicate a voiced pharyngeal fricative as it sounds and looks like the glottal stop to most English speakers. For example:\nFinally, in \"scientific\" transliteration of Cyrillic script, the apostrophe usually represents the soft sign \u044c, though in \"ordinary\" transliteration it is usually omitted. For example, \nNon-standard English use.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you have a name that ends in \"s,\" or if you will observe home-made signs selling tomatoes or chili-and-beans, you will quickly note what can be done with a possessive apostrophe in reckless hands.\nFailure to observe standard use of the apostrophe is widespread and frequently criticised as incorrect, often generating heated debate. The British founder of the Apostrophe Protection Society earned a 2001 Ig\u00a0Nobel prize for \"efforts to protect, promote and defend the differences between plural and possessive\". A 2004 report by British examination board OCR stated that \"the inaccurate use of the apostrophe is so widespread as to be almost universal\". A 2008 survey found that nearly half of the UK adults polled were unable to use the apostrophe correctly.\nSuperfluous apostrophes (\"greengrocers' apostrophes\").\nApostrophes used in a non-standard manner to form noun plurals are known as \"greengrocers' apostrophes\" or \"grocers' apostrophes\" or \"grocer's apostrophes\". They are sometimes humorously called \"greengrocers apostrophe's\", \"rogue apostrophes\", or \"idiot's apostrophes\" (a literal translation of the German word \"Deppenapostroph\", which criticises the misapplication of apostrophes in Denglisch). The practice, once common and acceptable (see \"Historical development\"), comes from the identical sound of the plural and possessive forms of most English nouns. It is often criticised as a form of hypercorrection coming from a widespread ignorance of the proper use of the apostrophe or of punctuation in general. Lynne Truss, author of \"Eats, Shoots &amp; Leaves\", points out that before the 19th century it was standard orthography to use the apostrophe to form a plural of a foreign-sounding word that ended in a vowel (e.g., banana's, folio's, logo's, quarto's, pasta's, ouzo's) to clarify pronunciation. Truss says this usage is no longer considered proper in formal writing.\nThe term is believed to have been coined in the middle of the 20th century by a teacher of languages working in Liverpool, at a time when such mistakes were common in the handwritten signs and advertisements of greengrocers (e.g., \"Apple's 1/- a pound, Orange's 1/6 a pound\"). Some have argued that its use in mass communication by employees of well-known companies has led to the less literate assuming it to be standard and adopting the habit themselves.\nThe same use of apostrophe before noun plural -s forms is sometimes made by non-native speakers of English. For example, in Dutch, the apostrophe is inserted before the \"s\" when pluralising most words ending in a vowel or \"y\" for example, (English \"babies\") and (English \"radios\"). This often produces so-called \"Dunglish\" errors when carried over into English. Hyperforeignism has been formalised in some pseudo-anglicisms. For example, the French word (from English \"pin\") is used (with the apostrophe in both singular and plural) for collectible lapel pins. Similarly, there is an Andorran football club called (after such British clubs as Rangers F.C.) and a Japanese dance group called Super Monkey's.\nOmission.\nIn the UK there is a tendency to drop apostrophes in many commonly used names such as St Annes, St Johns Lane, and so on.\nUK supermarket chain Tesco omits the mark where standard practice would require it. Signs in Tesco advertise (among other items) \"mens magazines\", \"girls toys\", \"kids books\" and \"womens shoes\". In his book \"Troublesome Words\", author Bill Bryson lambasts Tesco for this, stating that \"the mistake is inexcusable, and those who make it are linguistic Neanderthals.\"\nThe United States Board on Geographic Names discourages the use of possessive apostrophes in geographic names (see above), though state agencies do not always conform; Vermont's official state website provides information concerning Camel's Hump State Forest.\nThe Geographical Names Board of New South Wales, Australia, excludes possessive apostrophes from place names, along with other punctuation.\nParticular cases.\nGeorge Bernard Shaw, a proponent of English spelling reform on phonetic principles, argued that the apostrophe was mostly redundant. He did not use it for spelling \"cant\", \"hes\", etc., in many of his writings. He did, however, allow \"I'm\" and \"it's\". Hubert Selby Jr. used a slash instead of an apostrophe mark for contractions and did not use an apostrophe at all for possessives. Lewis Carroll made greater use of apostrophes, and frequently used \"sha'n't\", with an apostrophe in place of the elided \"ll\" as well as the more usual \"o\". These authors' usages have not become widespread.\nThe British pop group Hear'Say famously made unconventional use of an apostrophe in its name. Truss comments that \"the naming of Hear'Say in 2001 was\u00a0... a significant milestone on the road to punctuation anarchy\".\nCriticism.\nOver the years, the use of apostrophes has been criticised. George Bernard Shaw called them \"uncouth bacilli\", referring to the apostrophe-like shape of many bacteria. The author and language commentator Anu Garg has called for the abolition of the apostrophe, stating \"Some day this world would be free of metastatic cancers, narcissistic con men, and the apostrophe\". In his book \"American Speech\", linguist Steven Byington stated of the apostrophe that \"the language would be none the worse for its abolition\". Adrian Room, in his \"English Journal\" article \"Axing the Apostrophe\", argued that apostrophes are unnecessary, and context will resolve any ambiguity. In a letter to the \"English Journal\", Peter Brodie stated that apostrophes are \"largely decorative ... [and] rarely clarify meaning\". John C. Wells, emeritus professor of phonetics at University College London, says the apostrophe is \"a waste of time\". The Apostrophe Protection Society, founded by retired journalist John Richards in 2001, closed in 2019, after a period of 18 years of campaigning for its preservation and correct usage. Closing the association, Richards, then aged 96, said that \"We, and our many supporters worldwide, have done our best but the ignorance and laziness present in modern times have won!\".\nIn a \"Chronicle of Higher Education\" blog, Geoffrey Pullum proposed that the apostrophe be considered the 27th letter of the alphabet, arguing that it is not a form of punctuation.\nNon-English use.\nAs a mark of elision.\nIn many languages, especially European languages, the apostrophe is used to indicate the elision of one or more sounds, as in English.\nAs a glottal stop.\nSeveral languages and transliteration systems use the apostrophe or some similar mark to indicate a glottal stop, sometimes considering it a letter of the alphabet:\nThe apostrophe represents sounds resembling the glottal stop in the Turkic languages and in some romanizations of Semitic languages, including Arabic and Hebrew. In that case, the letter \"'ayn\" (Arabic \u0639 and Hebrew \u05e2) is correspondingly transliterated with the opening single quotation mark.\nAs a mark of palatalization or non-palatalization.\nSome languages and transliteration systems use the apostrophe to mark the presence, or the lack of, palatalization:\nTo separate morphemes.\nSome languages use the apostrophe to separate the root of a word and its affixes, especially if the root is foreign and unassimilated. (For another kind of morphemic separation see pinyin, below.)\nTypographic form.\nThe shape of the apostrophe originated in manuscript writing, as a point with a downwards tail curving clockwise. This is the form of the modern punctuation apostrophe (\u2019), (which is also known informally as the typeset apostrophe, the typographic apostrophe or the curly apostrophe) and of the right single quotation mark. Later sans-serif typefaces had stylised apostrophes with a more geometric or simplified form, but usually retaining the same directional bias as a closing quotation mark.\nWith the invention of the typewriter, a \"neutral\" or \"straight\" shape quotation mark, ' (known as the \"typewriter apostrophe\" or the \"ASCII apostrophe\"), was created to represent a number of different glyphs with a single keystroke: the apostrophe, both the opening and the closing single quotation marks, the single primes, and on some typewriters even the exclamation point (by backspacing and overprinting with a period). This is known as the typewriter apostrophe or vertical apostrophe. The same convention was adopted for double quotation marks (\"). Both simplifications carried over to computer keyboards and the ASCII character set.\nInformal use in measurement and mathematics.\nFormally, the symbol used to represent a foot of length, depth, or height, is \u2032 (prime) and that for the inch is \u2033 (double prime). (Thus, for example, the notation 5\u2032 7\u2033 signifies 5 feet and 7 inches). Similarly, the prime symbol is the formal representation of a minute of arc (1/60 of a degree in geometry and geomatics), and double prime represents a second of arc (for example, 17\u00b054\u203232\u2033 represents 17 degrees 54 minutes and 32 seconds). Similarly in mathematics, the prime is generally used to generate more variable names for similar things without resorting to subscripts, with generally meaning something related to (or derived from) x.\nBecause of the very close similarity of the typewriter apostrophe and typewriter double quote to prime and double prime, substitution in informal contexts is ubiquitous but they are deprecated in contexts where proper typography is important. There is also a risk of an automatic process \"correcting\" a typewriter apostrophe to a punctuation apostrophe, which results in another variant when a prime symbol was intended.\nUnicode.\nIn its Unicode Standard (version 13.0), the Unicode Consortium describes three characters that represent apostrophe:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComputing.\nIn modern computing practice, Unicode is the standard and default method for character encoding. However, Unicode itself and many legacy applications have echoes of earlier practices. Furthermore, the limited character set provided by computer keyboards has also required practical and pragmatic adjustments. These issues are detailed below.\nASCII encoding.\nThe typewriter apostrophe, ', was inherited by computer keyboards, and is the only apostrophe character available in the (7-bit) ASCII character encoding, at code value 0x27 (39). In ASCII, it may be used to represent any of left single quotation mark, right single quotation mark, apostrophe, vertical line or prime (punctuation marks), or an acute accent (modifier letters). In Unicode, which is a superset of ASCII, it is encoded as .\nMany earlier (pre-1985) computer displays and printers rendered the ASCII apostrophe as a punctuation apostrophe, and rendered the backtick (freestanding grave accent symbol, `, 0x60, 96) as a matching left single quotation mark. This allowed a more \"typeset\" appearance of text: codice_1 would appear as ``I\u00a0can\u00b4t\u00b4\u00b4 on these systems. This can still be seen in many documents prepared at that time, and is still used in the TeX typesetting system to create typographic quotes.\nPunctuation apostrophe in 8-bit encodings.\nSupport for the punctuation apostrophe (\u00a0\u2019\u00a0) was introduced in several 8-bit character encodings, such as the original Apple Macintosh operating system's Mac Roman character set (in 1984), and later in the CP1252 encoding of Microsoft Windows. Both sets also used this code point for a closing single quote. There is no such character in ISO 8859-1.\nThe Microsoft Windows code page CP1252 (sometimes incorrectly called \"ANSI\" or \"ISO-Latin\") contains the punctuation apostrophe at 0x92. Due to \"smart quotes\" in Microsoft software converting the ASCII apostrophe to this value, other software makers have been effectively forced to adopt this as a \"de facto\" convention. For instance, the HTML5 standard specifies that this value is interpreted as this character from CP1252. Some earlier non-Microsoft browsers would display a '?' for this and make web pages composed with Microsoft software somewhat hard to read.\nIn Unicode (which practically all vendors have adopted), this apostrophe is encoded as . (The canonical name reflects the primary usage; its further use as the preferred form for an apostrophe is recorded in the database.)\nEntering apostrophes.\nAlthough ubiquitous in typeset material, the punctuation apostrophe () is rather difficult to enter on a computer, since it does not have its own key on most types of consumer keyboard. Outside the world of professional typesetting and graphic design, most people use the typewriter apostrophe (). Because typewriter apostrophes are now often automatically converted to punctuation apostrophes by word processing and similar software, the punctuation apostrophe routinely appears in documents produced by non-professionals (albeit sometimes incorrectly\u2014see below).\nXML (and hence XHTML) defines an codice_2 character entity reference for the ASCII typewriter apostrophe. This entity reference is officially supported in HTML since HTML 5.\nSmart quotes.\nTo make punctuation apostrophes easier to enter, word processing and publishing software often convert typewriter apostrophes to punctuation apostrophes during text entry (at the same time converting opening and closing single and double quotes to their standard left-handed or right-handed forms). A similar facility may be offered on web servers after submitting text in a form field, e.g. on weblogs or free encyclopedias. This is known as the \"smart quotes\" feature; apostrophes and quotation marks that are not automatically altered by computer programs are known as \"dumb quotes\".\nSuch conversion is not always correct. Smart quotes features often incorrectly convert a leading apostrophe to an opening quotation mark (e.g., in abbreviations of years: \"\u201829\" rather than the correct \"\u201929\" for the years \"1929\" or \"2029\" (depending on context); or \"\u2018twas\" instead of \"\u2019twas\" as the archaic abbreviation of \"it was\"). Smart quote features also often fail to recognise situations when a prime rather than an apostrophe is needed; for example, incorrectly rendering the latitude 49\u00b0\u00a053\u2032\u00a008\u2033 as 49\u00b0\u00a053\u2019\u00a008\u201d.\nIn Microsoft Word it is possible to turn smart quotes off (in some versions, by navigating through \"Tools\", \"AutoCorrect\", \"AutoFormat as you type\", and then unchecking the appropriate option). Alternatively, typing Control-Z (for \"Undo\") immediately after entering the apostrophe will convert it back to a typewriter apostrophe. In Microsoft Word for Windows, holding down the Control key while typing two apostrophes will produce a single punctuation apostrophe.\nProgramming.\nSome programming languages, like Pascal, use the ASCII apostrophe to delimit string literals. In many languages, including JavaScript, ECMAScript, and Python, either the apostrophe or the double quote may be used, allowing string literals to contain the other character (but not to contain both without using an escape character), e.g. codice_3. Strings delimited with apostrophes are often called \"single quoted\". Some languages, such as Perl, PHP, and many shell languages, treat single quoted strings as \"raw\" strings, while double quoted strings have expressions (such as codice_4) replaced with their values when interpreted.\nThe C programming language (and many derived languages like C++, Java, C#, and Scala) uses apostrophes to delimit a character literal. In these languages a character is a different object than a one-letter string.\nIn C++, since C++14, apostrophes can be included as optional digit separators in numeric literals.\nIn Visual Basic (and earlier Microsoft BASIC dialects such as QuickBASIC) an apostrophe is used to denote the start of a comment.\nIn the Lisp family of programming languages, an apostrophe is shorthand for the codice_5 operator.\nIn Rust, in addition to being used to delimit a character literal, an apostrophe can start an explicit lifetime.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n "}
{"id": "59127", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59127", "title": "Gennady Nevelskoy", "text": "Russian naval officer (1813\u20131876)\nGennady Ivanovich Nevelskoy (; December 5\u00a0[O.S. November 23]\u00a01813 in Drakino, Soligalichsky Uyezd, Kostroma Governorate\u00a0\u2013 April 29\u00a0[O.S. April 17]\u00a01876 in St.\u00a0Petersburg) was a Russian navigator and naval officer.\nIn 1829 he joined the Naval Cadet Corps and in 1846 was given the rank of captain lieutenant in the Russian Navy. \nIn 1848 Nevelskoy set out in command of what became the Amur Expedition of 1849-1855 to the area of the present-day Russian Far East, exploring Sakhalin and the outlet of the Amur River. He proved that the Strait of Tartary was not a gulf, but indeed a strait, connected to Amur's estuary by a narrow section (later called Nevelskoy Strait). On 13 August 1850 he founded Nikolayevsk-on-Amur, the first Russian settlement in the region.\nNot knowing of the work of the Japanese navigator Mamiya Rinz\u014d, who had explored the same area forty years earlier, the Russians took Nevelskoy's report as the first proof that Sakhalin is indeed an island. They renamed the Gulf of Tartary as the Strait of Tartary, and named the northernmost, narrowest section of the strait, the Strait of Nevelskoy, in the captain's honour. It connects the strait's main body (formerly known as the Gulf of Tartary) with the Amur Liman (Amur River estuary).\nMemory.\nThe following entities are named after Nevelskoy:\nMemorials:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59131", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59131", "title": "Colon (punctuation)", "text": "Punctuation mark with two dots\nThe colon, :, is a punctuation mark consisting of two equally sized dots aligned vertically. A colon often precedes an explanation, a list, or a quoted sentence. It is also used between hours and minutes in time, between certain elements in medical journal citations, between chapter and verse in Bible citations, between two numbers in a ratio, and, in the US, for salutations in business letters and other formal letters.\nHistory.\nIn Ancient Greek, in rhetoric and prosody, the term (\"\", lit. 'limb, member of a body') did not refer to punctuation, but to a member or section of a complete thought or passage; see also \"Colon (rhetoric)\". From this usage, in palaeography, a colon is a clause or group of clauses written as a line in a manuscript.\nIn the 3rd century BC, Aristophanes of Byzantium is alleged to have devised a punctuation system, in which the end of such a was thought to occasion a medium-length breath, and was marked by a middot \u00b7. In practice, evidence is scarce for its early usage, but it was revived later as the \"ano teleia\", the modern Greek semicolon. Some writers also used a double dot symbol \u205a, that later came to be used as a full stop or to mark a change of speaker. (See also \"Punctuation in Ancient Greek\".)\nIn 1589, in \"The Arte of English Poesie\", the English term \"colon\" and the corresponding punctuation mark : is attested:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For these respectes the auncient reformers of language, inuented, three maner of pauses [...] The shortest pause or intermission they called \"comma\" [...] The second they called \"colon\", not a peece but as it were a member for his larger length, because it occupied twise as much time as the comma. The third they called \"periodus\", [...]\nIn 1622, in Nicholas Okes' print of William Shakespeare's \"Othello\", the typographical construction of a colon followed by a hyphen or dash to indicate a restful pause is attested. This construction, known as the \"dog's bollocks\", was once common in British English, though this usage is now discouraged.\nAs late as the 18th century, John Mason related the appropriateness of a colon to the length of the pause taken when reading the text aloud, but silent reading eventually replaced this with other considerations.\nUsage in English.\nIn modern English usage, a complete sentence precedes a colon, while a list, description, explanation, or definition follows it. The elements which follow the colon may or may not be a complete sentence: since the colon is preceded by a sentence, it is a complete sentence whether what follows the colon is another sentence or not. While it is acceptable to capitalise the first letter after the colon in American English, it is not the case in British English, except where a proper noun immediately follows a colon.\n\"Daequan was so hungry that he ate everything in the house: chips, cold pizza, pretzels and dip, hot dogs, peanut butter, and candy.\"\n\"Bertha is so desperate that she'll date anyone, even William: he's uglier than a squashed toad on the highway, and that's on his good days.\"\n\"For years while I was reading Shakespeare's \"Othello\" and criticism on it, I had to constantly look up the word \"egregious\" since the villain uses that word: outstandingly bad or shocking.\"\n\"I guess I can say I had a rough weekend: I had chest pain and spent all Saturday and Sunday in the emergency room.\"\nSome writers use fragments (incomplete sentences) before a colon for emphasis or stylistic preferences (to show a character's voice in literature), as in this example:\n\"Dinner: chips and juice. What a well-rounded diet I have.\"\n\"The Bedford Handbook\" describes several uses of a colon. For example, one can use a colon after an independent clause to direct attention to a list, an appositive, or a quotation, and it can be used between independent clauses if the second summarizes or explains the first. In non-literary or non-expository uses, one may use a colon after the salutation in a formal letter, to indicate hours and minutes, to show proportions, between a title and subtitle, and between city and publisher in bibliographic entries.\nLuca Serianni, an Italian scholar who helped to define and develop the colon as a punctuation mark, identified four punctuational modes for it: \"syntactical-deductive\", \"syntactical-descriptive\", \"appositive\", and \"segmental\".\nSyntactical-deductive.\nThe colon introduces the logical consequence, or effect, of a fact stated before.\n\"There was only one possible explanation: the train had never arrived.\"\nSyntactical-descriptive.\nIn this sense the colon introduces a description; in particular, it makes explicit the elements of a set.\n\"I have three sisters: Daphne, Rose, and Suzanne.\"\nSyntactical-descriptive colons may separate the numbers indicating hours, minutes, and seconds in abbreviated measures of time.\n\"The concert begins at 21:45.\"\n\"The rocket launched at 09:15:05.\"\nBritish English and Australian English, however, more frequently use a point for this purpose:\n\"The programme will begin at 8.00 pm.\"\n\"You will need to arrive by 14.30.\"\nA colon is also used in the descriptive location of a book verse if the book is divided into verses, such as in the Bible or the Quran:\n\"Isaiah 42:8\"\n\"Deuteronomy 32:39\"\n\"Quran 10:5\"\n\"Luruns could not speak: he was drunk.\"\nAppositive.\nAn appositive colon also separates the subtitle of a work from its principal title. (In effect, the example given above illustrates an appositive use of the colon as an abbreviation for the conjunction \"because\".) Dillon has noted the impact of colons on scholarly articles, but the reliability of colons as a predictor of quality or impact has also been challenged. In titles, neither needs to be a complete sentence as titles do not represent expository writing:\n\"Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi\"\nSegmental.\nLike a dash or quotation mark, a segmental colon introduces speech. The segmental function was once a common means of indicating an unmarked quotation on the same line. The following example is from the grammar book \"The King's English\":\n\"Benjamin Franklin proclaimed the virtue of frugality: A penny saved is a penny earned.\"\nThis form is still used in British industry-standard templates for written performance dialogues, such as in a play. The colon indicates that the words following an character's name are spoken by that character.\n\"Patient: Doctor, I feel like a pair of curtains.\"\n\"Doctor: Pull yourself together!\"\nThe uniform visual pattern of codice_1 placement on a script page assists an actor in scanning for the lines of their assigned character during rehearsal, especially if a script is undergoing rewrites between rehearsals.\nUse of capitals.\nUse of capitalization or lowercase after a colon varies. In British English, and in most Commonwealth countries, the word following the colon is in lowercase unless it is normally capitalized for some other reason, as with proper nouns and acronyms. British English also capitalizes a new sentence introduced by a colon's segmental use.\nAmerican English permits writers to similarly capitalize the first word of any independent clause following a colon. This follows the guidelines of some modern American style guides, including those published by the Associated Press and the Modern Language Association. \"The Chicago Manual of Style\", however, requires capitalization only when the colon introduces a direct quotation, a direct question, or two or more complete sentences.\nIn many European languages, the colon is usually followed by a lowercase letter unless the upper case is required for other reasons, as with British English. German usage requires capitalization of independent clauses following a colon. Dutch further capitalizes the first word of any quotation following a colon, even if it is not a complete sentence on its own.\nSpacing and parentheses.\nIn print, a thin space was traditionally placed before a colon and a thick space after it. In modern English-language printing, no space is placed before a colon and a single space is placed after it. In French-language typing and printing, the traditional rules are preserved.\nOne or two spaces may be and have been used after a colon. The older convention (designed to be used by monospaced fonts) was to use \"two\" spaces after a colon.\nIn modern typography, a colon will be placed outside the closing parenthesis introducing a list. In very early English typography, it could be placed inside, as seen in Roger Williams' 1643 book about the Native American languages of New England.\nUsage in other languages.\nSuffix separator.\nIn Finnish and Swedish, the colon can appear inside words in a manner similar to the apostrophe in the English possessive case, connecting a grammatical suffix to an abbreviation or initialism, a special symbol, or a digit (e.g., Finnish \"USA:n\" and Swedish \"USA:s\" for the genitive case of \"USA\", Finnish \"%:ssa\" for the inessive case of \"%\", or Finnish \"20:een\" for the illative case of \"20\").\nAbbreviation mark.\nWritten Swedish uses colons in contractions, such as \"S:t\" for \"Sankt\" (Swedish for \"Saint\") \u2013 for example in the name of the Stockholm metro station \"S:t Eriksplan\", and \"k:a\" for \"kyrka\" (\"church\") \u2013 for instance Svenska k:a (Svenska kyrkan), the Evangelical Lutheran national Church of Sweden. This can even occur in people's names, for example (\"\" for \"Axelson\"). Early Modern English texts also used colons to mark abbreviations.\nWord separator.\nIn Ethiopia, both Amharic and Ge'ez script used and sometimes still use a colon-like mark as word separator.\nHistorically, a colon-like mark was used as a word separator in Old Turkic script.\nEnd of sentence or verse.\nIn Armenian, a colon indicates the end of a sentence, similar to a Latin full stop or period.\nIn liturgical Hebrew, the sof pasuq is used in some writings such as prayer books to signal the end of a verse.\nScore divider.\nIn German, Hebrew, and sometimes in English, a colon divides the scores of opponents in sports and games. A result of 149\u20130 would be written as 149\u202f:\u202f0 in German and in Hebrew.\nMathematics and logic.\nThe colon is used in mathematics, cartography, model building, and other fields, in this context it denotes a ratio or a scale, as in 3:1 (pronounced \"three to one\").\nWhen a ratio is reduced to a simpler form, such as 10:15 to 2:3, this may be expressed with a double colon as 10:15::2:3; this would be read \"10 is to 15 as 2 is to 3\". This form is also used in tests of logic where the question of \"Dog is to Puppy as Cat is to _____?\" can be expressed as \"Dog:Puppy::Cat:_____\". For these uses, there is a dedicated Unicode symbol () that is preferred in some contexts. Compare 2:3 (ratio colon) with 2:3 (U+003A ASCII colon).\nIn some languages (e.g. German, Russian, and French), the colon is the commonly used sign for division (instead of \u00f7).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe notation formula_1 may also denote the index of a subgroup.\nThe notation formula_2 indicates that f is a function with domain X and codomain Y.\nThe combination with an equal sign (\u2254) is used for definitions.\nIn mathematical logic, when using set-builder notation for describing the characterizing property of a set, it is used as an alternative to a vertical bar (which is the ISO 31-11 standard), to mean \"such that\". Example:\nformula_3 (\"S\" is the set of all x in formula_4 (the real numbers) such that x is strictly greater than 1 and strictly smaller than 3)\nIn older literature on mathematical logic, it is used to indicate how expressions should be bracketed (see Glossary of \"Principia Mathematica\").\nIn type theory and programming language theory, the colon sign after a term is used to indicate its type, sometimes as a replacement to the \"\u2208\" symbol. Example:\nformula_5.\nA colon is also sometimes used to indicate a tensor contraction involving two indices, and a double colon (::) for a contraction over four indices.\nA colon is also used to denote a parallel sum operation involving two operands (many authors, however, instead use a \u2225 sign and a few even a \u2217 for this purpose).\nComputing.\nThe character was on early typewriters and therefore appeared in most text encodings, such as Baudot code and EBCDIC. It was placed at code 58 in ASCII and from there inherited into Unicode. Unicode also defines several related characters:\nProgramming languages.\nMany programming languages, most notably ALGOL, Pascal and Ada, use a colon and equals sign as the assignment operator, to distinguish it from a single equals which is an equality test (C instead uses a single equals as assignment, and a double equals as the equality test).\nMany languages including C and Java use the colon to indicate the text before it is a label, such as a target for a goto or an introduction to a case in a switch statement.131 In a related use, Python uses a colon to separate a control statement (the \"clause header\") from the block of statements it controls (the \"suite\").\nIn many languages, including JavaScript, colons are used to define name\u2013value pairs in a dictionary or object. This is also used by data formats such as JSON. Some other languages use an equals sign.\nThe colon is used as part of the conditional operator in C and many other languages.90\nC++ and Rust use a double colon as the scope resolution operator/namespace qualification, and class member access. This is unlike some other languages, which use periods to do so. Another language using colons for scope resolution is Erlang, which uses a single colon. In C#, the double colon is used to access a member of an aliased namespace. Similarly in Java, the double colon is used to retrieve a method reference.\nIn BASIC, it is used as a separator between the statements or instructions in a single line. Most other languages use a semicolon, but BASIC had used semicolon to separate items in print statements.\nIn Forth, a colon \"precedes\" definition of a new word.\nHaskell uses a colon (pronounced as \"cons\", short for \"construct\") as an operator to add a data element to the front of a list, while a double colon codice_2 is read as \"has type of\" (compare scope resolution operator). The ML languages (such as Standard ML) have the above reversed, where the double colon (codice_2) is used to add an element to the front of a list; and the single colon (codice_4) is used for type guards. Rust, ActionScript, Kotlin, and TypeScript also use a colon to include a type annotation on a function or a variable.\nMATLAB uses the colon as a binary operator to generate a vector, or to select a part of an extant matrix.\nAPL uses the colon:\nThe colon is also used in many operating systems commands.\nIn the esoteric programming language INTERCAL, the colon is called \"two-spot\" and used to label a 32-bit variable, distinct from \"spot\" (.) to label a 16-bit variable.3\nAddresses.\nInternet URLs use the colon to separate the protocol (such as ) from the hostname or IP address.\nIn an IPv6 address, colons (and one optional double colon) separate up to 8 groups of 16 bits in hexadecimal representation. In a URL, a colon follows the initial scheme name (such as Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and File Transfer Protocol (FTP), and separates a port number from the hostname or IP address.\nIn Microsoft Windows filenames, the colon is reserved for use in alternate data streams and cannot appear in a filename. It was used as the directory separator in Classic Mac OS, and was difficult to use in early versions of the newer BSD-based macOS due to code swapping the slash and colon to try to preserve this usage. In most systems it is often difficult to put a colon in a filename as the shell interprets it for other purposes.\nCP/M and early versions of MSDOS required the colon after the names of devices, such as though this gradually disappeared except for disks (where it had to be between the disk name and the required path representation of the file as in codice_6). This then migrated to use in URLs.\nText markup.\nIt is often used as a single post-fix delimiter, signifying a token keyword had immediately preceded it or the transition from one mode of character string interpretation to another related mode. Some applications, such as the widely used MediaWiki, use the colon as both a pre-fix and post-fix delimiter.\nIn wiki markup, the colon is often used to indent text. Common usage includes separating or marking comments in a discussion as replies, or to distinguish certain parts of a text.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59133", "revid": "30645640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59133", "title": "Hauts-de-Seine", "text": "Department of France in \u00cele-de-France\nHauts-de-Seine (; lit.\u2009'Seine Heights') is a department in the \u00cele-de-France region of France. It covers Paris's western inner suburbs. It is bordered by Paris, Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne to the east, Val-d'Oise to the north, Yvelines to the west and Essonne to the south. With a population of 1,624,357 (as of 2019) and a total area of 176 square kilometres (68 square miles), it has the second highest population density among all departments of France, after Paris. It is the fifth most populous department in France. Its prefecture is Nanterre, but Boulogne-Billancourt, one of its two subprefectures, alongside Antony, has a larger population.\nHauts-de-Seine is best known for containing the modern office, cinema and shopping complex La D\u00e9fense, one of Grand Paris's main economic centres and one of Europe's major business districts. Hauts-de-Seine is one of the wealthiest departments in France; it had the highest GDP per capita in France at \u20ac107,800 in 2020. Its inhabitants are called (masculine) and (feminine) in French.\nHistory.\nFrom 1790 to 1968, Hauts-de-Seine was part of the former department of Seine.\nThe Hauts-de-Seine department was created in 1968, from parts of the former departments of Seine and Seine-et-Oise. Its creation reflected the implementation of a law passed in 1964; Nanterre had already been selected as the prefecture for the new department early in 1965.\nIn 2016, the Departmental Council of Hauts-de-Seine voted in favour of a fusion of Hauts-de-Seine and Yvelines, its western neighbour. Following a similar vote in Yvelines, an was established. The fusion project was abandoned in 2021, but the cooperation between the two departments continues.\nDemographics.\nPopulation development since 1881.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeography.\nLocation.\nHauts-de-Seine and two other small departments (Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne) form an inner ring around Paris, known as the \"Petite Couronne\" (literal translation: \"Little Crown\"). Together with the City of Paris, they are included in Greater Paris since 1 January 2016. It is the smallest department in France, followed by Seine-Saint-Denis and Val-de-Marne. It is slightly smaller than Maldives.\nAdministration.\nHauts-de-Seine comprises three departmental arrondissements and 36 communes:\nHauts-de-Seine currently has the fewest number of any communes in Metropolitan France. With only 36 communes, not including Paris which has only one commune, this makes the French department in Metropolitan France with the fewest number of communes.\nEconomy.\nHauts-de-Seine is one of France's wealthiest departments and one of Europe's richest areas. Its GDP per capita was \u20ac106,800 in 2020, according to Eurostat official figures.\nPolitics.\nIn both local and national elections, the department predominantly supports centre-right political candidates, though the 1st and 11th constituencies favor the left. \nHauts-de-Seine was the political base of Nicolas Sarkozy, President of the French Republic from 2007 to 2012. He was the mayor of Neuilly-sur-Seine (1983\u20132002) and president of the Departmental Council of Hauts-de-Seine (2004\u20132007) before he assumed the office. Sarkozy had succeeded Charles Pasqua as president of the Departmental Council.\nIn the 1990s and early 2000s, Hauts-de-Seine received national media attention as the result of a corruption scandal concerning the misuse of public funds provided for the department's housing projects. Implicated were Charles Pasqua, as well as other personalities of the Rally for the Republic (RPR) party.\nDepartmental Council of Hauts-de-Seine.\nHauts-de-Seine is governed by a departmental council. Its 46 members are called departmental councillors. The electorate of Hauts-de-Seine usually votes for right-wing parties; there has never been a left-wing majority since the department's inception in 1968.\nThe departmental council is the deliberative organ of the department. The executive is led by the council president, assisted by vice presidents, in charge of various portfolios. Departmental councillors are elected (two per canton) by the department's inhabitants for six-year terms (no term limits). The president of the Departmental Council is Georges Siffredi, elected in 2020.\nNational representation.\nHauts-de-Seine elected the following members of the National Assembly in the 2024 legislative election:\nIn the Senate, Hauts-de-Seine is represented by:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59134", "revid": "46033525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59134", "title": "Paris Commune", "text": "Revolutionary city council of Paris of 1871\nThe Paris Commune (, ) was a French revolutionary government that seized power in Paris on 18 March 1871 and controlled parts of the city until 28 May 1871. During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371, the French National Guard had defended Paris, and working class radicalism grew among its soldiers. Following the establishment of the French Third Republic in September 1870 (under French chief-executive Adolphe Thiers from February 1871) and the complete defeat of the French Army by the Germans by March 1871, soldiers of the National Guard seized control of the city on 18 March. The Communards killed two French Army generals and refused to accept the authority of the Third Republic; instead, the radicals set about establishing their own independent government.\nThe Commune governed Paris for two months, promoting policies that tended toward a progressive, anti-religious system, which was an eclectic mix of many 19th-century schools of thought. These policies included the separation of church and state, self-policing, the remission of rent, the abolition of child labor, and the right of employees to take over an enterprise deserted by its owner. The Commune closed all Catholic churches and schools in Paris. Feminist, communist, old-style social democracy (a mix of reformism and revolutionism), and anarchist/Proudhonist currents, among other socialist types, played important roles in the Commune.\nThe various Communards had little more than two months to achieve their respective goals before the national French Army suppressed the Commune during the (\"bloody week\") beginning on 21 May 1871. The national forces still loyal to the Third Republic government either killed in battle or executed an estimated 10,000 to 15,000 Communards, though one unconfirmed estimate from 1876 put the toll as high as 20,000. In its final days, the Commune executed the Archbishop of Paris, Georges Darboy, and about one hundred hostages, mostly gendarmes and priests.\nNational army forces took 43,522 Communards as prisoners, including 1,054 women. More than half of the prisoners had not fought, and were released immediately. The Third Republic tried around 15,000 in court, 13,500 of whom were found guilty, 95 were sentenced to death, 251 to forced labor, and 1,169 to deportation (mostly to New Caledonia). Many other Commune supporters, including several of the leaders, fled abroad, mostly to England, Belgium or Switzerland. All the surviving prisoners and exiles received pardons in 1880 and could return home, where some resumed political careers.\nDebates over the policies and result of the Commune had significant influence on the ideas of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, who described the r\u00e9gime in Paris as the first example of the dictatorship of the proletariat. Engels wrote: \"Of late, the Social-Democratic philistine has once more been filled with wholesome terror at the words: \"Dictatorship of the Proletariat\". Well and good, gentlemen, do you want to know what this dictatorship looks like? Look at the Paris Commune. That was the Dictatorship of the Proletariat.\"\nPrelude.\nOn 2 September 1870, France was defeated in the Battle of Sedan, and Emperor Napoleon III was captured. When the news reached Paris the next day, shocked and angry crowds came out into the streets. Empress Eug\u00e9nie, the acting Regent, fled the city, and the government of the Second Empire swiftly collapsed. Republican and radical deputies of the National Assembly proclaimed the new French Republic, and formed a Government of National Defence with the intention of continuing the war. The Prussian army marched swiftly toward Paris.\nDemographics.\nIn 1871, France was deeply divided between the large rural, Catholic, and conservative population of the French countryside and the more republican and radical cities of Paris, Marseille, Lyon and a few others. In the first round of the 1869 parliamentary elections held under the French Empire, 4,438,000 had voted for the Bonapartist candidates supporting Napoleon III, while 3,350,000 had voted for the republicans or the legitimists. In Paris, however, the republican candidates dominated, winning 234,000 votes against 77,000 for the Bonapartists.\nOf the two million people in Paris in 1869, according to the official census, there were about 500,000 industrial workers, or fifteen percent of all the industrial workers in France, plus another 300,000\u2013400,000 workers in other enterprises. Only about 40,000 were employed in factories and large enterprises; most were employed in small industries in textiles, furniture, and construction. There were also 115,000 servants and 45,000 concierges. In addition to the native French population, there were about 100,000 immigrant workers and political refugees, the largest number being from Italy and Poland.\nDuring the war and the Siege of Paris, various members of the middle and upper classes departed the city. At the same time, there was an influx of refugees from parts of France occupied by the Germans. The working class and immigrants suffered the most from the lack of industrial activity due to the war and the siege; they formed the bedrock of the Commune's popular support.\nRadicalisation of the Paris workers.\nThe Commune resulted in part from growing discontent among the Paris workers. This discontent can be traced to the first worker uprisings, the Canut revolts (a was a Lyonnais silk worker, often working on Jacquard looms), in Lyon and Paris in the 1830s. Many Parisians, especially workers and the lower-middle classes, supported a democratic republic. A specific demand was that Paris should be self-governing with its own elected council, something enjoyed by smaller French towns but denied to Paris by a national government wary of the capital's unruly populace.\nSocialist movements, such as the First International, had been growing in influence with hundreds of societies affiliated to it across France. In early 1867, Parisian employers of bronze-workers attempted to de-unionise their workers. This was defeated by a strike organised by the International. Later in 1867, a public demonstration in Paris was answered by the dissolution of its executive committee and the leadership being fined. Tensions escalated: Internationalists elected a new committee and put forth a more radical programme, the authorities imprisoned their leaders, and a more revolutionary perspective was taken to the International's 1868 Brussels Congress. The International had considerable influence even among unaffiliated French workers, particularly in Paris and the large cities.\nThe killing of journalist Victor Noir incensed Parisians, and the arrests of journalists critical of the Emperor did nothing to quiet the city. The German military attach\u00e9, Alfred von Waldersee, wrote in his diary in February:\"Every night, isolated barricades were thrown up, constructed for the most part out of disused conveyances, especially omnibuses, a few shots were fired at random, and scenes of disorder were taken part in by a few hundreds of persons, mostly quite young\".He noted, however, that \"working-men, as a class, took no part in the proceedings.\" A coup was attempted in early 1870, but tensions eased significantly after the plebiscite in May. The war with Prussia, initiated by Napoleon III in July, was initially met with patriotic fervour.\nRadicals and revolutionaries.\nParis was the traditional home of French radical movements. Revolutionaries had gone into the streets and overthrown their governments during the popular uprisings of July 1830 and the French Revolution of 1848, as well as subsequent failed attempts such as the 1832 June Rebellion and the uprising of June 1848.\nOf the radical and revolutionary groups in Paris at the time of the Commune, the most conservative were the \"radical republicans\". This group included the young doctor and future prime minister Georges Clemenceau, who was a member of the National Assembly and Mayor of the 18th arrondissement. Clemenceau tried to negotiate a compromise between the Commune and the government, but neither side trusted him. He was considered extremely radical by the provincial deputies of rural France, but too moderate by the leaders of the Commune.\nThe most extreme revolutionaries in Paris were the followers of Louis Auguste Blanqui, a charismatic professional revolutionary who had spent most of his adult life in prison. He had about a thousand followers, many of them armed and organized into cells of ten persons each. Each cell operated independently and was unaware of the members of the other groups, communicating only with their leaders by code. Blanqui had written a manual on revolution, \"Instructions for an Armed Uprising\", to give guidance to his followers. Though their numbers were small, the Blanquists provided many of the most disciplined soldiers and several of the senior leaders of the Commune.\nDefenders of Paris.\nBy 20 September 1870, the Imperial German Army had surrounded Paris and was camped just from the French front lines. The regular French Army in Paris, under General Trochu's command, had only 50,000 professional soldiers of the line; the majority of the French first-line soldiers were prisoners of war, or trapped in Metz, surrounded by the Germans. The regulars were thus supported by around 5,000 firemen, 3,000 gendarmes, and 15,000 sailors. The regulars were also supported by the \"Garde Mobile\", new recruits with little training or experience. 17,000 of them were Parisian, and 73,000 from the provinces. These included twenty battalions of men from Brittany, who spoke little French.\nThe largest armed force in Paris was the National Guard, numbering about 300,000 men. They also had very little training or experience. They were organised by neighbourhoods. Those from the upper- and middle-class arrondissements tended to support the national government, while those from the working-class neighbourhoods were far more radical and politicised. Guardsmen from many units were known for their lack of discipline; some units refused to wear uniforms, often refused to obey orders without discussing them, and demanded the right to elect their own officers. The members of the National Guard from working-class neighbourhoods became the main armed force of the Commune.\nSiege of Paris; first demonstrations.\nAs the Germans surrounded the city, radical groups saw that the Government of National Defence had few soldiers to defend itself, and launched the first demonstrations against it. On 19 September, National Guard units from the main working-class neighbourhoods\u2014Belleville, M\u00e9nilmontant, La Villette, Montrouge, the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, and the Faubourg du Temple\u2014marched to the centre of the city and demanded that a new government, a Commune, be elected. They were met by regular army units loyal to the Government of National Defence, and the demonstrators eventually dispersed peacefully. On 5 October, 5,000 protesters marched from Belleville to the H\u00f4tel de Ville, demanding immediate municipal elections and rifles. On 8 October, several thousand soldiers from the National Guard, led by Eug\u00e8ne Varlin of the First International, marched to the centre chanting 'Long Live the Commune!\", but they also dispersed without incident.\nLater in October, General Louis-Jules Trochu launched a series of armed attacks to break the German siege, with heavy losses and no success. The telegraph line connecting Paris with the rest of France had been cut by the Germans on 27 September. On 6 October, Defense Minister L\u00e9on Gambetta departed the city by balloon to try to organise national resistance against the Germans.\nUprising of 31 October.\nOn 28 October, the news arrived in Paris that the 160,000 soldiers of the French army at Metz, which had been surrounded by the Germans since August, had surrendered. The news arrived the same day of the failure of another attempt by the French army to break the siege of Paris at Le Bourget, with heavy losses. On 31 October, the leaders of the main revolutionary groups in Paris, including Blanqui, F\u00e9lix Pyat and Louis Charles Delescluze, called new demonstrations at the H\u00f4tel de Ville against General Trochu and the government. Fifteen thousand demonstrators, some of them armed, gathered in front of the H\u00f4tel de Ville in pouring rain, calling for the resignation of Trochu and the proclamation of a commune. Shots were fired from the H\u00f4tel de Ville, one narrowly missing Trochu, and the demonstrators crowded into the building, demanding the creation of a new government, and making lists of its proposed members.\nBlanqui, the leader of the most radical faction, established his own headquarters at the nearby Prefecture of the Seine, issuing orders and decrees to his followers, intent upon establishing his own government. While the formation of the new government was taking place inside the H\u00f4tel de Ville, however, units of the National Guard and the Garde Mobile loyal to General Trochu arrived and recaptured the building without violence. By three o'clock, the demonstrators had been given safe passage and left, and the brief uprising was over.\nOn 3 November, city authorities organized a plebiscite of Parisian voters, asking if they had confidence in the Government of National Defence. \"Yes\" votes totalled 557,996, while 62,638 voted \"no\". Two days later, municipal councils in each of the twenty arrondissements of Paris voted to elect mayors; five councils elected radical opposition candidates, including Delescluze and a young Montmartrean doctor, Georges Clemenceau.\nNegotiations with the Germans; continued war.\nIn September and October, Adolphe Thiers, the leader of the National Assembly conservatives, had toured Europe, consulting with the foreign ministers of Britain, Russia, and Austria-Hungary, and found that none of them were willing to support France against the Germans. He reported to the government that there was no alternative to negotiating an armistice. He travelled to German-occupied Tours and met with Otto von Bismarck on 1 November. The German Chancellor demanded the cession of all of Alsace, parts of Lorraine, and enormous reparations. The Government of National Defence decided to continue the war and raise a new army to fight the Germans. The newly organized French armies won a single victory at Coulmiers on 10 November, but an attempt by General Auguste-Alexandre Ducrot on 29 November at Villiers to break out of Paris was defeated with a loss of 4,000 soldiers, compared with 1,700 German casualties.\nEveryday life for Parisians became increasingly difficult during the siege. In December, temperatures dropped to , and the Seine froze for three weeks. Parisians suffered shortages of food, firewood, coal and medicine. The city was almost completely dark at night. The only communication with the outside world was by balloon, carrier pigeon, or letters packed in iron balls floated down the Seine. Rumours and conspiracy theories abounded. Because supplies of ordinary food ran out, starving denizens ate most of the city zoo's animals, then resorted to feeding on rats.\nBy early January 1871, Bismarck and the Germans themselves were tired of the prolonged siege. They installed seventy-two 120- and 150-mm artillery pieces in the forts around Paris and on 5 January began to bombard the city day and night. Between 300 and 600 shells hit the city centre every day.\nUprising and armistice.\nBetween 11 and 19 January 1871, the French armies had been defeated on four fronts and Paris was facing a famine. General Trochu received reports from the prefect of Paris that agitation against the government and military leaders was increasing in the political clubs and in the National Guard of the working-class neighbourhoods of Belleville, La Chapelle, Montmartre, and Gros-Caillou.\nAt midday on 22 January, three or four hundred National Guards and members of radical groups\u2014mostly Blanquists\u2014gathered outside the H\u00f4tel de Ville. A battalion from Brittany was inside the building to defend it in case of an assault. The demonstrators presented their demands that the military be placed under civil control, and that there be an immediate election of a commune. The atmosphere was tense, and in the middle of the afternoon, gunfire broke out between the two sides; each side blamed the other for firing first. Six demonstrators were killed, and the army cleared the square. The government quickly banned two publications, Delescluze's ' and Pyat's ', and arrested 83 revolutionaries.\nAt the same time as the demonstration in Paris, the leaders of the Government of National Defence in Bordeaux had concluded that the war could not continue. On 26 January, they signed a ceasefire and armistice, with special conditions for Paris. The city would not be occupied by the Germans. Regular soldiers would give up their arms, but would not be taken into captivity. Paris would pay an indemnity of 200 million francs. At Jules Favre's request, Bismarck agreed not to disarm the National Guard, so that order could be maintained in the city.\nAdolphe Thiers; parliamentary elections of 1871.\nThe national government in Bordeaux called for national elections at the end of January, held just ten days later on 8 February. Most electors in France were rural, Catholic and conservative, and this was reflected in the results; of the 645 deputies assembled in Bordeaux on February, about 400 favoured a constitutional monarchy under either Henri, Count of Chambord (grandson of Charles X) or Prince Philippe, Count of Paris (grandson of Louis Philippe).\nOf the 200 republicans in the new parliament, 80 were former Orl\u00e9anists (Philippe's supporters) and moderately conservative. They were led by Adolphe Thiers, who was elected in 26 departments, the most of any candidate. There were an equal number of more radical republicans, including Jules Favre and Jules Ferry, who wanted a republic without a monarch, and who felt that signing the peace treaty was unavoidable. Finally, on the extreme left, there were the radical republicans and socialists, a group that included Louis Blanc, L\u00e9on Gambetta and Georges Clemenceau. This group was dominant in Paris, where they won 37 of the 42 seats.\nOn 17 February the new parliament elected the 74-year-old Thiers as chief executive of the Third Republic. He was considered to be the candidate most likely to bring peace and to restore order. Long an opponent of the Prussian war, Thiers persuaded parliament that peace was necessary. He travelled to Versailles, where Bismarck and the German Emperor were waiting, and on 24 February the armistice was signed.\nEstablishment.\nDispute over cannons of Paris.\nAt the end of the war, 400 obsolete muzzle-loading bronze cannons, paid for by the Paris public via a subscription, remained in the city. The new Central Committee of the National Guard, now dominated by radicals, decided to put the cannons in parks in the working-class neighborhoods of Belleville, Buttes-Chaumont and Montmartre, to keep them away from the regular army and to defend the city against any attack by the national government. Thiers was equally determined to bring the cannons under national-government control.\nClemenceau, a friend of several revolutionaries, tried to negotiate a compromise; some cannons would remain in Paris and the rest go to the army. However, neither Thiers nor the National Assembly accepted his proposals. The chief executive wanted to restore order and national authority in Paris as quickly as possible, and the cannons became a symbol of that authority. The Assembly also refused to prolong the moratorium on debt collections imposed during the war; and suspended two radical newspapers, ' of Jules Vall\u00e8s and ' of Henri Rochefort, which further inflamed Parisian radical opinion. Thiers also decided to move the National Assembly and government from Bordeaux to Versailles, rather than to Paris, to be farther away from the pressure of demonstrations, which further enraged the National Guard and the radical political clubs.\nOn 17 March 1871, there was a meeting of Thiers and his cabinet, who were joined by Paris mayor Jules Ferry, National Guard commander General Louis d'Aurelle de Paladines and General Joseph Vinoy, commander of the regular army units in Paris. Thiers announced a plan to send the army the next day to take charge of the cannons. The plan was initially opposed by War Minister Adolphe Le Fl\u00f4, d'Aurelle de Paladines, and Vinoy, who argued that the move was premature, because the army had too few soldiers, was undisciplined and demoralized, and that many units had become politicized and were unreliable. Vinoy urged that they wait until Germany had released the French prisoners of war, and the army returned to full strength. Thiers insisted that the planned operation must go ahead as quickly as possible, to have the element of surprise. If the seizure of the cannon was not successful, the government would withdraw from the centre of Paris, build up its forces, and then attack with overwhelming force, as they had done during the uprising of June 1848. The Council accepted his decision, and Vinoy gave orders for the operation to begin the next day.\nFailed seizure attempt and government retreat.\nEarly in the morning of 18 March, two brigades of soldiers climbed the butte of Montmartre, where the largest collection of cannons, 170 in number, were located. A small group of revolutionary national guardsmen were already there, and there was a brief confrontation between the brigade led by General Claude Lecomte, and the National Guard; one guardsman, named Turpin, was shot, later dying. Word of the shooting spread quickly, and members of the National Guard from all over the neighbourhood, along with others including Clemenceau, hurried to the site to confront the soldiers.\nWhile the Army had succeeded in securing the cannons at Belleville and Buttes-Chaumont and other strategic points, at Montmartre a crowd gathered and continued to grow, and the situation grew increasingly tense. The horses that were needed to take the cannon away did not arrive, and the army units were immobilized. As the soldiers were surrounded, they began to break ranks and join the crowd. General Lecomte tried to withdraw, and then ordered his soldiers to load their weapons and fix bayonets. He thrice ordered them to fire, but the soldiers refused. Some of the officers were disarmed and taken to the city hall of Montmartre, under the protection of Clemenceau. General Lecomte and his staff officers were seized by the guardsmen and his mutinous soldiers and taken to the local headquarters of the National Guard under the command of captain Simon Charles Mayer at the ballroom of the Ch\u00e2teau Rouge. The officers were pelted with rocks, struck, threatened, and insulted by the crowd. In the middle of the afternoon, Lecomte and the other officers were taken to 6 rue des Rosiers by members of a group calling themselves the Committee of Vigilance of the 18th , who demanded that they be tried and executed.\nAt 5:00 in the afternoon, the National Guard had captured another important prisoner: General Jacques Leon Cl\u00e9ment-Thomas. An ardent republican and fierce disciplinarian, he had helped suppress the armed uprising of June 1848 against the Second Republic. Because of his republican beliefs, he had been arrested by Napoleon III and exiled, and had only returned to France after the downfall of the Empire. He was particularly hated by the national guardsmen of Montmartre and Belleville because of the severe discipline he imposed during the siege of Paris. Earlier that day, dressed in civilian clothes, he had been trying to find out what was going on, when he was recognized by a soldier and arrested, and brought to the building at rue des Rosiers. At about 5:30 on 18 March, the angry crowd of national guardsmen and deserters from Lecomte's regiment at rue des Rosiers seized Cl\u00e9ment-Thomas, beat him with rifle butts, pushed him into the garden, and shot him repeatedly. A few minutes later, they did the same to General Lecomte. Doctor Jean Casimir F\u00e9lix Guyon, who examined the bodies shortly afterwards, found forty bullets in Cl\u00e9ment-Thomas's body and nine in Lecomte's back. By late morning, the operation to recapture the cannons had failed, and crowds and barricades were appearing in all the working-class neighborhoods of Paris. General Vinoy ordered the army to pull back to the Seine, and Thiers began to organise a withdrawal to Versailles, where he could gather enough troops to take back Paris.\nOn the afternoon of 18 March, following the government's failed attempt to seize the cannons at Montmartre, the Central Committee of the National Guard ordered the three battalions to seize the H\u00f4tel de Ville, where they believed the government was located. They were not aware that Thiers, the government, and the military commanders were at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where the gates were open and there were few guards. They were also unaware that Marshal Patrice de MacMahon, the future commander of the forces against the Commune, had just arrived at his home in Paris, having just been released from imprisonment in Germany. As soon as he heard the news of the uprising, he made his way to the railway station, where national guardsmen were already stopping and checking the identity of departing passengers. A sympathetic station manager hid him in his office and helped him board a train, and he escaped the city. While he was at the railway station, national guardsmen sent by the Central Committee arrived at his house looking for him.\nOn the advice of General Vinoy, Thiers ordered the evacuation to Versailles of all the regular forces in Paris, some 40,000 soldiers, including those in the fortresses around the city; the regrouping of all the army units in Versailles; and the departure of all government ministries from the city.\nNational Guard takes power.\nIn February, while the national government had been organising in Bordeaux, a new rival government had been organised in Paris. The National Guard had not been disarmed as per the armistice, and had on paper 260 battalions of 1,500 men each, a total of 390,000 men. Between 15 and 24 February, some 500 delegates elected by the National Guard began meeting in Paris. On 15 March, just before the confrontation between the National Guard and the regular army over the cannons, 1,325 delegates of the federation of organisations created by the National Guard elected a leader, Giuseppe Garibaldi (who was in Italy and respectfully declined the title), and created a Central Committee of 38 members, which made its headquarters in a school on the rue Basfroi, between Place de la Bastille and Rue de la Roquette. The first vote of the new Central Committee was to refuse to recognise the authority of General D'Aurelle de Paladines, the official commander of the National Guard appointed by Thiers, or of General Vinoy, the Military Governor of Paris.\nLate on 18 March, when they learned that the regular army was leaving Paris, units of the National Guard moved quickly to take control of the city. The first to take action were the followers of Blanqui, who went quickly to the Latin Quarter and took charge of the gunpowder stored in the Panth\u00e9on, and to the Orl\u00e9ans railway station. Four battalions crossed the Seine and captured the prefecture of police, while other units occupied the former headquarters of the National Guard at the Place Vend\u00f4me, as well as the Ministry of Justice. That night, the National Guard occupied the offices vacated by the government. They quickly took over the Ministries of Finance, the Interior, and War. At eight in the morning the next day, the Central Committee was meeting in the H\u00f4tel de Ville. By the end of the day, 20,000 national guardsmen camped in triumph in the square in front of the H\u00f4tel de Ville, with several dozen cannons. A red flag was hoisted over the building.\nThe extreme-left members of the Central Committee, led by the Blanquists, demanded an immediate march on Versailles to disperse the Thiers government and to impose their authority on all of France; but the majority first wanted to establish a more solid base of legal authority in Paris. The Committee officially lifted the state of siege, named commissions to administer the government, and called elections for 23 March. They also sent a delegation of mayors of the Paris , led by Clemenceau, to negotiate with Thiers in Versailles to obtain a special independent status for Paris.\nOn 22 March 1871, demonstrators holding banners declaring them to be \"Friends of Peace\" were blocked from entering the Place Vend\u00f4me by guardsmen who, after being fired on, opened fire on the crowd. At least 12 people were killed and many wounded. The event was labeled the Massacre in the Rue de la Paix.\nCouncil elections.\nIn Paris, hostility was growing between the elected republican mayors, including Clemenceau, who believed that they were legitimate leaders of Paris, and the Central Committee of the National Guard. On 22 March, the day before the elections, the Central Committee declared that it, not the mayors, was the legitimate government of Paris. It declared that Clemenceau was no longer the Mayor of Montmartre, and seized the city hall there, as well as the city halls of the 1st and 2nd , which were occupied by more radical national guardsmen. \"We are caught between two bands of crazy people,\" Clemenceau complained, \"those sitting in Versailles and those in Paris.\"\nThe elections of 26 March elected a Commune council of 92 members, one for every 20,000 residents. Ahead of the elections, the Central Committee and the leaders of the International gave out their lists of candidates, mostly belonging to the extreme left. The candidates had only a few days to campaign. Thiers' government in Versailles urged Parisians to abstain from voting. When the voting was finished, 233,000 Parisians had voted, out of 485,000 registered voters, or forty-eight percent. In upper-class neighborhoods many abstained from voting: 77 percent of voters in the 7th and 8th arrondissements; 68 percent in the 15th, 66 percent in the 16th, and 62 percent in the 6th and 9th. But in the working-class neighborhoods, turnout was high: 76 percent in the 20th arrondissement, 65 percent in the 19th, and 55 to 60 percent in the 10th, 11th, and 12th.\nA few candidates, including Blanqui (who had been arrested when outside Paris, and was in prison in Brittany), won in several . Other candidates who were elected, including about twenty moderate republicans and five radicals, refused to take their seats. In the end, the council had just 60 members. Nine of the winners were Blanquists (some of whom were also from the International); twenty-five, including Delescluze and Pyat, classified themselves as \"Independent Revolutionaries\"; about fifteen were from the International; the rest were from a variety of radical groups. One of the best-known candidates, Clemenceau, received only 752 votes. The professions represented in the council were 33 workers; five small businessmen; 19 clerks, accountants and other office staff; twelve journalists; and a selection of workers in the liberal arts. 20 members were Freemasons. All were men; women were not allowed to vote. The winners were announced on 27 March, and a large ceremony and parade by the National Guard was held the next day in front of the H\u00f4tel de Ville, decorated with red flags.\nOrganisation and early work.\nThe new Commune held its first meeting on 28 March in a euphoric mood. The members adopted a dozen proposals, including an honorary presidency for Blanqui; the abolition of the death penalty; the abolition of military conscription; a proposal to send delegates to other cities to help launch communes there; and a resolution declaring that membership in the Paris Commune was incompatible with being a member of the National Assembly. This was aimed particularly at Pierre Tirard, the republican mayor of the 2nd arrondissement, who had been elected to both Commune and National Assembly. Seeing the more radical political direction of the new Commune, Tirard and some twenty republicans decided it was wisest to resign from the Commune. A resolution was also passed, after a long debate, that the deliberations of the council were to be secret, since the Commune was effectively at war with the government in Versailles and should not make its intentions known to the enemy.\nFollowing the model proposed by the more radical members, the new government had no president, no mayor, and no commander in chief. The Commune began by establishing nine commissions, similar to those of the National Assembly, to manage the affairs of Paris. The commissions in turn reported to an Executive Commission. One of the first measures passed declared that military conscription was abolished, that no military force other than the National Guard could be formed or introduced into the capital, and that all healthy male citizens were members of the National Guard. The new system had one important weakness: the National Guard now had two different commanders. They reported to both the Central Committee of the National Guard and to the Executive Commission, and it was not clear which one was in charge of the inevitable war with Thiers' government.\nAdministration and actions.\nProgramme.\nThe Commune adopted the discarded French Republican calendar during its brief existence and used the socialist red flag rather than the republican tricolor. Despite internal differences, the council began to organise public services for the city which at the time consisted of two million residents. It also reached a consensus on certain policies that tended towards a progressive, secular, and social democracy. Because the Commune only existed for two months before it was suppressed, only a few decrees were actually implemented. The decrees included:\nFeminist initiatives.\nWomen played an important role in both the initiation and the governance of the Commune, though women could not vote in the Commune elections and there were no elected women members of the Commune itself. Their participation included building barricades and caring for wounded fighters. Jos\u00e9phine Marchais, a washer woman, picked up a gun during the battles of 22-23 May and said, \"You cowardly crew! Go and Fight! If I'm killed it will be because I've done some killing first!\" She was arrested as an incendiary, but there is no documentation that she was a (female arsonist). She worked as a with the . While carrying back the laundry she was given by the guardsmen, she carried away the body of her lover, Jean Guy, who was a butcher's apprentice. There were reports in various newspapers of female arsonists, but evidence remains weak. The \"Paris Journal\" reported that soldiers arrested 13 women who allegedly threw petrol into houses. There were rumours that were paid 10 francs per house. While it was clear that communard arsonists burned the Tuileries Palace, the Hotel de Ville and other landmarks, the reports of women participating were exaggerated at the time.\nSome women organised a feminist movement, following earlier attempts in 1789 and 1848. Thus, Nathalie Lemel, a socialist bookbinder, and Elisabeth Dmitrieff, a young Russian exile and member of the Russian section of the First International, created the Women's Union for the Defence of Paris and Care of the Wounded on 11 April 1871. The feminist writer Andr\u00e9 L\u00e9o, a friend of Paule Mink, was also active in the Women's Union. Believing that the situation of women could only be improved through a global struggle against capitalism, the association demanded gender and wage equality, the right of divorce for women, the right to secular education, and professional education for girls. They also demanded suppression of the distinction between married women and concubines, and between legitimate and illegitimate children. They advocated the abolition of prostitution (obtaining the closing of the maisons de tol\u00e9rance, or legal brothels). The Women's Union also participated in several municipal commissions and organised cooperative workshops. Along with Eug\u00e8ne Varlin, Nathalie Lemel created the cooperative restaurant , which served free food for indigents, and then fought during the Bloody Week on the barricades.\nPaule Minck opened a free school in the Church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre and ran the in the Church of Saint-Sulpice on the Left Bank. The Russian Anne Jaclard, who declined to marry Fyodor Dostoevsky and finally became the wife of Blanquist activist Victor Jaclard, founded the newspaper with Andr\u00e9 L\u00e9o. She was also a member of the , along with Louise Michel and Paule Minck, as well as of the Russian section of the First International. Victorine Brocher, close to the IWA activists, and founder of a cooperative bakery in 1867, also fought during the Commune and the Bloody Week. Louise Michel, who would later be deported to New Caledonia, was one of those who symbolised the active participation of a small number of women in the insurrectionary events. A women's battalion of the National Guard defended the Place Blanche during the repression.\nBank of France.\nThe Commune named Fran\u00e7ois Jourde as the head of the Commission of Finance. A former clerk of a notary, accountant in a bank and employee of the city's bridges and roads department, Jourde maintained the Commune's accounts with prudence. Paris's tax receipts amounted to 20 million francs, with another six million seized at the H\u00f4tel de Ville. The expenses of the Commune were 42 million, the largest part going to pay the daily salary of the National Guard. Jourde first obtained a loan from the Rothschild Bank, then paid the bills from the city account, which was soon exhausted.\nThe gold reserves of the Bank of France had been moved out of Paris for safety in August 1870, in addition to 88 million francs in gold coins and 166 million francs in banknotes. When the Thiers government left Paris in March, they did not have the time or the reliable soldiers to take the money with them. The reserves were guarded by 500 national guardsmen who were themselves Bank of France employees. Some Communards wanted to appropriate the bank's reserves to fund social projects, but Jourde resisted, explaining that without the gold reserves the currency would collapse and all the money of the Commune would be worthless. The Commune appointed Charles Beslay as the Commissioner of the Bank of France, and he arranged for the Bank to loan the Commune 400,000 francs a day. This was approved by Thiers, who felt that to negotiate a future peace treaty the Germans were demanding war reparations of five billion francs; the gold reserves would be needed to keep the franc stable and pay the indemnity. Jourde's actions were later condemned by Karl Marx and other Marxists, who felt the Commune should have confiscated the bank's reserves.\nPress.\nFrom 21 March, the Central Committee of the National Guard banned the major pro-Versailles newspapers, and . Their offices were invaded and closed by crowds of the Commune's supporters. After 18 April other newspapers sympathetic to Versailles were also closed. The Versailles government, in turn, imposed strict censorship and prohibited any publication in favour of the Commune.\nAt the same time, the number of pro-Commune newspapers and magazines published in Paris during the Commune expanded exponentially. The most popular of the pro-Commune newspapers was ', published by Jules Vall\u00e8s, which was published from 22 February until 23 May. Another highly popular publication was ', inspired by a similar paper of the same name published from 1790 until 1794; after its first issue on 6 March, it was briefly closed by General Vinoy, but it reappeared until 23 May. It specialised in humour, vulgarity and extreme abuse against the opponents of the Commune.\nA republican press also flourished, including such papers as ' of Henri Rochefort, which was both violently anti-Versailles and critical of the faults and excesses of the Commune. The most popular republican paper was ', which condemned both Thiers and the killing of generals Lecomte and Clement-Thomas by the Communards. Its editor Auguste Vacquerie was close to Victor Hugo, whose son Fran\u00e7ois-Victor Hugo wrote for the paper. The editors wrote,\"We are against the National Assembly, but we are not for the Commune. That which we defend, that which we love, that which we admire, is Paris.\"\nAnti-clericalism.\nFrom the beginning, the Commune had a hostile relationship with the Catholic Church. On 2 April, soon after the Commune was established, it voted a decree accusing the Catholic Church of \"complicity in the crimes of the monarchy.\" The decree declared the separation of church and state, confiscated the state funds allotted to the Church, seized the property of religious congregations, and ordered that Catholic schools cease religious education and become secular.\nOver the next seven weeks, some two hundred priests, nuns and monks were arrested, and twenty-six churches were closed to the public. At the urging of the more radical newspapers, National Guard units searched the basements of churches, looking for evidence of alleged sadism and criminal practices. More extreme elements of the National Guard carried out mock religious processions and parodies of religious services. Some churches, like Saint-Germain l'Auxerrois, were turned into socialist meeting clubs.\nEarly in May, some of the political clubs began to demand the immediate execution of Archbishop Darboy and the other priests in the prison. The Archbishop and a number of priests were executed during Bloody Week, in retaliation for the execution of Commune soldiers by the regular army.\nDestruction of the Vend\u00f4me Column.\nThe destruction of the Vend\u00f4me Column honouring the victories of Napoleon I, topped by a statue of the Emperor, was one of the most prominent civic events during the Commune. It was voted on 12 April by the executive committee of the Commune, which declared that the column was \"a monument of barbarism\" and a \"symbol of brute force and false pride.\" The idea had originally come from the painter Gustave Courbet, who had written to the Government of National Defence on 4 September calling for the demolition of the column. In October, he had called for a new column, made of melted-down German cannons, \"the column of peoples, the column of Germany and France, forever federated.\" Courbet was elected to the Council of the Commune on 16 April, after the decision to tear down the column had already been made. The ceremonial destruction took place on 16 May. In the presence of two battalions of the National Guard and the leaders of the Commune, a band played \"La Marseillaise\" and the \"Chant du D\u00e9part\". The first effort to pull down the column failed, but at 5:30 in the afternoon the column broke from its base and shattered into three pieces. The pedestal was draped with red flags, and pieces of the statue were taken to be melted down and made into coins.\nOn 12 May a crowd organised by the Commune destroyed the residence of Adolphe Thiers, the leader of the Third Republic, on Place Saint-Georges. Proposed by Henri Rochefort, editor of the , on 6 April, it was not voted upon by the Commune until 10 May.\nWar with the national government.\nMobilization of both sides and attack by the government army.\nIn Versailles, Thiers had estimated that he needed 150,000 men to recapture Paris, and that he had only about 20,000 reliable first-line soldiers, plus about 5,000 gendarmes. He worked rapidly to assemble a new and reliable regular army. Most of the soldiers were prisoners of war who had just been released by the Germans, following the terms of the armistice. Others were sent from military units in all of the provinces. To command the new army, Thiers chose Patrice de MacMahon, who had won fame fighting the Austrians in Italy under Napoleon III, and who had been seriously wounded at the Battle of Sedan. He was highly popular both within the army and in the country. By 30 March, less than two weeks after the Army's Montmartre rout, it began skirmishing with the National Guard on the outskirts of Paris.\nThe Versailles Army was the first to attack. On 21 March, it occupied the fort of Mont-Val\u00e9rien where the Commune's \"f\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9s\" had neglected to settle. This position, which dominated the entire near western suburbs of Paris, gave them a considerable advantage. On 30 March, General de Gallifet occupied the Courbevoie roundabout and on 2 April, the Versaillais seized Courbevoie and Puteaux, the f\u00e9d\u00e9r\u00e9s retreating towards Neuilly.\nFailure of the march on Versailles.\nIn Paris, members of the Military Commission and the executive committee of the Commune, as well as the Central Committee of the National Guard, met on 1 April. They decided to launch an offensive against the Army in Versailles within five days. The attack was first launched on the morning of 2 April by five battalions who crossed the Seine at the Pont de Neuilly. The National Guard troops were quickly repulsed by the Army, with a loss of about twelve soldiers. One officer of the Versailles army, a surgeon from the medical corps, was killed; the National Guardsmen had mistaken his uniform for that of a gendarme. Five national guardsmen were captured by the regulars; two were Army deserters and two were caught with their weapons in their hands. General Vinoy, the commander of the Paris Military District, had ordered any prisoners who were deserters from the Army to be shot. The commander of the regular forces, Colonel Georges Ernest Boulanger, went further and ordered that all four prisoners be summarily shot. The practice of shooting prisoners captured with weapons became common in the bitter fighting in the weeks ahead.\nDespite this first failure, Commune leaders were still convinced that, as at Montmartre, French army soldiers would refuse to fire on national guardsmen. They prepared a massive offensive of 27,000 national guardsmen who would advance in three columns. They were expected to converge at the end of 24 hours at the gates of the Palace of Versailles. They advanced on the morning of 3 April\u2014without cavalry to protect the flanks, without artillery, without stores of food and ammunition, and without ambulances\u2014confident of rapid success. They passed by the line of forts outside the city, believing them to be occupied by national guardsmen. In fact the army had re-occupied the abandoned forts on 28 March. The National Guard soon came under heavy artillery and rifle fire; they broke ranks and fled back to Paris. Once again national guardsmen captured with weapons were routinely shot by army units.\nDecree on Hostages.\nCommune leaders responded to the execution of prisoners by the Army by passing a new order on 5 April\u2014the Decree on Hostages, which will only be implemented when the insurrection is crushed (Bloody Week). Under the decree, any person accused of complicity with the Versailles government could be immediately arrested, imprisoned and tried by a special jury of accusation. Those convicted by the jury would become \"hostages of the people of Paris.\" Article 5 stated,\"Every execution of a prisoner of war or of a partisan of the government of the Commune of Paris will be immediately followed by the execution of a triple number of hostages held by virtue of article four.\"Prisoners of war would be brought before a jury, which would decide if they would be released or held as hostages.\nThe National Assembly in Versailles responded to the decree the next day; it passed a law allowing military tribunals to judge and punish suspects within 24 hours. \u00c9mile Zola wrote,\"Thus we citizens of Paris are placed between two terrible laws; the law of suspects brought back by the Commune and the law on rapid executions which will certainly be approved by the Assembly. They are not fighting with cannon shots, they are slaughtering each other with decrees.\"About one hundred hostages, including the Archbishop, were shot by the Commune before its end.\nRadicalisation.\nBy April, as MacMahon's forces steadily approached Paris, divisions arose within the Commune about whether to give absolute priority to military defence, or to political and social freedoms and reforms. The majority, including the Blanquists and the more radical revolutionaries, supported by of Pyat and of Vermersch, supported giving the military priority. The publications , and Valles' feared that a more authoritarian government would destroy the kind of social republic they wanted to achieve. Soon, the Council of the Commune voted, with strong opposition, for the creation of a Committee of Public Safety, modelled on and named after the committee that carried out the Reign of Terror (1793\u201394). Because of the implications carried by its name, many members of the Commune opposed the Committee of Public Safety's creation.\nThe committee was given extensive powers to hunt down and imprison enemies of the Commune. Led by Raoul Rigault, it began to make several arrests, usually on suspicion of treason, intelligence with the enemy, or insults to the Commune. Those arrested included General Edmond-Charles de Martimprey, the governor of Les Invalides, alleged to have caused the assassination of revolutionaries in December 1851, as well as more recent commanders of the National Guard, including Gustave Cluseret. High religious officials had been arrested: Archbishop Darboy, the Vicar General Abb\u00e9 Lagarde, and the Cur\u00e9 of the Madeleine Abb\u00e9 Deguerry. The policy of holding hostages for possible reprisals was denounced by some defenders of the Commune, including Victor Hugo, in a poem entitled \"No Reprisals\" published in Brussels on 21 April. On 12 April, Rigault proposed to exchange Archbishop Darboy and several other priests for the imprisoned Blanqui. Thiers refused the proposal, arguing that it would encourage more hostage-taking. On 14 May, Rigault proposed to exchange 70 hostages for the extreme-left leader, and Thiers again refused.\nComposition of the National Guard.\nSince every able-bodied man in Paris was obliged to be a member of the National Guard, the Commune on paper had an army of about 200,000 men on 6 May; the actual number was much lower, probably between 25,000 and 50,000 men. At the beginning of May, 20 percent of the National Guard was reported absent without leave.\nBy the end of the Commune, 43,522 prisoners were captured, 7,000 to 8,000 Communards had gone into exile abroad, and an estimated 10 to 15,000 Communards were killed, giving a total Commune force of about 65,000 men.\nThe National Guard had hundreds of cannons and thousands of rifles in its arsenal, but only half of the cannons and two-thirds of the rifles were ever used. There were heavy naval cannons mounted on the ramparts of Paris, but few national guardsmen were trained to use them. Between the end of April and 20 May, the number of trained artillerymen fell from 5,445 to 2,340.\nThe officers of the National Guard were elected by the soldiers, and their leadership qualities and military skills varied widely. Gustave Cluseret, the commander of the National Guard until his dismissal on 1 May, had tried to impose more discipline in the force, disbanding many unreliable units and making soldiers live in barracks instead of at home. He recruited officers with military experience, particularly Poles who had fled to France in 1863, after the Russians quelled the January Uprising; they played a prominent role in the last days of the Commune. One of these officers was General Jaros\u0142aw D\u0105browski (\"Jaroslav Dombrowski\" in French), a Polish noble and a former Imperial Russian Army officer, who was appointed commander of the Commune forces on the right bank of the Seine. On 5 May, he was appointed commander of the Commune's whole army. D\u0105browski held this position until 23 May, when he was killed while defending the city barricades.\nCapture of Fort Issy.\nOne of the key strategic points around Paris was Fort d'Issy, south of the city near the Porte de Versailles, which blocked the route of the Army into Paris. The fort's garrison was commanded by Leon Megy, a former mechanic and a militant Blanquist, who had been sentenced to 20 years of hard labour for killing a policeman. After being freed he had led the takeover of the prefecture of Marseille by militant revolutionaries. When he came back to Paris, he was given the rank of colonel by the Central Committee of the National Guard, and the command of Fort d'Issy on 13 April.\nThe army commander, General Ernest Courtot de Cissey, began a systematic siege and a heavy bombardment of the fort that lasted three days and three nights. At the same time Cissey sent a message to Colonel Megy, with the permission of Marshal MacMahon, offering to spare the lives of the fort's defenders, and let them return to Paris with their belongings and weapons, if they surrendered the fort. Colonel Megy gave the order, and during the night of 29\u201330 April, most of the soldiers evacuated the fort and returned to Paris, but news of the evacuation reached the Central Committee of the National Guard and the Commune. Before General Cissey and the Versailles army could occupy the fort, the National Guard rushed reinforcements there and re-occupied all the positions. General Cluseret, commander of the National Guard, was dismissed and put in prison. General Cissey resumed the intense bombardment of the fort. The defenders resisted until the night of 7\u20138 May, when the remaining national guardsmen in the fort, unable to withstand further attacks, decided to withdraw. The new commander of the National Guard, Louis Rossel, issued a terse bulletin: \"The tricolor flag flies over the fort of Issy, abandoned yesterday by the garrison.\" The abandonment of the fort led the Commune to dismiss Rossel, and replace him with Delescluze, a fervent Communard but a journalist with no military experience.\nBitter fighting followed, as MacMahon's army worked its way systematically forward to the walls of Paris. On 20 May, MacMahon's artillery batteries at Montretout, Mont-Valerian, Boulogne, Issy, and Vanves opened fire on the western neighbourhoods of the city\u2014Auteuil, Passy, and Trocad\u00e9ro\u2014with shells falling close to l'\u00c9toile. D\u0105browski reported that the soldiers he had sent to defend the ramparts of the city between Point du Jour and Porte d'Auteuil had retreated to the city and that he had only 4,000 soldiers left at la Muette, 2,000 at Neuilly, and 200 at Asni\u00e8res and Saint Ouen. \"I lack artillerymen and workers to hold off the catastrophe.\" On 19 May, while the Commune executive committee was meeting to judge the former military commander Cluseret for the loss of the Issy fortress, it received word that the forces of Marshal MacMahon were within the fortifications of Paris.\n\"Bloody Week\".\n21 May: Army enters Paris.\nThe final offensive on Paris by MacMahon's army began on Sunday, 21 May. On the front line in the southwest, soldiers camped just outside the city learned from an agent inside the walls that the National Guard had withdrawn from one section of the city wall at Point-du-Jour, and that the fortifications were undefended. An army engineer crossed the moat and inspected the empty fortifications, and immediately telegraphed the news to Marshal MacMahon, who was with Thiers at Fort Mont-Val\u00e9rien. MacMahon promptly gave orders, and two battalions passed through the fortifications without meeting resistance. The Versailles forces were able to swiftly capture the city gates of the Porte de Saint-Cloud, La Muette and the Porte de Versailles from inside. By four o'clock in the morning, fifty thousand soldiers had passed into the city, and advanced as far as the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es.\nWhen he received the news from Dombrowski that the army was inside Paris, the Commune leader Delescluze refused to believe it, and refused to ring the bells to warn the city until the following morning. The trial of Gustave Cluseret, the former commander, was still going on at the Commune when they received the message from General Dombrowski that the army was inside the city. He asked for reinforcements and proposed an immediate counterattack. \"Remain calm,\" he wrote, \"and everything will be saved. We must not be defeated!\". When they had received this news, the members of the Commune executive returned to their deliberations on the fate of Cluseret, which continued until eight o'clock that evening.\nThe first reaction of many of the National Guard was to find someone to blame, and Dombrowski was the first to be accused. Rumours circulated that he had accepted a million francs to give up the city. He was deeply offended by the rumours. They stopped when Dombrowski died two days later from wounds received on the barricades. His last reported words were: \"Do they still say I was a traitor?\"\n22 May: Barricades, first street battles.\nOn the morning of 22 May, bells finally were rung around the city, and Delescluze, as delegate for war of the Commune, issued a proclamation, posted all over Paris:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the name of this glorious France, mother of all the popular revolutions, permanent home of the ideas of justice and solidarity which should be and will be the laws of the world, march at the enemy, and may your revolutionary energy show him that someone can sell Paris, but no one can give it up, or conquer it! The Commune counts on you, count on the Commune!\nThe Committee of Public Safety issued its own decree:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;TO ARMS! That Paris be bristling with barricades, and that, behind these improvised ramparts, it will hurl again its cry of war, its cry of pride, its cry of defiance, but its cry of victory; because Paris, with its barricades, is undefeatable ...That revolutionary Paris, that Paris of great days, does its duty; the Commune and the Committee of Public Safety will do theirs!\nDespite the appeals, only fifteen to twenty thousand persons, including many women and children, responded. The forces of the Commune were outnumbered five-to-one by the army of Marshal MacMahon.\nOnce the fighting began inside Paris, the strong neighborhood loyalties that had been an advantage of the Commune became something of a disadvantage: instead of an overall planned defence, each \"quartier\" fought desperately for its survival, and each was overcome in turn. The webs of narrow streets that made entire districts nearly impregnable in earlier Parisian revolutions had in the centre been replaced by wide boulevards during Haussmann's renovation of Paris. The Versailles forces enjoyed a centralised command and had superior numbers. Equally important, they had learned the tactics of street fighting from 1848 and earlier uprisings. They avoided making frontal attacks on Commune barricades. They tunnelled through walls of neighbouring houses to establish positions above the barricades, and gradually worked their way around and behind them, usually forcing the Communards to withdraw without a fight. The majority of the barricades in Paris were abandoned without combat. On the morning of 22 May, the regular army occupied a large area from the Porte Dauphine; to the Champ de Mars and the \u00c9cole Militaire, where General Cissey established his headquarters; to the Porte de Vanves. In a short time the army's 5th Corps advanced toward Parc Monceau and Place Clichy, while General F\u00e9lix Douay occupied the Place de l'\u00c9toile and General Clichant occupied the Gare Saint-Lazare. Little resistance was encountered in the west of Paris, but the army moved forward slowly and cautiously, in no hurry.\nNo one had expected the army to enter the city, so only a few large barricades were already in place, on the rue Saint-Florentin and Avenue de l'Op\u00e9ra, and the rue de Rivoli. Barricades had not been prepared in advance; some nine hundred barricades were built hurriedly out of paving stones and sacks of earth. Many other people prepared shelters in the cellars. The first serious fighting took place on the afternoon of the 22nd: an artillery duel between regular army batteries on the Quai d'Orsay and the Madeleine, and National Guard batteries on the terrace of the Tuileries Palace. On the same day, the first executions of National Guard soldiers by the regular army inside Paris took place; some sixteen prisoners captured on the rue du Bac were given a summary hearing, and then shot.\n23 May: Battle for Montmartre; burning of Tuileries Palace.\nOn 23 May the next objective of the army was the butte Montmartre, where the uprising had begun. The National Guard had built and manned a circle of barricades and makeshift forts around the base of the butte. The eighty-five cannon and twenty rapid-firing guns captured from the army at the beginning of the Commune were still there, but no one had expected an attack and they had no ammunition, powder cartridges or trained gunners.\nThe garrison of one barricade, at Chaussee Clignancourt, included a battalion of about thirty women, including Louise Michel. She was seized by regular soldiers and thrown into the trench in front of the barricade and left for dead. She escaped and soon afterwards surrendered to the army, to prevent the arrest of her mother. The battalions of the National Guard were no match for the army; by midday on the 23rd the regular soldiers were at the top of Montmartre, and the tricolor flag was raised over the Solferino tower. The soldiers captured 42 guardsmen and several women, took them to the same house on rue des Rosier where generals Clement-Thomas and Lecomte had been executed, and shot them. On the rue Royale, soldiers seized the formidable barricade around the Madeleine church; 300 prisoners captured with their weapons were shot there, the largest of the mass executions of the rebels.\nOn the same day, having had little success fighting the army, units of national guardsmen began to take revenge by burning public buildings symbolising the government. The guardsmen led by Paul Brunel, one of the original leaders of the Commune, took cans of oil and set fire to buildings near the rue Royale and the rue du Faubourg Saint-Honor\u00e9. Following the example set by Brunel, guardsmen set fire to dozens of other buildings on rue Saint-Florentin, rue de Rivoli, rue du Bac, rue de Lille, and other streets.\nThe Tuileries Palace, which had been the residence of most of the monarchs of France from Henry IV to Napoleon III, was defended by a garrison of some three hundred National Guard with thirty cannon placed in the garden. They had been engaged in a day-long artillery duel with the regular army. At about seven in the evening, the commander of the garrison, Jules Bergeret, gave the order to burn the palace. The walls, floors, curtains and woodwork were soaked with oil and turpentine, and barrels of gunpowder were placed at the foot of the grand staircase and in the courtyard, then the fires were set. The fire lasted 48 hours and gutted the palace, except for the southernmost part, the . Bergeret sent a message to the Hotel de Ville:\"The last vestiges of royalty have just disappeared. I wish that the same will happen to all the monuments of Paris.\"The Richelieu library of the Louvre, connected to the Tuileries, was also set on fire and entirely destroyed. The rest of the Louvre was saved by the efforts of the museum curators and fire brigades. The consensus of later historians is that most of the major fires were started by the National Guard and several organised Communard groups; but that few if any fires were started by women. In addition to public buildings, the National Guard also started fires at the homes of a number of residents associated with the regime of Napoleon III, including that of historian and playwright Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, author of \"Carmen\".\n24 May: Burning of Hotel de Ville; executions of Communards, the archbishop and hostages.\nAt two in the morning on 24 May, Brunel and his men went to the H\u00f4tel de Ville, which was still the headquarters of the Commune and of its chief executive, Delescluze. Wounded men were being tended in the halls, and some of the National Guard officers and Commune members were changing from their uniforms into civilian clothes and shaving their beards, preparing to escape from the city. Delescluze ordered everyone to leave the building, and Brunel's men set it on fire.\nThe battles resumed at daylight on 24 May, under a sky black with smoke from the burning palaces and ministries. There was no co-ordination or central direction on the Commune side; each neighborhood fought on its own. The National Guard disintegrated, with many soldiers changing into civilian clothes and fleeing the city, leaving between 10,000 and 15,000 Communards to defend the barricades. Delescluze moved his headquarters from the H\u00f4tel de Ville to the city hall of the 11th arrondissement, and set fire to the Hotel de Ville. More public buildings were set afire, including the Palais de Justice, the Prefecture de Police, the theatres of Ch\u00e2telet and Porte-Saint-Martin, and the Church of Saint-Eustache. Most of the Palais de Justice was destroyed, but the Sainte-Chapelle survived. Fires set at the Louvre Palace, Palais-Royal and Notre-Dame were extinguished without causing significant damage.\nAs the army continued its methodical advance, the summary executions of captured Communard soldiers by the army continued. Informal military courts were established at the , Ch\u00e2telet, the Luxembourg Palace, Parc Monceau, and other locations around Paris. The hands of captured prisoners were examined to see if they had fired weapons. The prisoners gave their identity, sentence was pronounced by a court of two or three gendarme officers, the prisoners were taken out and sentences immediately carried out.\nAmid the news of the growing number of executions carried out by the army in different parts of the city, the Communards carried out their own executions as a desperate and futile attempt at retaliation. Raoul Rigaut, the chairman of the Committee of Public Safety, without getting the authorisation of the Commune, executed one group of four prisoners, before he himself was captured and shot by an army patrol. On 24 May, a delegation of national guardsmen and Gustave Genton, a member of the Committee of Public Safety, came to the new headquarters of the Commune at the city hall of the 11th arrondissement and demanded the immediate execution of the hostages held at the prison of La Roquette. The new prosecutor of the Commune, Th\u00e9ophile Ferr\u00e9, hesitated and then wrote a note: \"Order to the Citizen Director of La Roquette to execute six hostages.\" Genton asked for volunteers to serve as a firing squad, and went to the La Roquette prison, where many of the hostages were being held. Genton was given a list of hostages and selected six names, including Georges Darboy, the Archbishop of Paris, and three priests. The governor of the prison, M. Fran\u00e7ois, refused to give up the Archbishop without a specific order from the Commune. Genton sent a deputy back to the Prosecutor, who wrote \"and especially the archbishop\" on the bottom of his note. Archbishop Darboy and five other hostages were promptly taken out into the courtyard of the prison, lined up against the wall, and shot.\n25 May: Death of Delescluze.\nBy the end of 24 May, the regular army had cleared most of the Latin Quarter barricades, and held three-fifths of Paris. MacMahon had his headquarters at the Quai d'Orsay. The insurgents held only the 11th, 12th, 19th and 20th arrondissements, and parts of the 3rd, 5th, and 13th. Delescluze and the remaining leaders of the Commune, about 20 in all, were at the city hall of the 13th arrondissement on Place Voltaire. A bitter battle took place between about 1,500 national guardsmen from the 13th arrondissement and the Mouffetard district, commanded by Walery Antoni Wr\u00f3blewski, a Polish exile who had participated in the uprising against the Russians, against three brigades commanded by General de Cissey.\nDuring the course of the 25th, the insurgents lost the city hall of the 13th arrondissement and moved to a barricade on Place Jeanne-d'Arc, where 700 were taken prisoner. Wr\u00f3blewski and some of his men escaped to the city hall of the 11th arrondissement, where he met Delescluze, the chief executive of the Commune. Several of the other Commune leaders, including Brunel, were wounded, and Pyat had disappeared. Delescluze offered Wr\u00f3blewski the command of the Commune forces, which he declined, saying that he preferred to fight as a private soldier. At about seven-thirty, Delescluze put on his red sash of office, walked unarmed to the barricade on the Place du Ch\u00e2teau-d'Eau, climbed to the top and showed himself to the soldiers, and was promptly shot dead.\n26 May: Capture of Place de la Bastille; more executions.\nOn the afternoon of 26 May, after six hours of heavy fighting, the regular army captured the Place de la Bastille. The National Guard still held parts of the 3rd Arrondissement, from the Carreau du Temple to the Arts-et-Metiers, and the National Guard still had artillery at their strongpoints at the Buttes-Chaumont and P\u00e8re-Lachaise, from which they continued to bombard the regular army forces along the Canal Saint-Martin.\nA contingent of several dozen national guardsmen led by Antoine Clavier, a commissaire, and Emile Gois, a colonel of the National Guard, arrived at La Roquette prison and demanded, at gunpoint, the remaining hostages there: ten priests, thirty-five policemen and gendarmes, and two civilians. They took them first to the city hall of the 20th arrondissement; the Commune leader of that district refused to allow his city hall to be used as a place of execution. Clavier and Gois took them instead to Rue Haxo. The procession of hostages was joined by a large and furious crowd of national guardsmen and civilians who insulted, spat upon, and struck the hostages. Arriving at an open yard, they were lined up against a wall and shot in groups of ten. National guardsmen in the crowd opened fire along with the firing squad. The hostages were shot from all directions, then beaten with rifle butts and stabbed with bayonets. According to Prosper-Olivier Lissagaray, a defender of the Commune, a total of 63 people were executed by the Commune during the bloody week.\n27\u201328 May: Final battles; executions at P\u00e8re-Lachaise Cemetery.\nOn the morning of 27 May, the regular army soldiers of Generals Grenier, Paul de Ladmirault and Jean-Baptiste Montaudon launched an attack on the National Guard artillery on the heights of the Buttes-Chaumont. The heights were captured at the end of the afternoon by the 1st Foreign Regiment of the French Foreign Legion. One of the last remaining strongpoints of the National Guard was the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery, defended by about 200 men. At 6 PM, the army used cannon to demolish the gates and the 1st Marine Infantry Regiment stormed the cemetery. Savage fighting followed around the tombs until nightfall, when the last Communards were taken prisoner. The captured guardsmen were taken to the wall of the cemetery and shot. Another group of prisoners, consisting of the National guard officers, was collected at Mazas Prison and La Roquette prison. They were given brief trials before the military tribunal, sentenced to death, and then delivered to P\u00e8re Lachaise. There they were lined up in front of the same wall and executed in groups, and then buried with them in a common grave. This group include one woman, the only recorded execution of a woman by the army during the Bloody Week. The wall is now called the Communards' Wall, and is the site of annual commemorations of the Commune.\nOn 28 May, the regular army captured the remaining positions of the Commune, which offered little resistance. In the morning, the regular army captured La Roquette prison and freed the remaining 170 hostages. The army took 1,500 prisoners at the National Guard position on Rue Haxo, and 2,000 more at Derroja, near P\u00e8re Lachaise. A handful of barricades at rue Ramponneau and Avenue de Tourville held out into the middle of the afternoon, when all resistance ceased.\nCommunard prisoners and casualties.\nPrisoners and exiles.\nThe French Army officially recorded the capture of 43,522 prisoners during and immediately after Bloody Week. Of these, 1,054 were women, and 615 were under the age of 16. They were marched in groups of 150 or 200, escorted by cavalrymen, to Versailles or the Camp de Satory, where they were held in extremely crowded and unsanitary conditions until they could be tried. More than half of the prisoners, 22,727, were released before trial for extenuating circumstances or on humanitarian grounds. Since Paris had been officially under a state of siege during the Commune, the prisoners were tried by military tribunals. Trials were held for 15,895 prisoners, of whom 13,500 were found guilty. Ninety-five were sentenced to death; 251 to forced labour; 1,169 to deportation, usually to New Caledonia; 3,147 to simple deportation; 1,257 to solitary confinement; 1,305 to prison for more than a year; and 2,054 to prison for less than a year.\nA separate and more formal trial was held beginning 7 August for the Commune leaders who survived and had been captured, including Th\u00e9ophile Ferr\u00e9, who had signed the death warrant for the hostages, and the painter Gustave Courbet, who had proposed the destruction of the column in Place Vend\u00f4me. They were tried by a panel of seven senior army officers. Ferr\u00e9 was sentenced to death, and Courbet was sentenced to six months in prison, and later ordered to pay the cost of rebuilding the column. Serving part of his sentence in the Sainte-P\u00e9lagie Prison in Paris, he was allowed an easel and paints, but he could not have models pose for him. He did a famous series of still-life paintings of flowers and fruit.\nHe was released, but was unable to pay for the rebuilding of the column. He went into exile in Switzerland and died before making a payment.\nIn October 1871 a commission of the National Assembly reviewed the sentences; 310 of those convicted were pardoned, 286 had their sentences reduced, and 1,295 commuted. Of the 270 condemned to death\u2014175 in absentia\u201425 were shot, including Ferr\u00e9 and Gustave Genton, who had selected the hostages for execution. Thousands of Communards, including leaders such as F\u00e9lix Pyat, succeeded in slipping out of Paris before the end of the battle, and went into exile; some 3,500 going to England, 2,000\u20133,000 to Belgium, and 1,000 to Switzerland.\nA partial amnesty was granted on 3 March 1879, allowing 400 of the 600 deportees sent to New Caledonia to return, and 2,000 of the 2,400 prisoners sentenced in absentia. A general amnesty was granted on 11 July 1880, allowing the remaining 543 condemned prisoners, and 262 sentenced in absentia, to return to France.\nCasualties.\nHistorians have long debated the number of Communards killed during \"Semaine sanglante\" (Bloody Week). The official army report by General F\u00e9lix Antoine Appert mentioned only Army casualties, which amounted, from April through May, to 877 killed, 6,454 wounded, and 183 missing. The report assessed information on Communard casualties only as \"very incomplete\". The issue of casualties during the Bloody Week arose at a National Assembly hearing on 28 August 1871, when Marshal MacMahon testified. Deputy M. Vacherot told him, \"A general has told me that the number killed in combat, on the barricades, or after the combat, was as many as 17,000 men.\" MacMahon responded, \"I don't know what that estimate is based upon; it seems exaggerated to me. All I can say is that the insurgents lost a lot more people than we did.\" Vacherot continued, \"Perhaps this number applies to all of the siege, and to the fighting at Forts d'Issy and Vanves.\" MacMahon replied, \"the number is exaggerated.\" Vacherot persisted, \"It was General Appert who gave me that information. Perhaps he meant both dead and wounded.\" MacMahon replied, \"That's a different matter.\"\nIn 1876 Prosper-Olivier Lissagaray, who had fought on the barricades during Bloody Week, and had gone into exile in London, wrote a highly popular and sympathetic history of the Commune. At the end, he wrote: \"No one knows the exact number of victims of the Bloody Week. The chief of the military justice department claimed seventeen thousand shot.\" This was inaccurate; Appert made no such claim, he referred only to prisoners. \"The municipal council of Paris,\" Lissagaray continued, \"paid for the burial of seventeen thousand bodies; but a large number of persons were killed or cremated outside of Paris.\" Later historians, including Robert Tombs, could not find the source Lissagaray cited for the city payment for seventeen thousand burials, and Lissagaray provided no evidence that thousands of Communards were cremated or buried outside Paris. \"It is no exaggeration,\" Lissagaray concluded, \"to say twenty thousand, a number admitted by the officers.\" But neither MacMahon or Appert had \"admitted\" that twenty thousand were killed, they both said the number was exaggerated.\nIn a new 1896 edition, Lissagaray wrote that the twenty thousand estimate included those killed not only in Paris, but also in the other Communes that broke out in France at the same time, and those killed in fighting outside Paris before the Bloody Week. Several historians repeated versions of Lissagaray's estimate, among them Pierre Milza (\"...As many as twenty thousand\"), Alfred Cobban and Benedict Anderson. Vladimir Lenin said that Lissagaray's estimate demonstrated ruling-class brutality: \"20,000 killed in the streets... Lessons: bourgeoisie will stop at \"nothing\".\"\nBetween 1878 and 1880, a French historian and member of the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise, Maxime Du Camp, wrote a new history . Du Camp had witnessed the last days of the Commune, went inside the Tuileries Palace shortly after the fires were put out, witnessed the executions of Communards by soldiers, and the bodies in the streets. He studied the question of the number of dead, and studied the records of the office of inspection of the Paris cemeteries, which was in charge of burying the dead. Based on their records, he reported that between 20 and 30 May, 5,339 Communard corpses had been taken from the streets or Paris morgue to the city cemeteries for burial. Between 24 May and 6 September, the office of inspection of cemeteries reported that an additional 1,328 corpses were exhumed from temporary graves at 48 sites, including 754 corpses inside the old quarries near Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, for a total of 6,667.\nMarxist critics attacked du Camp and his book; Collette Wilson called it \"a key text in the construction and promulgation of the reactionary memory of the Commune\" and Paul Lidsky called it \"the bible of the anti-Communard literature.\" In 2012, however, supporting du Camp's research, historian Robert Tombs made a new study of the Paris cemetery records and placed the total number killed between 6,000 and 7,000, estimating around 1,400 of those to have been executed and the rest being killed in combat or dying from wounds received during the fighting. Jacques Rougerie, who had earlier accepted the 20,000 figure, wrote in 2014, \"the number ten thousand victims seems today the most plausible; it remains an enormous number for the time.\"\nThe debate was still underway in 2021. A new book was published by mathematician Michele Audin in May, 2021, to commemorate the 150th anniversary of The Commune. Citing cemetery and police records which she said had not been consulted by Tombs and other earlier historians, she wrote that \"more than ten thousand\" and \"certainly fifteen thousand\" Communards had been killed in the \"Bloody Week\".\nThe number killed during the \"Bloody Week\", usually estimated at ten to fifteen thousand or possibly more, was extraordinarily high by historical standards. Eight years before the Bloody Week, during the three days of the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863, the deadliest battle of the American Civil War, a total of 7,863 soldiers, both Confederate and Union, were killed, or about half as many as the estimated Commune casualties. The number may have equalled or exceeded the number executed during the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution, when, following June 1793, 16,594 official death sentences were carried out throughout France.\nCritique.\nContemporary artists and writers.\nFrench writers and artists had strong views about the Commune. Gustave Courbet was the most prominent artist to take part in the Commune, and was an enthusiastic participant and supporter, though he criticised its executions of suspected enemies. On the other side, the young Anatole France described the Commune as \"A committee of assassins, a band of hooligans [], a government of crime and madness.\" The diarist Edmond de Goncourt wrote, three days after \"La Semaine Sanglante\", \"...the bleeding has been done thoroughly, and a bleeding like that, by killing the rebellious part of a population, postpones the next revolution... The old society has twenty years of peace before it...\"\nOn 23 April, George Sand, an ardent republican who had taken part in the 1848 revolution, took the opposite view. She wrote \"The horrible adventure continues. They ransom, they threaten, they arrest, they judge. They have taken over all the city halls, all the public establishments, they're pillaging the munitions and the food supplies.\" Soon after the Commune began, Gustave Flaubert wrote to Sand, \"Austria did not go into Revolution after Sadowa, nor Italy after Novara, nor Russia after Sebastopol! But our good Frenchmen hasten to pull down their house as soon as the chimney takes fire...\" Near the end of the Commune, Flaubert wrote to her again, \"As for the Commune, which is about to die out, it is the last manifestation of the Middle Ages.\" On 10 June, when the Commune was finished, Flaubert wrote to Sand:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I come from Paris, and I do not know whom to speak to. I am suffocated. I am quite upset, or rather out of heart. The sight of the ruins is nothing compared to the great Parisian insanity. With very rare exceptions, everybody seemed to me only fit for the strait-jacket. One half of the population longs to hang the other half, which returns the compliment. That is clearly to be read in the eyes of the passers-by.\nVictor Hugo blamed Thiers for his short-sightedness. At the news that the government had failed to have the cannons seized he wrote in his diary, \"He touched off the fuse to the powder keg. Thiers is premeditated thoughtlessness.\" On the other hand, he was critical of the Commune but sympathetic to the Communards. At the beginning of April, he moved to Brussels to take care of the family of his son, who had just died. On 9 April, he wrote, \"In short, this Commune is as idiotic as the National Assembly is ferocious. From both sides, folly.\" He wrote poems that criticized both the government and the Commune's policy of taking hostages for reprisals, and condemned the destruction of the Vend\u00f4me Column. On 25 May, during the Bloody Week, he wrote: \"A monstrous act; they've set fire to Paris. They've been searching for firemen as far away as Brussels.\" But after the repression, he offered to give sanctuary to members of the Commune, which, he said, \"was barely elected, and of which I never approved.\" He became the most vocal advocate of an amnesty for exiled Communards, finally granted in the 1880s.\n\u00c9mile Zola, as a journalist for Le S\u00e9maphore de Marseille, reported on the fall of the Commune, and was one of the first reporters to enter the city during Bloody Week. On 25 May he reported: \"Never in civilised times has such a terrible crime ravaged a great city... The men of the H\u00f4tel de Ville could not be other than assassins and arsonists. They were beaten and fled like robbers from the regular army, and took vengeance upon the monuments and houses... The fires of Paris have pushed over the limit the exasperation of the army. ...Those who burn and who massacre merit no other justice than the gunshot of a soldier.\" But on 1 June, when the fighting was over, his tone had changed, \"The court martials [\"sic\"] are still meeting and the summary executions continue, less numerous, it's true. The sound of firing squads, which one still hears in the mournful city, atrociously prolongs the nightmare ... Paris is sick of executions. It seems to Paris that they're shooting everyone. Paris is not complaining about the shooting of the members of the Commune, but of innocent people. It believes that, among the pile, there are innocent people, and that it's time that each execution is preceded by at least an attempt at a serious inquiry ... When the echoes of the last shots have ceased, it will take a great deal of gentleness to heal the million people suffering nightmares, those who have emerged, shivering from the fire and massacre.\"\nAnarchists.\nThe anarchist philosopher George Woodcock said that \"a notable contribution to the activities of the Commune and particularly to the organization of public services was made by members of various anarchist factions, including the mutualists Courbet, Longuet, and Vermorel, the libertarian collectivists Varlin, Malon, and Lefrangais, and the Bakuninists Elie and Elis\u00e9e Reclus and Louise Michel.\" Anarchist Mikhail Bakunin was a strong supporter of the Commune. He saw the Commune as above all a \"rebellion against the State,\" and commended the Communards for rejecting not only the State but also revolutionary dictatorship.\nLouise Michel was an important participant in the Paris Commune, though she was not formally introduced to anarchist doctrines until her exile after the Commune. Initially she worked as an ambulance woman, treating those injured on the barricades. During the Siege of Paris, she untiringly preached resistance to the Prussians. On the establishment of the Commune, she joined the National Guard. She offered to shoot Thiers, and suggested the destruction of Paris by way of vengeance for its surrender. In December 1871, she was brought before the 6th council of war and charged with offences including trying to overthrow the government, encouraging citizens to arm themselves, and herself using weapons and wearing a military uniform. Defiantly, she vowed to never renounce the Commune, and dared the judges to sentence her to death. According to court records, Michel told the court, \"Since it seems that every heart that beats for freedom has no right to anything but a little slug of lead, I demand my share. If you let me live, I shall never cease to cry for vengeance.\" Michel was sentenced to penal transportation. Following the 1871 Paris Commune, the anarchist movement, as with the whole of the workers' movement, was decapitated and severely crippled for years.\nMarxism.\nCommunists, left-wing socialists, anarchists, and others have seen the Commune as a model for, or a prefiguration of, a liberated society, with a political system based on participatory democracy from the grassroots up. Marx and Engels, Mikhail Bakunin, and later Lenin, tried to draw major theoretical lessons (in particular as regards the \"dictatorship of the proletariat\" and the \"withering away of the state\") from the limited experience of the Commune.\nMarx, in \"The Civil War in France\" (1871), written during the Commune, praised the Commune's achievements, and described it as the prototype for a revolutionary government of the future, \"the form at last discovered\" for the emancipation of the proletariat. Marx wrote that, \"Working men's Paris, with its Commune, will be forever celebrated as the glorious harbinger of a new society. Its martyrs are enshrined in the great heart of the working class. Its exterminators, history has already nailed to that eternal pillory from which all of the prayers of their priest will not avail to redeem them.\"\nLater, however, in private, Marx expressed a different, more critical view of the Commune. In 1881, in a letter to a Dutch friend, Nieuwenhuis, he wrote: \"The Commune was simply the rebellion of a city in exceptional circumstances, and furthermore, the majority of the Commune was in no way socialist, and could not have been. With a little bit of good sense, they might, however, have obtained a compromise with Versailles favourable to the mass of the people, which was in fact the only real possibility.\"\nEngels echoed his partner, maintaining that the absence of a standing army, the self-policing of the \"quarters\", and other features meant that the Commune was no longer a \"state\" in the old, repressive sense of the term. It was a transitional form, moving towards the abolition of the state as such. He used the famous term later taken up by Lenin and the Bolsheviks: the Commune was, he said, the first \"dictatorship of the proletariat\", a state run by workers and in the interests of workers. But Marx and Engels also analyzed what they perceived to be the weaknesses or errors of the commune, including its inability to link up with the rest of the French people, its failure to completely re-organize state machinery, its Central Committee passing over power too soon to the representative assembly, its failure to immediately pursue the retreating bourgeois, and the failure to recognize the possibility that France and Prussia would unite against the commune.\nThe other point of disagreement was the anti-authoritarian socialists' opposition to the Communist conception of conquest of power and of a temporary transitional state: the anarchists were in favour of general strike and immediate dismantlement of the state through the constitution of decentralised workers' councils, as those seen in the Commune.\nLenin, like Marx, considered the Commune a living example of the \"dictatorship of the proletariat\". But he criticised the Communards for not having done enough to secure their position, highlighting two errors in particular. The first was that the Communards \"stopped half way ... led astray by dreams of ... establishing a higher [capitalist] justice in the country ... such institutions as the banks, for example, were not taken over\". Secondly, he thought their \"excessive magnanimity\" had prevented them from \"destroying\" the class enemy. For Lenin, the Communards \"underestimated the significance of direct military operations in civil war; and instead of launching a resolute offensive against Versailles that would have crowned its victory in Paris, it tarried and gave the Versailles government time to gather the dark forces and prepare for the blood-soaked week of May\".\nIn 1926, Mao Zedong published \"The Importance of Commemorating the Paris Commune.\" Similarly to Lenin's analysis, Mao wrote that there were two reasons for the Commune's failure: (1) it lacked a united and disciplined party to lead it, and (2) it was too benevolent towards its enemies.\nOther commentary.\nThe American Ambassador in Paris during the Commune, Elihu Washburne, writing in his personal diary which is quoted at length in noted historian David McCullough's book \"The Greater Journey\" (Simon &amp; Schuster 2011), described the Communards as \"brigands\", \"assassins\", and \"scoundrels\"; \"I have no time now to express my detestation ... [T]hey threaten to destroy Paris and bury everybody in its ruins before they will surrender.\"\nEdwin Child, a young Londoner working in Paris, noted that during the Commune, \"the women behaved like tigresses, throwing petroleum everywhere and distinguishing themselves by the fury with which they fought\". However, it has been argued in recent research that these famous female arsonists of the Commune, or , may have been exaggerated or a myth. Lissagaray claimed that because of this myth, hundreds of working-class women were murdered in Paris in late May, falsely accused of being , but he offered no evidence to support his claim. Lissagaray also claimed that the artillery fire by the French army was responsible for probably half of the fires that consumed the city during the Bloody Week. However, photographs of the ruins of the Tuileries Palace, the Hotel de Ville, and other prominent government buildings that burned show that the exteriors were untouched by cannon fire, while the interiors were completely gutted by fire; and prominent Communards such as Jules Bergeret, who escaped to live in New York, proudly claimed credit for the most famous acts of arson.\nAcademic dispute over Thiers' handling of the crisis.\nHistorian J.P.T. Bury considers that Thiers tackled the crisis in a ruthless but successful way, thus giving a solid base to the Third Republic. As he put it, \"the exile of so many extremists enabled the new Republic to [...] develop in a peaceful and orderly fashion.\"\nThis view is shared by French historian Alain Plessis, who writes that \"the crushing of the communards [...] was ultimately to facilitate the advent of the Third Republic.\"\nFor David Thomson, Thiers had no other option to restore the unity of a country fractured by an overwhelming defeat and innumerable factions.\nAnother French historian, Paul Lidsky, argues that Thiers felt urged by mainstream newspapers and leading intellectuals to take decisive action against 'the social and democratic vermin' (Le Figaro), 'those abominable ruffians' (Countess of S\u00e9gur).\nEven a moderate daily newspaper like \"\" wrote, \"even though we were to drown this uprising in blood, were we to bury it under the ruins of the burning city, there would be no room for compromise.\"\nTheodore Zeldin in \"France 1848\u20131945, vol.I\" goes so far as to say Thiers deliberately ordered Paris to be evacuated in order to incite part of the population to rise up and eventually have a pretext for crushing Paris as a rebellious force.\nInfluence and legacy.\nThe Paris Commune inspired other uprisings named or called Communes: in Moscow (December 1905); Hungary (March\u2013July 1919); Canton (December 1927), most famously, Petrograd (1917), and Shanghai, 1927 and Shanghai, 1967. The Commune was regarded with admiration and awe by later Communist and leftist leaders. Vladimir Lenin identified the Russian soviets as the contemporary forms of the Commune and wrote: \"We are only dwarves perched on the shoulders of those giants.\" He celebrated by dancing in the snow in Moscow on the day that his Bolshevik government was more than two months old, surpassing the Commune. The ministers and officials of the Bolshevik government were given the title \"Commissar\", which was borrowed directly from the of the Commune. Lenin's Mausoleum in Moscow was (and still is) decorated with red banners from the Commune, brought to Moscow in 1924 by French communists. Stalin wrote: \"In 1917 we thought that we would form a commune, an association of workers, and that we would put an end to bureaucracy...That is a goal that we are still far from reaching.\" The Bolsheviks renamed their dreadnought battleship \"Sevastopol\" to . In the years of the Soviet Union, the spaceflight Voskhod 1 carried part of a Communard banner.\nThe Communards inspired many anarchists, such as Paul Brousse, Errico Malatesta, Carlo Cafiero, and Andrea Costa. By taking up arms, they spread their ideas faster and more forcefully than they would have with the written word. The historian Zoe Baker writes that \"while a person must find, buy, and read a book or newspaper for it to radicalise them, an insurrection rapidly gains the attention of large numbers of people, including those who cannot read, and puts them in a position where they must take a side in the ongoing struggle.\"\nThe National Assembly decreed a law on 24 July 1873 for the construction of the Basilica of Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur on Montmartre, near the location of the cannon park and where General Cl\u00e9ment-Thomas and General Lecomte were killed, specifying that it be erected to \"expiate the crimes of the Commune\". A plaque and a church, Notre-Dame-des-Otages (Our Lady of the Hostages) on Rue Haxo mark the place where fifty hostages, including priests, gendarmes and four civilians, were shot by a firing squad.\nA plaque also marks the wall in P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery where 147 Communards were executed, commonly known as the Communards' Wall. Memorial commemorations are held at the cemetery every year in May to remember the Commune. Another plaque behind the H\u00f4tel de Ville marks the site of a mass grave of Communards shot by the army. Their remains were later reburied in city cemeteries.\nThere are several locations named after the Paris Commune. Including the Place de la Commune-de-Paris in Paris, the Stra\u00dfe der Pariser Kommune in Berlin, Germany, the Komunard\u016f in Prague, Czech Republic, and the C\u00f4ng x\u00e3 Paris Square in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.\nThe Paris Commune was a recurring theme during China's Cultural Revolution. When students put up the first big character poster following the 16 May Notification, Mao Zedong described it as the \"declaration of China's twentieth-century Paris Commune.\" In the Cultural Revolution's early period, the spontaneity of everyday life and mass political participation during the Paris Commune became lessons to be learned. For example, the 8 August 1966 \"Decision of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party concerning the Great Proletarian Revolution\" stated, \"It is necessary to institute a system of general elections, like that of the Paris Commune, for electing members to the cultural revolutionary groups and committees and delegates to the cultural revolutionary congresses.\" During the phase of the Cultural Revolution where mass political mobilization was trending downward, the Shengwulian (an ultraleft group in Hunan province) modeled its ideology on the radically egalitarian nature of the Paris Commune.\nPol Pot, the leader of Khmer Rouge was also inspired by Paris Commune and said the Commune had been overthrown because the proletariat had failed to exercise dictatorship over the bourgeoisie. He would not make the same mistake.\nIn 2021, Paris commemorated the 150th anniversary of the Commune with \"a series of exhibitions, lectures and concerts, plays and poetry readings\" lasting from March through May. The Mayor of Paris, Anne Hidalgo, planted a memorial Araucaria tree native to New Caledonia in Montmartre; New Caledonia is where thousands of Communards were deported after the Commune was suppressed. The city's plans to commemorate the Commune proved controversial, evoking protest from right-wing members of the city council.\nThe Commune is still an emotional and politically-charged subject, even 150 years later. On 29 May 2021, a Catholic procession of 300 people honouring the memory of the Archbishop of Paris and the other hostages shot by the Commune in its final days was physically attacked by far-left anti-fascists, who were celebrating the Commune near the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery. Two Catholic sixty-year-olds fell to the ground and a man with a head injury was taken to a hospital due to left-wing violence.\nAccording to BBC News, as of 2021, supporters of the Paris Commune view it as \"a springtime of hope bloodily repressed by the forces of conservatism\", while members of the political right view the Commune as \"a time of chaos and class vengeance. They remembered the killings of priests and the burning of landmarks like the H\u00f4tel de Ville.\"\nOther communes of 1871.\nSoon after the Paris Commune took power in Paris, revolutionary and socialist groups in several other French cities tried to establish their own communes. The Paris Commune sent delegates to the large cities to encourage them. The longest-lasting commune outside Paris was that of Marseille, from 23 March to 4 April, which was suppressed with the loss of thirty soldiers and one hundred and fifty insurgents. None of the other Communes lasted more than a few days, and most ended with little or no bloodshed.\nAftermath.\nSome leaders of the Commune, including Delescluze, died on the barricades, but most of the others survived and lived long afterwards, and some of them resumed political careers in France. Between 1873 and 1876, 4,200 political prisoners were sent to the penal colony of New Caledonia. The convicts included about one thousand Communards, including Henri de Rochefort and Louise Michel.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59135", "revid": "31263187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59135", "title": "Solemnity", "text": "Highest-ranking feast day of the Roman Rite\nIn the liturgical calendar of the Roman Rite, a solemnity is a feast day of the highest rank celebrating a mystery of faith such as the Trinity, an event in the life of Jesus, his mother Mary, his legal father Joseph, or another important saint. The observance begins with the vigil on the evening before the actual date of the feast. Unlike feast days of the rank of feast (other than feasts of the Lord) or those of the rank of memorial, solemnities replace the celebration of Sundays outside Advent, Lent, and Easter (those in Ordinary Time).\nThe word comes from postclassical Latin , meaning a solemnity, festival, celebration of a day.\nRanking.\nThe solemnities of Nativity of the Lord, the Epiphany, the Ascension, and Pentecost are outranked only by the Paschal Triduum.\nOther solemnities inscribed in the General Roman Calendar give way also to the following celebrations:\n* The Paschal Triduum\n* Sundays of Advent, Lent, and Easter\n* Ash Wednesday\n* Weekdays of Holy Week up to and including Thursday\n* Days within the Octave of Easter\nSolemnities inscribed in particular calendars yield not only to these, but also to the Commemoration of All the Faithful Departed.\nWith the exceptions noted in the table below regarding the solemnities of Saint Joseph and the Annunciation of the Lord, a solemnity that falls on the same day as a celebration of higher rank is transferred to the next day not occupied by a solemnity, a Sunday or a feast.\nAmong solemnities inscribed in the General Roman Calendar, those of the Lord have precedence over those of the Blessed Virgin and these latter over solemnities of other saints. Thus if, for instance, the Solemnity of the Sacred Heart of Jesus coincides with that of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist or that of Saints Peter and Paul, it is these that are transferred to the next free day.\nAmong solemnities inscribed in particular calendars (proper solemnities) the order of precedence is:\nList and dates.\nThe solemnities inscribed in the General Roman Calendar and which are therefore observed throughout the Latin Church are indicated in the following list.\nProper solemnities.\nThere are also solemnities not inscribed in the General Roman Calendar, which are observed in particular places, regions, churches or religious institutes. The optional memorial of Saint Patrick on 17 March is a solemnity in Ireland, the memorial of Saint Josemar\u00eda Escriv\u00e1 on 26 June is a solemnity within the prelature of Opus Dei, and the optional memorial of Our Lady of Mount Carmel on 16 July is a solemnity for the Carmelites.\nA partial list of proper solemnities follows below: \nObservance.\nEven if it is a weekday or within Advent and Lenten season, if the day is a Solemnity, then the Gloria is said or sung (except Good Friday which is the second day of the Paschal Triduum), as well as the saying of the Creed at Mass, and there are two scriptural readings, not one, before the Gospel. Also, there will sometimes be processional and recessional hymns, and use of incense.\nSome but not all solemnities are also holy days of obligation, on which, as on Sundays, Catholics are required to attend Mass and to avoid work and business that hinder divine worship or suitable relaxation of mind and body. All holy days of obligation have the rank of solemnity at least at local level, though not necessarily holding that rank in the General Roman Calendar. With the exception of the solemnities of the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the Annunciation of the Lord and the Birth of John the Baptist, all the solemnities inscribed in the General Roman Calendar are mentioned as holy days of obligation in https:// of the Code of Canon Law, but are not necessarily all observed in a particular country.\nWhen a solemnity falls on a Friday, the obligation to abstain from meat or some other food as determined by the episcopal conference does not apply.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59142", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59142", "title": "Solidus (punctuation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59145", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59145", "title": "Pyongyang, North Korea", "text": ""}
{"id": "59150", "revid": "35791198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59150", "title": "Slush fund", "text": "Fund used for illegal purposes\nA slush fund is a fund or account used for miscellaneous income and expenses, particularly when these are corrupt or illegal. Such funds may be kept hidden and maintained separately from money that is used for legitimate purposes. Slush funds may be employed by government or corporate officials in efforts to pay influential people discreetly in return for preferential treatment, advance information (such as non-public information in financial transactions), and other services. The funds themselves may not be kept secret but the source of the funds or how they were acquired or for what purposes they are used may be hidden. Use of slush funds to influence government activities may be viewed as subversive of the democratic process.\nA slush fund can also be a reserve account used to reduce fluctuations in an organization's earnings by withholding them when they are high and supplementing them when they are low. This type of slush fund is not inherently corrupt, but is nonetheless a form of earnings management that tends to mislead stakeholders about the organization's financial condition.\nExamples.\nRichard Nixon's \"Checkers speech\" of 1952 was a somewhat successful effort to dispel a scandal concerning a slush fund of campaign contributions. Years later, Nixon's presidential re-election campaign used slush funds to buy the silence of the \"White House Plumbers\".\nFinancial derivative traders for Enron employed a slush fund system called \"prudency reserves,\" in which the department reported part of each trade's profit or loss to the company and withheld the remainder. This system was originally used to regulate the trading department's profits, but also enabled the company to conceal large profits during the 2000\u201301 California electricity crisis.\nHockey Canada maintained three slush funds to pay for sexual assault settlements perpetrated by ice hockey players and other uninsured claims. Membership fees from across Canada were used to fund at least one of these slush funds. The existence and purpose of these slush funds were discovered during the Hockey Canada sexual assault scandal in 2022. $7.6 million in 11 sexual assault settlements were paid out by these funds between 1989 and 2022.\nEtymology.\n\"Slush fund\" was originally a nautical term for the cash that a ship's crew raised by selling fat (slush) scraped from cooking pots to tallow makers. This cash was kept separate from the ship's accounts and used to make small purchases for the crew.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59152", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59152", "title": "Asterisk", "text": "Typographical symbol (*)\nThe asterisk ( *), from Late Latin , from Ancient Greek , , \"little star\", is a typographical symbol.\nAn asterisk is usually five- or six-pointed in print and six- or eight-pointed when handwritten, though more complex forms exist. Its most common use is to call out a footnote. It is also often used to censor words considered offensive. Computer scientists and mathematicians often vocalize it as \"star\" (as, for example, in \"the A* search algorithm\" or \"C*-algebra\").\nHistory.\nThere are several precursors to the asterisk, which may be unrelated in meaning. A kind of asterisk symbol was in used in ice age cave paintings. One hypothesis for the origin of the asterisk used to mark notes is that it stems from the 5000-year-old Sumerian character dingir, \ud808\udc2d, though this hypothesis seems to only be based on visual appearance. \nThere is also a two-thousand-year-old character used by Aristarchus of Samothrace called the , which he used when editing Homeric poetry to mark lines that were duplicated. Origen is known to have also used the asteriskos to mark missing Hebrew lines from his Hexapla. In the Middle Ages, the asterisk (along with other symbols) was used to emphasize a particular part of text, often linking those parts of the text to a marginal comment. The asterisk was frequently used to indicate footnotes in the era of print media.\nUsage.\nCensorship.\nWhen toning down expletives, asterisks are often used to replace letters. For example, the word \"badword\" might become \"ba***rd\", \"b*****d\", \"b******\" or even \"*******\". Vowels tend to be censored with an asterisk more than consonants, but the intelligibility of censored profanities with multiple syllables such as \"b*dw*rd\" and \"b*****d\" or \"ba****d\", or uncommon ones is higher if put in context with surrounding text. In comics, an entire swear word may be replaced with a grawlix, a string of typographic symbols used to indicate undefined profanity.\nAsterisks are one method used to redact nonpublic information. When a document containing classified information is published, the document may be redacted or \"sanitized\" by replacing the classified information with asterisks. For example, the Intelligence and Security Committee Russia report.\nCompetitive sports and games.\nIn colloquial usage, an asterisk attached to a sporting record indicates that it is somehow tainted. This is because results that have been considered dubious or set aside are recorded in the record books with an asterisk rendering to a footnote explaining the reason or reasons for concern. During the first decades of the 21st century, the asterisk came to denote a tainted accomplishment, initially due to its use in North American sports records. This \"tainted\" usage soon spread to American politics.\nBaseball.\nThe usage of the term in sports arose during the 1961 baseball season in which Roger Maris of the New York Yankees was threatening to break Babe Ruth's 34-year-old single-season home run record. Ruth had amassed 60 home runs in a season with only 154 games, but Maris was playing the first season in the American League's newly expanded 162-game season. Baseball Commissioner Ford C. Frick, a friend of Ruth's during the legendary slugger's lifetime, held a press conference to announce his \"ruling\" that should Maris take longer than 154 games both records would be acknowledged by Major League Baseball, but that some \"distinctive mark\" [his term] be placed next to Maris', which should be listed alongside Ruth's achievement in the \"record books\". The asterisk as such a mark was suggested at that time by New York Daily News sportswriter Dick Young, not Frick. The reality, however, was that MLB had no direct control over any record books until many years later, and it all was merely a suggestion on Frick's part. Within a few years the controversy died down and all prominent baseball record keepers listed Maris as the single-season record holder for as long as he held the record.\nNevertheless, the stigma of holding a tainted record remained with Maris for many years, and the concept of a real or figurative asterisk denoting less-than-accepted \"official\" records has become widely used in sports and other competitive endeavors. A 2001 TV movie about Maris's record-breaking season was called \"61*\" (pronounced \"sixty-one asterisk\") in reference to the controversy.\nUproar over the integrity of baseball records and whether or not qualifications should be added to them arose again in the late 1990s, when a steroid-fueled power explosion led to the shattering of Maris' record. Even though it was obvious - and later admitted - by Mark McGwire that he was heavily on steroids when he hit 70 home runs in 1998, ruling authorities did nothing - to the annoyance of many fans and sportswriters. Three years later self-confessed steroid-user Barry Bonds pushed that record out to 73, and fans once again began to call for an asterisk in the sport's record books.\nFans were especially critical and clamored louder for baseball to act during the 2007 season, as Bonds approached and later broke Hank Aaron's career home run record of 755.\nThe Houston Astros' 2017 World Series win was marred after an investigation by MLB revealed the team's involvement in a sign-stealing scheme during that season. Fans, appalled by what they perceived to be overly lenient discipline against the Astros players, nicknamed the team the \"Houston Asterisks\".\nCricket.\nThe asterisk has several uses in cricket:\nComputing.\nIn computer science, the asterisk is commonly used as a wildcard character, or to denote pointers, repetition, or multiplication.\nProgramming languages.\nMany programming languages and calculators use the asterisk as a symbol for multiplication. It also has a number of special meanings in specific languages, for instance:\nfrom typing import Any\ndef function1(a: int, b: int, c: int, d: int) -&gt; None:\n print(a, b, c, d)\ndef function2(first: int, *args: tuple[int, ...]) -&gt; None:\n # args will be a tuple\n # the name 'args' is convention: it may be any parameter name\n print(args)\ndef function3(first: int, **kwargs: dict[str, Any]) -&gt; None:\n # kwargs will be a dict\n # the name 'kwargs' is convention: it may be any parameter name\n print(kwargs)\nfunction1(1, 2, 3, 4) # prints 1 2 3 4\nfunction1(*[1, 2, 3, 4]) # prints 1 2 3 4\nfunction1(**{\"a\": 5, \"b\": 6, \"c\": 7, \"d\": 8}) # prints 5 6 7 8\nfunction2(1, 2, 3, 4) # prints (2, 3, 4), 1 is not part of args\nfunction2(99) # prints (), unfilled *parameter will be ()\nfunction3(0, e = 3, f = 9) # prints {'e': 3, 'f': 9}, 0 is not part of kwargs\nComments in programming languages.\nIn the B programming language and languages that borrow syntax from it, such as C, PHP, Java, or C#, comments in the source code (for information to people, ignored by the compiler) are marked by an asterisk combined with the slash:\n /* This section displays message if user input was not valid\n (comment ignored by compiler) */\nCSS also uses this comment format:\nbody {\n /* This ought to make the text more readable for far-sighted people */\n font-size: 24pt;\nSome Pascal-like programming languages, such as Object Pascal, Modula-2, Modula-3, and Oberon, and other languages such as ML, Wolfram Language (Mathematica), AppleScript, OCaml, Standard ML, and Maple, use an asterisk combined with a parenthesis:\n (* Do not change this variable - it is used later\n (comment ignored by compiler) *)\nEach computing language has its own way of handling comments; and similar notations are not universal.\nHistory of information technology.\nThe asterisk was a supported symbol on the IBM 026 Keypunch (introduced in 1949 and used to create punch cards with data for early computer systems). It was also included in the FIELDATA character encoding and the ASCII standard.\nFluid mechanics.\nIn fluid mechanics an asterisk in superscript is sometimes used to mean a property at sonic speed.\nLinguistics.\nIn linguistics, an asterisk may be used for a range of purposes depending on what is being discussed. The symbol is used to indicate reconstructed words of proto-languages (for which there are no records). For modern languages, it may be placed before posited problematic word forms, phrases or sentences to flag that they are hypothetical, ungrammatical, unpronounceable, etc. \nHistorical linguist August Schleicher is cited as first using the asterisk for linguistic purposes, specifically for unattested forms that are linguistic reconstructions.\nUsing the asterisk for descriptive and not just historical purposes arose in the 20th century. By analogy with its use in historical linguistics, the asterisk was variously prepended to \"hypothetical\" or \"unattested\" elements in modern language. Its usage also expanded to include \"non-existent\" or \"impossible\" forms. Leonard Bloomfield (1933) uses the asterisk with forms such as \"*cran,\" impossible to occur in isolation: \"cran-\" only occurs within the compound \"cranberry\". Such usage for a \"non-existent form\" was also found in French, German and Italian works in the middle of the 20th century.\nAsterisk usage in linguistics later came to include not just impossible forms, but \"ungrammatical sentences\", those that are \"ill formed for the native speaker\". The expansion of asterisk usage to entire sentences is often credited to Noam Chomsky, but Chomsky in 1968 already describes this usage as \"conventional\". Linguist Fred Householder claims some credit, but Giorgio Graffi argues that using an asterisk for this purpose predates his works.\nThe meaning of the asterisk usage in specific linguistic works may go unelucidated so can be unclear. Linguistics sometimes uses double asterisks (), another symbol such as the question mark, or both symbols (e.g. ) to indicate degrees of unacceptability.\nHistorical linguistics.\nIn historical linguistics, the asterisk marks words or phrases that are not directly recorded in texts or other media, and that are therefore reconstructed on the basis of other linguistic material by the comparative method.\nIn the following example, the Proto-Germanic word is a reconstructed form.\nA double asterisk () sometimes indicates an intermediary or proximate reconstructed form (e.g. a single asterisk for reconstructed thirteenth century Chinese and a double asterisk for reconstructions of older Ancient Chinese or a double asterisk for proto-Popolocan and a single asterisk for intermediary forms).\nIn other cases, the double asterisk denotes a form that would be expected according to a rule, but is not actually found. That is, it indicates a reconstructed form that is not found or used, and in place of which \"another\" form is found in actual usage:\nUngrammaticality.\nIn most areas of linguistics, but especially in syntax, an asterisk in front of a word or phrase indicates that the word or phrase is not used because it is ungrammatical.\nAn asterisk before a parenthesis indicates that the lack of the word or phrase inside is ungrammatical, while an asterisk after the opening bracket of the parenthesis indicates that the existence of the word or phrase inside is ungrammatical\u2014e.g., the following indicates \"go the station\" would be ungrammatical:\nUse of an asterisk to denote forms or sentences that are ungrammatical is often complemented by the use of the question mark () to indicate a word, phrase or sentence that is avoided, questionable or strange, but not necessarily outright ungrammatical.\nOther sources go further and use several symbols (e.g. the asterisk, question mark, and degree symbol ) to indicate gradations or a continuum of acceptability.\nAmbiguity.\nSince a word marked with an asterisk could mean either \"unattested\" or \"impossible\", it is important in some contexts to distinguish these meanings. In general, authors retain asterisks for \"unattested\", and prefix , , , or for the latter meaning. An alternative is to append the asterisk (or another symbol, possibly to differentiate between even more cases) at the end.\nOptimality theory.\nIn optimality theory, asterisks are used as \"violation marks\" in tableau cells to denote a violation of a constraint by an output form.\nPhonetic transcription.\nIn phonetic transcription using the International Phonetic Alphabet and similar systems, an asterisk was historically used to denote that the word it preceded was a proper noun. See this example from W. Perrett's 1921 transcription of Gottfried Keller's :\n(\"\")\nThis convention is no longer usual.\nMathematics.\nThe asterisk has many uses in mathematics. The following list highlights some common uses and is not exhaustive.\nThe asterisk is used in all branches of mathematics to designate a correspondence between two quantities denoted by the same letter \u2013 one with the asterisk and one without.\nMathematical typography.\nIn fine mathematical typography, the Unicode character (in HTML, &amp;lowast;; not to be confused with ) is available. This character also appeared in the position of the regular asterisk in the PostScript symbol character set in the \"Symbol\" font included with Windows and Macintosh operating systems and with many printers. It should be used for a large asterisk that lines up with the other mathematical operators, sitting on the math centerline rather than on the text baseline.\nStar of Life.\nA Star of Life, a six-bar asterisk overlaid with the Rod of Asclepius (the symbol of health), may be used as an alternative to cross or crescent symbols on ambulances.\nStatistical results.\nIn many scientific publications, the asterisk is employed as a shorthand to denote the statistical significance of results when testing hypotheses. When the likelihood that a result occurred by chance alone is below a certain level, one or more asterisks are displayed. Popular significance levels are &lt;0.05 (*), &lt;0.01 (**), and &lt;0.001 (***).\nTelephony.\nOn a tone dialling telephone keypad, the asterisk (called \"star\") is one of the two special keys (the other is the key\u00a0\u2013 almost invariably replaced by the number sign # (called 'pound sign' (US), 'hash' (other countries), or 'hex'), and is found to the left of the zero). They are used to navigate menus in systems such as voice mail, or in vertical service codes. Its codepoint in Unicode is as a valid alternative usage.\nEncodings.\nThe Unicode standard has a variety of asterisk-like characters, compared in the table below. (Characters will display differently in different browsers and fonts.) The reason there are so many is chiefly because of the controversial decision to include in Unicode the entire Zapf Dingbats symbol font.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59153", "revid": "38198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59153", "title": "Ampersand", "text": "Symbol representing the word \"and\" (&amp;)\nThe ampersand, also known as the and sign, is the logogram &amp;, representing the conjunction \"and\". It originated as a ligature of the letters of the word (Latin for \"and\").\nEtymology.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Ampersand\": the sign &amp; the name being a corruption of 'and = and'; i.e. '&amp; by itself = and'. The sign derives from the scribes' ligature for the in certain italic versions, the letters \"e\" and \"t\" are clearly distinguishable. \u2014\u200a \nTraditionally in English, when spelling aloud, any letter that could also be used as a word in itself (\"A\", \"I\", and \"O\") was referred to by the Latin expression ('by itself'), as in \"\"per se\" A\" or \"A \"per se\" A\". The character &amp;, when used by itself as opposed to more extended forms such as \"&amp;c.\", was similarly referred to as \"and \"per se\" and\". This last phrase was routinely slurred to \"ampersand\", and the term had entered common English usage by 1837.\nIt has been falsely claimed that Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re used the symbol in his widely read publications and that people began calling the new shape \"Amp\u00e8re's and\".\nHistory.\nThe ampersand can be traced back to the 1st century AD and the old Roman cursive, in which the letters E and T occasionally were written together to form a ligature (Evolution of the ampersand \u2013 figure 1). In the later and more flowing New Roman Cursive, ligatures of all kinds were extremely common; figures 2 and 3 from the middle of 4th century are examples of how the et-ligature could look in this script. During the later development of the Latin script leading up to Carolingian minuscule (9th century) the use of ligatures in general diminished. The et-ligature, however, continued to be used and gradually became more stylized and less revealing of its origin (figures 4\u20136).\nThe modern italic type ampersand is a kind of \"et\" ligature that goes back to the cursive scripts developed during the Renaissance. After the advent of printing in Europe in 1455, printers made extensive use of both the italic and Roman ampersands. Since the ampersand's roots go back to Roman times, many languages that use a variation of the Latin alphabet make use of it.\nThe ampersand often appeared as a character at the end of the Latin alphabet, as for example in Byrhtfer\u00f0's list of letters from 1011. Similarly, &amp; was regarded as the 27th letter of the English alphabet, as taught to children in the US and elsewhere. An example may be seen in M. B. Moore's 1863 book \"The Dixie Primer, for the Little Folks\". In her 1859 novel \"Adam Bede\", George Eliot refers to this when she makes Jacob Storey say: \"He thought it [Z] had only been put to finish off th' alphabet like; though ampusand would ha' done as well, for what he could see.\" The popular nursery rhyme Apple Pie ABC finishes with the lines \"X, Y, Z, and ampersand, All wished for a piece in hand\".\nSimilar characters.\nIn Irish and Scottish Gaelic, the character \u204a () is used in place of the ampersand. This character is a survival of Tironian notes, a medieval shorthand system. This character is known as the Tironian Et in English, the in Irish, and the in Scottish Gaelic.\nIn Swedish, o\u0331 is frequently used as a substitute for &amp;, particularly in handwriting and in prose.\nThe logical conjunction symbol, \u2227, is often pronounced \"and,\" but is not related to the ampersand.\nWriting the ampersand.\nIn everyday handwriting, the ampersand is sometimes simplified in design as a large lowercase epsilon \u0190 or a reversed numeral 3, superimposed by a vertical line. The ampersand is also sometimes shown as an epsilon with a vertical line above and below it or a dot above and below it.\nThe plus sign + (itself based on an et-ligature) is often informally used in place of an ampersand, sometimes with an added loop and resembling \u026c. Other times it is a single stroke with a diagonal line connecting the bottom to the left side. This was a version of shorthand for ampersand, and the stroke economy of this version provided ease of writing for workers while also assuring the character was distinct from other numeric or alphabetic symbols.\nUsage.\nAmpersands are commonly seen in business names formed from a partnership of two or more people, such as \"Johnson &amp; Johnson\", \"Dolce &amp; Gabbana\", \"Marks &amp; Spencer\" and \"Tiffany &amp; Co\", as well as some abbreviations containing the word \"and\", such as \"AT&amp;T\" (American Telephone and Telegraph), \"A&amp;P\" (supermarkets), \"P&amp;O\" (originally \"Peninsular and Oriental\", shipping and logistics company), \"R&amp;D\" (research and development), \"D&amp;B\" (drum and bass), \"D&amp;D\" (Dungeons &amp; Dragons), \"R&amp;B\" (rhythm and blues), \"B&amp;B\" (bed and breakfast), and \"P&amp;L\" (profit and loss).\nIn film credits for stories, screenplays, etc., \"&amp;\" indicates a closer collaboration than \"and\". The ampersand is used by the Writers Guild of America to denote two writers collaborating on a specific script, rather than one writer rewriting another's work. In screenplays, two authors joined with \"&amp;\" collaborated on the script, while two authors joined with \"and\" worked on the script at different times and may not have consulted each other at all. In the latter case, they both contributed enough significant material to the screenplay to receive credit but did not work together. As a result, both &amp; and \"and\" may appear in the same credit, as appropriate to how the writing proceeded.\nIn APA style, the ampersand is used when citing sources in text such as (Jones &amp; Jones, 2005). In the list of references, an ampersand precedes the last author's name when there is more than one author. (This does not apply to MLA style, which calls for the \"and\" to be spelled.)\nThe phrase (\"and the rest\"), usually written as \"etc.\" can be abbreviated \"&amp;c.\" representing the combination \"et\" + \"c(etera)\".\nThe ampersand can be used to indicate that the \"and\" in a listed item is a part of the item's name and not a separator (e.g. \"Rock, pop, rhythm &amp; blues and hip hop\").\nThe ampersand may still be used as an abbreviation for \"and\" in informal writing regardless of how \"and\" is used.\nComputing.\nEncoding and display.\nThe character exists in many computer character sets, usually at 38 (26hex) from ASCII. Unicode provides the following variants:\nThe last six of these are carryovers from the Wingdings fonts, and are meant only for backward compatibility with those fonts.\nOn the QWERTY keyboard layout, the ampersand is . It is almost always available on keyboard layouts, sometimes on or . On the AZERTY keyboard layout, is an unmodified keystroke, positioned above .\nProgramming languages.\nIn the 20th century, following the development of formal logic, the ampersand became a commonly used logical notation for the binary operator or sentential connective \"AND\". This usage was adopted in computing.\nMany languages with syntax derived from C, including C++, Perl, and more differentiate between:\nIn C, C++, Rust and Go, a prefix is a unary operator denoting the address in memory of the argument, e.g. .\nIn C++ and PHP, unary prefix before a formal parameter of a function denotes pass-by-reference.\nIn Pascal, the as the first character of an identifier prevents the compiler from treating it as a keyword, thus \"escaping\" it.\nIn Fortran, the ampersand forces the compiler to treat two lines as one. This is accomplished by placing an ampersand at the end of the first line and at the beginning of the second line.\nIn many implementations of ALGOL 60 the ampersand denotes the tens exponent of a real number.\nIn Common Lisp, the ampersand is the prefix for lambda list keywords.\nAmpersand is the string concatenation operator in many BASIC dialects, AppleScript, Lingo, HyperTalk, and FileMaker. In Ada it applies to all one-dimensional arrays, not just strings.\nBASIC-PLUS on the DEC PDP-11 uses the ampersand as a short form of the verb .\nApplesoft BASIC used the ampersand as an internal command, not intended to be used for general programming, that invoked a machine language program in the computer's ROM.\nIn some versions of BASIC, unary suffix &amp; denotes a variable is of type \"long\", or 32 bits in length.\nThe ampersand was occasionally used as a prefix to denote a hexadecimal number, such as for decimal 255, for instance in BBC BASIC. (The modern convention is to use \"x\" as a prefix to denote hexadecimal, thus .) Some other languages, such as the Monitor built into ROM on the Commodore 128, used it to indicate octal instead, a convention that spread throughout the Commodore community and is now used in the VICE emulator.\nIn MySQL, has dual roles. As well as a logical AND, it serves as the bitwise operator of an intersection between elements.\nDyalog APL uses ampersand similarly to Unix shells, spawning a separate green thread upon application of a function.\nIn more recent years, the ampersand has made its way into the Haskell standard library, representing flipped function application: means the same thing as .\nPerl uses the ampersand as a sigil to refer to subroutines:\nIn the Xbase family of languages, which includes dBase and FoxPro, a singe ampersand signifies macro substitution (where elements of program code are stored in a variable for evaluation at run time). A pair of consecutive ampersands marks the start of an in-line comment.\nIn MASM 80x86 Assembly Language, is the Substitution Operator, which tells the assembler to replace a macro parameter or text macro name with its actual value.\nAmpersand is the name of a reactive programming language, which uses relation algebra to specify information systems.\nText markup.\nIn SGML, XML, and HTML, the ampersand is used to introduce an SGML entity, such as (for non-breaking space) or (for the Greek letter \u03b1). The HTML and XML encoding for the ampersand character is the entity . This can create a problem known as delimiter collision when converting text into one of these markup languages. For instance, when putting URLs or other material containing ampersands into XML format files such as RSS files the &amp; must be replaced with &amp;amp; or they are considered not well formed, and computers will be unable to read the files correctly. SGML derived the use from IBM Generalized Markup Language, which was one of many IBM-mainframe languages to use the ampersand to signal a text substitution, eventually going back to System/360 macro assembly language.\nIn the plain TeX markup language, the ampersand is used to mark tabstops. The ampersand itself can be applied in TeX with . The Computer Modern fonts replace it with an \"E.T.\" symbol in the cmti\"#\" (text italic) fonts, so it can be entered as in running text when using the default (Computer Modern) fonts.\nIn Microsoft Windows menus, labels, and other captions, the ampersand is used to denote the next letter as a keyboard shortcut (called an \"Access key\" by Microsoft). For instance setting a button label to makes it display as Print and for to be a shortcut equivalent to pressing that button. A double ampersand is needed in order to display a real ampersand. This convention originated in the first WIN32 api, and is used in Windows Forms, (but not WPF, which uses underscore _ for this purpose) and is also copied into many other toolkits on multiple operating systems. Sometimes this causes problems similar to other programs that fail to sanitize markup from user input, for instance Navision databases have trouble if this character is in either \"Text\" or \"Code\" fields.\nUnix shells.\nSome Unix shells use the ampersand as a metacharacter:\nSome Unix shells, like the POSIX standard codice_1 shell, use an ampersand to execute a process in the background and to duplicate file descriptors.\nWeb standards.\nThe generic URL (Uniform Resource Locator) syntax allows for a query string to be appended to a file name in a web address so that additional information can be passed to a script; the question mark, or query mark, ?, is used to indicate the start of a query string. A query string is usually made up of a number of different name\u2013value pairs, each separated by the ampersand symbol, &amp;. For example, . A \"real\" ampersand must be replaced by codice_2 to avoid interpretation as this syntax.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59155", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59155", "title": "Bullet (typography)", "text": "Typographical symbol (\u2022)\nIn typography, a bullet or bullet point, \u2022, is a typographical mark used to introduce items in a list. For example:\nThe bullet symbol may take any of a variety of shapes, such as circular, square, diamond or arrow. Typical word processor software offers a wide selection of shapes and colors. Several regular symbols, such as * (asterisk), - (hyphen), . (period), and even o (lowercase Latin letter O), are conventionally used in ASCII-only text or other environments where bullet characters are not available. Historically, the index symbol \u261e (representing a hand with a pointing index finger) was popular for similar uses.\nLists made with bullets are called bulleted lists. The HTML element name for a bulleted list is \"unordered list\", because the list items are not arranged in numerical order (as they would be in a numbered list).\n\"Bullet points\".\nItems\u2014known as \"bullet points\"\u2014may be short phrases, single sentences, or of paragraph length. Bulleted items are not usually terminated with a full stop unless they are complete sentences. In some cases, however, the style guide for a given publication may call for every item except the last one in each bulleted list to be terminated with a semicolon, and the last item with a full stop. It is correct to terminate any bullet point with a full stop if the text within that item consists of one full sentence or more. Bullet points are usually used to highlight list elements.\nHistory.\nThe 1950 \"New York News\" Type Book is credited as the first style guide to include a defined use for bullets. The Type Book described it as a typographic device to be used as an \"Accessory\" alongside asterisks, checks, and other marks available to people making advertisements for the \"News\". The book \"neither discusses the function of bullets in advertisements nor distinguishes them from any of the other items in the 'accessories' category\", but can be seen to use them as a form of dinkus in an advertising panel.\nModern use.\nExample: \n\"Bullets are often used in technical writing, reference works, notes, and presentations\". This statement may be presented using bullets or other techniques.\nBullets are often used in:\nAlternatives to bulleted lists are numbered lists and outlines (lettered lists, hierarchical lists). They are used where either the order is important or to label the items for later referencing.\nOther uses.\nThe bullet glyph is sometimes used as a way to hide passwords or confidential information in a practice known as password masking. For example, the credit card number might be displayed as .\nBullet operator.\nA variant, the bullet operator () has a unicode code-point but its purpose does not appear to be documented. The glyph was transposed into Unicode from the original IBM PC character set, Code page 437, where it had the code-point F916 (24910).\nComputer usage.\nThere have been different ways to encode bullet points in computer systems.\nIn historical systems.\nGlyphs such as \u2022, \u25e6 and their reversed variants \u25d8, \u25d9 became available in text mode since early IBM PCs with MDA\u2013CGA\u2013EGA graphic adapters, because built-in screen fonts contained such forms at code points 7\u201310. These were not true characters because such points belong to the C0 control codes range; therefore, these glyphs required a special way to be placed on the screen (see code page 437 for discussion).\nPrior to the widespread use of word processors, bullets were often denoted by an asterisk; several word processors automatically convert asterisks to bullets if used at the start of line. This notation was inherited by Setext and wiki engines.\nIn Unicode.\nThere are a variety of Unicode bullet characters, including:\nIn web pages.\nTo create bulleted list items for a web page, the markup language HTML provides the list tag codice_1. The browser will display one bulleted list item for each item in an unordered list.\nIn Windows.\nWhen using the US keyboard, a bullet point character can be produced by pressing 7 on the numpad while keeping Alt pressed.\nIn MacOS.\nWhen using the US keyboard, a bullet point character can be produced by pressing 8 while keeping Option(Alt) pressed.\nIn LaTeX.\nTo create bulleted list items for a document, the markup language LaTeX provides the item tag codice_2. Each item tag inside an itemized list will generate one bulleted list item.\nWiki markup.\nA list item on a wiki page is indicated using one or more leading asterisks in wiki markup as well as in many other wikis.\nOther uses in computing.\nThe bullet is often used for separating menu items, usually in the footer menu. It is common, for example, to see it in website designs and in many WordPress themes. It is also used by text editors, like Microsoft Word, to create lists.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59156", "revid": "45528208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59156", "title": "Dry ice", "text": "Solid form of carbon dioxide\nDry ice is the solid form of carbon dioxide. It is commonly used for temporary refrigeration as CO2 does not have a liquid state at normal atmospheric pressure and sublimes directly from the solid state to the gas state. It is used primarily as a cooling agent, but is also used in fog machines at theatres for dramatic effects. Its advantages include lower temperature than that of water ice and not leaving any residue (other than incidental frost from moisture in the atmosphere). It is useful for preserving frozen foods (such as ice cream) where mechanical cooling is unavailable.\nDry ice sublimes at at Earth atmospheric pressure. This extreme cold makes the solid dangerous to handle without protection from frostbite injury. While generally not very toxic, the outgassing from it can cause hypercapnia (abnormally elevated carbon dioxide levels in the blood) due to a buildup in confined locations.\nProperties.\nDry ice is the solid form of carbon dioxide (CO2), a molecule consisting of a single carbon atom bonded to two oxygen atoms. Dry ice is colorless, odorless, and non-flammable, and can lower the pH of a solution when dissolved in water, forming carbonic acid (H2CO3).\nAt pressures below 5.13 atm and temperatures below (the triple point), CO2 changes from a solid to a gas with no intervening liquid form, through a process called sublimation. The opposite process is called deposition, where CO2 changes from the gas to solid phase (dry ice). At atmospheric pressure, sublimation/deposition occurs at .\nThe density of dry ice increases with decreasing temperature and ranges between about below . The low temperature and direct sublimation to a gas makes dry ice an effective coolant, since it is colder than water ice and leaves no residue as it changes state. Its enthalpy of sublimation is 571 kJ/kg (25.2 kJ/mol, 136.5 calorie/g).\nDry ice is non-polar, with a dipole moment of zero, so attractive intermolecular van der Waals forces operate. The composition results in low thermal and electrical conductivity.\nHistory.\nIt is generally accepted that dry ice was first observed in 1835 by French inventor Adrien-Jean-Pierre Thilorier (1790\u20131844), who published the first account of the substance. In his experiments, he noted that when opening the lid of a large cylinder containing liquid carbon dioxide, most of the liquid carbon dioxide quickly evaporated. This left only solid dry ice in the container. In 1924, Thomas B. Slate applied for a US patent to sell dry ice commercially. Subsequently, he became the first to make dry ice successful as an industry. In 1925, this solid form of CO2 was trademarked by the DryIce Corporation of America as \"Dry ice\", leading to its common name. That same year the DryIce Co. sold the substance commercially for the first time, marketing it for refrigeration purposes.\nManufacture.\nDry ice is easily manufactured. The most common industrial method of manufacturing dry ice starts with a gas having a high concentration of carbon dioxide. Such gases can be a byproduct of another process, such as producing ammonia from nitrogen and natural gas, oil refinery activities or large-scale fermentation. Second, the carbon dioxide-rich gas is pressurized and refrigerated until it liquefies. Next, the pressure is reduced. When this occurs some liquid carbon dioxide vaporizes, causing a rapid lowering of temperature of the remaining liquid. As a result, the extreme cold causes the liquid to solidify into a snow-like consistency. Finally, the snow-like solid carbon dioxide is compressed into small pellets or larger blocks of dry ice.\nDry ice is typically produced in three standard forms: large blocks, small ( diameter) cylindrical pellets and tiny ( diameter) cylindrical, high surface to volume pellets that float on oil or water and do not stick to skin because of their high radii of curvature. Tiny dry ice pellets are used primarily for dry ice blasting, quick freezing, fire fighting, oil solidifying and have been found to be safe for experimentation by middle school students wearing appropriate personal protective equipment such as gloves and safety glasses. A standard block weighing approximately covered in a taped paper wrapping is most common. These are commonly used in shipping, because they sublime relatively slowly due to a low ratio of surface area to volume. Pellets are around in diameter and can be bagged easily. This form is suited to small scale use, for example at grocery stores and laboratories where it is stored in a thickly insulated chest. Density of pellets is 60\u201370% of the density of blocks.\nDry ice is also produced as a byproduct of cryogenic air separation, an industry primarily concerned with manufacturing extremely cold liquids such as liquid nitrogen and liquid oxygen. In this process, carbon dioxide liquefies or freezes at a far higher temperature compared to that needed to liquefy nitrogen and oxygen. The carbon dioxide must be removed during the process to prevent dry ice from fouling the equipment, and once separated can be processed into commercial dry ice in a manner similar to that described above.\nApplications.\nCommercial.\nThe most common use of dry ice is to preserve food, using non-cyclic refrigeration.\nIt is frequently used to package items that must remain cold or frozen, such as ice cream or biological samples, in the absence of availability or practicality of mechanical cooling.\nDry ice is critical in the deployment of some vaccines, which require storage at ultra-cold temperatures along their supply line.\nDry ice can be used to flash-freeze food or laboratory biological samples, carbonate beverages, make ice cream, solidify oil spills and stop ice sculptures and ice walls from melting.\nDry ice can be used to arrest and prevent insect activity in closed containers of grains and grain products, as it displaces oxygen, but does not alter the taste or quality of foods. For the same reason, it can prevent or retard food oils and fats from becoming rancid.\nWhen dry ice is placed in water, sublimation is accelerated, and low-sinking, dense clouds of smoke-like fog are created. This is used in fog machines, at theatres, haunted house attractions, and nightclubs for dramatic effects. Unlike most artificial fog machines, in which fog rises like smoke, fog from dry ice hovers near the ground. Dry ice is useful in theatre productions that require dense fog effects. The fog originates from the bulk water into which the dry ice is placed, and not from atmospheric water vapor (as is commonly assumed).\nIt is occasionally used to freeze and remove warts. However, liquid nitrogen performs better in this role, as it is colder, thereby requiring less time to act, and needs less pressure to store. Dry ice has fewer problems with storage, since it can be generated from compressed carbon dioxide gas as needed.\nIn plumbing, dry ice is used to cut off water flow to pipes to allow repairs to be made without shutting off water mains. Pressurised liquid CO2 is forced into a jacket wrapped around a pipe, which in turn causes the water inside to freeze and block the pipe. When the repairs are done, the jacket is removed and the ice plug melts, allowing the flow to resume. This technique can be used on pipes up to 4\u00a0inches or 100\u00a0mm in diameter.\nDry ice can be used as bait to trap mosquitoes, bedbugs, and other insects, due to their attraction to carbon dioxide.\nIt can be used to exterminate rodents. This is done by dropping pellets into rodent tunnels in the ground and then sealing off the entrance, thus suffocating the animals as the dry ice sublimates.\nTiny dry ice pellets can be used to fight fire by both cooling fuel and suffocating the fire by excluding oxygen.\nThe extreme temperature of dry ice can cause viscoelastic materials to change to glass phase. Thus, it is useful for removing many types of pressure sensitive adhesives.\nIndustrial.\nDry ice can be used for loosening asphalt floor tiles or car sound deadening material, making them easy to prise off, as well as freezing water in valveless pipes to enable repair.\nOne of the largest mechanical uses of dry ice is blast cleaning. Dry ice pellets are shot from a nozzle with compressed air, combining the power of the speed of the pellets with the action of the sublimation. This can remove residues from industrial equipment. Examples of materials removed include ink, glue, oil, paint, mold and rubber. Dry ice blasting can replace sandblasting, steam blasting, water blasting or solvent blasting. The primary environmental residue of dry ice blasting is the sublimed CO2, thus making it a useful technique where residues from other blasting techniques are undesirable. Recently, blast cleaning has been introduced as a method of removing smoke damage from structures after fires.\nDry ice is also useful for the de-gassing of flammable vapours from storage tanks \u2013the sublimation of dry ice pellets inside an emptied and vented tank causes an outrush of CO2 that carries with it the flammable vapours.\nThe removal and fitting of cylinder liners in large engines requires the use of dry ice to chill and thus shrink the liner so that it freely slides into the engine block. When the liner then warms up, it expands, and the resulting interference fit holds it tightly in place. Similar procedures may be used in fabricating mechanical assemblies with a high resultant strength, replacing the need for pins, keys or welds.\nDry ice has found its application in construction for freezing soil, serving as an effective alternative to liquid nitrogen. This method reduces the soil temperature to approximately -70 to -74 \u00b0C, rapidly freezing the groundwater. As a result, the soil's strength and impermeability significantly increase, which is essential for the safe execution of underground construction projects.\nIt is also useful as a cutting fluid.\nScientific.\nIn laboratories, a slurry of dry ice in an organic solvent is a useful freezing mixture for cold chemical reactions and for condensing solvents in rotary evaporators. Dry ice and acetone forms a cold bath of , which can be used for instance to prevent thermal runaway in a Swern oxidation.\nThe process of altering cloud precipitation can be done with the use of dry ice. It was widely used in experiments in the US in the 1950s and early 1960s before it was replaced by silver iodide. Dry ice has the advantage of being relatively cheap and completely non-toxic. Its main drawback is the need to be delivered directly into the supercooled region of clouds being seeded.\nDry ice bombs.\nA \"dry ice bomb\" is a balloon-like device using dry ice in a sealed container such as a plastic bottle. Water is usually added to accelerate the sublimation of the dry ice. As the dry ice sublimes, pressure increases, causing the bottle to burst with a loud noise. The screw cap can be replaced with a rubber stopper to make a water rocket.\nThe dry ice bomb device was featured on \"MythBusters\", episode 57 Mentos and Soda, which first aired on August 9, 2006. It was also featured in an episode of \"Time Warp\", as well as in an episode of \"Archer\".\nExtraterrestrial occurrence.\nFollowing the Mars flyby of the Mariner 4 spacecraft in 1966, scientists concluded that Mars' polar caps consist entirely of dry ice. However, findings made in 2003 by researchers at the California Institute of Technology have shown that Mars' polar caps are almost completely made of water ice, and that dry ice only forms a thin surface layer that thickens and thins seasonally. A phenomenon named dry ice storms was proposed to occur over the polar regions of Mars. They are comparable to Earth's thunderstorms, with crystalline CO2 taking the place of water in the clouds. Dry ice is also proposed as a mechanism for the geysers on Mars.\nIn 2012, the European Space Agency's Venus Express probe detected a cold layer in the atmosphere of Venus where temperatures are close to the triple point of carbon dioxide \u2013hence it is possible that flakes of dry ice precipitate.\nObservations from the Uranus flyby by \"Voyager 2\" indicates that dry ice is present on the surface of its large moons Ariel, Umbriel and Titania. Scientists speculate that the magnetic field of Uranus contributes to the generation of CO2 ice on the surfaces of its moons. \"Voyager 2\" observations of Neptune's moon Triton suggested the presence of dry ice on the surface, though followup observations indicate that the carbon ices on the surface are carbon monoxide but that the moon's crust is composed of a significant quantity of dry ice.\nSafety.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nProlonged exposure to dry ice can cause severe skin damage through frostbite, and the fog produced may also hinder attempts to withdraw from contact in a safe manner. Because it sublimes into large quantities of carbon dioxide gas, which could pose a danger of hypercapnia, dry ice should only be exposed to open air in a well-ventilated environment. For this reason, in the context of laboratory safety dry ice is assigned label precaution Industrial dry ice may contain contaminants that make it unsafe for direct contact with food. Tiny dry ice pellets used in dry ice blast cleaning do not contain oily residues.\nDry ice is assigned a UN number, a code for hazardous substances: UN 1845. Dry ice is not classified as a dangerous substance by the European Union, or as a hazardous material by the United States Department of Transportation for ground transportation. However, in the US, it is regulated as a dangerous good when shipped by air or water. International Air Transport Association (IATA) regulations require specific diamond-shaped black-and white labelling to be placed on the package. The package must have adequate ventilation so that it will not rupture from pressure in the event that the Dry Ice begins to sublime in the packaging. The Federal Aviation Administration in the US allows airline passengers to carry up to per person either as checked baggage or carry-on baggage, when used to refrigerate perishables.\nAt least one person has been killed by carbon dioxide gas subliming off dry ice in coolers placed in a car. In 2020, three people were killed at a party in Moscow after 25\u00a0kg of dry ice was dumped in a pool; carbon dioxide is heavier than air, and so can linger near the ground, just above water level.\nDrink.\nDry ice is sometimes used to give a fog effect to cocktails. One bar patron who accidentally ingested pellets from a drink suffered severe burns to his esophagus, stomach, and duodenum, causing permanent problems with eating. Rapid sublimation could cause gas buildup that ruptures digestive organs or suffocation. Products that contain dry ice and prevent it from being accidentally ingested eliminate these risks while producing the desired fog effect.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "59157", "revid": "1319293534", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59157", "title": "Sociology of knowledge", "text": "Field of study\nThe sociology of knowledge is the study of the relationship between human thought, the social context within which it arises, and the effects that prevailing ideas have on societies. It is not a specialized area of sociology. Instead, it deals with broad fundamental questions about the extent and limits of social influences on individuals' lives and the social-cultural basis of our knowledge about the world. The sociology of knowledge has a subclass and a complement. Its subclass is sociology of scientific knowledge. Its complement is the Sociology of Ignorance.\nThe sociology of knowledge was pioneered primarily by the sociologist \u00c9mile Durkheim at the beginning of the 20th century. His work deals directly with how conceptual thought, language, and logic can be influenced by the societal milieu in which they arise. The 1903 essay \"Primitive Classification\", by Durkheim and Marcel Mauss, invoked \"primitive\" group mythology to argue that classification systems are collectively based and that the divisions within these systems derive from social categories. In his 1912 \"The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life\", Durkheim elaborated on his theory of knowledge. In this work, he examined how languages, concepts, and the categories (such as space and time) used in logical thought have a sociological origin. Neither Durkheim nor Mauss specifically coined the term \"sociology of knowledge\". However, their work was an exceptional contribution to the subject.\nThe widespread use of the term 'sociology of knowledge' emerged in the 1920s, when several German-speaking sociologists, most notably Max Scheler and Karl Mannheim, wrote extensively on sociological aspects of knowledge. This was followed in 1937 by a much-cited survey of the subject by Robert K. Merton, the American sociologist, 'The sociology of knowledge'. With the dominance of functionalism through the middle years of the 20th century, the sociology of knowledge remained on the periphery of mainstream sociological thought. However, it was reinvented and applied closely to everyday life in the 1960s, particularly by Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann in \"The Social Construction of Reality\" (1966). It is still central for methods dealing with a qualitative understanding of human society (compare \"socially constructed reality\"). The 'genealogical' and 'archaeological' studies of Michel Foucault are of considerable contemporary influence.\nHistory.\nThe Enlightenment.\nPeter Hamilton argues that the thinkers of the Enlightenment produced a sociology of ideas and values when they turned their attention to the scientific analysis of society.1 He argues that specific values inherent in critical rationalism, such as anthropocentrism (i.e., the assumption that humans are the most crucial element in understanding reality), were central to these thinkers' understanding of society. Hamilton argues that these thinkers were committed to progress and the freedom of the individual to determine his own beliefs and values, which are at odds with traditional moral considerations in theology. The empirical method of cross-cultural comparison became a methodology for understanding society rather than the idea of revealed truth inherent in sociology, leading to a measure of cultural relativism.\nHe argues that some thinkers sought to change society based on their theories. These ideas play out in the French Revolution with its Reign of Terror. Hamilton argues that the Enlightenment can be seen as a critical response to the Christian theology used by the Jacobins, which manipulated people's understanding of truth to maintain a feudal order.\nEarlier viewpoints.\nThe sociology of knowledge requires a particular viewpoint that Giambattista Vico first expounded in his \"New Science\" in the early 18th century, long before the first sociologists studied the relationship between knowledge and society. The book, a justification for a new historical and sociological methodology, suggests that the natural and social worlds are known in different ways. The former is known through external or empirical methods, while the latter can be known internally and externally. In other words, human history is a construct that creates a critical epistemological distinction between the natural and social worlds, a central concept in the social sciences. Primarily focused on historical methodology, Vico asserts that it is necessary to move beyond a chronicle of events to study a society's history. He examined society's cultural elements, which were termed the \"civil world\". This \"civil world\", made up of actions, thoughts, ideas, myths, norms, religious beliefs, and institutions, is the product of the human mind. These socially constructed elements can be better understood than the physical world, as it is in abstraction. Vico highlights that human nature and its products are not fixed entities. Therefore, it necessitates a historical perspective emphasizing the changes and developments implicit in individuals and societies. He also emphasizes the dialectical relationship between society and culture as key in this new historical perspective.\nWhile permeated by his penchant for etymology, Vico's ideas and a theory of cyclical history (\"corsi e ricorsi),\" are significant for the underlying premise about our understanding and knowledge of social structure. They are dependent upon the ideas and concepts we employ and the language used. Vico was primarily unknown in his own time. He was the first to establish the foundations of a sociology of knowledge, even though later writers did not necessarily pick up his concepts. There is evidence that Montesquieu and Karl Marx read Vico's work. However, the similarities in their works are superficial, limited mainly to the overall conception of their projects. They were characterized by cultural relativism and historicism.\nApproaches to the sociology of knowledge.\n\u00c9mile Durkheim.\n\u00c9mile Durkheim (1858\u20131917) is credited as having been the first professor to successfully establish the field of sociology, institutionalizing a department of sociology at the University de Bordeaux in the 1890s. While his works deal with several subjects, including suicide, the family, social structures, and social institutions, a large part of his work deals with the sociology of knowledge.\nWhile publishing short articles on the subject early in his career (for example, the essay \"De quelques formes primitives de classification\" written in 1902 with Marcel Mauss), Durkheim worked mainly out of a Kantian framework and sought to understand how logical thought concepts and categories could arise out of social life. He argued, for example, that the types of space and time were not \"a priori\". Instead, the category of space depends on a society's social grouping and geographical use of space, and a group's social rhythm determines our understanding of time. Durkheim sought to combine elements of rationalism and empiricism, arguing that certain aspects of logical thought common to all humans did exist, but that they were products of collective life (thus contradicting the \"tabula rasa\" empiricist understanding whereby categories are acquired by individual experience alone), and that they were not universal \"a priori\" truths (as Kant argued) since the content of the categories differed from society to society.\nAnother key element to Durkheim's theory of knowledge is his concept of (collective representations), which he outlined in 1912 in \"The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life\". are the symbols and images that come to represent the ideas, beliefs, and values elaborated by a collectivity and are not reducible to individual constituents. They can include words, slogans, ideas, or any number of material items that can serve as a symbol, such as a cross, a rock, a temple, a feather, etc. As Durkheim elaborates, are created through intense social interaction and are products of collective activity. As such, these representations have the particular, and somewhat contradictory, aspect that they exist externally to the individual (since they are created and controlled not by the individual but by society as a whole), and yet simultaneously within each individual of the society (by virtue of that individual's participation within society). Language is an important , which, according to Durkheim, is a product of collective action. And because language is a collective action, language contains within it a history of accumulated knowledge and experience that no individual would be capable of creating alone. As Durkheim says, , and language in particular:\"Add to that which we can learn by our own personal experience all that wisdom and science which the group has accumulated in the course of centuries. Thinking by concepts is not merely seeing reality on its most general side, but it is projecting a light upon the sensation which illuminates it, penetrates it, and transforms it.\"As such, language, as a social product, literally structures and shapes our experience of reality, an idea developed by later French philosophers, such as Michel Foucault.\nKarl Mannheim.\nThe German political philosophers Karl Marx (1818\u20131883) and Friedrich Engels (1820\u20131895) argued in \"Die deutsche Ideologie\" (1846, \"The German Ideology\") and elsewhere that people's ideologies, including their social and political beliefs and opinions, are rooted in their class interests and more broadly in the social and economic circumstances in which they live:\n \"It is men, who in developing their material inter-course, change, along with this their real existence, their thinking and the products of their thinking. Being is not determined by consciousness, but consciousness by being.\" (\"Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe\" 1/5)\nUnder the influence of this doctrine and of phenomenology, the Hungarian-born German sociologist Karl Mannheim (1893\u20131947) gave impetus to the growth of the sociology of knowledge with his \"Ideologie und Utopie\" (1929, translated and extended in 1936 as \"Ideology and Utopia\"), although the term had been introduced five years earlier by the co-founder of the movement, the German philosopher, phenomenologist and social theorist Max Scheler (1874\u20131928), in \"Versuche zu einer Soziologie des Wissens\" (1924, \"Attempts at a Sociology of Knowledge\").\nMannheim feared that this interpretation could be seen to claim that all knowledge and beliefs are the products of socio-political forces since this form of relativism is self-defeating (if it is true, then it too is merely a product of socio-political forces and has no claim to truth and no persuasive force). Mannheim believed that relativism was a strange mixture of modern and ancient beliefs in that it contained within itself a belief in an absolute truth that was true for all times and places (the ancient view most often associated with Plato) and condemned other truth claims because they could not achieve this level of objectivity (an idea gleaned from Marx). Mannheim sought to escape this problem with the idea of relationism. This is the idea that certain things are true only in certain times and places (a view influenced by pragmatism) however, this does not make them less true. Mannheim felt that a stratum of free-floating intellectuals (who he claimed were only loosely anchored to the class structure of society) could most perfectly realize this form of truth by creating a \"dynamic synthesis\" of the ideologies of other groups.\nThe sociology of Mannheim is specified with particular attention to the forms of transmission of culture and knowledge. It follows the constellations of senses and options that, through the generations, are related to the transmission and reproduction of values.\nPhenomenological sociology.\nPhenomenological sociology is the study of the formal structures of concrete social existence as made available in and through the analytical description of acts of intentional consciousness. The \"object\" of such an analysis is the meaningful lived world of everyday life: the \"Lebenswelt\", or life-world (Husserl:1889). The task, like that of every other phenomenological investigation, is to describe the formal structures of this object of investigation in subjective terms, as an object-constituted-in-and-for-consciousness (Gurwitsch:1964). The utilization of phenomenological methods is what makes such a description different from the \"naive\" subjective descriptions of the man in the street, or those of the traditional, positivist social scientist.\nThe leading proponent of phenomenological sociology was Alfred Sch\u00fctz (1899\u20131959). Sch\u00fctz sought to provide a critical philosophical foundation for the interpretive sociology of Max Weber (1864-1920) through the use of phenomenological methods derived from the transcendental phenomenological investigations of Edmund Husserl (1859\u20131938). Husserl's work aimed at establishing the formal structures of intentional consciousness. Sch\u00fctz's work was directed at establishing the formal structures of the Life-world (Sch\u00fctz:1980). Husserl's work was conducted as a transcendental phenomenology of consciousness. Sch\u00fctz's work was conducted as a mundane phenomenology of the Life-world (Natanson:1974). The difference in their research projects lies in the level of analysis, the objects taken as topics of study, and the type of phenomenological reduction that is employed for the purposes of analysis. Ultimately, the two projects should be seen as complementary, with the structures of the latter dependent on the structures of the former. That is, valid phenomenological descriptions of the formal structures of the Life-world should be wholly consistent with the descriptions of the formal structures of intentional consciousness. It is from the latter that the former derives its validity and truth value (Sokolowski:2000).\nThe phenomenological tie-in with the sociology of knowledge stems from two key historical sources for Mannheim's analysis: \nIt is also noteworthy that Husserl's analysis of the formal structures of consciousness, and Sch\u00fctz's analysis of the formal structures of the Life-world are specifically intended to establish the foundations in consciousness for the understanding and interpretation of a social world that is subject to cultural and historical change. The phenomenological position is that although the facticity of the social world may be culturally and historically relative, the formal structures of consciousness, and the processes by which we come to know and understand this facticity are not. That is, the understanding of any actual social world is unavoidably dependent on understanding the structures and processes of consciousness that found, and constitute, any possible social world.\nAlternatively, if the facticity of the social world \"and\" the structures of consciousness prove to be culturally and historically relative, then we are at an impasse in regard to any meaningful scientific understanding of the social world that is not subjective (as opposed to being objective and grounded in nature [positivism], or inter-subjective and grounded in the structures of consciousness [phenomenology]), and relative to the cultural and idealization formations of particular concrete individuals living in a particular socio-historical group.\nMichel Foucault.\nThe work of Michel Foucault made a particularly important contemporary contribution to the sociology of knowledge. \"Madness and Civilization\" (1961) postulated that conceptions of madness and what was considered \"reason\" or \"knowledge\" were themselves subject to major culture bias, in this respect mirroring similar criticisms by Thomas Szasz (1920-2012), at the time the foremost critic of psychiatry and subsequently an eminent psychiatrist. Foucault and Szasz agreed that sociological processes played a major role in defining \"madness\" as an \"illness\" and in prescribing \"cures\". In \"The Birth of the Clinic: An Archeology of Medical Perception\" (1963), Foucault extended his critique to institutional clinical medicine, arguing for the central conceptual metaphor of \"The Gaze\", which had implications for medical education, prison design, and the carceral state as understood today. Concepts of criminal justice and its intersection with medicine were better developed in this work than in the contributions of Szasz and others, who confined their critique to current psychiatric practice. Foucault's \"The Order of Things\" (1966) and \"The Archeology of Knowledge\" (1969) introduced abstract notions of mathesis and taxonomia to explain the subjective 'ordering' of the human sciences. These, he claimed, had transformed 17th and 18th-century studies of \"general grammar\" into modern \"linguistics\", \"natural history\" into modern \"biology\", and \"analysis of wealth\" into modern \"economics\"\u2014though not, claimed Foucault, without loss of meaning. Foucault believed that the 19th century transformed what knowledge was.\nFoucault stated that \"Man did not exist\" before the 18th century. Foucault regarded notions of humanity and of humanism as inventions of modernity. Accordingly, a cognitive bias had been introduced unwittingly into science, by over-trusting the individual doctor or scientist's ability to see and state things objectively. Foucault roots this argument in the rediscovery of Kant, though his thought is significantly influenced by Nietzsche \u2013 that philosopher declaring the \"death of God\" in the 19th century, and the anti-humanists proposing the \"death of Man\" in the 20th.\nIn \"Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison\" (1975), Foucault concentrates on the correlation between knowledge and power. According to him, knowledge is a form of power and can conversely be used against individuals as a form of power. As a result, knowledge is socially constructed. He argues that knowledge forms discourses, which, in turn, form the dominant ideological ways of thinking that govern human lives. For him, social control is maintained in 'the disciplinary society' through codes of control over sexuality and the ideas/knowledge perpetuated through social institutions. In other words, discourses and ideologies subject us to authority and turn people into 'subjected beings', who are afraid of being punished if they sway from social norms. Foucault believes that institutions overtly regulate and control our lives. Institutions such as schools reinforce the dominant ideological forms of thinking in the populace and force us into becoming obedient and docile beings. Hence, the dominant ideology that serves the interests of the ruling class, all the while appearing as 'neutral', needs to be questioned and must not go unchallenged.\nKnowledge ecology.\nKnowledge ecology is a concept originating from knowledge management that aims at \"bridging the gap between the static data repositories of knowledge management and the dynamic, adaptive behavior of natural systems\", in particular relying on the concepts of interaction and emergence.\nKnowledge ecology, and its related concept information ecology has been elaborated by different academics and practitioners, such as Thomas H. Davenport, Bonnie Nardi, or Swidler.\nNew Sociology of Knowledge.\nThe New Sociology of Knowledge (a postmodern approach considering knowledge as culture by drawing upon Marxist, French structuralist, and American pragmatist traditions) introduces concepts that dictate how knowledge is socialized in the modern era by new kinds of social organizations and structures.\nRobert K. Merton.\nAmerican sociologist Robert K. Merton (1910\u20132003) dedicates a section of \"Social Theory and Social Structure\" (1949; revised and expanded, 1957 and 1968) to the study of the sociology of knowledge in Part III, titled \"The Sociology of Knowledge and Mass Communications\". For the news in this prospect see Guglielmo Rinzivillo, \"Robert King Merton\" Utet, Turin, 2019.\nLegitimation Code Theory.\nLegitimation Code Theory (LCT) emerged as a framework for the study of knowledge and education and is now being used to analyse a growing range of social and cultural practices across increasingly different institutional and national contexts, both within and beyond education. The approach primarily builds on the work of Basil Bernstein (1924-2000) and of Pierre Bourdieu (1930-2002). It also integrates insights from sociology (including Durkheim, Marx, Weber and Foucault), systemic functional linguistics, philosophy (such as Karl Popper and critical realism), early cultural studies, anthropology (especially Mary Douglas and Ernest Gellner), and other approaches.\nSouthern Theory.\nSouthern theory is an approach to the sociology of knowledge that looks at the global production of sociological knowledge and the dominance of the global north. It was first developed by Australian sociologist Raewyn Connell in her book \"Southern Theory\", and applied with colleagues\nat the University of Sydney and elsewhere to a number of contexts. Southern theory offers a decolonizing perspective within the sociology of knowledge that seeks to emphasize perspectives from the global south to counter bias towards the perspectives of theorists and social scientists from the global north.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSociologists of knowledge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59158", "revid": "4319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59158", "title": "Commercial at", "text": ""}
{"id": "59159", "revid": "76027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59159", "title": "Judaeo-Christian tradition", "text": ""}
{"id": "59160", "revid": "47120006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59160", "title": "Confirmation bias", "text": "Bias confirming existing attitudes\nConfirmation bias (also confirmatory bias, myside bias, or congeniality bias) is the tendency to search for, interpret, favor and recall information in a way that confirms or supports one's prior beliefs or values. People display this bias when they select information that supports their views, ignoring contrary information or when they interpret ambiguous evidence as supporting their existing attitudes. The effect is strongest for desired outcomes, emotionally charged issues and deeply entrenched beliefs.\nBiased search for information, biased interpretation of this information and biased memory recall have been invoked to explain four specific effects:\nA series of psychological experiments in the 1960s suggested that people are biased toward confirming their existing beliefs. Later work re-interpreted these results as a tendency to test ideas in a one-sided way, focusing on one possibility and ignoring alternatives. Explanations for the observed biases include wishful thinking and the limited human capacity to process information. Another proposal is that people show confirmation bias because they are pragmatically assessing the costs of being wrong rather than investigating in a neutral, scientific way.\nFlawed decisions due to confirmation bias have been found in a wide range of political, organizational, financial and scientific contexts. These biases contribute to overconfidence in personal beliefs and can maintain or strengthen beliefs in the face of contrary evidence. For example, confirmation bias produces systematic errors in scientific research based on inductive reasoning (the gradual accumulation of supportive evidence). Similarly, a police detective may identify a suspect early in an investigation, but then may only seek confirming rather than disconfirming evidence. A medical practitioner may prematurely focus on a particular disorder early in a diagnostic session, and then seek only confirming evidence. In social media, confirmation bias is amplified by the use of filter bubbles and \"algorithmic editing\", which display to individuals only information they are likely to agree with, while excluding opposing views.\nDefinition and context.\nConfirmation bias, previously used as a \"catch-all phrase\", was refined by English psychologist Peter Wason, as \"a preference for information that is consistent with a hypothesis rather than information which opposes it.\"\nConfirmation biases are effects in information processing. They differ from what is sometimes called the \"behavioral confirmation effect\", commonly known as \"self-fulfilling prophecy\", in which a person's expectations influence their own behavior, bringing about the expected result.\nSome psychologists restrict the term \"confirmation bias\" to selective collection of evidence that supports what one already believes while ignoring or rejecting evidence that supports a different conclusion. Others apply the term more broadly to the tendency to preserve one's existing beliefs when searching for evidence, interpreting it, or recalling it from memory. Confirmation bias is a result of automatic, unintentional strategies rather than deliberate deception.\nTypes.\nBiased search for information.\nExperiments have found repeatedly that people tend to test hypotheses in a one-sided way, by searching for evidence consistent with their current hypothesis. Rather than searching through all the relevant evidence, they phrase questions to receive an affirmative answer that supports their theory. They look for the consequences that they would expect if their hypothesis were true, rather than what would happen if it were false. For example, someone using yes/no questions to find a number they suspect to be the number 3 might ask, \"Is it an odd number?\" People prefer this type of question, called a \"positive test\", even when a negative test such as \"Is it an even number?\" would yield exactly the same information. However, this does not mean that people seek tests that guarantee a positive answer. In studies where subjects could select either such pseudo-tests or genuinely diagnostic ones, they favored the genuinely diagnostic.\nThe preference for positive tests in itself is not a bias, since positive tests can be highly informative. However, in combination with other effects, this strategy can confirm existing beliefs or assumptions, independently of whether they are true. In real-world situations, evidence is often complex and mixed. For example, various contradictory ideas about someone could each be supported by concentrating on one aspect of his or her behavior. Thus any search for evidence in favor of a hypothesis is likely to succeed. One illustration of this is the way the phrasing of a question can significantly change the answer. For example, people who are asked, \"Are you happy with your social life?\" report greater satisfaction than those asked, \"Are you \"un\"happy with your social life?\"\nEven a small change in a question's wording can affect how people search through available information, and hence the conclusions they reach. This was shown using a fictional child custody case. Participants read that Parent A was moderately suitable to be the guardian in multiple ways. Parent B had a mix of salient positive and negative qualities: a close relationship with the child but a job that would take them away for long periods of time. When asked, \"Which parent should have custody of the child?\" the majority of participants chose Parent B, looking mainly for positive attributes. However, when asked, \"Which parent should be denied custody of the child?\" they looked for negative attributes and the majority answered that Parent B should be denied custody, implying that Parent A should have custody.\nSimilar studies have demonstrated how people engage in a biased search for information, but also that this phenomenon may be limited by a preference for genuine diagnostic tests. In an initial experiment, participants rated another person on the introversion\u2013extroversion personality dimension on the basis of an interview. They chose the interview questions from a given list. When the interviewee was introduced as an introvert, the participants chose questions that presumed introversion, such as, \"What do you find unpleasant about noisy parties?\" When the interviewee was described as extroverted, almost all the questions presumed extroversion, such as, \"What would you do to liven up a dull party?\" These loaded questions gave the interviewees little or no opportunity to falsify the hypothesis about them. A later version of the experiment gave the participants less presumptive questions to choose from, such as, \"Do you shy away from social interactions?\" Participants preferred to ask these more diagnostic questions, showing only a weak bias towards positive tests. This pattern, of a main preference for diagnostic tests and a weaker preference for positive tests, has been replicated in other studies.\nPersonality traits influence and interact with biased search processes. Individuals vary in their abilities to defend their attitudes from external attacks in relation to selective exposure. Selective exposure occurs when individuals search for information that is consistent, rather than inconsistent, with their personal beliefs. An experiment examined the extent to which individuals could refute arguments that contradicted their personal beliefs. People with high confidence levels more readily seek out contradictory information to their personal position to form an argument. This can take the form of an \"oppositional news consumption\", where individuals seek opposing partisan news in order to counterargue. Individuals with low confidence levels do not seek out contradictory information and prefer information that supports their personal position. People generate and evaluate evidence in arguments that are biased towards their own beliefs and opinions. Heightened confidence levels decrease preference for information that supports individuals' personal beliefs.\nAnother experiment gave participants a complex rule-discovery task that involved moving objects simulated by a computer. Objects on the computer screen followed specific laws, which the participants had to figure out. So, participants could \"fire\" objects across the screen to test their hypotheses. Despite making many attempts over a ten-hour session, none of the participants figured out the rules of the system. They typically attempted to confirm rather than falsify their hypotheses, and were reluctant to consider alternatives. Even after seeing objective evidence that refuted their working hypotheses, they frequently continued doing the same tests. Some of the participants were taught proper hypothesis-testing, but these instructions had almost no effect.\nBiased interpretation of information.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSmart people believe weird things because they are skilled at defending beliefs they arrived at for non-smart reasons.\n\u2014Michael Shermer \nConfirmation biases are not limited to the collection of evidence. Even if two individuals have the same information, the way they interpret it can be biased.\nA team at Stanford University conducted an experiment involving participants who felt strongly about capital punishment, with half in favor and half against it. Each participant read descriptions of two studies: a comparison of U.S. states with and without the death penalty, and a comparison of murder rates in a state before and after the introduction of the death penalty. After reading a quick description of each study, the participants were asked whether their opinions had changed. Then, they read a more detailed account of each study's procedure and had to rate whether the research was well-conducted and convincing. In fact, the studies were fictional. Half the participants were told that one kind of study supported the deterrent effect and the other undermined it, while for other participants the conclusions were swapped.\nThe participants, whether supporters or opponents, reported shifting their attitudes slightly in the direction of the first study they read. Once they read the more detailed descriptions of the two studies, they almost all returned to their original belief regardless of the evidence provided, pointing to details that supported their viewpoint and disregarding anything contrary. Participants described studies supporting their pre-existing view as superior to those that contradicted it, in detailed and specific ways. Writing about a study that seemed to undermine the deterrence effect, a death penalty proponent wrote, \"The research didn't cover a long enough period of time,\" while an opponent's comment on the same study said, \"No strong evidence to contradict the researchers has been presented.\" The results illustrated that people set higher standards of evidence for hypotheses that go against their current expectations. This effect, known as \"disconfirmation bias\", has been supported by other experiments.\nAnother study of biased interpretation occurred during the 2004 U.S. presidential election and involved participants who reported having strong feelings about the candidates. They were shown apparently contradictory pairs of statements, either from Republican candidate George W. Bush, Democratic candidate John Kerry or a politically neutral public figure. They were also given further statements that made the apparent contradiction seem reasonable. From these three pieces of information, they had to decide whether each individual's statements were inconsistent. There were strong differences in these evaluations, with participants much more likely to interpret statements from the candidate they opposed as contradictory.\nIn this experiment, the participants made their judgments while in a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner which monitored their brain activity. As participants evaluated contradictory statements by their favored candidate, emotional centers of their brains were aroused. This did not happen with the statements by the other figures. The experimenters inferred that the different responses to the statements were not due to passive reasoning errors. Instead, the participants were actively reducing the cognitive dissonance induced by reading about their favored candidate's irrational or hypocritical behavior.\nBiases in belief interpretation are persistent, regardless of intelligence level. Participants in an experiment took the SAT test (a college admissions test used in the United States) to assess their intelligence levels. They then read information regarding safety concerns for vehicles, and the experimenters manipulated the national origin of the car. American participants provided their opinion if the car should be banned on a six-point scale, where one indicated \"definitely yes\" and six indicated \"definitely no\". Participants firstly evaluated if they would allow a dangerous German car on American streets and a dangerous American car on German streets. Participants believed that the dangerous German car on American streets should be banned more quickly than the dangerous American car on German streets. There was no difference among intelligence levels at the rate participants would ban a car.\nBiased interpretation is not restricted to emotionally significant topics. In another experiment, participants were told a story about a theft. They had to rate the evidential importance of statements arguing either for or against a particular character being responsible. When they hypothesized that character's guilt, they rated statements supporting that hypothesis as more important than conflicting statements.\nBiased recall of information.\nPeople may remember evidence selectively to reinforce their expectations, even if they gather and interpret evidence in a neutral manner. This effect is called \"selective recall\", \"confirmatory memory\", or \"access-biased memory\". Psychological theories differ in their predictions about selective recall. Schema theory predicts that information matching prior expectations will be more easily stored and recalled than information that does not match. Some alternative approaches say that surprising information stands out and so is memorable. Predictions from both these theories have been confirmed in different experimental contexts, with no theory winning outright.\nIn one study, participants read a profile of a woman which described a mix of introverted and extroverted behaviors. They later had to recall examples of her introversion and extroversion. One group was told this was to assess the woman for a job as a librarian, while a second group were told it was for a job in real estate sales. There was a significant difference between what these two groups recalled, with the \"librarian\" group recalling more examples of introversion and the \"sales\" groups recalling more extroverted behavior. A selective memory effect has also been shown in experiments that manipulate the desirability of personality types. In one of these, a group of participants were shown evidence that extroverted people are more successful than introverts. Another group were told the opposite. In a subsequent, apparently unrelated study, participants were asked to recall events from their lives in which they had been either introverted or extroverted. Each group of participants provided more memories connecting themselves with the more desirable personality type, and recalled those memories more quickly.\nChanges in emotional states can also influence memory recall. Participants rated how they felt when they had first learned that O. J. Simpson had been acquitted of murder charges. They described their emotional reactions and confidence regarding the verdict one week, two months, and one year after the trial. Results indicated that participants' assessments for Simpson's guilt changed over time. The more that participants' opinion of the verdict had changed, the less stable were the participant's memories regarding their initial emotional reactions. When participants recalled their initial emotional reactions two months and a year later, past appraisals closely resembled current appraisals of emotion. People demonstrate sizable myside bias when discussing their opinions on controversial topics. Memory recall and construction of experiences undergo revision in relation to corresponding emotional states.\nMyside bias has been shown to influence the accuracy of memory recall. In an experiment, widows and widowers rated the intensity of their experienced grief six months and five years after the deaths of their spouses. Participants noted a higher experience of grief at six months rather than at five years. Yet, when the participants were asked after five years how they had felt six months after the death of their significant other, the intensity of grief participants recalled was highly correlated with their current level of grief. Individuals appear to utilize their current emotional states to analyze how they must have felt when experiencing past events. Emotional memories are reconstructed by current emotional states.\nOne study showed how selective memory can maintain belief in extrasensory perception (ESP). Believers and disbelievers were each shown descriptions of ESP experiments. Half of each group were told that the experimental results supported the existence of ESP, while the others were told they did not. In a subsequent test, participants recalled the material accurately, apart from believers who had read the non-supportive evidence. This group remembered significantly less information and some of them incorrectly remembered the results as supporting ESP.\nIndividual differences.\nMyside bias was once believed to be correlated with intelligence; however, studies have shown that myside bias can be more influenced by ability to rationally think as opposed to level of intelligence. Myside bias can cause an inability to effectively and logically evaluate the opposite side of an argument. Studies have stated that myside bias is an absence of \"active open-mindedness\", meaning the active search for why an initial idea may be wrong. Typically, myside bias is operationalized in empirical studies as the quantity of evidence used in support of their side in comparison to the opposite side.\nA study has found individual differences in myside bias. This study investigates individual differences that are acquired through learning in a cultural context and are mutable. The researcher found important individual difference in argumentation. Studies have suggested that individual differences such as deductive reasoning ability, ability to overcome belief bias, epistemological understanding, and thinking disposition are significant predictors of the reasoning and generating arguments, counterarguments, and rebuttals.\nA study by Christopher Wolfe and Anne Britt also investigated how participants' views of \"what makes a good argument?\" can be a source of myside bias that influences the way a person formulates their own arguments. The study investigated individual differences of argumentation schema and asked participants to write essays. The participants were randomly assigned to write essays either for or against their preferred side of an argument and were given research instructions that took either a balanced or an unrestricted approach. The balanced-research instructions directed participants to create a \"balanced\" argument, i.e., that included both pros and cons; the unrestricted-research instructions included nothing on how to create the argument.\nOverall, the results revealed that the balanced-research instructions significantly increased the incidence of opposing information in arguments. These data also reveal that personal belief is not a \"source\" of myside bias; however, that those participants, who believe that a good argument is one that is based on facts, are more likely to exhibit myside bias than other participants. This evidence is consistent with the claims proposed in Baron's article\u2014that people's opinions about what makes good thinking can influence how arguments are generated.\nDiscovery.\nInformal observations.\nBefore psychological research on confirmation bias, the phenomenon had been observed throughout history. Beginning with the Greek historian Thucydides (c.\u2009460\u00a0BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009395\u00a0BC), who wrote of misguided reason in \"The Peloponnesian War\"; \"...\u00a0for it is a habit of mankind to entrust to careless hope what they long for, and to use sovereign reason to thrust aside what they do not fancy\". Italian poet Dante Alighieri (1265\u20131321) noted it in the \"Divine Comedy\", in which St. Thomas Aquinas cautions Dante upon meeting in Paradise, \"opinion\u2014hasty\u2014often can incline to the wrong side, and then affection for one's own opinion binds, confines the mind\". Ibn Khaldun noticed the same effect in his \"Muqaddimah\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Untruth naturally afflicts historical information. There are various reasons that make this unavoidable. One of them is partisanship for opinions and schools. ... if the soul is infected with partisanship for a particular opinion or sect, it accepts without a moment's hesitation the information that is agreeable to it. Prejudice and partisanship obscure the critical faculty and preclude critical investigation. The result is that falsehoods are accepted and transmitted. In the \"Novum Organum\", English philosopher and scientist Francis Bacon (1561\u20131626) noted that biased assessment of evidence drove \"all superstitions, whether in astrology, dreams, omens, divine judgments or the like\". He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The human understanding when it has once adopted an opinion\u00a0... draws all things else to support and agree with it. And though there be a greater number and weight of instances to be found on the other side, yet these it either neglects or despises, or else by some distinction sets aside or rejects[.]\nIn the second volume of his \"The World as Will and Representation\" (1844), German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer observed that \"An adopted hypothesis gives us lynx-eyes for everything that confirms it and makes us blind to everything that contradicts it.\"\nIn his essay (1897) \"What Is Art?\", Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I know that most men\u2014not only those considered clever, but even those who are very clever, and capable of understanding most difficult scientific, mathematical, or philosophic problems\u2014can very seldom discern even the simplest and most obvious truth if it be such as to oblige them to admit the falsity of conclusions they have formed, perhaps with much difficulty\u2014conclusions of which they are proud, which they have taught to others, and on which they have built their lives. In his essay (1894) \"The Kingdom of God Is Within You\", Tolstoy had earlier written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The most difficult subjects can be explained to the most slow-witted man if he has not formed any idea of them already; but the simplest thing cannot be made clear to the most intelligent man if he is firmly persuaded that he knows already, without a shadow of doubt, what is laid before him.\nHypothesis-testing (falsification) explanation (Wason).\nIn Peter Wason's initial experiment published in 1960 (which does not mention the term \"confirmation bias\"), he repeatedly challenged participants to identify a rule applying to triples of numbers. They were told that (2,4,6) fits the rule. They generated triples, and the experimenter told them whether each triple conformed to the rule.\nThe actual rule was simply \"any ascending sequence\", but participants had great difficulty in finding it, often announcing rules that were far more specific, such as \"the middle number is the average of the first and last\". The participants seemed to test only positive examples\u2014triples that obeyed their hypothesized rule. For example, if they thought the rule was, \"Each number is two greater than its predecessor,\" they would offer a triple that fitted (confirmed) this rule, such as (11,13,15) rather than a triple that violated (falsified) it, such as (11,12,19).\nWason interpreted his results as showing a preference for confirmation over falsification, hence he coined the term \"confirmation bias\". Wason also used confirmation bias to explain the results of his selection task experiment. Participants repeatedly performed badly on various forms of this test, in most cases ignoring information that could potentially refute (falsify) the specified rule.\nHypothesis testing (positive test strategy) explanation (Klayman and Ha).\nKlayman and Ha's 1987 paper argues that the Wason experiments do not actually demonstrate a bias towards confirmation, but instead a tendency to make tests consistent with the working hypothesis. They called this the \"positive test strategy\". This strategy is an example of a heuristic: a reasoning shortcut that is imperfect but easy to compute. Klayman and Ha used Bayesian probability and information theory as their standard of hypothesis-testing, rather than the falsificationism used by Wason. According to these ideas, each answer to a question yields a different amount of information, which depends on the person's prior beliefs. Thus a scientific test of a hypothesis is one that is expected to produce the most information. Since the information content depends on initial probabilities, a positive test can either be highly informative or uninformative. Klayman and Ha argued that when people think about realistic problems, they are looking for a specific answer with a small initial probability. In this case, positive tests are usually more informative than negative tests. However, in Wason's rule discovery task the answer\u2014three numbers in ascending order\u2014is very broad, so positive tests are unlikely to yield informative answers. Klayman and Ha supported their analysis by citing an experiment that used the labels \"DAX\" and \"MED\" in place of \"fits the rule\" and \"doesn't fit the rule\". This avoided implying that the aim was to find a low-probability rule. Participants had much more success with this version of the experiment.\nIn light of this and other critiques, the focus of research moved away from confirmation versus falsification of an hypothesis, to examining whether people test hypotheses in an informative way, or an uninformative but positive way. The search for \"true\" confirmation bias led psychologists to look at a wider range of effects in how people process information.\nInformation processing explanations.\nThere are currently three main information processing explanations of confirmation bias, plus a recent addition.\nCognitive versus motivational.\nAccording to Robert MacCoun, most biased evidence processing occurs through a combination of \"cold\" (cognitive) and \"hot\" (motivated) mechanisms.\nCognitive explanations for confirmation bias are based on limitations in people's ability to handle complex tasks, and the shortcuts, called \"heuristics\", that they use. For example, people may judge the reliability of evidence by using the \"availability heuristic\" that is, how readily a particular idea comes to mind. It is also possible that people can only focus on one thought at a time, so find it difficult to test alternative hypotheses in parallel. Another heuristic is the positive test strategy identified by Klayman and Ha, in which people test a hypothesis by examining cases where they expect a property or event to occur. This heuristic avoids the difficult or impossible task of working out how diagnostic each possible question will be. However, it is not universally reliable, so people can overlook challenges to their existing beliefs.\nMotivational explanations involve an effect of desire on belief. It is known that people prefer positive thoughts over negative ones in a number of ways: this is called the \"Pollyanna principle\". Applied to arguments or sources of evidence, this could explain why desired conclusions are more likely to be believed true. According to experiments that manipulate the desirability of the conclusion, people demand a high standard of evidence for unpalatable ideas and a low standard for preferred ideas. In other words, they ask, \"Can I believe this?\" for some suggestions and, \"Must I believe this?\" for others. Although consistency is a desirable feature of attitudes, an excessive drive for consistency is another potential source of bias because it may prevent people from neutrally evaluating new, surprising information. Social psychologist Ziva Kunda combines the cognitive and motivational theories, arguing that motivation creates the bias, but cognitive factors determine the size of the effect.\nCost-benefit.\nExplanations in terms of cost-benefit analysis assume that people do not just test hypotheses in a disinterested way, but assess the costs of different errors. Using ideas from evolutionary psychology, James Friedrich suggests that people do not primarily aim at truth in testing hypotheses, but try to avoid the most costly errors. For example, employers might ask one-sided questions in job interviews because they are focused on weeding out unsuitable candidates. Yaacov Trope and Akiva Liberman's refinement of this theory assumes that people compare the two different kinds of error: accepting a false hypothesis or rejecting a true hypothesis. For instance, someone who underestimates a friend's honesty might treat him or her suspiciously and so undermine the friendship. Overestimating the friend's honesty may also be costly, but less so. In this case, it would be rational to seek, evaluate or remember evidence of their honesty in a biased way. When someone gives an initial impression of being introverted or extroverted, questions that match that impression come across as more empathic. This suggests that when talking to someone who seems to be an introvert, it is a sign of better social skills to ask, \"Do you feel awkward in social situations?\" rather than, \"Do you like noisy parties?\" The connection between confirmation bias and social skills was corroborated by a study of how college students get to know other people. Highly self-monitoring students, who are more sensitive to their environment and to social norms, asked more matching questions when interviewing a high-status staff member than when getting to know fellow students.\nExploratory versus confirmatory.\nPsychologists Jennifer Lerner and Philip Tetlock distinguish two different kinds of thinking process. \"Exploratory thought\" neutrally considers multiple points of view and tries to anticipate all possible objections to a particular position, while \"confirmatory thought\" seeks to justify a specific point of view. Lerner and Tetlock say that when people expect to justify their position to others whose views they already know, they will tend to adopt a similar position to those people, and then use confirmatory thought to bolster their own credibility. However, if the external parties are overly aggressive or critical, people will disengage from thought altogether, and simply assert their personal opinions without justification. Lerner and Tetlock say that people only push themselves to think critically and logically when they know in advance they will need to explain themselves to others who are well-informed, genuinely interested in the truth, and whose views they do not already know. Because those conditions rarely exist, they argue, most people are using confirmatory thought most of the time.\nMake-believe.\nDevelopmental psychologist Eve Whitmore has argued that beliefs and biases involved in confirmation bias have their roots in childhood coping through make-believe, which becomes \"the basis for more complex forms of self-deception and illusion into adulthood.\" The friction brought on by questioning as an adolescent with developing critical thinking can lead to the rationalization of false beliefs, and the habit of such rationalization can become unconscious over the years.\nOptimal information acquisition.\nRecent research in economics has challenged the traditional view of confirmation bias as purely a cognitive flaw. Under conditions where acquiring and processing information is costly, seeking confirmatory evidence can actually be an optimal strategy. Instead of pursuing contrarian or disconfirming evidence, it may be more efficient to focus on sources likely to align with one's existing beliefs, given the constraints on time and resources.\nEconomist Weijie Zhong has developed a model demonstrating that individuals who must make decisions under time pressure, and who face costs for obtaining more information, will often prefer confirmatory signals. According to this model, when individuals believe strongly in a certain hypothesis, they optimally seek information that confirms it, allowing them to build confidence more efficiently. If the expected confirmatory signals are not received, their confidence in the initial hypothesis will gradually decline, leading to belief updating. This approach shows that seeking confirmation is not necessarily biased but may be a rational allocation of limited attention and resources.\nReal-world effects.\nSocial media.\nIn social media, confirmation bias is amplified by the use of filter bubbles and echo chambers (or \"algorithmic editing\"), which displays to individuals only information they are likely to agree with, while excluding opposing views. Some have argued that confirmation bias is the reason why society can never escape from filter bubbles, because individuals are psychologically hardwired to seek information that agrees with their preexisting values and beliefs. Others have further argued that the mixture of the two is degrading democracy\u2014claiming that this \"algorithmic editing\" removes diverse viewpoints and information\u2014and that unless filter bubble algorithms are removed, voters will be unable to make fully informed political decisions.\nThe rise of social media has contributed greatly to the rapid spread of fake news, that is, false and misleading information that is presented as credible news from a seemingly reliable source. Confirmation bias (selecting or reinterpreting evidence to support one's beliefs) is one of three main hurdles cited as to why critical thinking goes astray in these circumstances. The other two are shortcut heuristics (when overwhelmed or short of time, people rely on simple rules such as group consensus or trusting an expert or role model) and social goals (social motivation or peer pressure can interfere with objective analysis of facts at hand).\nIn combating the spread of fake news, social media sites have considered turning toward \"digital nudging\". This can currently be done in two different forms of nudging. This includes nudging of information and nudging of presentation. Nudging of information entails social media sites providing a disclaimer or label questioning or warning users of the validity of the source while nudging of presentation includes exposing users to new information which they may not have sought out but could introduce them to viewpoints that may combat their own confirmation biases.\nScience and scientific research.\nA distinguishing feature of scientific thinking is the search for confirming or supportive evidence (inductive reasoning) as well as falsifying evidence (deductive reasoning).\nMany times in the history of science, scientists have resisted new discoveries by selectively interpreting or ignoring unfavorable data. Several studies have shown that scientists rate studies that report findings consistent with their prior beliefs more favorably than studies reporting findings inconsistent with their previous beliefs.\nHowever, assuming that the research question is relevant, the experimental design adequate and the data are clearly and comprehensively described, the empirical data obtained should be important to the scientific community and should not be viewed prejudicially, regardless of whether they conform to current theoretical predictions. In practice, researchers may misunderstand, misinterpret, or not read at all studies that contradict their preconceptions, or wrongly cite them anyway as if they actually supported their claims.\nFurther, confirmation biases can sustain scientific theories or research programs in the face of inadequate or even contradictory evidence. The discipline of parapsychology is often cited as an example.\nAn experimenter's confirmation bias can potentially affect which data are reported. Data that conflict with the experimenter's expectations may be more readily discarded as unreliable, producing the so-called file drawer effect. To combat this tendency, scientific training teaches ways to prevent bias. For example, experimental design of randomized controlled trials (coupled with their systematic review) aims to minimize sources of bias.\nThe social process of peer review aims to mitigate the effect of individual scientists' biases, even though the peer review process itself may be susceptible to such biases. Confirmation bias may thus be especially harmful to objective evaluations regarding nonconforming results since biased individuals may regard opposing evidence to be weak in principle and give little serious thought to revising their beliefs. Scientific innovators often meet with resistance from the scientific community, and research presenting controversial results frequently receives harsh peer review.\nFinance.\nConfirmation bias can lead investors to be overconfident, ignoring evidence that their strategies will lose money. In studies of political stock markets, investors made more profit when they resisted bias. For example, participants who interpreted a candidate's debate performance in a neutral rather than partisan way were more likely to profit. To combat the effect of confirmation bias, investors can try to adopt a contrary viewpoint \"for the sake of argument\". In one technique, they imagine that their investments have collapsed and ask themselves why this might happen.\nMedicine and health.\nCognitive biases are important variables in clinical decision-making by medical general practitioners (GPs) and medical specialists. Two important ones are confirmation bias and the overlapping availability bias. A GP may make a diagnosis early on during an examination, and then seek confirming evidence rather than falsifying evidence. This cognitive error is partly caused by the availability of evidence about the supposed disorder being diagnosed. For example, the client may have mentioned the disorder, or the GP may have recently read a much-discussed paper about the disorder. The basis of this cognitive shortcut or heuristic (termed anchoring) is that the doctor does not consider multiple possibilities based on evidence, but prematurely latches on (or anchors to) a single cause. In emergency medicine, because of time pressure, there is a high density of decision-making, and shortcuts are frequently applied. The potential failure rate of these cognitive decisions needs to be managed by education about the 30 or more cognitive biases that can occur, so as to set in place proper debiasing strategies. Confirmation bias may also cause doctors to perform unnecessary medical procedures due to pressure from adamant patients.\nMental disorders may be prone to misdiagnosis in being based upon observations and self-reporting rather than objective testing. Confirmation bias may play a role when practitioners stick with an early diagnosis.\nRaymond Nickerson, a psychologist, blames confirmation bias for the ineffective medical procedures that were used for centuries before the arrival of scientific medicine. If a patient recovered, medical authorities counted the treatment as successful, rather than looking for alternative explanations such as that the disease had run its natural course. Biased assimilation is a factor in the modern appeal of alternative medicine, whose proponents are swayed by positive anecdotal evidence but treat scientific evidence hyper-critically.\nCognitive therapy was developed by Aaron T. Beck in the early 1960s and has become a popular approach. According to Beck, biased information processing is a factor in depression. His approach teaches people to treat evidence impartially, rather than selectively reinforcing negative outlooks. Phobias and hypochondria have also been shown to involve confirmation bias for threatening information.\nPolitics, law and policing.\nNickerson argues that reasoning in judicial and political contexts is sometimes subconsciously biased, favoring conclusions that judges, juries or governments have already committed to. Since the evidence in a jury trial can be complex, and jurors often reach decisions about the verdict early on, it is reasonable to expect an attitude polarization effect. The prediction that jurors will become more extreme in their views as they see more evidence has been borne out in experiments with mock trials. Both inquisitorial and adversarial criminal justice systems are affected by confirmation bias.\nConfirmation bias can be a factor in creating or extending conflicts, from emotionally charged debates to wars: by interpreting the evidence in their favor, each opposing party can become overconfident that it is in the stronger position. On the other hand, confirmation bias can result in people ignoring or misinterpreting the signs of an imminent or incipient conflict. For example, psychologists Stuart Sutherland and Thomas Kida have each argued that U.S. Navy Admiral Husband E. Kimmel showed confirmation bias when playing down the first signs of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.\nA two-decade study of political pundits by Philip E. Tetlock found that, on the whole, their predictions were not much better than chance. Tetlock divided experts into \"foxes\" who maintained multiple hypotheses, and \"hedgehogs\" who were more dogmatic. In general, the hedgehogs were much less accurate. Tetlock blamed their failure on confirmation bias, and specifically on their inability to make use of new information that contradicted their existing theories.\nIn police investigations, a detective may identify a suspect early in an investigation, but then sometimes largely seek supporting or confirming evidence, ignoring or downplaying falsifying evidence.\nSelf concept and self esteem.\nSocial psychologists have identified two tendencies in the way people seek or interpret information about themselves. \"Self-verification\" is the drive to reinforce the existing self-image and \"self-enhancement\" is the drive to seek positive feedback. Both are served by confirmation biases. In experiments where people are given feedback that conflicts with their self-image, they are less likely to attend to it or remember it than when given self-verifying feedback. They reduce the impact of such information by interpreting it as unreliable. Similar experiments have found a preference for positive feedback, and the people who give it, over negative feedback.\nMass delusions.\nConfirmation bias can play a key role in the propagation of mass delusions. Witch trials are frequently cited as an example.\nFor another example, in the Seattle windshield pitting epidemic, there seemed to be a \"pitting epidemic\" in which windshields were damaged due to an unknown cause. As news of the apparent wave of damage spread, more and more people checked their windshields, discovered that their windshields too had been damaged, thus confirming belief in the supposed epidemic. In fact, the windshields were previously damaged, but the damage went unnoticed until people checked their windshields as the delusion spread.\nParanormal beliefs.\nOne factor in the appeal of alleged psychic readings is that listeners apply a confirmation bias which fits the psychic's statements to their own lives. By making a large number of ambiguous statements in each sitting, the psychic gives the client more opportunities to find a match. This is one of the techniques of cold reading, with which a psychic can deliver a subjectively impressive reading without any prior information about the client. Investigator James Randi compared the transcript of a reading to the client's report of what the psychic had said, and found that the client showed a strong selective recall of the \"hits\".\nAs a striking illustration of confirmation bias in the real world, Nickerson mentions numerological pyramidology: the practice of finding meaning in the proportions of the Egyptian pyramids. There are many different length measurements that can be made of, for example, the Great Pyramid of Giza and many ways to combine or manipulate them. Hence it is almost inevitable that people who look at these numbers selectively will find superficially impressive correspondences, for example with the dimensions of the Earth.\nRecruitment and selection.\nUnconscious cognitive bias (including confirmation bias) in job recruitment can affect hiring decisions and can potentially prohibit a diverse and inclusive workplace. There are a variety of unconscious biases that can affect recruitment decisions, and confirmation bias is one of the major ones, especially during the interview stage. The interviewer may select a candidate that confirms their own beliefs, even though other candidates are equally or better qualified.\nAssociated effects and outcomes.\nPolarization of opinion.\nWhen people with opposing views interpret new information in a biased way, their views can move even further apart. This is called \"attitude polarization\". The effect was demonstrated by an experiment that involved drawing a series of red and black balls from one of two concealed \"bingo baskets\". Participants knew that one basket contained 60 percent black and 40 percent red balls; the other, 40 percent black and 60 percent red. The experimenters looked at what happened when balls of alternating color were drawn in turn, a sequence that does not favor either basket. After each ball was drawn, participants in one group were asked to state out loud their judgments of the probability that the balls were being drawn from one or the other basket. These participants tended to grow more confident with each successive draw\u2014whether they initially thought the basket with 60 percent black balls or the one with 60 percent red balls was the more likely source, their estimate of the probability increased. Another group of participants were asked to state probability estimates only at the end of a sequence of drawn balls, rather than after each ball. They did not show the polarization effect, suggesting that it does not necessarily occur when people simply hold opposing positions, but rather when they openly commit to them.\nA less abstract study was the Stanford biased interpretation experiment, in which participants with strong opinions about the death penalty read about mixed experimental evidence. Twenty-three percent of the participants reported that their views had become more extreme, and this self-reported shift correlated strongly with their initial attitudes. In later experiments, participants also reported their opinions becoming more extreme in response to ambiguous information. However, comparisons of their attitudes before and after the new evidence showed no significant change, suggesting that the self-reported changes might not be real. Based on these experiments, Deanna Kuhn and Joseph Lao concluded that polarization is a real phenomenon but far from inevitable, only happening in a small minority of cases, and it was prompted not only by considering mixed evidence, but by merely thinking about the topic.\nCharles Taber and Milton Lodge argued that the Stanford team's result had been hard to replicate because the arguments used in later experiments were too abstract or confusing to evoke an emotional response. The Taber and Lodge study used the emotionally charged topics of gun control and affirmative action. They measured the attitudes of their participants towards these issues before and after reading arguments on each side of the debate. Two groups of participants showed attitude polarization: those with strong prior opinions and those who were politically knowledgeable. In part of this study, participants chose which information sources to read, from a list prepared by the experimenters. For example, they could read arguments on gun control from the National Rifle Association of America and the Brady Anti-Handgun Coalition. Even when instructed to be even-handed, participants were more likely to read arguments that supported their existing attitudes than arguments that did not. This biased search for information correlated well with the polarization effect.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;backfire effect is a name for the finding that given evidence against their beliefs, people can reject the evidence and believe even more strongly. The phrase was coined by Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reifler in 2010. However, subsequent research has since failed to replicate findings supporting the backfire effect. One study conducted out of the Ohio State University and George Washington University studied 10,100 participants with 52 different issues expected to trigger a backfire effect. While the findings did conclude that individuals are reluctant to embrace facts that contradict their already held ideology, no cases of backfire were detected. The backfire effect has since been noted to be a rare phenomenon rather than a common occurrence (compare the boomerang effect).\nPersistence of discredited beliefs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBeliefs can survive potent logical or empirical challenges. They can survive and even be bolstered by evidence that most uncommitted observers would agree logically demands some weakening of such beliefs. They can even survive the total destruction of their original evidential bases.\n\u2014Lee Ross and Craig Anderson\nConfirmation biases provide one plausible explanation for the persistence of beliefs when the initial evidence for them is removed or when they have been sharply contradicted. This belief perseverance effect has been first demonstrated experimentally by Festinger, Riecken, and Schachter. These psychologists spent time with a cult whose members were convinced that the world would end on 21 December 1954. After the prediction failed, most believers still clung to their faith. Their book describing this research is aptly named \"When Prophecy Fails\".\nThe term \"belief perseverance\", however, was coined in a series of experiments using what is called the \"debriefing paradigm\": participants read fake evidence for a hypothesis, their attitude change is measured, then the fakery is exposed in detail. Their attitudes are then measured once more to see if their belief returns to its previous level.\nA common finding is that at least some of the initial belief remains even after a full debriefing. In one experiment, participants had to distinguish between real and fake suicide notes. The feedback was random: some were told they had done well while others were told they had performed badly. Even after being fully debriefed, participants were still influenced by the feedback. They still thought they were better or worse than average at that kind of task, depending on what they had initially been told.\nIn another study, participants read job performance ratings of two firefighters, along with their responses to a risk aversion test. This fictional data was arranged to show either a negative or positive association: some participants were told that a risk-taking firefighter did better, while others were told they did less well than a risk-averse colleague. Even if these two case studies were true, they would have been scientifically poor evidence for a conclusion about firefighters in general. However, the participants found them subjectively persuasive. When the case studies were shown to be fictional, participants' belief in a link diminished, but around half of the original effect remained. Follow-up interviews established that the participants had understood the debriefing and taken it seriously. Participants seemed to trust the debriefing, but regarded the discredited information as irrelevant to their personal belief.\nThe continued influence effect is the tendency for misinformation to continue to influence memory and reasoning about an event, despite the misinformation having been retracted or corrected. This occurs even when the individual believes the correction.\nPreference for early information.\nExperiments have shown that information is weighted more strongly when it appears early in a series, even when the order is unimportant. For example, people form a more positive impression of someone described as \"intelligent, industrious, impulsive, critical, stubborn, envious\" than when they are given the same words in reverse order. This \"irrational primacy effect\" is independent of the primacy effect in memory in which the earlier items in a series leave a stronger memory trace. Biased interpretation offers an explanation for this effect: seeing the initial evidence, people form a working hypothesis that affects how they interpret the rest of the information.\nOne demonstration of irrational primacy used colored chips supposedly drawn from two urns. Participants were told the color distributions of the urns, and had to estimate the probability of a chip being drawn from one of them. In fact, the colors appeared in a prearranged order. The first thirty draws favored one urn and the next thirty favored the other. The series as a whole was neutral, so rationally, the two urns were equally likely. However, after sixty draws, participants favored the urn suggested by the initial thirty.\nAnother experiment involved a slide show of a single object, seen as just a blur at first and in slightly better focus with each succeeding slide. After each slide, participants had to state their best guess of what the object was. Participants whose early guesses were wrong persisted with those guesses, even when the picture was sufficiently in focus that the object was readily recognizable to other people.\nIllusory association between events.\nIllusory correlation is the tendency to see non-existent correlations in a set of data. This tendency was first demonstrated in a series of experiments in the late 1960s. In one experiment, participants read a set of psychiatric case studies, including responses to the Rorschach inkblot test. The participants reported that the homosexual men in the set were more likely to report seeing buttocks, anuses or sexually ambiguous figures in the inkblots. In fact the fictional case studies had been constructed so that the homosexual men were no more likely to report this imagery or, in one version of the experiment, were less likely to report it than heterosexual men. In a survey, a group of experienced psychoanalysts reported the same set of illusory associations with homosexuality.\nAnother study recorded the symptoms experienced by arthritic patients, along with weather conditions over a 15-month period. Nearly all the patients reported that their pains were correlated with weather conditions, although the real correlation was zero.\nThis effect is a kind of biased interpretation, in that objectively neutral or unfavorable evidence is interpreted to support existing beliefs. It is also related to biases in hypothesis-testing behavior. In judging whether two events, such as illness and bad weather, are correlated, people rely heavily on the number of \"positive-positive\" cases: in this example, instances of both pain and bad weather. They pay relatively little attention to the other kinds of observation (of no pain or good weather). This parallels the reliance on positive tests in hypothesis testing. It may also reflect selective recall, in that people may have a sense that two events are correlated because it is easier to recall times when they happened together.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59161", "revid": "43331825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59161", "title": "Dagger (mark)", "text": "Typographical mark indicating footnotes\nA dagger, obelisk, or obelus is a typographical mark that usually indicates a footnote if an asterisk has already been used. The symbol is also used to indicate death (of people) or extinction (of species or languages). It is one of the modern descendants of the obelus, a mark used historically by scholars as a critical or highlighting indicator in manuscripts. In older texts, it is called an \"obelisk\".\nA double dagger, or diesis, \u2021 is a variant with two hilts and crossguards that usually marks a third footnote after the asterisk and dagger. The triple dagger \u2e4b is a variant with three crossguards and is used by medievalists to indicate another level of notation.\nHistory.\nThe dagger symbol originated from a variant of the obelus, originally depicted by a plain line \u2212 or a line with one or two dots \u00f7. It represented an iron roasting spit, a dart, or the sharp end of a javelin, symbolizing the skewering or cutting out of dubious matter.\nThe obelus is believed to have been invented by the Homeric scholar Zenodotus as one of a system of editorial symbols. They marked questionable or corrupt words or passages in manuscripts of the Homeric epics. The system was further refined by his student Aristophanes of Byzantium, who first introduced the asterisk and used a symbol resembling a \u22a4 for an obelus; and finally by Aristophanes' student, in turn, Aristarchus, from whom they earned the name of \"Aristarchian symbols\".\nWhile the asterisk (\"asteriscus\") was used for corrective additions, the obelus was used for corrective deletions of invalid reconstructions. It was used when non-attested words are reconstructed for the sake of argument only, implying that the author did not believe such a word or word form had ever existed. Some scholars used the obelus and various other critical symbols, in conjunction with a second symbol known as the \"metobelos\" (\"end of obelus\"), variously represented as two vertically arranged dots, a \u03b3-like symbol, a mallet-like symbol, or a diagonal slash (with or without one or two dots). They indicated the end of a marked passage.\nIt was used much in the same way by later scholars to mark differences between various translations or versions of the Bible and other manuscripts. The early Christian Alexandrian scholar Origen (c.\u2009184\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009253 AD) used it to indicate differences between different versions of the Old Testament in his \"Hexapla\". Epiphanius of Salamis (c. 310\u2013320 \u2013 403) used both a horizontal slash or hook (with or without dots) and an upright and slightly slanting dagger to represent an obelus. St. Jerome (c. 347\u2013420) used a simple horizontal slash for an obelus, but only for passages in the Old Testament. He describes the use of the asterisk and the dagger as: \"an asterisk makes a light shine, the obelisk cuts and pierces\".\nIsidore of Seville (c. 560\u2013636) described the use of the symbol as follows: \"The obelus is appended to words or phrases uselessly repeated, or else where the passage involves a false reading, so that, like the arrow, it lays low the superfluous and makes the errors disappear\u00a0... The obelus accompanied by points is used when we do not know whether a passage should be suppressed or not.\"\nMedieval scribes used the symbols extensively for critical markings of manuscripts. In addition to this, the dagger was also used in notations in early Christianity, to indicate a minor intermediate pause in the chanting of Psalms, equivalent to the quaver rest notation or the trope symbol in Hebrew cantillation. It also indicates a breath mark when reciting, along with the asterisk, and is thus frequently seen beside a comma.\nIn the 16th century, the printer and scholar Robert Estienne (also known as Stephanus in Latin and Stephens in English) used it to mark differences in the words or passages between different printed versions of the Greek New Testament (\"Textus Receptus\").\nDue to the variations as to the different uses of the different forms of the obelus, there is some controversy as to which symbols can actually be considered an obelus. The \u2a2a symbol and its variant, the \u00f7, is sometimes considered to be different from other obeli. The term 'obelus' may have referred strictly only to the horizontal slash and the dagger symbols.\nModern usage.\nThe dagger usually indicates a footnote if an asterisk has already been used. A third footnote employs the double dagger. Additional footnotes are somewhat inconsistent and represented by a variety of symbols, e.g., parallels ( \u2016 ), section sign \u00a7, and the pilcrow \u00b6. Superscript numerals have increasingly been used in modern literature in the place of these symbols because it results in a transparent and consistent order to the notes. Some texts use asterisks and daggers alongside superscripts, using the former for per-page footnotes and the latter for endnotes.\nThe dagger is also used to indicate death, extinction, or obsolescence. The asterisk and the dagger, when placed beside years, indicate year of birth and year of death respectively. This usage is particularly common in German. When placed immediately before or after a person's name, the dagger indicates that the person is deceased. In this usage, it is referred to as the \"death dagger\". Death-related usages include:\nNon-death usages include:\nVisually similar symbols.\nThe dagger should not be confused with the symbols , , or other cross symbols.\nThe double dagger should not be confused with the , or , or in IPA, or .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59163", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59163", "title": "Double dagger (typography)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59164", "revid": "5075409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59164", "title": "Slash (typography)", "text": ""}
{"id": "59166", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59166", "title": "Cassowary", "text": "Genus of flightless birds\nCassowaries (; Biak: \"man suar\" 'bird strong'; ; Papuan: \"kasu weri\" 'horned head') are flightless birds of the genus Casuarius, in the order Casuariiformes. They are classified as ratites, flightless birds without a keel on their sternum bones. Cassowaries are native to the tropical forests of New Guinea (Western New Guinea and Papua New Guinea), the Moluccas (Seram and Aru Islands), and northeastern Australia.\nThree cassowary species are extant. The most common, the southern cassowary, is the third-tallest and second-heaviest living bird, smaller only than the ostrich and emu. The other two species are the northern cassowary and the dwarf cassowary; the northern cassowary is the most recently discovered and the most threatened. A fourth, extinct, species is the pygmy cassowary.\nCassowaries are very wary of humans, but if provoked, they are capable of inflicting serious, even fatal, injuries. They are known to attack both dogs and people. The cassowary has often been labelled \"the world's most dangerous bird\", although in terms of recorded statistics, it pales in comparison to the common ostrich, which kills two to three humans per year in South Africa.\nTaxonomy, systematics, and evolution.\nThe genus \"Casuarius\" was erected by French scientist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in his published in 1760. The type species is the southern cassowary (\"Casuarius casuarius\"). The Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus had introduced the genus \"Casuarius\" in the sixth edition of his published in 1748, but Linnaeus dropped the genus in the important tenth edition of 1758 and put the southern cassowary together with the common ostrich and the greater rhea in the genus \"Struthio\". As the publication date of Linnaeus's sixth edition was before the 1758 starting point of the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature, Brisson, and not Linnaeus, is considered the authority for the genus.\nCassowaries (from cognate of several related languages spoken around the Moluccas and New Guinea) are part of the ratite group, which also includes the emu, rheas, ostriches, and kiwi, as well as the extinct moas and elephant birds. These species are recognised:\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Common name\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:25%;\"|Scientific name and subspecies\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Range\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:29%;\"\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:16%; min-width:112px;\"\n!scope=\"row\"| Southern cassowary or double-wattled cassowary\n!scope=\"row\"|Northern cassowary or single-wattled cassowary \n!scope=\"row\"|Dwarf cassowary or Bennett's cassowary \n!scope=\"row\"|\u2020 Pygmy cassowary or small cassowary \nMost authorities consider the taxonomic classification above to be monotypic, but several subspecies of each have been described, and some of them have even been suggested as separate species, e.g., \"C. (b) papuanus\". The taxonomic name \"C. (b) papuanus\" also may be in need of revision to \"Casuarius (bennetti) westermanni\". Validation of these subspecies has proven difficult due to individual variations, age-related variations, the scarcity of specimens, the stability of specimens (the bright skin of the head and neck\u2014the basis of describing several subspecies\u2014fades in specimens), and the practice of trading live cassowaries for thousands of years, some of which are likely to have escaped or been deliberately introduced to regions away from their origin.\nThe evolutionary history of cassowaries, as of all ratites, is not well known. Genetic evidence suggests that their closest living relatives are emus, and that the dwarf cassowary is more closely related to the Northern Cassowary than either is to the Southern cassowary. A fossil species was reported from Australia, but for reasons of biogeography, this assignment is not certain, and it might belong to the prehistoric \"Emuarius\", which was a genus of cassowary-like primitive emus.\nDescription.\nTypically, all cassowaries are shy birds that are found in the deep forest. They are adept at disappearing long before a human knows they are there. The southern cassowary of the far north Queensland rain forests is not well studied, and the northern and dwarf cassowaries even less so. Females are larger and more brightly coloured than the males. Adult southern cassowaries are tall, although some females may reach , and weigh . However, it is not uncommon to see exceptionally large females topping the scales beyond , with the largest maximum recorded being a southern cassowary at and tall.\nHence, by technicality, all three species of cassowaries are considered as Asia's largest bird since the extinction of the Arabian ostrich. Moreover, not only is the cassowary Asia's largest bird, within New Guinea, the cassowary is the island's second largest terrestrial animal after the introduction of Cervidaes such as the rusa deer, chital, and fallow deer.\nAll cassowaries' feathers consist of a shaft and loose barbules. They do not have rectrices (tail feathers) or a preen gland. Cassowaries have small wings with five or six large remiges. These are reduced to stiff, keratinous quills, resembling porcupine quills, with no barbs. The furcula and coracoid are degenerate, and their palatal bones and sphenoid bones touch each other. These, along with their wedge-shaped body, are thought to be adaptations to ward off vines, thorns, and saw-edged leaves, allowing them to run quickly through the rainforest.\nUnlike the majority of birds, cassowaries lack a tongue. Their beaks are pointed, sharp and robust but not serrated, which allows them to pick up fruit more easily than the short bills of an emu or an ostrich.\nCassowaries have three-toed feet with sharp claws. The inner (first) toe has a dagger-like claw that may be long. This claw is particularly fearsome, since cassowaries sometimes kick humans and other animals with their powerful legs. Cassowaries can run at up to through the dense forest and can jump up to . They are good swimmers, crossing wide rivers and swimming in the sea.\nAll three species have a keratinous, skin-covered casque on their heads that grows with age. The casque's shape and size, up to , is species-dependent. \"C. casuarius\" has the largest and \"C. bennetti\" the smallest (tricorn shape), with \"C. unappendiculatus\" having variations in between. Contrary to earlier findings, the hollow inside of the casque is spanned with fine fibres.\nSeveral functions for the casque have been proposed. One is that they are a secondary sexual characteristic. Other suggested functions include batting through the underbrush, as a weapon in dominance disputes, or pushing aside leaf litter during foraging. The latter three are disputed by biologist Andrew Mack, whose personal observation suggests that the casque amplifies deep sounds. This is related to a discovery that at least the dwarf cassowary and southern cassowary produce very low-frequency sounds, which may aid in communication in dense rainforests. The \"boom\" vocalization that cassowaries produce is the lowest-frequency bird call known and is at the lower limit of human hearing. Recent study suggests that casque acts as a thermal radiator, offloading heat at high temperatures and restricting heat loss at low temperatures.\nThe average lifespan of wild cassowaries is approximately 18\u201320 years, with those held in captivity living up to 40 years.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nCassowaries are solitary birds except during courtship, egg-laying, and sometimes around ample food supplies. Males and females each maintain separate territories that overlap, of a size of approximately 3 square kilometres in one study. While females move among satellite territories of different males, they appear to remain within the same territories for most of their lives, mating with the same, or closely related, males over the course of their lives.\nCourtship and pair-bonding rituals begin with the vibratory sounds broadcast by females. Males approach and run with their necks parallel to the ground while making dramatic movements of their heads, which accentuate the frontal neck region. The female approaches drumming slowly. The male crouches on the ground, and the female either steps on the male's back for a moment before crouching beside him in preparation for copulation, or she may attack. This is often the case with the females pursuing the males in ritualistic chasing behaviours that generally terminate in water. The male cassowary dives into water and submerges himself up to his upper neck and head. The female pursues him into the water, where he eventually drives her to the shallows, where she crouches making ritualistic motions of her head. The two may remain in copulation for extended periods of time. In some cases, another male may approach and run off the first male. He will climb onto her to copulate, as well.\nBoth male and female cassowaries do not tolerate the presence of others of the same sex, but females are more prone to fight than males, which will generally flee when encountering another male. While males and females may also be territorial and confrontational, this decreases during the mating season\nReproduction.\nThe cassowary breeding season starts in May to June. Females lay three to eight large, bright green or pale green-blue eggs in each clutch into a heap of leaf litter prepared by the male. The eggs measure about \u2013 only ostrich and emu eggs are larger.\nThe male incubates those eggs for 50\u201352 days, removing or adding litter to regulate the temperature, then protects the chicks, which stay in the nest for about 9 months. He defends them fiercely against all potential predators, including humans. The young males later go off to find a territory of their own.\nThe female does not care for the eggs or the chicks, but rather moves on within her territory to lay eggs in the nests of several other males. Young cassowaries are brown and have buffy stripes. They are often kept as pets in native villages (in New Guinea), where they are permitted to roam like barnyard fowl until nearing maturity. Caged birds are regularly bereft of their fresh plumes.\nDiet.\nFruit from at least 26 plant families has been documented in the diet of cassowaries. Fruits from the laurel, podocarp, palm, wild grape, nightshade, and myrtle families are important items in the diet. The poisonous cassowary plum takes its name from the bird. The bird avoids the poisons of these fruits due to the presence of their incredibly short gastrointestinal tract, the shortest of all ratites in relation to their size. The cassowary's incredibly short and simple digestive tract leads to a short gut retention time which allow seeds to remain unharmed during the comparatively soft digestion process and allows them to consume fruits that contain toxins such as cyanogens.\nWhere trees are dropping fruit, cassowaries come in and feed, with each bird defending a tree from others for a few days. They move on when the fruit is depleted. Fruit, even items as large as bananas and apples, is swallowed whole. Cassowaries are a keystone species of rain forests because they eat fallen fruit whole and distribute seeds across the jungle floor via excrement.\nAdult and young cassowaries also practice coprophagia. As adult waste often contain half-digested fruit which still has nutritional value, birds will devour each other's as well as their own droppings.\nIn more urbanised areas, especially in Queensland, Australia, 'urbanised' cassowaries have adopted to also feed from picnic blankets, tables and baskets or backyard bird feeders and compost heaps, thereby consuming a wide range of non-natural and non-native foods as well. Cassowaries are also known to eat non-edible items \u2014 in one case, collection of urban cassowary droppings resulted in many unusual items, which apart from the skeletal remains of a honeyeater, researchers also found remains of a child's coloured building blocks, various sized marbles and a very small plastic car that came from a cereal packet. In terms of roadkill, discarded fish was reported; another type of roadkill reported eaten by cassowaries is the bandicoot.\nIn captivity, cassowaries get the majority of their protein source from dog or monkey food. Captive cassowaries consume almost of a protein source (such as dog food) in conjunction with almost of fruit a day.\nRole in seed dispersal and germination.\nCassowaries feed on the fruit of several hundred rainforest species and usually pass viable seeds in large, dense scats. They are known to disperse seeds over distances greater than a kilometre, thus playing an important role in the ecosystem. Germination rates for seeds of the rare Australian rainforest tree \"Ryparosa\" were found to be much higher after passing through a cassowary's gut (92% versus 4%).\nThreats.\nIn its main home of New Guinea, cassowaries are the island's largest and most dominant and formidable bird, as well as being one of the largest terrestrial endemic animals in New Guinea. As such, adult cassowaries have no natural enemies other than humans (and even then, the birds are rarely hunted due to their reputation, speed, wariness and self-defence, with juveniles being preferred over adults for ceremonial purposes - on average, it is considered very fortunate for a human hunter to kill one in every five years). With regards to their relationship with the New Guinea singing dogs \u2014 one of Papua's only obligate terrestrial apex predators, with the other being the crocodile monitor \u2014 adult birds generally ignore them, with some even believing that the dogs take full advantage of the birds' foraging behaviour, as both species share and use the same feeding trail through the forests. It was believed that these dogs follow adult birds to catch small prey attracted to the dropped fruits on the rainforest floor. Nevertheless, there was a report from a native hunter of an exceptionally rare case of a singing dog attacking the dwarf species. The incident ended with the singing dog being disemboweled and ripped open by the bird. In general, however, both animals mutually keep their distance and avoid one another.\nCassowary chicks are vulnerable to large pythons, monitor lizards, New Guinea singing dogs, and Papuan eagles. When threatened, it is known that cassowary chicks emit different vocalisation calls to indicate the specific threat, such as a hawk, before running underneath their father. Adult males aggressively defend their chicks. While adult males usually scare off or kill most predators, a chick will occasionally be separated in the chaos and become a potential target.\nHowever, in the relic populations of north-eastern Australia, the cassowary population faces threats from vehicles, and are in danger of being outcompeted by wild boars, with their eggs being most vulnerable to boar predation. Their chicks also face dangers and predation from domesticated dogs, which has resulted in a widespread decline in the Australian mainland. Because of such frequent inter-species conflicts, hunting dogs are one of the biggest enemies for cassowaries, and it is not unheard of for hunting dogs to accidentally kill cassowary chicks instead of feral pigs, with the dogs in turn being killed by the nearby adult rooster. Outside of threats from invasive species, the birds are also vulnerable to being unintentionally poisoned as well. It is unknown why the cassowary population in Australia is in decline, as the New Guinea population has dealt with introduced wild boars, dogs and feral cats for thousands of years longer with little to no impact on its population, suggesting that either the cassowaries of New Guinea had long adapted to human-introduced species or that the rich biodiversity of New Guinea allowed for additional niche partitioning.\nCassowary meat has been reported to be quite tough. Australian administrative officers stationed in New Guinea were advised that it \"should be cooked with a stone in the pot: when the stone is ready to eat, so is the cassowary\".\nDistribution and habitat.\nCassowaries are native to the humid rainforests of New Guinea, nearby smaller islands, East Nusa Tenggara, the Maluku Islands, and northeastern Australia. They do, however, venture out into palm scrub, grassland, savanna, and swamp forest. The wild population of cassowaries is threatened by deforestation, hunting, and habitat destruction. Human presence and agricultural activities have also contributed to the decline of their population in some areas. To protect this species, various conservation efforts have been carried out, including preserving natural habitat and enforcing regulations against illegal hunting. In Indonesia, cassowaries are predominantly found in the rainforests of Papua, particularly in lowland and montane areas. In addition, cassowaries are known to inhabit protected areas such as Wasur National Park in Merauke and Lorentz National Park, which is the largest national park in Southeast Asia, encompassing a vast range of ecosystems from coastal to alpine environments. These birds play a critical ecological role in seed dispersal, contributing to the regeneration of forests in these protected areas. They can also be easily spotted in some national parks such as Mellwraith Range National Park, Paluma Range National Park, and Jardine National Park in Australia.\nStatus and conservation.\nThe southern cassowary is endangered in Queensland. Kofron and Chapman, upon assessing the decline of this species, found that only 20-25% of the former cassowary habitat remains. Habitat loss and fragmentation is the primary cause of decline. They then studied 140 cases of cassowary mortality, and found that motor-vehicle strikes accounted for 55% of the deaths, and dog attacks produced another 18%. Remaining causes of death included hunting (five cases), entanglement in wire (one case), the removal of cassowaries that attacked humans (four cases), and natural causes (18 cases), including tuberculosis (four cases). The cause for 14 cases was indicated as \"for unknown reasons\".\nHand feeding cassowaries poses a significant threat to their survival because it lures them into suburban areas. There, the birds are more susceptible to encounters with vehicles and dogs. Contact with humans encourages cassowaries to take food from picnic tables. Feral pigs also are a significant threat to their survival. They destroy nests and eggs of cassowaries, but their worst effect is as competitors for food, which may be catastrophic for cassowaries during lean times.\nIn February 2011, Cyclone Yasi destroyed a large area of cassowary habitat, endangering 200 of the birds \u2013 about 10% of the total Australian population.\nThe Mission Beach community in far north Queensland holds an annual Cassowary Festival in September, where funds are raised to map the bird's habitat.\nConcerns have been raised about cassowaries as a potential invasive species on the island of Tasmania. According to the Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment from Hobart, risk assessments on the cassowary as a potential invasive pest states that, while the birds may have trouble establishing a stable population on the island, they might be a destructive element to Tasmania's ecological diversity; the assessment recommends strict import controls. Cassowaries would be the island's largest and most dominant native terrestrial animal and could displace smaller animals in the same ecological niche. Frugivores such as the common brushtail possum, common ringtail possum, eastern pygmy possum and the little pygmy possum could be denied access to fruit, which they depend upon.\nHowever, since Tasmania lacks the same levels of fruit diversity as Queensland and New Guinea, assessments state that the birds might adapt by also eating invertebrates and small vertebrates. This could lead to competition with the island's endemic insectivores, such as the eastern quoll, southern brown bandicoot, and eastern barred bandicoot.\nIn captivity.\nThe cassowary has solitary habits and breeds less frequently in zoos than other ratites such as the ostrich and emu. Unlike other ratites, it lives exclusively in tropical rainforests, making reproducing their habitat essential. Unlike the emu, which will live with other sympatric species, such as kangaroos, in \"mixed Australian fauna\" displays, the cassowary does not cohabit well among its own kind. Individual specimens must even be kept in separate enclosures, due to their solitary and aggressive nature.\nThe double-wattled cassowary (\"C. casuarius\") is the most popular species in captivity, and it is fairly common in European and American zoos, where it is known for its distinctive appearance. As of 2019[ [update]], only Weltvogelpark Walsrode in Germany has all three species of cassowaries in its collection: single-wattled cassowary (\"Casuarius unappendiculatus\") and Bennett's cassowary (\"Casuarius bennetti\"). If subspecies are recognised, Weltvogelpark Walsrode has \"C. b. westermanni\" and \"C. u. rufotinctus\".\nRelationship with humans.\nRole in Papuan cultures and semi-domestication.\nThere is evidence that the cassowary may have been domesticated by humans thousands of years before the chicken. Some New Guinea Highlands societies capture cassowary chicks and raise them as semi-tame poultry, for use in ceremonial gift exchanges and as food. They are the only indigenous Australasian animal known to have been partly domesticated by people prior to European arrival and colonization and by definition, the oldest form of domesticated animal and the largest domesticated bird. The Maring people of Kundagai sacrificed cassowaries (\"C. bennetti\") in certain rituals. The Kalam people considered themselves related to cassowaries, and did not classify them as birds, but as kin. Consequently, they use the Pandanus register of the Kalam language when eating cassowary meat.\nStudies on Pleistocene/early Holocene cassowary remains in Papua suggest that indigenous people at the time preferred to harvest eggs rather than adults. They seem to have regulated their consumption of these birds, possibly even collecting eggs and rearing young birds as one of the earliest forms of domestication.\nUrbanisation of local cassowary population.\nIn extremely urbanised areas where cassowaries used to naturally live such as in Queensland, Australia or in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, the local cassowary population had adapted to its less forested grounds. Increasing urbanisation has increased the likelihood of human-cassowary interaction, a potentially dangerous mix.\nIt was found that cassowaries in these urban environments changed their diets accordingly, with urbanised cassowaries actually consuming an even greater proportion of fruits from exotic plants (~30%) but still incorporating a significant proportion of fruits from native plants in their diet. Likewise, as aforementioned, the high concentration of human activity in the urban ecology also equates to a higher concentration of food diversity and food waste, with these 'urbanised' cassowaries foraging for food scraps, bird feeders and outdoor picnic/food venues without fear from humans or domesticated animals due to the birds' size and reputation.\nThe high concentration of human activity as well as vehicles, mixed with domesticated animals and less forest coverage, had also changed their behaviours. These 'city' cassowaries were shown to exist in a higher state of activity and rested less than individuals inhabiting more intact swathes of rainforest, actively moving between urban gardens and the rainforest. The study give evidence that these birds showed a surprising amount of flexible foraging strategy that has enabled them to persist in rainforest-fragmented landscapes.\nAttacks.\nCassowaries have a reputation for being dangerous to people and domestic animals. During World War\u00a0II, American and Australian troops stationed in New Guinea were warned to steer clear of them. In his 1958 book \"Living Birds of the World\", ornithologist Ernest Thomas Gilliard wrote:\nThe inner or second of the three toes is fitted with a long, straight, murderous nail which can sever an arm or eviscerate an abdomen with ease. There are many records of natives being killed by this bird.\nThis assessment of the danger posed by cassowaries has been repeated in print by authors, including Gregory S. Paul and Jared Diamond. A 2003 historical study of 221 cassowary attacks showed that 150 had been against humans; 75% of these had been from cassowaries that had been fed by people, 71% of the time the bird had chased or charged the victim, and 15% of the time they kicked. Of the attacks, 73% involved the birds expecting or snatching food, 5% involved defending their natural food sources, 15% involved defending themselves, and 7% involved defending their chicks or eggs. Only one human death was reported among those 150 attacks.\nThe first documented human death caused by a cassowary was on April 6, 1926. In Australia, 16-year-old Phillip McClean and his brother, age 13, came across a cassowary on their property near Mossman, Queensland, and decided to try to kill it by striking it with clubs. The bird kicked the younger boy, who fell and ran away as his older brother struck the bird. The older McClean then tripped and fell to the ground. While he was on the ground, the cassowary kicked him in the neck, opening a wound that severed his jugular vein. The boy died of his injuries shortly thereafter.\nCassowary strikes to the abdomen are among the rarest of all, but in one case in 1995, a dog was kicked in the belly. The blow left no puncture, but severe bruising occurred. The dog later died from an apparent intestinal rupture.\nAnother human death due to a cassowary was recorded in Florida on April 12, 2019. The bird's owner, a 75-year-old man who had raised the animal, was apparently clawed to death after he fell to the ground.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited texts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59170", "revid": "42316734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59170", "title": "Judas (disambiguation)", "text": "Judas Iscariot was the apostle of Jesus who betrayed him.\nJudas is also the Greek form of the Hebrew name Judah, and may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "59171", "revid": "39076087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59171", "title": "Mumps", "text": "Human disease caused by paramyxovirus\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMumps is a highly contagious viral disease caused by the mumps virus. Initial symptoms of mumps are non-specific and include fever, headache, malaise, muscle pain, and loss of appetite. These symptoms are usually followed by painful swelling around the side of the face (the parotid glands, called parotitis), which is the most common symptom of a mumps infection. Symptoms typically occur 16 to 18 days after exposure to the virus. About one-third of people with a mumps infection do not have any symptoms (asymptomatic).\nComplications are rare but include deafness and a wide range of inflammatory conditions, of which inflammation of the testes, breasts, ovaries, pancreas, meninges, and brain are the most common. Viral meningitis can occur in 1/4 of people with mumps. Testicular inflammation may result in reduced fertility and, rarely, sterility.\nHumans are the only natural hosts of the mumps virus. The mumps virus is an RNA virus in the family \"Paramyxoviridae\". The virus is primarily transmitted by respiratory secretions such as droplets and saliva, as well as via direct contact with an infected person. Mumps is highly contagious and spreads easily in densely populated settings. Transmission can occur from one week before the onset of symptoms to eight days after. During infection, the virus first infects the upper respiratory tract. From there, it spreads to the salivary glands and lymph nodes. Infection of the lymph nodes leads to the presence of the virus in the blood, which spreads the virus throughout the body. In places where mumps is common, it can be diagnosed based on clinical presentation. In places where mumps is less common, however, laboratory diagnosis using antibody testing, viral cultures, or real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction may be needed. \nThere is no specific treatment for mumps, so treatment is supportive and includes rest and pain relief. Mumps infection is usually self-limiting, coming to an end as the immune system clears the infection. Infection can be prevented with vaccination. The MMR vaccine is a safe and effective vaccine to prevent mumps infections and is used widely around the world. The MMR vaccine also protects against measles and rubella. The spread of the disease can also be prevented by isolating infected individuals.\nMumps historically has been a highly prevalent disease, commonly occurring in outbreaks in densely crowded spaces. In the absence of vaccination, infection normally occurs in childhood, most frequently at the ages of 5\u20139. Symptoms and complications are more common in males and more severe in adolescents and adults. Infection is most common in winter and spring in temperate climates, whereas no seasonality is observed in tropical regions. Written accounts of mumps have existed since ancient times, and the cause of mumps, the mumps virus, was discovered in 1934. By the 1970s, vaccines had been created to protect against infection, and countries that have adopted mumps vaccination have seen a near-elimination of the disease. In the 21st century, however, there has been a resurgence in the number of cases in many countries that vaccinate, primarily among adolescents and young adults, due to multiple factors such as waning vaccine immunity and opposition to vaccination.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"mumps\" was first attested circa 1600 and is the plural form of \"mump\", meaning \"grimace\", originally a verb meaning \"to whine or mutter like a beggar\". The disease was likely called mumps due to the swelling caused by mumps parotitis, reflecting its impact on facial expressions and the painful, difficult swallowing that it causes. \"Mumps\" was also used starting from the 17th century to mean \"a fit of melancholy, sullenness, silent displeasure\". Mumps is sometimes called \"epidemic parotitis\".\nHistory.\nAccording to Chinese medical literature, mumps was recorded as far back as 640 B.C. The Greek physician Hippocrates documented an outbreak on the island of Thasos in approximately 410 B.C. and provided a fuller description of the disease in the first book of \"Epidemics\" in the Corpus Hippocraticum. In modern times, the disease was first described scientifically in 1790 by British physician Robert Hamilton in \"Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh\". During the First World War, mumps was one of the most debilitating diseases among soldiers. In 1934, the etiology of the disease, the mumps virus, was discovered by Claude D. Johnson and Ernest William Goodpasture. They found that rhesus macaques exposed to saliva taken from humans in the early stages of the disease developed mumps. Furthermore, they showed that mumps could then be transferred to children via filtered and sterilized, bacteria-less preparations of macerated monkey parotid tissue, showing that it was a viral disease.\nIn 1945, the mumps virus was isolated for the first time. Just a few years later, in 1948, an inactivated vaccine using killed viruses was invented. This vaccine provided only short-term immunity and was later discontinued. It was replaced in the 1970s with vaccines that have live but weakened viruses, which are more effective at providing long-term immunity than the inactivated vaccine. The first of these vaccines was Mumpsvax, licensed on 30 March 1967, which used the Jeryl Lynn strain. Maurice Hilleman created this vaccine using the strain taken from his five-year-old daughter, Jeryl Lynn. Mumpsvax was recommended for use in 1977, and the Jeryl Lynn strain continues to be used.\nHilleman worked to combine the attenuated mumps vaccines with the measles and rubella vaccines, creating the MMR-1 vaccine. In 1971, a newer version, MMR-2, was approved for use by the US Food and Drug Administration. In the 1980s, the benefit of multiple doses was recognized, so a two-dose immunization schedule was widely adopted. With MMR-2, four other MMR vaccines have been created since the 1960s: Triviraten, Morupar, Priorix, and Trimovax. Since the mid-2000s, two MMRV vaccines have been in use: Priorix-Tetra and ProQuad.\nThe United States began to vaccinate against mumps in the 1960s, with other countries following suit. From 1977 to 1985, 290 cases per 100,000 people were diagnosed each year worldwide. Although few countries recorded mumps cases after they began vaccination, those that did reported dramatic declines. From 1968 to 1982, cases declined by 97% in the U.S., and in Finland cases were reduced to less than one per 100,000 people per year, and a decline from 160 cases per 100,000 to 17 per 100,000 per year in England was observed from 1989 to 1995. By 2001, there had been a 99.9% reduction in the number of cases in the U.S. and similar near-elimination in other vaccinating countries.\nIn Japan in 1993, concerns over the rates of aseptic meningitis following MMR vaccination with the Urabe strain prompted the removal of MMR vaccines from the national immunization program, resulting in a dramatic increase in the number of cases. Japan provides voluntary mumps vaccination separately from measles and rubella. Starting in the mid-1990s, controversies surrounding the MMR vaccine emerged. One paper connected the MMR vaccine to Crohn's disease in 1995, and another in 1998 connected it to autism spectrum disorders and inflammatory bowel disease. These papers are now considered to be fraudulent and incorrect, and no association between the MMR vaccine and the aforementioned conditions has been identified. Despite this, their publication led to a significant decline in vaccination rates, ultimately causing measles, mumps, and rubella to reemerge in places with lowered vaccination rates.\nOutbreaks in the 21st century include more than 300,000 cases in China in 2013 and more than 56,000 cases in England and Wales in 2004\u20132005. In the latter outbreak, most cases were reported in 15\u201324 year olds who were attending colleges and universities. This age group was thought to be vulnerable to infection because of the MMR vaccine controversies when they should have been vaccinated or MMR vaccine shortages that had also occurred at that time. Similar outbreaks in densely crowded environments have frequently occurred in many other countries, including the U.S., the Netherlands, Sweden, and Belgium.\nResurgence.\nIn the 21st century, mumps has reemerged in many places that vaccinate against it, causing recurrent outbreaks. These outbreaks have largely affected adolescents and young adults in densely crowded spaces, such as schools, sports teams, religious gatherings, and the military, and it is expected that outbreaks will continue to occur. The cause of this reemergence is subject to debate, and various factors have been proposed, including waning immunity from vaccination, low vaccination rates, vaccine failure, and potential antigenic variation of the mumps virus.\nWaning immunity from vaccines is likely the primary cause of the mumps resurgence. In the past, subclinical natural infections provided boosts to immunity similar to vaccines. As time went on with vaccine use, these asymptomatic infections declined in frequency, likely leading to a reduction in long-term immunity against mumps. With less long-term immunity, the effects of waning vaccine immunity became more prominent, and vaccinated individuals have frequently fallen ill from mumps. A third dose of the vaccine provided in adolescence has been considered to address this as some studies support this. Other research indicates that a third dose may be useful only for short-term immunity in responding to outbreaks, which is recommended for at-risk persons by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.\nLow vaccination rates have been implicated as the cause of some outbreaks in the UK, Canada, Sweden, and Japan, whereas outbreaks in other places, such as the U.S., the Czech Republic, and the Netherlands, have occurred mainly among the vaccinated. Compared to the measles and rubella vaccines, mumps vaccines appear to have a relatively high failure rate, varying depending on the vaccine strain. This has been addressed by providing two vaccine doses, supported by recent outbreaks among the vaccinated having primarily occurred among those who received only one dose. Lastly, certain mumps virus lineages are highly divergent genetically from vaccine strains, which may cause a mismatch between protection against vaccine strains and non-vaccine strains, though research is inconclusive on this matter.\nSigns and symptoms.\nCommon symptoms.\nThe incubation period, the time between the start of an infection and when symptoms begin to show, is about 7\u201325 days, averaging 16\u201318 days. 20\u201340% of infections are asymptomatic or are restricted to mild respiratory symptoms, sometimes with a fever. Over the course of the disease, three distinct phases are recognized: prodromal, early acute, and established acute. The prodromal phase typically has non-specific, mild symptoms such as a low-grade fever, headache, malaise, muscle pain, loss of appetite, and sore throat. In the early acute phase, as the mumps virus spreads throughout the body, systemic symptoms emerge. Most commonly, parotitis occurs during this time period. During the established acute phase, orchitis, meningitis, and encephalitis may occur, and these conditions are responsible for the bulk of mumps morbidity.\nThe parotid glands are salivary glands situated on the sides of the mouth in front of the ears. Inflammation of them, called parotitis, is the most common mumps symptom and occurs in about 90% of symptomatic cases and 60\u201370% of total infections. During mumps parotitis, usually both the left and right parotid glands experience painful swelling, with unilateral swelling in a small percentage of cases. Parotitis occurs 2\u20133 weeks after exposure to the virus, within two days of developing symptoms, and usually lasts 2\u20133 days, but it may last as long as a week or longer.\nIn 90% of parotitis cases, swelling on one side is delayed rather than both sides swelling in unison. The parotid duct, which is the opening that provides saliva from the parotid glands to the mouth, may become red, swollen, and filled with fluid. Parotitis is usually preceded by local tenderness and occasionally earache. Other salivary glands, namely the submandibular, and sublingual glands, may also swell. Inflammation of these glands is rarely the only symptom.\nComplications.\nOutside of the salivary glands, inflammation of the testes, called orchitis, is the most common symptom of infection. Pain, swelling, and warmness of a testis appear usually 1\u20132 weeks after the onset of parotitis but can occur up to six weeks later. During mumps orchitis, the scrotum is tender and inflamed. It occurs in 10\u201340% of pubertal and post-pubertal males who contract mumps. Usually, mumps orchitis affects only one testis but in 10\u201330% of cases both are affected. Mumps orchitis is accompanied by inflammation of the epididymis, called epididymitis, about 85% of the time, typically occurring before orchitis. The onset of mumps orchitis is associated with a high-grade fever, vomiting, headache, and malaise. In prepubertal males, orchitis is rare as symptoms are usually restricted to parotitis.\nA variety of other inflammatory conditions may also occur as a result of mumps virus infection, including:\nA relatively common complication is deafness, which occurs in about 4% of cases. Mumps deafness is often accompanied by vestibular symptoms such as vertigo and repetitive, uncontrolled eye movements. Based on electrocardiographic abnormalities in the infected, MuV also likely infects cardiac tissue, but this is usually asymptomatic. Rarely, myocarditis and pericarditis can occur. Fluid buildup in the brain, called hydrocephalus, has also been observed. In the first trimester of pregnancy, mumps may increase the risk of miscarriage. Otherwise, mumps is not associated with birth defects.\nOther rare complications of infection include: paralysis, seizures, cranial nerve palsies, cerebellar ataxia, transverse myelitis, ascending polyradiculitis, a polio-like disease, arthropathy, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, post-infectious encephalitis encephalomyelitis, and hemophagocytic syndrome. At least one complication occurs in combination with the standard mumps symptoms in up to 42% of cases. Mumps has also been connected to the onset of type\u00a01 diabetes, and, relatedly, the mumps virus is able to infect and replicate in insulin-producing beta cells. Among children, seizures occur in about 20\u201330% of cases involving the central nervous system.\nCause.\nMumps is caused by the mumps virus (MuV), scientific name \"Mumps orthorubulavirus\", which belongs to the \"Orthorubulavirus\" genus in the \"Paramyxoviridae\" family of viruses. Humans are the only natural host of the mumps virus. MuV's genome is made of RNA and contains seven genes that encode nine proteins. In MuV particles, the genome is encased by a helical capsid. The capsid is surrounded by a viral envelope that has spikes protruding from its surface. MuV particles are pleomorphic in shape and range from 100 to 600 nanometers in diameter.\nThe replication cycle of MuV begins when the spikes on its surface bond to a cell, which then causes the envelope to fuse with the host cell's cell membrane, releasing the capsid into the host cell's cytoplasm. Upon entry, the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) transcribes messenger RNA (mRNA) from the genome, which is then translated by the host cell's ribosomes to synthesize viral proteins. RdRp then begins replicating the viral genome to produce progeny. Viral spike proteins fuse into the host cell's membrane, and new virions are formed at the sites beneath the spikes. MuV then utilizes host cell proteins to leave the host cell by budding from its surface, using the host cell's membrane as the viral envelope.\nTwelve genotypes of MuV are recognized, named genotypes A to N, excluding E and M. These genotypes vary in frequency from region to region. For example, genotypes C, D, H, and J are more common in the western hemisphere, whereas genotypes F, G, and I are more common in Asia, although genotype G is considered to be a global genotype. Genotypes A and B have not been observed in the wild since the 1990s. MuV has just one serotype, so antibodies to one genotype are functional against all genotypes. MuV is a relatively stable virus and is unlikely to experience antigenic shifting that may cause new strains to emerge.\nTransmission.\nThe mumps virus is mainly transmitted by inhalation or oral contact with respiratory droplets or secretions. In experiments, mumps could develop after inoculation either via the mouth or the nose. Respiratory transmission is also supported by the presence of MuV in cases of respiratory illness without parotitis, detection in nasal samples, and transmission between people in close contact. MuV is excreted in saliva from approximately one week before to eight days after the onset of symptoms, peaking at the onset of parotitis, though it has also been identified in the saliva of asymptomatic individuals.\nMother-to-child transmission has been observed in various forms. In non-human primates, placental transmission has been observed, which is supported by the isolation of MuV from spontaneous and planned aborted fetuses during maternal mumps. MuV has also been isolated from newborns whose mother was infected. While MuV has been detected in breast milk, it is unclear if the virus can be transmitted through it. Other manners of transmission include direct contact with infected droplets or saliva, fomites contaminated by saliva and possibly urine. Most transmissions likely occur before the development of symptoms and up to five days after such time.\nIn susceptible populations, a single case can cause up to twelve new ones. The period when a person is contagious lasts from two days before the onset of symptoms to nine days after symptoms have ceased. Asymptomatic carriers of the mump virus can also transmit the virus. These factors are thought to be reasons why controlling the spread of mumps is difficult. Furthermore, reinfection can occur after natural infection or vaccination, indicating that lifelong immunity is not guaranteed after infection. Vaccinated individuals who are infected appear to be less contagious than the unvaccinated.\nThe average number of new cases generated from a single case in a susceptible population called the basic reproduction number, is 4\u20137. Given this, it is estimated that a vaccination rate between 79 and 100% is needed to achieve herd immunity. Outbreaks continue to occur in places that have vaccination rates exceeding 90%, however, suggesting that other factors may influence disease transmission. Outbreaks that have occurred in these vaccinated communities typically occur in highly crowded areas such as schools and military dormitories.\nPathogenesis.\nMany aspects of the pathogenesis of mumps are poorly understood and are inferred from clinical observations and experimental infections in laboratory animals. These animal studies may be unreliable due to unnatural methods of inoculation. Following exposure, the virus infects epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract that express sialic acid receptors on their surface. After infection, the virus spreads to the parotid glands, causing the signature parotitis. It is thought that shortly after infection the virus spreads to lymph nodes, in particular T-cells and viruses in the blood, called viremia. Viremia lasts for 7\u201310 days, during which MuV spreads throughout the body.\nIn mumps orchitis, infection leads to: parenchymal edema; congestion, or separation, of the seminiferous tubules; and perivascular infiltration by lymphocytes. The tunica albuginea forms a barrier against edema, causing an increase in intratesticular pressure that causes necrosis of the seminiferous tubules. The seminiferous tubules also experience hyalinization, i.e. degeneration into a translucent glass-like substance, which can cause fibrosis and atrophy of the testes.\nIn up to half of cases, MuV infiltrates the central nervous system (CNS), where it may cause meningitis, encephalitis, or hydrocephalus. Mumps is rarely fatal, so few post-mortem analyses have been done to analyze CNS involvement. Of these, fluid buildup, congestion, and hemorrhaging in the brain, white blood cell infiltration in the perivascular spaces in the brain, reactive changes to glial cells and damage to the myelin sheaths surrounding neurons were observed. Neurons appear to be relatively unaffected.\nIn laboratory tests on rodents, MuV appears to enter the CNS first through cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), then spreading to the ventricular system. There, MuV replicates in ependymal cells that line the ventricles, which allows the virus to enter the brain parenchyma. This often leads to MuV infecting pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Infected ependymal cells become inflamed, lose their cilia, and collapse into CSF, which may be the cause of the narrowing of the cerebral aqueduct thought to cause mumps hydrocephalus.\nIn humans, mumps hydrocephalus may be due to obstruction of the cerebral aqueduct with dilatation of the lateral and third ventricles, obstruction of the interventricular foramina, or obstruction of the median and lateral apertures. Ependymal cells have been isolated from CSF of mumps patients, suggesting that animals and humans share hydrocephalus pathogenesis. Hydrocephalus has also been observed in the absence of canal obstruction, however, indicating that obstruction may be a result of external compression by edematous tissue and not related to hydrocephalus.\nDeafness from mumps may be caused by MuV infection in CSF, which has contact with the perilymph of the inner ear, possibly leading to infection of the cochlea, or it may occur as a result of inner ear infection via viremia that leads to inflammation in the endolymph. Hearing loss may also be caused indirectly by the immune response. In animal studies, MuV has been isolated from the vestibular ganglion, which may explain vestibular symptoms such as vertigo that often co-occur with deafness.\nImmune response.\nEven though MuV has just one serotype, significant variation in the quantity of genotype-specific sera needed to neutralize different genotypes \"in vitro\" has been observed. Neutralizing antibodies in the salivary glands may be important in restricting MuV replication and transmission via saliva, as the level of viral secretion in saliva inversely correlates to the quantity of MuV-specific IgA produced. The neutralizing ability of salivary IgA appears to be greater than serum IgG and IgM.\nIt has been proposed that symptomatic infections in the vaccinated may be because memory T lymphocytes generated as a result of vaccination may be necessary but insufficient for protection. The immune system in general appears to have a relatively weak response to the mumps virus, indicated by various measures: antibody production appears to be predominately directed toward non-neutralizing viral proteins, and there may be a low quantity of MuV-specific memory B lymphocytes. The amount of antibodies needed to confer immunity is unknown.\nDiagnosis.\nIn places where mumps is widespread, diagnosis can be made based on the development of parotitis and a history of exposure to someone with mumps. In places where mumps is less common because parotitis has other causes, laboratory diagnosis may be needed to verify mumps infection. A differential diagnosis may be used to compare symptoms to other diseases, including allergic reaction, mastoiditis, measles, and pediatric HIV infection and rubella. MuV can be isolated from saliva, blood, the nasopharynx, salivary ducts, and seminal fluid within one week of the onset of symptoms, as well as from cell cultures. In meningitis cases, MuV can be isolated from CSF. In CNS cases, a lumbar puncture may be used to rule out other potential causes, which shows normal opening pressure, more than ten leukocytes per cubic millimeter, elevated lymphocyte count in CSF, polymorphonuclear leukocytes up to 25% of the time, often a mildly elevated protein level, and a slightly reduced CSF glucose to blood glucose ratio up to 30% of the time.\nMumps-specific IgM antibodies in serum or oral fluid specimens can be used to identify mumps. IgM quantities peak up to eight days after the onset of symptoms, and IgM can be measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) 7\u201310 days after the onset of symptoms. Sensitivity to IgM testing is variable, ranging from as low as 24\u201351% to 75% in the first week and 100% thereafter. Throughout infection, IgM titers increase four-fold between the acute phase and recovery. False negatives can occur in people previously infected or vaccinated, in which case a rise of serum IgG may be more useful for diagnosis. False positives can occur after infection of parainfluenza viruses1 and 3 and Newcastle disease virus as well as recently after mumps vaccination.\nAntibody titers can also be measured with complement fixation tests, hemagglutination assays, and neutralization tests. In vaccinated people, antibody-based diagnosis can be difficult since IgM oftentimes cannot be detected in acute-phase serum samples. In these instances, it is easier to identify MuV RNA from oral fluid, a throat swab, or urine. In meningitis cases, MuV-specific IgM can be found in CSF in half of cases, and IgG in 30\u201390%, sometimes lasting for more than a year with increased white blood cell count. These findings are not associated with an increased risk of long-term complications. Most parotitis cases have elevated white blood cell count in CSF.\nReal-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) can be used to detect MuV RNA from the first day symptoms appear, declining over the next 8\u201310 days. rRT-PCR of saliva is typically positive from 2\u20133 days before parotitis develops to 4\u20135 days after and has a sensitivity of about 70%. Since MuV replicates in kidneys, viral culture and RNA detection in urine can be used for diagnosis up to two weeks after symptoms begin, though rRT-PCR used to identify the virus in urine has a very low sensitivity compared to virus cultures at below 30%. In meningoencephalitis cases, a nested RT-PCR can detect MuV RNA in CSF up to two years after infection.\nIn sialadenitis cases, imaging shows an enlargement of the salivary glands, fat stranding, and thickening of the superficial cervical fascia and platysma muscles, which are situated on the front side of the neck. If parotitis occurs only on one side, then detection of mumps-specific IgM antibodies, IgG titer, or PCR is required for diagnosis. In cases of pancreatitis, there may be elevated levels of lipase or amylase, an enzyme found in saliva and the pancreas.\nMumps orchitis is usually diagnosed by white blood cell count, with normal differential white blood cell counts. A complete blood count can show above or below-average white blood cell count and an elevated C-reactive protein level. Urine analysis can exclude bacterial infections. If orchitis is present with normal urine analysis, negative urethral cultures, and negative midstream urine, then that can indicate mumps orchitis. Ultrasounds typically show diffuse hyper-vascularity, increased volume of the testes and epididymis, lower than usual ability to return ultrasound signals, swelling of the epididymis, and formation of hydroceles. Echo color Doppler ultrasound is more effective at detecting orchitis than ultrasound alone.\nPrevention.\nMumps is preventable with vaccination. Mumps vaccines use live attenuated viruses. Most countries include mumps vaccination in their immunization programs, and the MMR vaccine, which also protects against measles and rubella, is the most commonly used mumps vaccine. Mumps vaccination can also be done on its own and as a part of the MMRV vaccine, which also protects against measles, rubella, chickenpox, and shingles. More than 120 countries have adopted mumps vaccination, but coverage remains low in most African, South Asian, and Southeast Asian countries. In countries that have implemented mumps vaccination, significant declines in mumps cases and complications caused by infection such as encephalitis have been observed. Mumps vaccines are typically administered in early childhood, but may also be given in adolescence and adulthood if need be. Vaccination is expected to be capable of neutralizing wild-type MuVs, which are not included in the vaccine, since they do not appear to evade vaccine-derived immunity.\nA variety of virus strains have been used in mumps vaccines, including the Jeryl Lynn (JL), Leningrad-3, Leningrad-3-Zagreb (L-Zagreb), Rubini, and Urabe AM9 strains. Some other less prominent strains exist that are typically confined to individual countries. These include the Hoshino, Miyahara, Torii, and NK M-46 strains that have been produced in Japan and the S-12 strain, which is used by Iran. Mild adverse reactions are relatively common, including fever and rash, but aseptic meningitis also occurs at varying rates. Other rare adverse reactions include meningoencephalitis, parotitis, deafness from inner ear damage, orchitis, and pancreatitis. Safety and effectiveness vary by vaccine strain:\nMumps protection from the MMR vaccine is higher after two doses than one and is estimated to be between 79% and 95%, lower than the degree of protection against measles and rubella. This, however, has still been sufficient to nearly eliminate mumps in countries that vaccinate against it as well as significantly reduce frequencies of complications among the vaccinated. If at least one dose is received, then hospitalization rates are reduced by an estimated 50% among the infected. Compared to the MMR vaccine, the MMRV vaccine appears to be less effective in terms of providing mumps protection. A difficulty in assessing vaccine effectiveness is that there is no clear correlate of immunity, so it is not possible to predict if a person has acquired immunity from the vaccine.\nThere is a lack of data on the effectiveness of a third dose of the MMR vaccine. In an outbreak in which a third dose was administered, it was unclear if it had any effect on reducing disease incidence, and it only appeared to boost antibodies in those who previously had little or no antibodies to mumps. Contraindications for mumps vaccines include prior allergic reaction to any ingredients or to neomycin, pregnancy, immunosuppression, a moderate or severe illness, having received a blood product recently, and, for MMRV vaccines specifically, a personal or familial history of seizures. It is also advised that women not become pregnant in the four weeks after MMR vaccination. No effective prophylaxis exists for mumps after one has been exposed to the virus, so vaccination or receiving immunoglobulin after exposure does not prevent progression to illness.\nFor people who are infected or suspected to be infected, isolation is important in preventing the spread of the disease. This includes abstaining from school, childcare, work, and other settings in which people gather together. In healthcare settings, it is recommended that healthcare workers use precautions such as face masks to reduce the likelihood of infection and to abstain from work if they develop mumps. Additional measures taken in health care facilities include reducing wait times for mumps patients, having mumps patients wear masks, and cleaning and disinfecting areas that mumps patients use. The virus can be inactivated using formalin, ether, chloroform, heat, or ultraviolet light.\nTreatment.\nMumps is usually self-limiting, and no specific antiviral treatments exist for it, so treatment is aimed at alleviating symptoms and preventing complications. Non-medicinal ways to manage the disease include bed rest, using ice or heat packs on the neck and scrotum, consuming more fluids, eating soft food, and gargling with warm salt water. Anti-fever medications may be used during the febrile period, excluding aspirin when given to children, which may cause Reye syndrome. Analgesics may also be provided to control pain from mumps inflammatory conditions. For seizures, anticonvulsants may be used. In severe neurological cases, ventilators may be used to support breathing.\nIntramuscular mumps immunoglobulin may be of benefit when administered early in some cases, but it has not shown benefit in outbreaks. Although not recommended, intravenous immunoglobulin therapy may reduce the rates of some complications. Antibiotics may be used as a precaution in cases in which bacterial infection cannot be ruled out as well as to prevent secondary bacterial infection. Autoimmune-based disorders connected to mumps are treatable with intravenous immunoglobulin.\nVarious types of treatment for mumps orchitis have been used, but no specific treatment is recommended due to each method's limitations. These measures are primarily based on relieving testicular pain and reducing intratesticular pressure to reduce the likelihood of testicular atrophy. Interferon-\u03b12\u03b1 interferes with viral replication, so it has been postulated to be useful in preventing testicular damage and infertility. Interferon alfa-2b may reduce the duration of symptoms and incidence of complications. In cases of hydrocele formation, excess fluid can be removed.\nAcupuncture has been used fairly widely in China to treat children who have mumps, however, no high-quality trials have been conducted to determine the safety or effectiveness of this treatment approach.\nPrognosis.\nThe prognosis for most people who experience mumps is excellent as long-term complications and death are rare. Hospitalization is typically not required. Mumps is usually self-limiting and symptoms resolve spontaneously within two weeks as the immune system clears the virus from the body. In high-risk groups such as immunocompromised persons, the prognosis is considered to be the same as for other groups. For most people, infection leads to lifelong immunity against future infection. Reinfections appear to be more mild and atypical than the first infection. The overall case-fatality rate of mumps is 1.6\u20133.8 people per 10,000, and these deaths typically occur in those who develop encephalitis.\nMumps orchitis typically resolves within two weeks. In 20% of cases, the testicles may be tender for a few more weeks. Atrophy, or reduction of size, of the involved testicle occurs in 30\u201350% of orchitis cases, which may lead to abnormalities in sperm creation and fertility such as low sperm count, absence of sperm in semen, reduced sperm motility, reduced fertility (hypofertility) in 13% of cases, and rarely sterility. Hypofertility can, however, occur in cases without atrophy. Abnormalities in sperm creation can persist for months to years after recovery from the initial infection, the length of which increases as the severity of orchitis increases. Examination of these cases shows decreased testicular volume, tenderness of the testicles, and a feeling of inconsistency when handling the testicles. Infertility is linked to severe cases of orchitis affecting both testes followed by testicular atrophy, which may develop up to one year after the initial infection. Of bilateral orchitis cases, 30\u201387% experience infertility. There is a weak association between orchitis and later development of epididymitis and testicular tumors.\nMumps meningitis typically resolves within 3\u201310 days without long-term complications. In meningoencephalitis cases, higher protein levels in CSF and a lower CSF glucose to blood glucose ratio are associated with longer periods of hospitalization. Approximately 1% of those whose CNS is affected die from mumps. Post-infectious encephalitis tends to be relatively mild, whereas post-infectious encephalomyelitis has a case-fatality rate of up to ten percent. Most cases of mumps deafness affect just one ear and are temporary, but permanent hearing loss occurs in 0.005% of infections. Myocarditis and pericarditis that occur as a result of mumps may lead to endocardial fibroelastosis, i.e. thickening of the endocardium. With extreme rarity, infertility and premature menopause have occurred as a result of mumps oophoritis.\nEpidemiology.\nClinical age and immunity.\nMumps is found worldwide. In the absence of vaccination against mumps there are between 100 and 1,000 cases per 100,000 people each year, i.e. 0.1% to 1.0% of the population are infected each year. The number of cases peaks every 2\u20135 years, with incidence highest in children 5\u20139 years old. According to seroconversion surveys done before the start of mumps vaccination, a sharp increase in mumps antibody levels at age 2\u20133 was observed.\nFurthermore, 50% of 4\u20136 year olds, 90% of 14\u201315 year olds, and 95% of adults had tested positive to prior exposure to mumps, indicating that nearly all people are eventually infected in unvaccinated populations.\nPrior to the start of vaccination, mumps accounted for ten percent of meningitis cases and about a third of encephalitis cases. Worldwide, mumps is the most common cause of inflammation of the salivary glands. In children, mumps is the most common cause of deafness in one ear in cases when the inner ear is damaged. Asymptomatic infections are more common in adults, and the rate of asymptomatic infections is very high, up to two-thirds, in vaccinated populations. Mumps vaccination has the effect of increasing the average age of the infected in vaccinated populations that have not previously experienced a mumps outbreak. While infection rates appear to be the same in males and females, males appear to experience symptoms and complications, including neurological involvement, at a higher rate than females. Symptoms are more severe in adolescents and adults than in children.\nSettings of outbreaks.\nIt is common for outbreaks of mumps to occur. These outbreaks typically occur in crowded spaces where the virus can spread from person to person easily, such as schools, military barracks, prisons, and sports clubs. Since the introduction of vaccines, the frequency of mumps has declined dramatically, as have complications caused by mumps. The epidemiology in countries that vaccinate reflects the number of doses administered, age at vaccination, and vaccination rates. If vaccine coverage is insufficient, then herd immunity may be unobtainable and the average age of infection will increase, leading to an increase in the prevalence of complications. Risk factors include age, exposure to a person with mumps, compromised immunity, time of year, travel history, and vaccination status. Mumps vaccination is less common in developing countries, which consequently have higher rates of mumps.\nCases peak in different seasons of the year in different regions. In temperate climates, cases peak in winter and spring, whereas in tropical regions no seasonality is observed. Additional research has shown that mumps increases in frequency as temperature and humidity increase. The seasonality of mumps is thought to be caused by several factors: fluctuation in the human immune response due to seasonal factors, such as changes in melatonin levels; behavior and lifestyle changes, such as school attendance and indoor crowding; and meteorological factors such as changes in temperature, brightness, wind, and humidity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59172", "revid": "50008516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59172", "title": "Judas Iscariot", "text": "Disciple and betrayer of Jesus\nJudas Iscariot (; ; c.\u20093 AD \u2013 c.\u200930 to 33 AD) was, according to Christianity's four canonical gospels, one of the original Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ. Judas betrayed Jesus to the Sanhedrin in the Garden of Gethsemane, in exchange for thirty pieces of silver, by kissing him on the cheek and addressing him as \"master\" to reveal his identity in the darkness to the crowd who had come to arrest him. In modern times, his name is often used synonymously with betrayal or treason.\nThe Gospel of Mark gives no motive for Judas's betrayal but does present Jesus's predicting it at the Last Supper, an event also described in all the other gospels. The Gospel of Matthew states that Judas committed the betrayal in exchange for thirty pieces of silver. The Gospel of Luke and the Gospel of John and suggest that he was possessed by Satan. According to , after learning that Jesus was to be crucified, Judas attempted to return the money he had been paid for his betrayal to the chief priests and hanged himself. The priests used the money to buy a field to bury strangers in, which was called the \"Field of Blood\" because it had been bought with blood money. Acts of the Apostles quotes Peter as saying that Judas used the money to buy the field himself, and he \"[fell] headlong... burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.\" His place among the Twelve Apostles was later filled by Matthias.\nThe Gnostic Gospel of Judas portrays Judas's actions as done in obedience to instructions given to him by Jesus, and that Judas understood the Old Testament God (the Demiurge) as distinguishable from the true, unknowable God of the New Testament, the Monad or the One. Jesus transcends the domain of the demiurge, revealing deeper truths to Judas. This opens both Jesus and Judas to disclose a broader understanding of the Pleroma, which has inspired artists, writers, and thinkers. The Gospel was denounced as heresy in 180 AD by Irenaeus.\nDue to his notorious role in all the gospel narratives, Judas remains a controversial figure in Christian history. His betrayal is seen as setting in motion the events that led to Jesus's crucifixion and resurrection, which, according to traditional Christian theology brought salvation to humanity. Since the Middle Ages, Judas has sometimes been portrayed as a personification of the Jewish people, and his betrayal has been used to justify Christian antisemitism.\nHistoricity.\nAlthough Judas Iscariot's historical existence is generally widely accepted among secular historians, this relative consensus has not gone entirely unchallenged. The earliest possible allusion to Judas comes from the First Epistle to the Corinthians , in which Paul the Apostle does not mention Judas by name but uses the passive voice of the Greek word \"parad\u00edd\u014dmi\" (\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03b4\u03af\u03b4\u03c9\u03bc\u03b9), which most Bible translations render as \"was betrayed\": \"...the Lord Jesus on the night when he \"was betrayed\" took a loaf of bread...\" Nonetheless, some biblical scholars argue that the word \"parad\u00edd\u014dmi\" should be translated as \"was handed over\". This translation could still refer to Judas, but it could also instead refer to God metaphorically \"handing Jesus over\" to the Romans.\nIn his book \"Antisemitism and Modernity\" (2006), the Jewish scholar Hyam Maccoby suggests that, in the New Testament, the name \"Judas\" was constructed as an attack on the Judaeans or on the Judaean religious establishment held responsible for executing Jesus. In his book \"The Sins of Scripture\" (2009), John Shelby Spong concurs with this argument, insisting, \"The whole story of Judas has the feeling of being contrived... The act of betrayal by a member of the twelve disciples is not found in the earliest Christian writings. Judas is first placed into the Christian story by the Gospel of Mark (), who wrote in the early 70s AD.\"\nMost scholars reject these arguments for non-historicity, noting that there is nothing in the gospels to associate Judas with Judeans except his name, which was an extremely common one for Jewish men during the first century, and that numerous other figures named \"Judas\" are mentioned throughout the New Testament, none of whom are portrayed negatively. Positive figures named Judas mentioned in the New Testament include the prophet Judas Barsabbas (Acts 15:22\u201333), Jesus's brother Jude (Mark 6:3; Matt 13:55; Jude 1), and the apostle Judas the son of James (Luke 6:14\u201316; Acts 1:13; John 14:22).\nLife.\nName and background.\nThe name \"Judas\" () is a Greek rendering of the Hebrew name Judah (, , Hebrew for \"praise\" or \"praised\"), which was an extremely common name for Jewish men during the first century AD, due to the renowned hero Judas Maccabeus. Consequently, numerous other figures with this name are mentioned throughout the New Testament. In the Gospel of Mark , which was written in the mid-60s or early 70s AD, Judas Iscariot is the only apostle named \"Judas\". shares this portrayal. The Gospel of Luke , however, replaces the apostle whom Mark and Matthew call \"Thaddeus\" with \"Judas son of James\". Peter Stanford suggests that this renaming may represent an effort by the author of the Gospel of Luke to create a \"good Judas\" in contrast to the betrayer Judas Iscariot.\nJudas's epithet \"Iscariot\" ( or ), which distinguishes him from the other people named \"Judas\" in the gospels, is usually thought to be a Greek rendering of the Hebrew phrase , (), meaning \"the man from Kerioth\". This interpretation is supported by the statement in the Gospel of John that Judas was \"the son of Simon Iscariot\". Nonetheless, this interpretation of the name is not fully accepted by all scholars. One of the most popular alternative explanations holds that \"Iscariot\" (, in Syriac Aramaic, per the Peshitta text) may be a corruption of the Latin word , meaning \"dagger man\", which referred to a member of the Sicarii ( in Aramaic), a group of Jewish rebels who were known for assassinating people in crowds using long knives hidden under their cloaks. This interpretation is problematic, however, because there is nothing in the gospels to associate Judas with the Sicarii, and there is no evidence that the cadre existed during the 30s AD when Judas was alive.\nA possibility advanced by Ernst Wilhelm Hengstenberg is that \"Iscariot\" means \"the liar\" or \"the false one\", from the Hebrew . C. C. Torrey suggests instead the Aramaic form or , with the same meaning. Stanford rejects this, arguing that the gospel writers follow Judas's name with the statement that he betrayed Jesus, so it would be redundant for them to call him \"the false one\" before immediately stating that he was a traitor. Some have proposed that the word derives from an Aramaic word meaning \"red color\", from the root . Another hypothesis holds that the word derives from one of the Aramaic roots or . This would mean \"to deliver\", based on the Septuagint rendering of Isaiah 19:4 (a theory advanced by J. Alfred Morin). The epithet could also be associated with the manner of Judas's death, hanging. This would mean Iscariot derives from a kind of Greek-Aramaic hybrid: , , meaning \"chokiness\" or \"constriction\". This might indicate that the epithet was applied posthumously by the remaining disciples, but Joan E. Taylor has argued that it was a descriptive name given to Judas by Jesus, since other disciples such as Simon Peter/Cephas (\"Kephas\" \"rock\") were also given such names.\nRole as an apostle.\nAlthough the canonical gospels frequently disagree on the names of some of the minor apostles, all four of them list Judas Iscariot as one of them. The Synoptic Gospels state that Jesus sent out \"the twelve\" (including Judas) with power over unclean spirits and with a ministry of preaching and healing: Judas clearly played an active part in this apostolic ministry alongside the other eleven. However, in the Gospel of John, Judas's outlook was differentiated\u00a0\u2013 many of Jesus's disciples abandoned him because of the difficulty of accepting his teachings, and Jesus asked the twelve if they would also leave him. Simon Peter spoke for the twelve: \"Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life,\" but Jesus observed then that although he himself had chosen the twelve, one of them (unnamed by Jesus, but identified by the narrator) was \"a devil\" who would betray him.\nOne of the best-attested and most reliable statements made by Jesus in the gospels comes from the Gospel of Matthew , in which Jesus tells his apostles: \"in the new world, when the Son of Man shall sit on his glorious throne, you will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel.\" New Testament scholar Bart D. Ehrman concludes, \"This is not a tradition that was likely to have been made up by a Christian later, after Jesus's death\u00a0\u2013 since one of these twelve had abandoned his cause and betrayed him. No one thought that \"Judas Iscariot\" would be seated on a glorious throne in the Kingdom of God. That saying, therefore appears to go back to Jesus, and indicates, then, that he had twelve close disciples, whom he predicted would reign in the coming Kingdom.\"\nMatthew directly states that Judas betrayed Jesus for a bribe of \"thirty pieces of silver\" by identifying him with a kiss (\"the kiss of Judas\") to arresting soldiers of the High Priest Caiaphas, who then turned Jesus over to Pontius Pilate's soldiers. Mark's Gospel states that the chief priests were looking for a way to arrest Jesus. They decided not to do so during the feast [of the Passover], since they were afraid that people would riot; instead, they chose the night before the feast to arrest him. According to Luke's account, Satan entered Judas at this time.\nAccording to the account in the Gospel of John, Judas carried the disciples' money bag or box (, ), but the Gospel of John makes no mention of the thirty pieces of silver as a fee for betrayal. The evangelist comments in John 12:5\u20136 that Judas spoke fine words about giving money to the poor, but the reality was \"not that he cared for the poor, but [that] he was a thief, and had the money box; and he used to take what was put in it.\" However, in John 13:27\u201330, when Judas left the gathering of Jesus and his disciples with betrayal in mind, some [of the disciples] thought that Judas might have been leaving to buy supplies or on a charitable errand.\nEhrman argues that Judas's betrayal \"is about as historically certain as anything else in the tradition\", pointing out that the betrayal is independently attested in the Gospel of Mark, in the Gospel of John, and in the Book of Acts. Ehrman also contends that it is highly unlikely that early Christians would have made up the story of Judas's betrayal, since it reflects poorly on Jesus's judgment in choosing him as an apostle. Nonetheless, Ehrman argues that what Judas actually told the authorities was not Jesus's location, but rather Jesus's secret teaching that he was the Messiah. This, he holds, explains why the authorities did not try to arrest Jesus prior to Judas's betrayal. John P. Meier sums up the historical consensus, stating, \"We only know two basic facts about [Judas]: (1) Jesus chose him as one of the Twelve, and (2) he handed over Jesus to the Jerusalem authorities, thus precipitating Jesus's execution.\"\nDeath.\nMany different accounts of Judas's death have survived from antiquity, both within and outside the New Testament. states that after learning that Jesus was to be crucified, Judas was overcome by remorse and attempted to return the 30 pieces of silver to the priests, but they would not accept them because they were blood money, so he threw them on the ground and left. Afterwards, he committed suicide by hanging himself in accordance with Mosaic law (). The priests then used the money to buy a potter's field, which became known as Akeldama (\u05d7\u05e7\u05dc \u05d3\u05de\u05d0 \u2013 \"khakel dama\", the Field of Blood) because it had been bought with blood money. states that Judas used the money to buy a field, and \"[fell] headlong... burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.\" In this account, Judas's death is apparently by accident, and he shows no signs of remorse.\nThe early Church Father Papias of Hierapolis records in his \"Expositions of the Sayings of the Lord\" (which was probably written around 100 AD) that Judas was afflicted by God's wrath; his body became so enormously bloated that he could not pass through a street with buildings on either side. His face became so swollen that a doctor could not even identify the location of his eyes using an optical instrument. Judas's genitals became enormously swollen and oozed with pus and worms. Finally, he killed himself on his own land by pouring out his innards onto the ground, which stank so horribly that, even in Papias's own time a century later, people still could not pass the site without holding their noses. This story was well known among Christians in antiquity and was often told in competition with the two conflicting stories from the New Testament.\nAccording to the apocryphal Gospel of Nicodemus, which was probably written in the fourth century AD, Judas was overcome with remorse and went home to tell his wife, who was roasting a chicken on a spit over a charcoal fire, that he was going to kill himself, because he knew Jesus would rise from the dead and, when he did, he would punish him. Judas's wife laughed and told him that Jesus could no more rise from the dead than he could resurrect the chicken she was cooking. Immediately, the chicken was restored to life and began to crow. Judas then ran away and hanged himself. In the apocryphal Gospel of Judas, Judas has a vision of the disciples stoning and persecuting him.\nThe discrepancy between the two different accounts of Judas's death in and has proven to be a serious challenge to those who support the idea of Biblical inerrancy. This problem was one of the points leading C. S. Lewis, for example, to reject the view \"that every statement in Scripture must be historical truth\". Nonetheless, various attempts at harmonization have been suggested. Generally they have followed literal interpretations such as that of Augustine of Hippo, which suggest that these simply describe different aspects of the same event: that Judas hanged himself in the field, and the rope eventually snapped and the fall burst his body open, or that the accounts of Acts and Matthew refer to two different transactions. Some have taken the descriptions as figurative: that the \"falling prostrate\" was Judas in anguish, and the \"bursting out of the bowels\" is pouring out emotion.\nModern scholars reject these approaches; ancient historical works could display differences when reporting events, with variations between Tacitus, Suetonius, and Plutarch on Otho\u2019s death being similar to those in the gospels. Arie W. Zwiep argues that neither story was meant to be read in light of the other and against harmonizations, though other scholars argue Luke-Acts used Matthew or vice versa. David A. Reed argues that the Matthew account is a midrashic exposition that allows the author to present the event as a fulfillment of prophetic passages from the Old Testament. They argue that the author adds imaginative details such as the thirty pieces of silver, and the fact that Judas hangs himself, to an earlier tradition about Judas's death.\nMatthew's description of the death as fulfilment of a prophecy \"spoken through Jeremiah the prophet\" has caused difficulties, since it does not clearly correspond to any known version of the Book of Jeremiah but does appear to refer to a story from the Book of Zechariah which describes the return of a payment of thirty pieces of silver. Even writers such as Jerome and John Calvin conclude that this was obviously an error. Evangelical theologian James R. White has suggested the misattribution arises from a supposed Jewish practice of using the name of a major prophet to refer to the whole content of the scroll group, including books written by minor prophets placed in the same grouping.\nSome scholars have suggested that the writer may also have had a passage from Jeremiah in mind, such as chapters and which refer to a potter's jar and a burial place, and chapter which refers to a burial place and an earthenware jar. Raymond Brown suggests \"the most plausible [explanation] is that Matthew 27:9\u201310 is presenting a mixed citation with words taken both from Zechariah and Jeremiah, and... he refers to that combination by one name. Jeremiah 18\u20139 concerns a potter (18:2\u2013; 19:1), a purchase (19:1), the Valley of Hinnom (where the Field of Blood is traditionally located, 19:2), 'innocent blood' (19:4), and the renaming of a place for burial (19:6, 11); and Jer 32:6\u20135 tells of the purchase of a field with silver.\"\nClassicist Glenn W. Most suggests that Judas's death in Acts can be interpreted figuratively, writing that \u03c0\u03c1\u03b7\u03bd\u1f74\u03c2 \u03b3\u03b5\u03bd\u03cc\u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2 should be translated as saying his body went prone, rather than falling headlong, and the spilling of the entrails is meant to invoke the imagery of dead snakes and their burst-open bellies. Hence Luke was stating that Judas took the body posture of a snake and died like one. However, the Catholic biblical scholar John L. McKenzie states \"This passage probably echoes the fate of the wicked in...\" the Deuterocanonical book \"Wisdom of Solomon\" 4:19: \"...[the Lord] will dash them speechless to the ground, and shake them from the foundations; they will be left utterly dry and barren, and they will suffer anguish, and the memory of them will perish.\"\nBetrayal of Jesus.\nThere are several explanations as to why Judas betrayed Jesus. In the earliest account, in the Gospel of Mark, when he goes to the chief priests to betray Jesus, he is offered money as a reward, but it is not clear that money is his motivation. In the Gospel of Matthew account, on the other hand, he asks what they will pay him for handing Jesus over. In the Gospel of Luke and the Gospel of John, the devil enters into Judas, causing him to offer to betray Jesus. The Gospel of John account has Judas complaining that money has been spent on expensive perfumes to anoint Jesus which could have been spent on the poor, but adds that he was the keeper of the apostles' purse and used to steal from it. According to some, Judas thought he could get the money for betraying Jesus without Jesus being killed as he would escape as he had done many times before.\nOne suggestion has been that Judas expected Jesus to overthrow Roman rule of Judea. In this view, Judas is a disillusioned disciple betraying Jesus not so much because he loved money, but because he loved his country and thought Jesus had failed it. Another is that Jesus was causing unrest likely to increase tensions with the Roman authorities and they thought he should be restrained until after the Passover, when everyone had gone back home and the commotion had died down.\nThe gospels suggest that Jesus foresaw (, ) and allowed Judas's betrayal (). One explanation is that Jesus allowed the betrayal because it would allow God's plan to be fulfilled. Another is that regardless of the betrayal, Jesus was ultimately destined for crucifixion. \nIn April 2006, a Coptic papyrus manuscript titled the Gospel of Judas from 200 AD was translated, suggesting that Jesus told Judas to betray him, although some scholars question the translation. However, there is a consensus amongst scholars that this text contains no historical information.\nJudas is the subject of philosophical writings. Origen of Alexandria, in his \"Commentary on John's Gospel\", reflects on Judas's interactions with the other apostles and Jesus's confidence in him prior to his betrayal. Other philosophical reflections on Judas include \"The Problem of Natural Evil\" by Bertrand Russell and \"Three Versions of Judas\", a short story by Jorge Luis Borges. They allege various problematic ideological contradictions with the discrepancy between Judas's actions and his eternal punishment. Bruce Reichenbach argues that if Jesus foresees Judas's betrayal, then the betrayal is not an act of free will and therefore should not be punishable. Conversely, it is argued that just because the betrayal was foretold, it does not prevent Judas from exercising his own free will in this matter. Other scholars argue that Judas acted in obedience to God's will. The gospels suggest that Judas is apparently bound up with the fulfillment of God's purposes (, , , , , , ), yet \"woe is upon him\", and he would \"have been better unborn\" (). The difficulty inherent in the saying is its paradox: if Judas had not been born, the Son of Man would apparently no longer do \"as it is written of him.\" The consequence of this apologetic approach is that Judas's actions come to be seen as necessary and unavoidable, yet leading to condemnation. Another explanation is that Judas's birth and betrayal did not necessitate the only way the Son of Man could have suffered and been crucified. The earliest churches believed \"as it is written of him\" to be prophetic, fulfilling Scriptures such as that of the suffering servant in Isaiah 52\u201353 and the righteous one in Psalm 22, which do not require betrayal (at least by \"Judas\") as the means to the suffering. Regardless of any necessity, Judas is held responsible for his act (Mark 14:21; Luke 22:22; Matt 26:24).\nIn his 1965 book \"The Passover Plot\", British New Testament scholar Hugh J. Schonfield suggests that the crucifixion of Christ was a conscious re-enactment of Biblical prophecy and that Judas acted with the full knowledge and consent of Jesus in \"betraying\" him to the authorities. The book has been variously described as \"factually groundless\", based on \"little data\" and \"wild suppositions\", \"disturbing\", and \"tawdry\".\nJudas's eternal destination.\nThe nature of Judas's eternal destination has been a matter of debate within Christian theology. Some have argued that Judas was damned due to the despair which caused him to subsequently commit suicide. An example of this view is from Cornelius \u00e0 Lapide, \"Judas then added to his former sin the further sin of despair. It was not a more heinous sin, but one more fatal to himself, as thrusting him down to the very depths of hell. He might, on his repentance, have asked (and surely have obtained) pardon of God. But, like Cain, he despaired of forgiveness.\" The Theophylact presents a different view, stating that Judas \"hanged himself thinking to precede Jesus into hades and there to plead for his own salvation.\" According to the book of Matthew 27:5, Judas did commit suicide by hanging himself. However, according to the book of Acts 1:18, it says that Judas died by falling off a cliff with his intestines spilling out. These two accounts are usually considered complementary of one another, suggesting Judas hanged himself and, after either bodily decomposition or a breaking of the noose, fell and burst open.\nProtestant theologians.\nThe Catholic theologian Erasmus believed that Judas was free to change his intention, but Martin Luther argued in rebuttal that Judas' will was immutable. John Calvin states that Judas was predestined to damnation but writes on the question of Judas' guilt: \"surely in Judas' betrayal, it will be no more right, because God himself willed that his son be delivered up and delivered him up to death, to ascribe the guilt of the crime to God than to transfer the credit for redemption to Judas.\" Karl Daub, in his book \"Judas Ischariot\", writes that Judas should be considered \"an incarnation of the devil\" for whom \"mercy and blessedness are alike impossible.\"\nThe Geneva Bible contains several additional notes concerning Judas Iscariot within its commentaries. In the Gospel of Matthew, after the Sanhedrin condemns Jesus Christ to death, are added the comments concerning Judas: \"...late repentance brings desperation\" (cf. Mat. 27:3), and \"Although he abhor his sins, yet is he not displeased there with, but despairs in God's mercies, and seeks his own destruction\" (cf. Mat. 27:4). Furthermore, within Acts of the Apostles is the comment, \"Perpetual infamy is the reward of all such as by unlawfully gotten goods buy anything\" when Judas purchased the \"Field of Blood\" with the 30 pieces of silver (cf Acts 1:18).\nCatholic doctrine.\nThe Catholic Church took no specific view concerning the damnation of Judas during Vatican II; speaking in generalities, that Council stated, \"[We] must be constantly vigilant so that... we may not be ordered to go into the eternal fire (cf. Mk. 25, 41) like wicked and slothful servants (cf. Mk. 25, 26), into the exterior darkness where 'there will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth' (Mt. 22, 13 and 25, 30).\" The Vatican proclaims individuals' Eternal Salvation only through the Canon of Saints. There is no 'Canon of the Damned.'\nThus, there is a school of thought within the Catholic Church that it is unknown whether Judas Iscariot is in Hell; for example, David Endres, writing in \"The Catholic Telegraph\", cites \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" \u00a7597 for the inability to make any determination whether Judas is in Hell. However, while that section of the catechism does instruct Catholics that the personal sin of Judas is unknown but to God, that statement is within the context that the Jewish people have no collective responsibility for Jesus's death: \"...the Jews should not be spoken of as rejected or accursed as if this followed from holy Scripture.\" This seems to be defining a different doctrinal point (i.e., the relationship of Catholics with Jewish people), rather than making any sort of decision concerning Judas's particular judgment.\nLudwig Ott's reference book \"Fundamentals of Catholic Dogma\" identifies Judas Iscariot as an example of a person receiving punishment as a particular judgment.\nThe Catechism of the Council of Trent, which mentions Judas Iscariot several times, wrote that he possessed \"motive unworthy\" when he entered the priesthood and was thus sentenced to \"eternal perdition\". Furthermore, Judas is given as an example of a sinner that will \"despair of mercy\" because he looked \"...on God as an avenger of crime and not, also, as a God of clemency and mercy.\" The Catechism of the Council of Trent continued the tradition of the early Church fathers, such as Pope Leo I (\"...had [Judas] not thus denied His omnipotence, he would have obtained His mercy...\"), and Pope Gregory I (\"The godless betrayer, shutting his mind to all these things, turned upon himself, not with a mind to repent, but in a madness of self-destruction... even in the act of dying sinned \"unto the increase\" of his own eternal punishment.\")\nAlso, the \"Decree of Justification\", promulgated during Session VI of the Council of Trent, states in Canon 6, \"If anyone shall say that it is not in the power of man to make his ways evil, but that God produces evil as well as the good works, not only by permission, but also properly and of Himself, so that the betrayal of Judas is not less His own proper work than the vocation of Paul; let him be anathema.\" Here, the Council is making it clear that Judas exercised his own free will to commit the betrayal of Jesus Christ, rather than being predestined by God.\nLiturgical institutions are part of the expressions of Sacred Tradition of the Catholic Church. Within the 1962 \"Roman Missal\" for the Tridentine Latin Mass, the \"Collect\" for Holy Thursday states: \"O God, from whom Judas received the punishment of his guilt, and the thief the reward of his confession... our Lord Jesus Christ gave to each a different recompense according to his merits...\" In his commentary on the Liturgical Year, Abbot Gueranger, O.S.B. states that the \"Collect\" reminds Catholics that both Judas and the good thief are guilty, \"...and yet, the one is condemned, the other pardoned.\" Thus, the Tridentine Latin Mass, as currently celebrated, continues to foster the tradition within the Catholic Church that Judas was punished.\nOther.\nIn the \"Divine Comedy\" of Dante Alighieri, Judas is punished for all eternity in the ninth circle of Hell: in it, he is devoured by Lucifer, alongside Marcus Junius Brutus and Gaius Cassius Longinus (leaders of the group of senators that assassinated Julius Caesar). The innermost region of the ninth circle is reserved for traitors of masters and benefactors and is named Judecca, after Judas.\nIn his 1969 book \"Theologie der Drei Tage\" (English translation: \"Mysterium Paschale\"), Hans Urs von Balthasar emphasizes that Jesus was not betrayed but surrendered and delivered up by himself, since the meaning of the Greek word used by the New Testament, \"paradidonai\" (\u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03b4\u03b9\u03b4\u03cc\u03bd\u03b1\u03b9, ), is unequivocally \"handing over of self\". In the \"Preface to the Second Edition\", Balthasar takes a cue from Revelation (Vulgate: \"agni qui occisus est ab origine mundi\", NIV: \"the Lamb who was slain from the creation of the world\") to extrapolate the idea that God as \"immanent Trinity\" can endure and conquer godlessness, abandonment, and death in an \"eternal super-kenosis\". A Catholic priest, Richard Neuhaus, an admitted student of Balthasar, argues that it is unknown if Judas is in Hell, and it is also possible that Hell could be empty. However, French monsignor considers that Balthasar and Neuhaus are merely recycling the error of Origenism which includes denying the eternity of Hell \"...by a general rehabilitation of the damned, including, apparently, Satan.\" This error, while not considered a formal heresy, was condemned at a synod in 548 AD, which was subsequently confirmed by Pope Vigilius.\nRole in apocrypha.\nJudas has been a figure of great interest to esoteric groups, such as many Gnostic sects. Irenaeus records the beliefs of one Gnostic sect, the Cainites, who believed that Judas was an instrument of the Sophia, Divine Wisdom, thus earning the hatred of the Demiurge. His betrayal of Jesus thus was a victory over the materialist world. The Cainites later split into two groups, disagreeing over the ultimate significance of Jesus in their cosmology.\nSyriac Infancy Gospel.\nThe Syriac Infancy Gospel borrows from some of the different versions of the Infancy Gospel of Thomas. However, it adds many of its own tales, probably from local legends, including one of Judas. This pseudepigraphic work tells how Judas, as a boy, was possessed by Satan, who caused him to bite himself or anyone else present. In one of these attacks, Judas bit the young Jesus in the side; and, by touching Him, Satan was exorcised. It further states that the side which Judas supposedly bit was the same side that was pierced by the Holy Lance at the Crucifixion.\nGospel of Judas.\nDuring the 1970s, a Coptic papyrus codex (book) was discovered near Beni Masah, Egypt. It appeared to be a third- or fourth-century copy of a second-century original, relating a series of conversations in which Jesus and Judas interact and discuss the nature of the universe from a Gnostic viewpoint. The discovery was given dramatic international exposure in April 2006 when the US \"National Geographic\" magazine published a feature article entitled \"The Gospel of Judas\" with images of the fragile codex and analytical commentary by relevant experts and interested observers (but not a comprehensive translation). The article's introduction stated: \"An ancient text lost for 1,700 years says Christ's betrayer was his truest disciple.\" The article points to some evidence that the original document was extant in the second century: \"Around A.D. 180, Irenaeus, Bishop of Lyon, in what was then Roman Gaul, wrote a massive treatise called \"Against Heresies\" [in which he attacked] a 'fictitious history,' which 'they style the Gospel of Judas.'\"\nBefore the magazine's edition was circulated, other news media gave exposure to the story, abridging and selectively reporting it.\nIn December 2007, April DeConick asserted that the \"National Geographic\"'s translation is badly flawed: \"For example, in one instance the \"National Geographic\" transcription refers to Judas as a 'daimon,' which the society's experts have translated as 'spirit.' However, the universally accepted word for 'spirit' is 'pneuma'\u00a0\u2013 in Gnostic literature \"daimon\" is always taken to mean 'demon.'\" The National Geographic Society responded that \"Virtually all issues April D. DeConick raises about translation choices are addressed in footnotes in both the popular and critical editions.\" In a later review of the issues and relevant publications, critic Joan Acocella questioned whether ulterior intentions had not begun to supersede historical analysis, e.g., whether publication of The Gospel of Judas could be an attempt to roll back ancient anti-semitic imputations. She concluded that the ongoing clash between scriptural fundamentalism and attempts at revision were childish because of the unreliability of the sources. Therefore, she argued, \"People interpret, and cheat. The answer is not to fix the Bible but to fix ourselves.\" Other scholars have questioned the initial translation and interpretation of the Gospel of Judas by the \"National Geographic\" team of experts.\nGospel of Barnabas.\nAccording to the Gospel of Barnabas, a late medieval pseudepigraphical gospel, it was Judas, not Jesus, who was crucified on the cross. This work states that when Judas led the Roman soldiers to arrest Jesus in an effort to betray him, angels appeared to take Jesus out a window and up to the heavens. As Judas entered the room, his appearance was transformed to that of Jesus, and the Romans arrested him and brought him to be crucified. The narrative states this transformation of appearance not only fooled the Romans, but the Pharisees, the High Priest, the followers of Christ, and his mother Mary. The Gospel of Barnabas then mentions that after three days since burial, Judas's body was stolen from his grave with rumors spreading of Jesus being risen from the dead. In following with Islamic lore, when Jesus was informed in the third heaven about what happened he prayed to God to be sent back to the earth, and later descended and gathered his mother, disciples, and followers and told them the truth of what happened. He then ascended back to the heavens, with the narrative continuing Islamic legend mirroring Christian doctrine of returning at the end of times as a just king.\nThe Gospel of Barnabas was not written by Barnabas (fl.\u2009first century CE). Many of its teachings are synchronous with those in the Quran and oppose the Bible, especially the New Testament. The earliest known mention of the Gospel of Barnabas has been discovered in a 1634 manuscript by a Morisco which was found in Madrid, and the earliest published reference to it was in the 1715 book \"Menagiana\" by the French poet Bernard de la Monnoye. \nAn unrelated \"Gospel according to Barnabas\" was first mentioned in the sixth-century Gelasian Decree, and was condemned as apocryphal. Another mention of a gospel using his name is in the seventh-century \"List of the Sixty Books\", or the \"Catalogue of the Sixty Canonical Books\". Historians are uncertain whether these refer to this Gospel of Barnabas, since no quotes have been preserved for confirmation. Jomier believes a forger could have taken the title after the publishing of the Gelasian Decree by printing press.\nThe Gospel of Barnabas is criticized by Muslim scholars, who reject it partially or completely. According to American scholar Amina Inloes, the many differences between the gospel and the Quran dilute its importance. In the January 1977 issue of the \"Islamic World League\" journal, Syrian writer Yahya al-Hashimi called it a polemic by a Jew to generate hostility between Christians and Muslims. Al-Hashimi said that there was no need to use apocryphal gospels to prove that Muhammad was a prophet, because he believed Muhammad had been foretold by Jesus as the Paraclete in the Gospel of John. Egyptian literary critic Abbas Mahmoud al-Aqqad cited several reasons to reject the gospel, including the use of Andalusi Arabic phrases and teachings which conflict with the Quran.\nRepresentations.\nAlthough the sanctification of the instruments of the Passion of Jesus (the so-called \"Arma Christi\"), that slowly accrued over the course of the Middle Ages in Christian symbolism and art, also included the head and lips of Judas, the term \"Judas\" has entered many languages as a synonym for \"betrayer\", and Judas has become the archetype of the traitor in Western art and literature. Judas is given some role in virtually all literature telling the Passion story and appears in numerous modern novels and movies.\nIn the Eastern Orthodox hymns of Holy Wednesday (the Wednesday before Pascha), Judas is contrasted with the woman who anointed Jesus with expensive perfume and washed his feet with her tears. The hymns of Holy Wednesday contrast these two figures, encouraging believers to avoid the example of the fallen disciple and instead to imitate Mary's example of repentance. Also, Wednesday is observed as a day of fasting from meat, dairy products, and olive oil throughout the year in memory of the betrayal of Judas. The prayers of preparation for receiving the Eucharist also make mention of Judas's betrayal: \"I will not reveal your mysteries to your enemies, neither like Judas will I betray you with a kiss, but like the thief on the cross I will confess you.\"\nJudas Iscariot is often shown with red hair in Spanish culture and by William Shakespeare. The practice is comparable to the Renaissance portrayal of Jews with red hair, which was then regarded as a negative trait and which may have been used to correlate Judas Iscariot with contemporary Jews.\nIn paintings depicting the Last Supper, Judas is occasionally depicted with a dark-colored halo (contrasting with the lighter halos of the other apostles) to signify his former status as an apostle. More commonly, however, he is the only one at the table without one. Some church stained-glass windows show him with a dark halo such as in one of the windows of the Church of St John the Baptist, Yeovil.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59173", "revid": "50990420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59173", "title": "Id, ego and superego", "text": "Psychological concepts by Sigmund Freud\nIn psychoanalytic theory, the id, ego, and superego are three distinct, interacting agents in the psychic apparatus, outlined in Sigmund Freud's structural model of the psyche. The three agents are theoretical constructs that Freud employed to describe the basic structure of mental life as it was encountered in psychoanalytic practice. Freud himself used the German terms \"das Es\", \"Ich\", and \"\u00dcber-Ich\", which literally translate as \"the it\", \"I\", and \"over-I\". The Latin terms id, ego and superego were chosen by his original translators and have remained in use. \nThe structural model was introduced in Freud's essay \"Beyond the Pleasure Principle\" (1920) and further refined and formalised in later essays such as \"The Ego and the Id\" (1923). Freud developed the model in response to the perceived ambiguity of the terms \"conscious\" and \"unconscious\" in his earlier \"topographical\" model.\nBroadly speaking, the id is the organism's unconscious array of uncoordinated instinctual needs, impulses and desires; the superego is the part of the psyche that has internalised social rules and norms, largely in response to parental demands and prohibitions in childhood; the ego is the integrative agent that directs activity based on mediation between the id's energies, the demands of external reality, and the moral and critical constraints of the superego. Freud compared the ego, in its relation to the id, to a man on horseback: the rider must harness and direct the superior energy of his mount, and at times allow for a practicable satisfaction of its urges. The ego is thus \"in the habit of transforming the id's will into action, as if it were its own.\"\nHistory and translation of the terms.\nThe terms \"id\", \"ego\", and \"superego\" are not Freud's own; they are Latinisations by his translator James Strachey. Freud himself wrote of \"das Es\", \"das Ich\", and \"das \u00dcber-Ich\"\u2014respectively, \"the It\", \"the I\", and \"the Over-I\". Thus, to the German reader, Freud's original terms are to some degree self-explanatory. The term \"das Es\" was originally used by Georg Groddeck, a physician whose unconventional ideas were of interest to Freud (Groddeck's translators render the term in English as \"the It\"). The word \"ego\" is taken directly from Latin, where it is the nominative of the first person singular personal pronoun and is translated as \"I myself\" to express emphasis.\nFigures like Bruno Bettelheim have criticised the way \"the English translations impeded students' efforts to gain a true understanding of Freud\" by substituting the formalised language of the elaborated code for the quotidian immediacy of Freud's own language.\nId.\nFreud conceived of the id as the unconscious source of bodily needs, impulses and desires, especially those related to aggression and the sexual drive. The id acts according to the pleasure principle\u2014the psychic force oriented to the immediate gratification of impulse and desire.\nFreud described the id as \"the dark, inaccessible part of our personality\". Understanding of it is limited to analysis of dreams and neurotic symptoms, and it can only be described in terms of its contrast with the ego. It has no organisation and no collective will: it is concerned only with the satisfaction of drives in accordance with the pleasure principle. It is oblivious to reason and the presumptions of ordinary conscious life: \"contrary impulses exist side by side, without cancelling each other. . . There is nothing in the id that could be compared with negation. . . nothing in the id which corresponds to the idea of time.\" The id \"knows no judgements of value: no good and evil, no morality. ...Instinctual cathexes seeking discharge\u2014that, in our view, is all there is in the id.\" \nDevelopmentally, the id precedes the ego. The id consists of the basic instinctual drives that are present at birth, inherent in the somatic organisation, and governed only by the pleasure principle. The psychic apparatus begins as an undifferentiated id, part of which then develops into a structured \"ego\", a concept of self as an integrated unity that takes the principle of reality into account.\nFreud describes the id as \"the great reservoir of libido\", the energy of desire, usually conceived as sexual in nature, the life instincts that are constantly seeking a renewal of life. He later also postulated a death drive, which seeks \"to lead organic life back into the inanimate state.\" For Freud, \"the death instinct would thus seem to express itself\u2014though probably only in part\u2014as an \"instinct of destruction\" directed against the external world and other organisms\" through aggression. Since the id includes all instinctual impulses, the destructive instinct, as well as eros or the life instincts, is considered to be part of the id.\nEgo.\nThe ego acts according to the reality principle. It analyses complex perceptions (things, ideas, dreams), synthesises the appropriate parts into logically coherent interpretations (also models) and rules the muscular apparatus. Since the id's drives are frequently incompatible with the moral prescriptions and religious illusions of contemporary cultures, the ego attempts to direct the libidinal energy and satisfy its demands in accordance with the imperatives of that reality. According to Freud, the ego, in its role as mediator between the id and reality, is often \"obliged to cloak the (unconscious) commands of the id with its own preconscious rationalisations, to conceal the id's conflicts with reality, to profess...to be taking notice of reality even when the id has remained rigid and unyielding.\"\nOriginally, Freud used the word ego to mean the sense of self, but later expanded it to include psychic functions such as judgment, tolerance, reality testing, control, planning, defense, synthesis of information, intellectual functioning, and memory. The ego is the organizing principle upon which thoughts and interpretations of the world are based.\nAccording to Freud, \"the ego is that part of the id which has been modified by the direct influence of the external world ... The ego represents what may be called reason and common sense, in contrast to the id, which contains the passions. ... it is like a man on horseback, who has to hold in check the superior strength of the horse; with this difference, that the rider tries to do so with his own strength while the ego uses borrowed forces.\" In fact, the ego is required to serve \"three severe masters...the external world, the superego and the id.\" It seeks to find a balance between the natural drives of the id, the limitations imposed by reality, and the strictures of the superego. It is concerned with self-preservation: it strives to keep the id's instinctive needs within limits, adapted to reality and submissive to the superego.\nThus, \"driven by the id, confined by the superego, repulsed by reality\" the ego struggles to bring about harmony among the competing forces. Consequently, it can easily be subject to \"realistic anxiety regarding the external world, moral anxiety regarding the superego, and neurotic anxiety regarding the strength of the passions in the id.\" The ego may wish to serve the id, trying to gloss over the finer details of reality to minimise conflicts, while pretending to have a regard for reality. But the superego is constantly watching every one of the ego's moves and punishes it with feelings of guilt, anxiety, and inferiority.\nTo overcome this, the ego employs defense mechanisms. Defense mechanisms reduce the tension and anxiety by disguising or transforming the impulses that are perceived as threatening. Denial, displacement, intellectualisation, fantasy, compensation, projection, rationalisation, reaction formation, regression, repression, and sublimation were the defense mechanisms Freud identified. His daughter Anna Freud identified the concepts of undoing, suppression, dissociation, idealisation, identification, introjection, inversion, somatisation, splitting, and substitution.\nIn a diagram of the Structural and Topographical Models of Mind, the ego is depicted as being half in the conscious, a quarter in the preconscious, and the other quarter in the unconscious.\nSuperego.\nThe superego reflects the internalisation of cultural rules, mainly as absorbed from parents, but also other authority figures, and the general cultural ethos. Freud developed his concept of the superego from an earlier combination of the ego ideal and the \"special psychical agency which performs the task of seeing that narcissistic satisfaction from the ego ideal is ensured...what we call our 'conscience'.\" For him, the superego can be described as \"a successful instance of identification with the parental agency\", and as development proceeds, it also absorbs the influence of those who have \"stepped into the place of parents\u00a0\u2014 educators, teachers, people chosen as ideal models\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus a child's super-ego is in fact constructed on the model not of its parents but of its parents' super-ego; the contents which fill it are the same and it becomes the vehicle of tradition and of all the time-resisting judgments of value which have propagated themselves in this manner from generation to generation.\nThe superego aims for perfection. It is the part of the personality structure (mainly but not entirely unconscious) that includes the individual's ego ideals, spiritual goals, and the psychic agency, commonly called \"conscience\", that criticises and prohibits the expression of drives, fantasies, feelings, and actions. Thus, the superego works in contradiction to the id. It is an internalised mechanism that operates to confine the ego to socially acceptable behaviour, whereas the id merely seeks instant self-gratification.\nThe superego and the ego are the products of two key factors: the state of helplessness of the child and the Oedipus complex. In the case of the little boy, it forms during the dissolution of the Oedipus complex, through a process of identification with the father figure, following the failure to retain possession of the mother as a love-object out of fear of castration. Freud described the superego and its relationship to the father figure and Oedipus complex thus:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The super-ego retains the character of the father, while the more powerful the Oedipus complex was and the more rapidly it succumbed to repression (under the influence of authority, religious teaching, schooling and reading), the stricter will be the domination of the super-ego over the ego later on\u2014in the form of conscience or perhaps of an unconscious sense of guilt.\nIn \"The Ego and the Id\", Freud presents \"the general character of harshness and cruelty exhibited by the [ego] ideal \u2014 its dictatorial \"Thou shalt\"\". The earlier in the child's development, the greater the estimate of parental power. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;. . . nor must it be forgotten that a child has a different estimate of his parents at different periods of his life. At the time at which the Oedipus complex gives place to the super-ego they are something quite magnificent; but later, they lose much of this. Identifications then come about with these later parents as well, and indeed they regularly make important contributions to the formation of character; but in that case they only affect the ego, they no longer influence the super-ego, which has been determined by the earliest parental images.\u2014\u200a\nThus when the child is in rivalry with the parental imago it feels the dictatorial \"Thou shalt\"\u2014the manifest power that the imago represents\u2014on four levels: (i) the auto-erotic, (ii) the narcissistic, (iii) the anal, and (iv) the phallic. Those different levels of mental development, and their relations to parental imagos, correspond to specific id forms of aggression and affection.\nThe concept of the Oedipus complex internalised in the superego - anchored by Freud in the hypothetical murder of the forefather of the Darwinian horde by his sons - has been criticised for its supposed sexism. Women, who cannot develop a fear of castration due to their different genital make-up, do not identify with the father. Therefore, \u2018their superego is never as implacable, as impersonal, as independent of its emotional origins as we demand of men...they are often more influenced in their judgements by feelings of affection or hostility.\u2019 - not by fear of castration, as was the case with \u2018Little Hans\u2019 in his conflict with his father over his wife and mother. However, Freud went on to modify his position to the effect \"that the majority of men are also far behind the masculine ideal and that all human individuals, as a result of their human identity, combine in themselves both masculine and feminine characteristics, otherwise known as human characteristics.\"\nPsychic apparatus.\nIn order to overcome difficulties of understanding as far as possible, Freud formulated his \"metapsychology\" which for Lacan represents a \"technical elaboration\" of the concepts of the soul model: dividing the organism into three instances the id is regarded as the germ from which the ego and the superego develop. Driven by an energy that Freud calls \"libido\" in direct reference to Plato's Eros, the instances complement each other through their specific functions in a similar way to the organelles of a cell or parts of a technical apparatus. \nFurther distinctions (as the coordinates of \"topology\", \"dynamics\" and \"economy\") encouraged Freud to assume that the metapsychological elaboration of the structural model would make it fully compatible with biological sciences such as evolutionary theory and enable a well-founded concept of mental health including a theory of human development, which naturally completed in three successive stages: the oral, anal and genital phase. However, as important as this is for the diagnostic process (illness can only be realised as a deviation from the optimal cooperation of all psycho-organic functions), Freud had to be modest. He came to the conclusion that he had to leave his metapsychological-based model of the soul in the unfinished state of a \"torso\" because \u2013 as he stated one last time in Moses and Monotheism \u2013 there was no well-founded primate research in the first half of 20th century. Without knowledge of the instinctive social behaviour with the corresponding structure of cohabitation of our genetically closest relatives in realm of primates, Freud's thesis of Darwin's primordial horde (as presented for discussion in Totem and Taboo) can't be tested and, if possible, replaced by a realistic model. Horde life and its violent abolition through the introduction of monogamy (as an agreement between the sons who murdered the horde's polygamous father) embody the evolutionary as well as cultural-prehistorical core of psychoanalysis. It stands in contrast to the religiously enigmatic reports about the origin of monogamous couples on earth as an expression of divine will, but closer to the ancient trap to pacify political conflicts among the groups of Neolithic mankind. (See Prometheus' uprising against Zeus, who created Pandora as a fatal wedding gift for Epimetheus to divide and rule these titanic brothers; Plato's myth of spherical men cut into isolated individuals for the same reason; and the similarly resolved revolt of inferior gods in the Flood epic Atra-Hasis). Additional important assumptions are based on it, such as the Oedipus complex, the origin of moral-totemic rules like Incest taboo and, not least, Freud's \"Civilization and Its Discontents\". Nonetheless, due to the lack of ethological primate research, these ideas remained an unproven belief of palaeo-anthropological science \u2013 only a hypothesis or \"\"just so story\" as a not unpleasant English critic wittily called it. But I mean it honours a hypothesis if it shows the capability of creating context and understanding in new areas.\"\nStructural model and neuropsychoanalysis.\nFreud's basic metapsychological thesis is that the living \"soul\" with their needs, consciousness and memory resembles a psychological apparatus to which \"spatial extension and composition of several pieces\" can be attributed (...) and which \"locus ... is the brain (nervous system)\". \nModern technology has made it possible to observe the bioelectrical activity of neurons in the living brain. This led to the realisation in which area of the brain the needs for food, skin desire etc. begin to show themselves neuronally; where the highest performances of consciously thinking ego take place (s. frontal lobe); and that other parts of the brain are specialised in storing memories: one of the main function of the superego. \nDecisive for this view was Freud's Project for a Scientific Psychology. Written in 1895, it develops the thesis that experiences are stored in the neuronal network through \"a permanent change after an event\". Freud soon abandoned this attempt and left it unpublished. Insights into the neuronal processes that permanently store experiences in the brain \u2013 like engraving the proverbial tabula rasa with some code \u2013 belong to the physiological branch of science and lead in a different direction of research than the psychological question of what the differences between consciousness and unconsciousness are. Freud's point of view was that \"consciousness\" is directly given \u2013 cannot be explained by insights into physiological details. Essentially, two things were known about the living soul: The brain with its nervous system extending over the entire organism and the acts of consciousness. According to Freud, therefore, haphazard phenomena can be integrated between \"both endpoints of our knowledge\" (findings of modern neurology, just as well as the position of our planet in the universe, for example), but this only contributes to the spatial \"localisation of the acts of consciousness\", not to their understanding.\nAdvantages of the structural model.\nIn his earlier \"topographic model\", Freud divided the psyche into three \"regions\" or \"systems\": \"the Conscious\", that which is present to awareness at the surface level of the psyche in any given moment, including information and stimuli from both internal and external sources; \"the Preconscious\", consisting of material that is merely latent, not present to consciousness but capable of becoming so; and \"the Unconscious\", consisting of ideas and impulses that are made completely inaccessible to consciousness by the act of repression. By introducing the structural model, Freud was seeking to reduce his reliance on the term \"unconscious\" in its systematic and topographic sense\u2014as the mental region that is foreign to the ego\u2014by replacing it with the concept of the 'id'.\" The partition of the psyche outlined in the structural model is thus one that cuts across the topographical model's partition of \"conscious vs. unconscious\".\nFreud conceptualised the structural model because it allowed for a greater degree of precision and diversification. While the need contents of the id are initially unconscious (can become unconscious again as a result of an act of repression), the contents of the ego (such as thinking, perception) and the superego (memory; imprinting) can be both conscious and unconscious. Freud argued that his new model included the option of scientifically describing the structure and functions of the mentally healthy living being and therefore represented an effective diagnostic tool for clarifying the causes of mental disorders: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Transference neuroses correspond to a conflict between the ego and the id; narcissistic neuroses, to a conflict between the ego and the superego; and psychoses, to one between the ego and the external world.\nThe three newly presented entities, however, remained closely connected to their previous conceptions, including those that went under different names \u2013 the systematic unconscious for the id, and the conscience/ego ideal for the superego. Freud never abandoned the topographical division of conscious, preconscious, and unconscious, though he noted that \"the three qualities of consciousness and the three provinces of the mental apparatus do not fall together into three peaceful couples...we had no right to expect any such smooth arrangement.\"\nThe iceberg image is a visual metaphor, proposed by G. Stanley Hall, depicting the relationship between the ego, id and superego agencies (structural model) and the conscious and unconscious psychic systems (topographic model). In the iceberg metaphor, the entire id and part of both the superego and the ego are submerged in the underwater portion, representing the unconscious region of the psyche. The remaining portions of the ego and superego are displayed above water in the conscious region.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59176", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59176", "title": "Widukind", "text": "Duke of Saxony from 777 to 785\nWidukind, also known as Wittekind and Wittikund, was a leader of the Saxons and the chief opponent of the Frankish king Charlemagne during the Saxon Wars from 777 to 785. Charlemagne ultimately prevailed, organized Saxony as a Frankish province, massacred thousands of Saxon nobles, and ordered conversions of the pagan Saxons to Christianity. In later times, Widukind became a symbol of Saxon independence and a figure of legend. He is also venerated as a Blessed in the Catholic Church.\nLife.\nVery little is known about Widukind's life. His name literally translates as \"child of the forest\". In the chronicles he is accompanied by Abbi who may have been a close relative. However, it is uncertain how they were related because all sources about him stem from his enemies, the Franks, who painted a negative picture representing him as an \"insurgent\" and a \"traitor\". While Widukind was considered the leader of the Saxon resistance by the Franks, his exact role in the military campaigns is unknown.\nAccording to the \"Royal Frankish Annals\", the Franks campaigned in Saxony in 772, when Charlemagne ordered the destruction of the Irminsul sanctuary. The Saxon Wars continued when Westphalian tribes devastated the church of Deventer and the Angrarii laid siege to the Frankish court at Fritzlar. The king retaliated against the local nobility, enforcing the decree to incorporate the Saxon lands as a Frankish march.\nWidukind was first mentioned by the \"Annals\" in 777 when he was the only one of the Saxon nobles not to appear at Charlemagne's court in Paderborn. Instead, he stayed with the Danish king Sigfred (possibly Sigurd Hring). The next year, the Westphalians again invaded the Frankish Rhineland and subsequently fought a running battle against the Franks and their local allies while Charlemagne was busy in Spain.\nBy 782, Widukind had returned from Denmark and goaded the Saxon nobles into rebellion. From 782 to 784, battles between Saxons and Franks occurred annually, while Charlemagne had 4,500 Saxons executed at the Massacre of Verden. Widukind allied himself with the Frisians but Charlemagne's winter attacks of 784/785 were nevertheless successful, and the \"dux\" and his allies were pushed back to their homelands. Charlemagne, leading an expedition towards the mouth of the Elbe, learned that Widukind was in the land of the Nordalbingians, on the right bank of the river. In the Bardengau in 785, Widukind agreed to surrender in return for a guarantee that no bodily harm would be done to him. He and his allies were then baptized, possibly in Attigny, with Charlemagne as his godfather. Widukind thereby reached a peace agreement and the acknowledgement of the Saxon noble rank by their Frankish overlords.\nThere are no contemporary sources about Widukind's life or death after his baptism. Historian Gerd Althoff assumed that he was imprisoned at a monastery\u2014a fate that happened to other rulers deposed by Charlemagne. He tried to identify Reichenau Abbey as a likely location where Widukind may have spent the rest of his life, but his results are inconclusive and widely rejected. Alternatively, he may have received a position in the administration of occupied Saxony. The \"Vita Liudgeri\" biography of Saint Ludger mentions him accompanying Charlemagne on his campaign against the Veleti leader Dragovit. According to the 12th-century \"Kaiserchronik\", he was slain by Charlemagne's brother-in-law Gerold of Baar.\nLegend.\nNumerous legends developed around Widukind's life; he eventually appeared as a saintly figure (becoming \"Blessed Widukind\") and the builder of many churches. He was later assumed to have died in 807 or 808; his feast day is commemorated on January 7.\nAccording to legend, Widukind experienced a vision that led to his conversion. Disguised as a beggar, he was spying on Charlemagne's troop camp during Easter. He witnessed a priest performing a Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and the priest was holding a beautiful child during the consecration. To his astonishment, people would receive communion and the priest would give the same child to each person. Widukind was dumbfounded by this scene and went to beg outside after the mass. One of the emperor's servants recognized Widukind behind his disguise\u2014due to an odd formation of one of his fingers\u2014and Widukind was captured. He was interrogated and confessed to spying on Charlemagne's camp for the purpose of becoming better acquainted with the Christian faith. He later confessed the divine vision he had seen. The emperor concluded that God had given Widukind the grace of witnessing the divine child, Jesus, behind the Sacred Host of the Mass. Widukind then renounced his worship of pagan idols.\nLater perception.\nMedieval.\nSince the 9th century, Widukind had been idolized as a mythical hero. Around 1100, a tomb for him was made in Enger; recent excavations have found that the contents of the tomb are indeed early medieval, but are the remains of a young woman. In 1971, archaeologists discovered three graves in a prominent place in front of the altar. The remains of three men who had died in the early 9th century, two of them about sixty-year-old warriors, the third a young man, were identified after a DNA analysis in 2002 as half-brothers or maternal cousins and a nephew. The man buried in front of the altar is assumed to be Widukind. When in the 10th century Saxon kings (of the Ottonian dynasty) replaced the Frankish kings in East Francia (the later Holy Roman Empire), these kings proudly claimed descent from Widukind: Matilda, the wife of King Henry I, was apparently a great-great-great-granddaughter of Widukind. The House of Billung, to which several Dukes of Saxony belonged, had Matilda's sister among its ancestors and thus also claimed descent from Widukind. The Italian family Del Carretto (and its supposed French branch, family de Charette) also claimed to descend from the hero.\nIn German nationalism.\nWidukind became a hero for German nationalists in the early 20th century. German neo-pagans saw him as an heroic defender of Germany's traditional beliefs and their gods, resisting the Middle Eastern religion of Christianity. Christian nationalists also lauded him, linking Charlemagne with the humiliation of French domination after World War I, especially the occupation of the Rhineland, portraying Charlemagne as a \"French\" invader.\nAfter the Nazi Party came to power in 1933, so many plays and other works were written about Widukind that there were complaints that he was becoming a clich\u00e9. Alfred Rosenberg praised him as a hero of German freedom, who finally joined with the founder of the German Reich (Charlemagne). Two important plays about the Saxon leader were produced in 1934, \"Der Sieger\" by Friedrich Forster and \"Wittekind\" by Edmund Kiss. The first celebrated the conversion of Widukind, but the second caused controversy because of its explicit anti-Christian message. In that play after the massacre of Verden, Saxon leaders say, \"That is what the Christians have done; they feign love, but bring murder!\"\u2014a line that led to protests from the audience. The play portrays Catholic church leaders planning to destroy German freedom by forcing racial mixture on them, thus turning them into pliable \"Untermenschen\". Thousands of German maidens are captured and will be forced to mate with \"Jews and Moors\" unless Widukind converts, which he does only to avoid this horrifying prospect. He gives a speech saying that the survival of the German race was his principal concern, and that future generations will praise him for this when the true spirit of the German people arises once more.\nPresent.\nMany buildings are named after him in the area of Enger, including the Widukind-Gymnasium Enger.\nSainthood.\nHe is called 'Blessed Wittikund' in the Catholic Church and his feast day is celebrated on 7 January. Wittikund apparently saw an apparition of the child Jesus at Christmas mass one time. Following his baptism in 785 AD he forfeited engaging in warfare and became a prolific founder/restorer of churches; it was for this reason that he is regarded as a holy person.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59177", "revid": "251228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59177", "title": "Society of mind theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "59178", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59178", "title": "Staatsicherheit", "text": ""}
{"id": "59179", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59179", "title": "STASI", "text": ""}
{"id": "59180", "revid": "13892963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59180", "title": "Caroline County, Maryland", "text": "County in Maryland, United States\nCaroline County is a rural county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 33,293. Its county seat is Denton. The county is part of the Mid-Eastern Shore region of the state.\nCaroline County is bordered by Queen Anne's County to the north, Talbot County to the west, Dorchester County to the south, Kent County, Delaware, to the east, and Sussex County, Delaware, to the southeast.\nHistory.\nCaroline County was created via 1773 Maryland General Assembly legislation from parts of Dorchester and Queen Anne's counties. The county derives its name from Lady Caroline Eden, wife of Maryland's last colonial governor, Robert Eden. Seven commissioners were originally appointed: Charles Dickinson, Benson Stainton, Thomas White, William Haskins, Richard Mason, Joshua Clark, and Nathaniel Potter. These men bought of land at Pig Point (now Denton) on which to build a courthouse and jail.\nUntil the completion of these buildings, court was held at Melvill's Warehouse, approximately north of Pig Point. Elections and other business transactions were completed there. The first commissioner meeting was held on March 15, 1774, at Melvill's Warehouse. In 1777, court was moved to Bridgetown (now Greensboro), but in the interest of convenience, court was moved back to Melvill's.\nDisagreements arose concerning the permanent location of the county seat. The General Assembly reached a compromise in 1785 and ordered that of land at Melvill's Landing should be purchased for a courthouse and jail. In 1790, the county court and its belongings moved to Pig Point. The Caroline County Courthouse was completed in 1797.\nThe county has a number of properties on the National Register of Historic Places. The National Park Service is developing a site in the southern half of Caroline County dedicated to interpreting the Underground Railroad as part of the Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad National Monument.\nGovernment.\nCaroline County was granted home rule in 1984 under state code in an initiative led by County Commissioner Charles T. Dean, Sr.\nGrowth is a major issue faced by Caroline County and several other Mid-Shore counties. Retirees and workers willing to commute across the Chesapeake Bay to the western shore are increasingly attracted by the rural environment and low cost of living.\nFrom 1994 to 2014 Caroline was the only county in the state not represented by a resident legislator in the Maryland General Assembly. Redistricting and a sparse population were the chief causes.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Sheriff of Caroline County is Donnie Baker, who has held the position since 2022.\nPolitics.\nAt a Presidential level, Caroline is the \u201creddest\u201d county on the mostly Republican Eastern Shore, and rivals Carroll County as the most Republican county in the state outside of Appalachian Western Maryland. No Democratic presidential candidate has carried Caroline County since Lyndon Johnson\u2019s landslide in 1964, and before then it had last gone Democratic in 1940 with Franklin D. Roosevelt. Indeed, the last Democrat to reach forty percent of the county\u2019s vote was Jimmy Carter in 1980. In earlier times Caroline was a swing county, less secessionist than Wicomico, Worcester, Queen Anne\u2019s or Cecil.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.0%) is water. It is the second-smallest county by total area in Maryland. Notable waterways include the Choptank River and Tuckahoe Creek, as well as the man-made Williston Lake.\nCaroline County currently ranks seventh nationally in terms of land protected under the Ag Preservation Program.\nIts eastern border is the Mason\u2013Dixon line.\nCaroline is the only Eastern Shore county not to touch either the Chesapeake Bay or Atlantic Ocean. Additionally, it is the only county on the Eastern Shore without an Interstate or United States Highway within its borders.\nTuckahoe State Park, Holiday Park Campgrounds and Martinak State Park are located in Caroline County.\nThe American Discovery Trail runs through the county.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 33,066\u00a0people, 12,158\u00a0households, and 8,702\u00a0families living in the county. The population density was . There were 13,482 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 79.8% white, 13.9% black or African American, 0.6% Asian, 0.4% American Indian, 0.2% Pacific islander, 3.1% from other races, and 2.1% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 5.5% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 21.7% were German, 15.6% were Irish, 12.3% were English, and 6.9% were American.\nOf the 12,158\u00a0households, 36.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 52.1% were married couples living together, 13.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 28.4% were non-families, and 22.7% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.68 and the average family size was 3.12. The median age was 38.7 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $58,799 and the median income for a family was $65,801. Males had a median income of $45,944 versus $33,927 for females. The per capita income for the county was $24,294. About 8.0% of families and 11.5% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.5% of those under age 18 and 11.1% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 29,772 people, 11,097 households, and 8,156 families living in the county. The population density was . There were 12,028 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 81.69% White, 14.77% Black or African American, 0.37% Native American, 0.55% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.26% from other races, and 1.34% from two or more races. 2.65% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 17.4% were of American, 14.8% English, 14.4% German and 9.9% Irish ancestry.\nThere were 11,097 households, out of which 34.80% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 54.30% were married couples living together, 13.60% had a female householder with no husband present, and 26.50% were non-families. 21.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.64 and the average family size was 3.03.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.80% under the age of 18, 7.70% from 18 to 24, 28.90% from 25 to 44, 23.10% from 45 to 64, and 13.50% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 95.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.70 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $38,832, and the median income for a family was $44,825. Males had a median income of $31,119 versus $21,915 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,275. About 9.00% of families and 11.70% of the population were below the poverty line, including 14.50% of those under age 18 and 12.30% of those age 65 or over. It is regularly ranked among the poorest of all 23 Maryland counties.\nAs of Census 2010 the racial makeup of Caroline County was 78.19% Non-Hispanic white, 13.87% black, 0.37% Native American, 0.57% Asian, 0.16% Pacific Islander, 0.10% Non-Hispanics of some other race, 1.68% Non-Hispanics of two or more races and 5.49% Hispanic or Latino.\nEducation.\nCaroline County Public Schools provides public education in Caroline County.\nMedia.\nThe \"Caroline Review\" circulates monthly and is free of charge; a digital daily, \"Caroline Past and Present\", was established in 2018.\nTransportation.\nCaroline County is one of three Maryland counties that does not have an Interstate or U.S. Highway running through it. Caroline's \"major artery\" is Maryland Route 404, four lanes in some parts but two lanes in others. It is chiefly used in the summertime by non-local beachgoers heading to Ocean City, Maryland, or Rehoboth Beach, Delaware.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\nThe United States Census Bureau recognizes three Census-designated places in Caroline County:\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59182", "revid": "2049718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59182", "title": "Transactional analysis", "text": "Theory and practice of a type of psychological analysis\nTransactional analysis is a psychoanalytic theory and method of therapy wherein social interactions (or \"transactions\") are analyzed to determine the ego state of the communicator (whether parent-like, childlike, or adult-like) as a basis for understanding behavior. In transactional analysis, the communicator is taught to alter the ego state as a way to solve emotional problems. The method deviates from Freudian psychoanalysis, which focuses on increasing awareness of the contents of subconsciously held ideas. Eric Berne developed the concept and paradigm of transactional analysis in the late 1950s.\nHistory.\nEric Berne presented transactional analysis to the world as a phenomenological approach, supplementing Freud's philosophical construct with observable data. His theory built on the science of Wilder Penfield and Ren\u00e9 Spitz along with the neo-psychoanalytic thought of people such as Paul Federn, Edoardo Weiss, and Erik Erikson. By moving to an interpersonal motivational theory, he placed it both in opposition to the psychoanalytic traditions of his day and within what would become the psychoanalytic traditions of the future. From Berne, transactional analysts have inherited a determination to create an accessible and user-friendly system, an understanding of script or life-plan, ego states, transactions, and a theory of groups.\nBerne's theory was based on the ideas of Freud but with distinct differences. Freudian psychotherapists focused on client personalities. Berne believed that insight could be better discovered by analyzing a client's social transactions. Berne mapped interpersonal relationships to three ego-states of the individuals involved: the \"Parent, Adult\", and \"Child\" state. He then investigated communications between individuals based on the current state of each. He called these interpersonal interactions \"transactions\" and used the label \"games\" to refer to certain patterns of transactions which popped up repeatedly in everyday life in every human interaction.\nThe origins of transactional analysis can be traced to the first five of Berne's six articles on intuition, which he began writing in 1949. Even at this early juncture and while still working to become a psychoanalyst, his writings challenged Freudian concepts of the unconscious.\nIn 1956, after 15 years of psychoanalytic training, Berne was refused admission to the San Francisco Psychoanalytic Institute as a fully-fledged psychoanalyst. He interpreted the request for several more years of training as a rejection and decided to walk away from psychoanalysis. \nBefore the end of the year, he had written two seminal papers, both published in 1957. \nA few months later, he wrote a third article, titled \"Transactional Analysis: A New and Effective Method of Group Therapy\", which was presented by invitation at the 1957 Western Regional Meeting of the American Group Psychotherapy Association of Los Angeles. With the publication of this paper in the 1958 issue of the \"American Journal of Psychotherapy\", Berne's new method of diagnosis and treatment, transactional analysis, became a permanent part of the psychotherapeutic literature. In addition to restating his concepts of ego states and structural analysis, the 1958 paper added the important new features of transactional analysis proper (i.e. the analysis of transactions), games, and scripts.\nHis seminar group from the 1950s developed the term \"transactional analysis (TA)\" to describe therapies based on his work.\nBy 1964, this expanded into the International Transactional Analysis Association. While still largely ignored by the psychoanalytic community, many therapists have put his ideas into practice.\nIn the early 1960s, he published both technical and popular accounts of his conclusions. His first full-length book on TA was published in 1961, titled \"Transactional Analysis in Psychotherapy\". \"Structures and Dynamics of Organizations and Groups\" (1963) examined the same analysis in a broader context than one-on-one interaction.\nOverview.\nTA (Transactional Analysis) is not only post-Freudian, but, according to its founder's wishes, consciously extra-Freudian. That is to say that, while it has its roots in psychoanalysis, since Berne was a psychoanalytically-trained psychiatrist, it was designed as a dissenting branch of psychoanalysis in that it put its emphasis on transactional rather than \"psycho-\" analysis.\nWith its focus on transactions, TA shifted the attention from internal psychological dynamics to the dynamics contained in people's interactions. Rather than believing that increasing awareness of the contents of unconsciously held ideas was the therapeutic path, TA concentrated on the content of people's interactions with each other. Changing these interactions was TA's path to solving emotional problems.\nTA also differs from Freudian analysis in explaining that an individual's final emotional state is the result of inner dialogue between different parts of the psyche, as opposed to the Freudian hypothesis that imagery is the overriding determinant of inner emotional state. (For example, depression may be due to ongoing critical verbal messages from the inner Parent to the inner Child.) Berne believed that it is relatively easy to identify these inner dialogues and that the ability to do so is parentally suppressed in early childhood.\nIn addition, Berne believed in making a commitment to \"curing\" his clients, rather than just understanding them. To that end, he introduced one of the most important aspects of TA: the contract\u2014an agreement entered into by both client and therapist to pursue specific changes that the client desires.\nRevising Freud's concept of the human psyche as composed of the id, ego, and super-ego, Berne postulated in addition three \"ego states\"\u2014the Parent, Adult, and Child states\u2014which were largely shaped through childhood experiences. These three are all part of Freud's ego; none represent the id or the superego.\nUnhealthy childhood experiences can lead to being pathologically fixated in the Child and Parent ego states, bringing discomfort to an individual and/or others in a variety of forms, including many types of mental illness.\nBerne considered how individuals interact with one another, and how the ego states affect each set of transactions. Unproductive or counterproductive transactions were considered to be signs of ego state problems. Analyzing these transactions according to the person's individual developmental history would enable the person to \"get better\". Berne thought that virtually everyone has something problematic about their ego states and that negative behaviour would not be addressed by \"treating\" only the problematic individual.\nBerne identified a typology of common counterproductive social interactions, identifying these as \"games\".\nBerne presented his theories in two popular books on transactional analysis: \"Games People Play\" (1964) and \"What Do You Say After You Say Hello?\" (1975).\nBy the 1970s, because of TA's non-technical and non-threatening jargon and model of the human psyche, many of its terms and concepts were adopted by eclectic therapists as part of their individual approaches to psychotherapy. It also served well as a therapy model for groups of patients, or marital/family counselees, where interpersonal (rather than intrapersonal) disturbances were the focus of treatment.\nTA's popularity in the U.S. waned in the 1970s. The more dedicated TA purists banded together in 1964 with Berne to form a research and professional accrediting body, the International Transactional Analysis Association, or ITAA.\nFifty years later.\nWithin the framework of transactional analysis, more recent transactional analysts have developed different and overlapping theories of transactional analysis: cognitive, behavioural, relational, redecision, integrative, constructivist, narrative, body-work, positive psychological, personality adaptational, self-reparenting, psychodynamic and neuroconstructivist.\nSome transactional analysts highlight the many things they have in common with cognitive behavioral therapy: the use of contracts with clear goals, the attention to cognitive distortions (called \"adult decontamination\" or \"child deconfusion\"), the focus on the client's conscious attitudes and behaviours and the use of \"strokes\".\nCognitive-based transactional analysts use ego state identification to identify communication distortions and teach different functional options in the dynamics of communication.\nSome make additional contracts for more profound work involving life plans or scripts or with unconscious processes, including those which manifest in the client-therapist relationship as transference and countertransference, and define themselves as psychodynamic or relational transactional analysts. Some highlight the study and promotion of subjective well-being and optimal human functioning rather than pathology and so identify with positive psychology. Some are increasingly influenced by current research in attachment, mother-infant interaction and by the implications of interpersonal neurobiology and non-linear dynamic systems.\nOutline.\nTransactional analysis integrates the theories of psychology and psychotherapy because it has elements of psychoanalytic, humanist and cognitive ideas.\nAccording to the International Transactional Analysis Association, TA \"is a theory of personality and a systematic psychotherapy for personal growth and personal change.\"\nPhilosophy\nFreedom from historical maladaptations embedded in the childhood script is required in order to become free of inappropriate, inauthentic and displaced emotions which are not a fair and honest reflection of here-and-now life (such as echoes of childhood suffering, pity-me and other mind games, compulsive behaviour and repetitive dysfunctional life patterns). The aim of change under TA is to move toward autonomy (freedom from childhood script), spontaneity, intimacy, problem \"solving\" as opposed to \"avoidance\" or \"passivity\", cure as an ideal rather than merely making progress and learning new choices.\nEgo-state or Parent\u2013Adult\u2013Child (PAC) models.\nMany of the core TA models and concepts can be categorised into\nAt any given time, a person experiences and manifests his or her personality through a mixture of behaviours, thoughts, and feelings. Typically, according to TA, there are three ego states that people consistently use:\nBerne differentiated his Parent, Adult, and Child ego states from actual adults, parents, and children, by using capital letters when describing them. These ego states may or may not represent the relationships that they act out. For example, in the workplace, an adult supervisor may take on the Parent role, and scold an adult employee as though he were a Child. Or a child, using the Parent ego state, could scold her actual parent as though the parent were a Child.\nWithin each of these ego states are subdivisions. Thus Parental figures are often either\nChildhood behaviours are either \nThese subdivisions categorize individuals' patterns of behaviour, feelings, and ways of thinking, which can be functional (beneficial or \"positive\") or dysfunctional/counterproductive (\"negative\").\nBerne states that there are four types of diagnosis of ego states. They are: \"behavioural\" diagnosis, \"social\" diagnosis, \"historical\" diagnosis, and \"phenomenological\" diagnosis. A complete diagnosis would include all four types. It has subsequently been demonstrated that there is a fifth type of diagnosis, namely \"contextual\", because the same behaviour will be diagnosed differently according to the context of the behaviour.\nEgo states do not correspond directly to Sigmund Freud's ego, superego, and id, although there are obvious parallels: Superego/Parent; Ego/Adult; Id/Child. Ego states are consistent for each person, and (argue TA practitioners) are more observable than the components of Freud's model. In other words, the ego state from which someone is communicating is evident in their behavior, manner and expression.\nEmotional blackmail.\nEmotional blackmail is a term coined by psychotherapist Dr. Susan Forward, about controlling people in relationships and the theory that fear, obligation, and guilt (FOG) are the transactional dynamics at play between the controller and the person being controlled. Understanding these dynamics are useful to anyone trying to extricate from the controlling behavior of another person, and deal with their own compulsions to do things that are uncomfortable, undesirable, burdensome, or self-sacrificing for others.\nForward and Frazier identify four blackmail types each with their own mental manipulation style:\nThere are different levels of demands\u2014demands that are of little consequence, demands that involve important issues or personal integrity, demands that affect major life decisions, and/or demands that are dangerous or illegal.\nEffectiveness.\nA 1995 research article by the staff of \"Consumer Reports\", with Martin Seligman as consultant, assessed that psychotherapy conducted by a group of Transactional Analysts is more effective than that of groups of psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, marriage counselors, and physicians; and that psychotherapy lasting more than six months is 40% more effective than that lasting less than six months.\nA 2010 review found 50 studies on transactional analysis that concluded it had a positive effect, and 10 where no positive effect was found. No studies that concluded a negative effect were found.\nCriticism.\nThe three major limitations of Berne's work are: \nIn popular culture.\nThomas Harris's successful popular work from the late 1960s, \"I'm OK, You're OK\", is largely based on transactional analysis. A fundamental divergence, however, between Harris and Berne is that Berne postulates that everyone starts life in the \"I'm OK\" position, whereas Harris believes that life starts out \"I'm not OK, you're OK\".\nNew Age author James Redfield has acknowledged Harris and Berne as important influences in his best-seller \"The Celestine Prophecy\" (1993). The protagonists in the novel survive by striving (and succeeding) in escaping from \"control dramas\" that resemble the games of TA.\nSinger/songwriter Warren Zevon mentions transactional analysis in his 1980 song \"Gorilla, You're a Desperado\" from the album \"Bad Luck Streak in Dancing School\".\nSinger-songwriter Joe South's 1968 song, \"Games People Play\", was based directly on transactional-analytic concepts and Berne's book of the same name.\nTA makes an appearance in Antonio Campos' 2016 biographical drama \"Christine\", a film covering the events that led TV journalist Christine Chubbuck to die by suicide on TV. She is brought to a transactional analysis therapy session by a colleague, where they introduce her to the \"Yes, But...\" technique.\nSinger John Denver references transactional analysis in his autobiography. His wife at the time, Annie Denver, was getting into the movement. John says he tried it but found it wanting.\nEric Berne's \"Games People Play\" was featured prominently on an episode of \"Mad Men\". The book was seen in Season 4, Episode 11, titled \"Chinese Wall\". The approximate time period for this episode is September 1965. By late September 1965, \"Games People Play\" had been on the \"New York Times\" non-fiction bestseller list for nine weeks already.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59184", "revid": "14548726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59184", "title": "Widukind of Corvey", "text": "Saxon chronicler (c. 925 \u2013 after 973)\n Widukind of Corvey (c. 925\u00a0\u2013 after 973; , in italian \"Vitichindo Sacco di Corvey\", in Latin VVITICHINDI SAXO) was a medieval Saxon chronicler. His three-volume \"Res gestae Saxonicae sive annalium libri tres\" is an important chronicle of 10th-century Germany (Germania) during the rule of the Ottonian dynasty.\nLife.\nIn view of his name, he possibly was a descendant of the Saxon leader and national hero Widukind, mentioned in the \"Royal Frankish Annals\", who had battled Charlemagne in the Saxon Wars from 777 to 785. Widukind the Chronicler entered the Benedictine abbey of Corvey in the Westphalian part of Saxony around 940/42, probably to become a tutor. It is widely assumed that he had reached the age of 15 upon his access, though it has been recently suggested that he may have joined the Order as a child. In 936 Henry the Fowler, the first East Frankish king of the Saxon ducal Ottonian dynasty had died and was succeeded by his son Otto the Great.\nOtto's rise as undisputed ruler of a German kingdom against the reluctant dukes made great impression on the Benedictine monk. By his own admission, Widukind first wrote several Christian hagiographies before he began his \"Res gestae Saxonicae\". He dedicated the chronicles to Abbess Matilda of Quedlinburg (c. 955\u2013999), daughter of Emperor Otto the Great, like himself a descendant of the Saxon leader Widukind. The annals were written after Otto's coronation by Pope John XII on 2 February 962; however, though both Otto and his father Henry the Fowler are named \"Imperatores\", this incident is not mentioned. After the elevation of Matilda's brother Otto II as co-emperor in 967 and the death of her half-brother Archbishop William of Mainz one year later, the abbess remained the only important member of the Ottonian dynasty in the Saxon lands under regent Hermann Billung; therefore, Widukind may have begun the writing \u2013 or started all over again \u2013 to create a kind of mirror for princes.\nThe annals were continued until Otto's death on 7 May 973. Widukind probably died thereafter at Corvey Abbey.\nWork.\nThe \"Res gestae Saxonicae\" are significant historical accounts of the times of Otto the Great and Henry the Fowler, modelled on the works of the Roman historian Sallust and the deuterocanonical Books of the Maccabees. Widukind wrote as a Saxon, proud of his people and history, beginning his narration not with the Roman Empire but with a brief synopsis derived from the orally-transmitted history of the Saxons and their struggles with the Franks, with a terseness that makes his work difficult to interpret.\nWidukind of Corvey starts with the wars between Theuderich I, King of Austrasia, and the Thuringii, in which the Saxons played a large part. An allusion to the conversion of the Saxons to Christianity under Charlemagne brings him to the early Saxon dukes and details of the reign of Henry the Fowler, whose campaigns are referred to in some detail. He omitted Italian events in tracing the career of Henry, nor does he ever mention a pope, but one of the three surviving manuscripts of his \"Gesta\" was transcribed in Benevento, the Lombard duchy south of Rome. The second book opens with the election of Otto the Great as German king, treats of the risings against his authority, again omitting events in Italy, and concludes with the death of his first wife Edith of England in 946. In the third book the historian deals with Otto's expedition into France, his troubles with his son Liudolf and his son-in-law, Conrad, Duke of Lorraine, and the various wars in Germany.\nA manuscript of \"Res gestae Saxonicae sive annalium libri tres\" was first published in Basel in 1532 and is today in the British Library. There are two other surviving manuscripts. The best edition was published in 1935 by Paul Hirsch and Hans-Eberhard Lohmann in the series \"Monumenta Germaniae Historica: Scriptores rerum Germanicarum in usum scholarum editi\". A German translation appears in the \"Quellen zur Geschichte der s\u00e4chsischen Kaiserzeit\" published by Albert Bauer and Reinhold Rau in 1971. An English translation is found in an unprinted doctoral dissertation: Raymond F. Wood, \"The three books of the deeds of the Saxons, by Widukind of Corvey, translated with introduction, notes, and bibliography\" (University of California, Los Angeles, 1949).\nWidukind is also credited with \"vitae\" of St Paul and St Thecla doubtless based on the 2nd century \"Acts of Paul and Thecla\", but no traces of them now remain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59185", "revid": "1317061624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59185", "title": "Carroll County, Maryland", "text": "County in Maryland, United States\nCarroll County is a county located in the U.S. state of Maryland. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 172,891. Its county seat is Westminster. The county is part of the Central Maryland region of the state. Carroll County is included in the Washington-Baltimore-Arlington, DC-MD-VA-WV-PA Combined Statistical Area. While predominantly rural, the county has become increasingly suburban in recent years.\nHistory.\nPrior to European colonization, the land that now makes up Carroll County was inhabited by Native Americans for thousands of years. Numerous Native American archaeological sites and archeological artifacts have been located across the county. Native Americans used the land for permanent settlements, seasonal visits and journeys, and as hunting grounds.\n18th century.\nAt the time of European colonization, the Susquehannock and the Lenape were the predominant indigenous nations in the area. They spoke Iroquoian and Algonquian languages, respectively. Present-day Manchester, which was inhabited by the Susquehannock nation until around 1750, was where the two important Native American trails intersected. An ancient trail that was used by Algonquian and Iroquois nations, named the \"Patapsco-Conewago (Hanover) Road\" by colonists, stretched from the Susquehanna River to the Potomac River. Main Street in Westminster was built on a portion of the trail between the two rivers.\nBy the end of the 18th century, most roads in Carroll County followed trails that had been established by Native Americans.\n19th century.\nMaryland Route 26 (Liberty Road) was built over what was originally a Native American trail, which passed through the Freedom area of southern Carroll County and was used by Native Americans to travel from the Blue Ridge Mountains to Chesapeake Bay. The trail was developed as a road and renamed \"Liberty\" by an act of the Maryland General Assembly in the early 1800s. The land of what is now Sykesville was used by the Susquehannock and the Lenape as hunting grounds. \nTaneytown was inhabited by the Tuscarora people during the early to mid-1700s. The Tuscarora, also Iroquoian speakers, hunted deer, wolves, wildcats, and otters in the woodlands of what is now Taneytown. \nDue to the Six Nations land cessions, the Tuscarora were expelled westward by European Americans across the South Mountain of the Cumberland Valley.\nCarroll County was created in 1837 from parts of Baltimore and Frederick Counties. The county was named for Charles Carroll of Carrollton, who was one of 56 delegates to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia who unanimously signed the United States Declaration of Independence.\nThe earliest European settlers in Carroll County were predominantly Pennsylvania Dutch from southeast Pennsylvania and English from the Tidewater region of Maryland. German was the predominant language of Carroll County until the Civil War. German was most heavily spoken in the northern and western parts of the county. The towns of Hampstead, Manchester, and Taneytown had German majorities. English-speakers were a minority and were concentrated in southern Carroll.\nDuring the American Civil War, the population of Carroll County was sharply divided between supporters of the Union and the Confederacy. In 1863, there were significant troop movements through the county as part of the Gettysburg campaign. On June 29, 1863, the cavalry skirmish known as Corbit's Charge was fought in the streets of Westminster, when two companies of Delaware cavalry attacked a much larger Confederate force under General J. E. B. Stuart.\n20th century.\nDuring the 1970s, Carroll County was a stronghold of the Ku Klux Klan and the Klan regularly held rallies and cross-burnings. The KKK held rallies and handed out leaflets on Main Street in Westminster and in Manchester until the late 1980s.\n21st century.\nIn 2012, two minors were charged for a cross-burning in Westminster. In 2018, the KKK distributed fliers in southern Carroll County.\nIn 2013, the Carroll County Board of Commissioners voted to make English the official language of the county. In 2018, the Carroll County Public Schools announced that Confederate flags and Nazi swastikas would be banned from Carroll County schools, along with Ku Klux Klan and Aryan Nation symbolism and other messages that promote hatred or intolerance.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.1%) is water.\nTopographically, Carroll County is located within the Piedmont Plateau region, with characteristic upland terrain of rolling hills and deciduous forest. The most prominent relief is Parr's Ridge, which bisects the county from southwest to northeast. The highest point is an unnamed hilltop a half-mile south of the Pennsylvania state line in the northeastern part of the county off Harvey Yingling Road.\nCarroll County is bordered on the north by the Mason\u2013Dixon line with Pennsylvania, and on the south by Howard County across the South Branch of the Patapsco River. About half of the eastern border, with Baltimore County, is formed by the North Branch of the Patapsco River and by Liberty Reservoir, though the northern half near Manchester and Hampstead is a land border. Carroll County is bordered on the west by Frederick County, across the Monocacy River and Sam's Creek. Other major streams in the county include Big Pipe Creek, Little Pipe Creek, and Double Pipe Creek, Bear Branch, and the headwaters of the Gunpowder Falls. The Piney Run Reservoir is in the southern part of the county.\nThree railroad lines cross Carroll County. The old Baltimore and Ohio (B&amp;O) Old Main Line crosses the southern part of the county from east to west, with former stations in Sykesville and Mount Airy. The original Western Maryland Railway (WM) main line track runs southeast to northwest through Carrollton, Westminster, New Windsor, and Union Bridge. The old Baltimore and Hanover Railroad (later acquired by WM) runs further to the east through Hampstead, Millers, and Lineboro. Two of these railroad lines are now operated by CSX Transportation; the former WM main line is now operated by Maryland Midland Railway.\nCarroll County has two water reservoirs at present, Liberty and Piney Run; the county has also proposed a Union Mills Reservoir and Gillis Falls Reservoir.\nClimate.\nThe county is divided by the January freezing isotherm into a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\") and a hot-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfa\".) The hardiness zones are 6b and 7a.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCarroll County conducts an annual report on property development, which includes demographic elements.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 167,134\u00a0people, 59,786\u00a0households, and 45,163\u00a0families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 62,406 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 92.9% white, 3.2% black or African American, 1.4% Asian, 0.2% American Indian, 0.7% from other races, and 1.5% from two or more races. Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 2.6% of the population. In terms of ancestry, 33.8% were German, 19.1% were Irish, 14.0% were English, 8.4% were American, 8.2% were Italian, 5.3% were Polish, 2.8% were French and 2.3% were Scottish.\nOf the 59,786\u00a0households, 37.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.8% were married couples living together, 8.6% had a female householder with no husband present, 24.5% were non-families, and 20.0% of all households were made up of individuals. The average household size was 2.74 and the average family size was 3.15. The median age was 41.1 years.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $81,621 and the median income for a family was $95,825. Males had a median income of $62,322 versus $46,170 for females. The per capita income for the county was $33,938. About 4.0% of families and 5.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.6% of those under age 18 and 6.0% of those age 65 or over.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 150,897 people, 52,503 households, and 41,109 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 54,260 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 95.69% White, 2.28% Black or African American, 0.22% Native American, 0.75% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.31% from other races, and 0.73% from two or more races. 0.99% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 30.5% were of German, 14.0% Irish, 11.1% United States or American, 10.7% English and 7.3% Italian ancestry.\nThere were 52,503 households, out of which 39.70% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 66.50% were married couples living together, 8.30% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.70% were non-families. 17.50% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.81 and the average family size was 3.18.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 27.70% under the age of 18, 7.00% from 18 to 24, 30.60% from 25 to 44, 23.90% from 45 to 64, and 10.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 97.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $60,021, and the median income for a family was $66,430 (these figures had risen to $78,912 and $90,376 respectively as of a 2007 estimate). Males had a median income of $44,191 versus $30,599 for females. The per capita income for the county was $23,829. About 2.70% of families and 3.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.00% of those under age 18 and 4.90% of those age 65 or over.\nAs of 2007, Carroll County was the tenth wealthiest county in the country in its population range of 65,000 to 250,000\nAs of the 2010 census the population was 167,134. The racial makeup was 91.20% Non-Hispanic whites, 3.19% blacks, 0.20% Native Americans, 1.45% Asians, 0.03% Pacific Islanders, 0.09% Non-Hispanics of some other race, 1.33% Non-Hispanics reporting two or more races and 2.61% Hispanics.\nEconomy.\nJoS. A. Bank Clothiers has its headquarters in an unincorporated area in the county, near Hampstead.\nCarroll County Public Schools is the largest employer in Carroll County.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the county's comprehensive annual financial reports, the top employers by number of employees in the county are the following. (\"NR\" indicates the employer was not ranked among the top ten employers that year.)\nPolitics and government.\nCarroll County differs from most counties in the Baltimore-Washington area in that it is strongly Republican. No Democratic presidential candidate has carried Carroll County since Lyndon Johnson's 1964 landslide, and even LBJ won by a mere 119 votes out of 16,783 cast in that election. No Democrat since then has even won 40% of the county's vote. Since World War I, the only other Democrat to carry Carroll County has been Franklin D. Roosevelt, who managed to achieve this only during his initial 1932 campaign. Before World War I Carroll County had considerable Confederate sympathy and hence leaned Democratic, although it did vote twice for William McKinley.\nIn the 2012 presidential election, 65 percent of the county's vote went for Republican candidate Mitt Romney. In Maryland's 2014 gubernatorial race, Carroll County voted for Republican Larry Hogan over Democrat Lieutenant Governor Anthony Brown by sixty-six percentage points (82 to 16 percent).\nCarroll County is governed by five county commissioners, a \"commission\" being the traditional form of county government in Maryland.\nSeveral times in the past, Carroll County voters have rejected charter amendments that would call for a government consisting of a County Executive and a County Council.\nCommissioners.\nIn 2004, Carroll County voters approved legislation that expanded the number of County Commissioners from three to five. The five Commissioners are elected from five Commissioner districts, as opposed to three Commissioners elected at-large. The change occurred with the 2010 elections, since the Maryland General Assembly did not agree on the districts in time for the 2006 elections.\nCommissioners elected in 2022\u2014all Republican\u2014were:\nCabinet.\nSupporting the commissioners is a cabinet, composed of the following departments:\nSheriff.\nThe current elected Sheriff is James T. DeWees. The longest served Carroll County sheriff was LeRoy Campbell.\nFederal.\nThe current elected U.S. Representatives are Democrats Johnny Olszewski of the 2nd District and Sarah Elfreth of the 3rd District.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBus.\nCarroll County operates its own bus public transit system, known as the Carroll Transit System. After 40 years of service, the Carroll Area Transit System (CATS bus) ended its transportation services in the county at the end of July 2016. CATS was replaced by the Carroll Transit System, which is operated by Ride With Us. Carroll Transit Service offers five fixed-deviated routes that were previously operated by CATS, as well as demand-response, door-to-door service.\nThe Owings Mills station of the Baltimore Metro SubwayLink in nearby Owings Mills, Baltimore County, is a short drive by car from Carroll County and provides subway access to downtown Baltimore. Due to longstanding opposition to mass transit from local residents and politicians, there is no inter-county bus or rail transit linking Carroll County to nearby suburban communities of Baltimore County. Due to a resolution passed by the Carroll County Board of Commissioners, the Carroll Transit System is prohibited from offering bus services into or out of the county. The Baltimore Sun editorial board has condemned Carroll County's \"transit phobia\" and excoriated the mass transit resolution as \"thinly veiled racist provocation.\" The Baltimore City Paper declared the resolution \"racist\" and suggested adding toll booths for cars entering Baltimore County from Carroll County.\nEducation.\nThe Carroll County Public Schools School system is the ninth largest school district in the state of Maryland.\nMcDaniel College, a small private liberal arts college, is located in Westminster.\nCarroll Community College is a two-year community college serving the residents of Carroll County. It is located in Westminster, Maryland.\nMedia.\nThe newspaper of record is the \"Carroll County Times\".\nCarroll County has one AM radio station, WTTR, located in Westminster.\nInfrastructure.\nLaw enforcement.\nLaw enforcement services for the county are provided by the Carroll County Sheriff's Office, Maryland State Police, as well as several municipalities having their own police forces. In addition to providing police services, the Sheriff's Office also acts as an agent of the courts: serving warrants, enforcing child support laws, ensuring courthouse security, transporting prisoners, etc. On October 4, 2007, the County Commissioners voted to create a police department for the county. The police department would handle primary law enforcement duties while the Sheriff's office would continue to act under the arm of the courts. This move would give the Commissioners power to appoint or fire the chief of police instead of having a popularly elected Sheriff being in charge of all law enforcement. This move falls in line with Maryland's more populated counties who have such a dual system of law enforcement (Montgomery, Anne Arundel, Prince George's, Howard and Baltimore Counties), as Carroll County has begun to have a population increase. Municipal departments, such as Westminster Police, would be unaffected by the change.\nCommunities.\nThis county contains the following incorporated municipalities:\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59186", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59186", "title": "Dreamland, Michigan", "text": "Dreamland is an unincorporated community on Copper Island (the Keweenaw Peninsula), in Torch Lake Township, Houghton County, in the Upper Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan. It has been described as being a \"district of Bootjack\" or in Bootjack, but it is a separate town. The town consists almost entirely of the Dreamland Inn (sometimes called the Dreamland Bar &amp; Restaurant, Dreamland Hotel or \"Dreamland Hotel and bar;\" it is often referred to as being in Lake Linden\u2014due to that being its mailing address) and some docks on Torch Bay.\nHistory.\nDreamland was founded in 1913 with the building of the resort (containing a bar and hotel rooms often frequented by loggers unable to make it home in the winter) by Norbert Sarazin. A dance pavilion, originally quite a local attraction, burned in 1921 and Prohibition caused the closing of the bar; it reopened in 1947.\nLogging was formerly the main industry in the town.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nDreamland has a humid continental climate but winters are typically long and snowy with much lake effect snow.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "59188", "revid": "14784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59188", "title": "Adic", "text": ""}
{"id": "59191", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59191", "title": "Margo Howard", "text": "American advice columnist\nMargo Howard (n\u00e9e Lederer; born March 15, 1940) is an American writer and former advice columnist. She is the only child of businessman/innovator Jules Lederer and Eppie Lederer (better known as Ann Landers after her long-time advice column \"Ask Ann Landers\"), the niece of Pauline Phillips, and the cousin of Jeanne Phillips (the latter two both better known as Abigail Van Buren and authors of the advice column \"Dear Abby\").\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nHoward was born in Sioux City, Iowa, to Eppie (n\u00e9e Esther Pauline Friedman) and Jules Lederer, a businessman and eventually the founder of Budget-Rent-A-Car International. She attended Brandeis University but dropped out to marry, after which she worked at the \"Chicago Tribune\" and \"Chicago Daily News\", and wrote for \"The New Republic\", \"People\", \"The Nation\", and \"Boston Magazine\". She wrote a syndicated social commentary column, \"Margo\", in the 1970s.\nCareer.\nFor eight years, Howard wrote the \"Dear Prudence\" column featured in \"Slate\" magazine. \"Dear Prudence\" also was featured on National Public Radio and syndicated in more than 200 newspapers. In February 2006, she left the \"Dear Prudence\" column, and began writing a \"Dear Margo\" column for Yahoo, then for Women on the Web (wowowow.com) through Creators Syndicate. On May 11, 2013, Howard ended the \"Dear Margo\" column, announcing that she was retiring from writing on a deadline and saying, \"I plan to write long-form pieces as the spirit moves me\".\nHer aunt, Pauline Esther Friedman \"Popo\" Phillips, wrote the \"Dear Abby\" column. Although her mother and aunt were twin sisters, and close while growing up, an intense rivalry developed between them because of their columns. In an echo of that rivalry, Howard and her aunt never got along, and she has had public differences with her cousin Jeanne Phillips, who took over the \"Dear Abby\" column when her mother died.\nIn 2014, Howard published \"Eat, Drink, and Remarry: Confessions of a Serial Wife\", reminisces of her four marriages.\nMarriages and family.\nHoward has been married four times: first to John Coleman (1962\u20131967); second to Jules Furth (1971\u20131976); third to the actor Ken Howard (1977\u20131991); fourth (and currently) to Ronald Weintraub, a Boston cardiac surgeon. After her divorce from Howard, she retained the surname for professional use.\nHoward has three children by Coleman: two daughters, Abra and Andrea, and a son, Adam Coleman Howard, who is an actor and director.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
