{"id": "58702", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58702", "title": "John Glenn", "text": "American astronaut and politician (1921\u20132016)\nJohn Herschel Glenn Jr. (July 18, 1921\u00a0\u2013 December 8, 2016) was an American Marine Corps aviator, astronaut, businessman, and politician. He was the third American in space and the first to orbit the Earth, circling it three times in 1962. Following his retirement from NASA, he served from 1974 to 1999 as a U.S. Senator from Ohio; in 1998, he flew into space again at the age of 77.\nBefore joining NASA, Glenn was a distinguished fighter pilot in World War II, the Chinese Civil War, and the Korean War. He shot down three MiG-15s and was awarded six Distinguished Flying Crosses and eighteen Air Medals. In 1957, he made the first supersonic transcontinental flight across the United States. His on-board camera took the first continuous, panoramic photograph of the United States.\nGlenn was one of the Mercury Seven military test pilots selected in 1959 by NASA as the nation's first astronauts. On February 20, 1962, Glenn flew the \"Friendship 7\" mission, becoming the first American to orbit the Earth. He was the third American, and the fifth person, to be in space. He received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1962, the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978, was inducted into the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame in 1990, and received the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2012.\nGlenn resigned from NASA in January 1964. A member of the Democratic Party, Glenn was first elected to the Senate in 1974 and served for 24 years until January 1999. In 1998, at age 77, Glenn flew on Space Shuttle \"Discovery\"'s STS-95 mission, making him the oldest person to enter Earth orbit, the only person to fly in both the Mercury and the Space Shuttle programs, and the first Member of Congress to visit space since Congressman Bill Nelson in 1986. Glenn, both the oldest and the last surviving member of the Mercury Seven, died at the age of 95 on December 8, 2016.\nEarly life and education.\nJohn Herschel Glenn Jr. was born on July 18, 1921, in Cambridge, Ohio, the son of John Herschel Glenn Sr., who worked for a plumbing firm, and Clara Teresa Glenn (n\u00e9e\u00a0Sproat), a teacher. His parents had married shortly before John Sr., a member of the American Expeditionary Force, left for the Western Front during World War I. The family moved to New Concord, Ohio, soon after his birth, and his father started his own business, the Glenn Plumbing Company. Glenn Jr. was only a toddler when he met Anna Margaret (Annie) Castor, whom he would later marry. The two would not be able to recall a time when they did not know each other. He first flew in an airplane with his father when he was eight years old. He became fascinated by flight and built model airplanes from balsa wood kits. Along with his adopted sister Jean, he attended New Concord Elementary School. He washed cars and sold rhubarb to earn money to buy a bicycle, after which he took a job delivering \"The Columbus Dispatch\" newspaper. He was a member of the Ohio Rangers, an organization similar to the Cub Scouts. His boyhood home in New Concord has been restored as a historic house museum and education center.\nGlenn attended New Concord High School, where he played on the varsity football team as a center and linebacker. He also made the varsity basketball and tennis teams and was involved with Hi-Y, a junior branch of the YMCA. After graduating in 1939, Glenn entered Muskingum College (now Muskingum University), where he studied chemistry, joined the Stag Club fraternity, and played on the football team. Annie majored in music with minors in secretarial studies and physical education and competed on the swimming and volleyball teams, graduating in 1942. Glenn earned a private pilot license and a physics course credit for free through the Civilian Pilot Training Program in 1941. He did not complete his senior year in residence or take a proficiency exam, both required by the school for its Bachelor of Science degree.\nMilitary career.\nWorld War II.\nWhen the United States entered World War II, Glenn quit college to enlist in the U.S. Army Air Corps. He was not called to duty by the army and enlisted as a U.S. Navy aviation cadet in March 1942. Glenn attended the University of Iowa in Iowa City for pre-flight training and made his first solo flight in a military aircraft at Naval Air Station Olathe in Kansas, where he went for primary training. During advanced training at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in Texas, he accepted an offer to transfer to the U.S. Marine Corps. Having completed his flight training in March 1943, Glenn was commissioned as a second lieutenant. Glenn married Annie in a Presbyterian ceremony at College Drive Church in New Concord on April 6, 1943. After advanced training at Camp Kearny, California, he was assigned to Marine Squadron VMJ-353, which flew R4D transport planes from there.\nThe fighter squadron VMO-155 was also at Camp Kearny flying the Grumman F4F Wildcat. Glenn approached the squadron's commander, Major J. P. Haines, who suggested that he could put in for a transfer. This was approved, and Glenn was posted to VMO-155 on July 2, 1943, two days before the squadron moved to Marine Corps Air Station El Centro in California. The Wildcat was obsolete by this time, and VMO-155 re-equipped with the F4U Corsair in September 1943. He was promoted to first lieutenant in October 1943, and shipped out to Hawaii in January 1944. VMO-155 became part of the garrison on Midway Atoll on February 21, then moved to the Marshall Islands in June 1944 and flew 57 combat missions in the area. He received two Distinguished Flying Crosses and ten Air Medals.\nAt the end of his one-year tour of duty in February 1945, Glenn was assigned to Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point in North Carolina, then to Naval Air Station Patuxent River in Maryland. He was promoted to captain in July 1945 and ordered back to Cherry Point. There, he joined VMF-913, another Corsair squadron, and learned that he had qualified for a regular commission. In March 1946, he was assigned to Marine Corps Air Station El Toro in southern California. He volunteered for service with the occupation in North China, believing it would be a short tour. He joined VMF-218 (another Corsair squadron), which was based at Nanyuan Field near Beijing, in December 1946, and flew patrol missions until VMF-218 was transferred to Guam in March 1947.\nIn December 1948, Glenn was re-posted to NAS Corpus Christi as a student at the Naval School of All-Weather Flight before becoming a flight instructor. In July 1951, he traveled to the Amphibious Warfare School at Marine Corps Base Quantico in northern Virginia for a six-month course. He then joined the staff of the commandant of the Marine Corps Schools. He maintained his proficiency (and flight pay) by flying on weekends, although he was only allowed four hours of flying time per month. He was promoted to major in July 1952. Glenn received the World War II Victory Medal, American Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal (with one star), Navy Occupation Service Medal (with Asia clasp), and the China Service Medal for his efforts.\nKorean War.\nGlenn moved his family back to New Concord during a short period of leave, and after two and a half months of jet training at Cherry Point, was ordered to South Korea in October 1952, late in the Korean War. Before he set out for Korea in February 1953, he applied to fly the F-86 Sabre jet fighter-interceptor through an inter-service exchange position with the U.S. Air Force (USAF). In preparation, he arranged with Colonel Leon W. Gray to check out the F-86 at Otis Air Force Base in Massachusetts. Glenn reported to K-3, an airbase in South Korea, on February 3, 1953, and was assigned to be the operations officer for VMF-311, one of two Marine fighter squadrons there while he waited for the exchange assignment to go through. VMF-311 was equipped with the F9F Panther jet fighter-bomber. Glenn's first mission was a reconnaissance flight on February 26. He flew 63 combat missions in Korea with VMF-311 and was nicknamed \"Magnet Ass\" because of the number of flak hits he took on low-level close air support missions; twice, he returned to base with over 250 holes in his plane. He flew for a time with Marine reservist Ted Williams (then in the midst of a Hall of Fame baseball career with the Boston Red Sox) as his wingman. Williams later said about Glenn \"Absolutely fearless. The best I ever saw. It was an honor to fly with him.\" Glenn also flew with future major general Ralph H. Spanjer.\nIn June 1953, Glenn reported for duty with the USAF's 25th Fighter-Interceptor Squadron and flew 27 combat missions in the F-86, a much faster aircraft than the F9F Panther, patrolling MiG Alley. Combat with a MiG-15, which was faster and better armed still, was regarded as a rite of passage for a fighter pilot. On the Air Force buses that ferried the pilots out to the airfields before dawn, pilots who had engaged a MiG could sit while those who had not had to stand. Glenn later wrote, \"Since the days of the Lafayette Escadrille during World War I, pilots have viewed air-to-air combat as the ultimate test not only of their machines but of their own personal determination and flying skills. I was no exception.\" He hoped to become the second Marine jet flying ace after John F. Bolt. Glenn's USAF squadron mates painted \"MiG Mad Marine\" on his aircraft when he complained about there not being any MiGs to shoot at. He shot down his first MiG in a dogfight on July 12, 1953, downed a second one on July 19, and a third on July 22 when four Sabres shot down three MiGs. These were the final air victories of the war, which ended with an armistice five days later. For his service in Korea, Glenn received two more Distinguished Flying Crosses and eight more Air Medals. Glenn also received the Korean Service Medal (with two campaign stars), United Nations Korea Medal, Marine Corps Expeditionary Medal, National Defense Service Medal (with one star), and the Korean War Service Medal.\nTest pilot.\nWith combat experience as a fighter pilot, Glenn applied for training as a test pilot while still in Korea. He reported to the U.S. Naval Test Pilot School at NAS Patuxent River in Maryland in January 1954 and graduated in July. At Patuxent River, future Medal of Honor recipient James Stockdale tutored him in physics and math. Glenn's first flight test assignment, testing the FJ-3 Fury, nearly killed him when its cockpit depressurized and its oxygen system failed. He also tested the armament of aircraft such as the Vought F7U Cutlass and F8U Crusader. From November 1956 to April 1959, he was assigned to the Fighter Design Branch of the Navy Bureau of Aeronautics in Washington, D.C., and attended the University of Maryland.\nOn July 16, 1957, Glenn made the first supersonic transcontinental flight. Disliking his Bureau of Aeronautics desk job, he devised the flight as both a way to keep flying and publicly demonstrate the F8U Crusader. At that time, the transcontinental speed record, held by an Air Force Republic F-84 Thunderjet, was 3 hours 45 minutes and Glenn calculated that the F8U Crusader could do it faster. Because its air speed was faster than that of a .45 caliber bullet, Glenn called the flight \"Project Bullet\". He flew an F8U Crusader from Los Alamitos, California, to Floyd Bennett Field in New York City in 3 hours, 23 minutes and 8.3 seconds, averaging supersonic speed despite three in-flight refuelings when speeds dropped below . His on-board camera took the first continuous, transcontinental panoramic photograph of the United States. He received his fifth Distinguished Flying Cross for this mission, and was promoted to lieutenant colonel on April 1, 1959. The cross-country flight made Glenn a minor celebrity. A profile appeared in \"The New York Times,\" and he appeared on the television show \"Name That Tune\". Glenn now had nearly 9,000 hours of flying time, including about 3,000 hours in jets, but knew that at the age of 36, he was now likely too old to continue to fly.\nNASA career.\nSelection.\nOn October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first artificial satellite. This damaged American confidence in its technological superiority, creating a wave of anxiety known as the Sputnik crisis. In response, President Dwight D. Eisenhower launched the Space Race. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was established on October 1, 1958, as a civilian agency to develop space technology. One of its first initiatives was announced on December 17, 1958. This was Project Mercury, which aimed to launch a man into Earth orbit, return him safely to the Earth, and evaluate his capabilities in space.\nHis Bureau of Aeronautics job gave Glenn access to new spaceflight news, such as the X-15 rocket plane. While on duty at Patuxent and in Washington, Glenn read everything he could find about space. His office was asked to send a test pilot to Langley Air Force Base in Virginia to make runs on a spaceflight simulator, as part of research by the newly formed NASA into re-entry vehicle shapes. The pilot would also be sent to the Naval Air Development Center in Johnsville, Pennsylvania, and would be subjected to high G-forces in a centrifuge for comparison with data collected in the simulator. His request for the position was granted, and he spent several days at Langley and a week in Johnsville for the testing. As one of the very few pilots to have done such testing, Glenn had become an expert on the subject. NASA asked military-service members to participate in planning the mockup of a spacecraft. Having participated in the research at Langley and Johnsville, he was sent to the McDonnell plant in St. Louis as a service adviser to NASA's spacecraft mockup board. Envisioning himself in the vehicle, Glenn stated that the passenger would have to be able to control the spacecraft. McDonnell engineers told him of the importance of lightening the vehicle as much as possible, so Glenn began exercising to lose the by which he estimated he was overweight.\nEisenhower directed NASA to recruit its first astronauts from military test pilots. Of 508 graduates of test pilot schools, 110 matched the minimum standards. Marine Corps pilots were mistakenly omitted at first; two were quickly found, including Glenn. The candidates had to be younger than 40, possess a bachelor's degree or equivalent, and be or less. Only the height requirement was strictly enforced, owing to the size of the Project Mercury spacecraft. This was fortunate for Glenn, who barely met the requirements, as he was near the age cutoff and lacked a science-based degree, but had taken more classes since leaving college than needed for graduation. Glenn was otherwise so outstanding a candidate that Colonel Jake Dill, his commanding officer at test pilot school, visited NASA headquarters to insist that Glenn would be the perfect astronaut.\nFor an interview with Charles Donlan, associate director of Project Mercury, Glenn brought the results from the centrifuge to show that he had done well on a test that perhaps no other candidate had taken. Donlan also noticed that Glenn stayed late at night to study schematics of the Mercury spacecraft. He was among the 32 of the first 69 candidates that passed the first step of the evaluation and were interested in continuing, sufficient for the astronaut corps NASA wanted. On February 27 a grueling series of physical and psychological tests began at the Lovelace Clinic and the Wright Aerospace Medical Laboratory.\nBecause of his Bureau of Aeronautics job, Glenn was already participating in Project Mercury; while other candidates were at Wright, on March 17 he and most of those who would choose the astronauts visited the McDonnell plant building the spacecraft to inspect its progress and make changes. While Glenn had not scored the highest on all the tests, a member of the selection committee recalled how he had impressed everyone with his \"strength of personality and his dedication\". On April 6 Donlan called Glenn to offer him a position at Project Mercury, one of seven candidates chosen as astronauts. Glenn was pleased while Annie was supportive but wary of the danger; during his three years at Patuxent, 12 test pilots had died.\nThe identities of the seven were announced at a press conference at Dolley Madison House in Washington, D.C., on April 9, 1959: Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, Glenn, Gus Grissom, Wally Schirra, Alan Shepard, and Deke Slayton. In \"The Right Stuff\", Tom Wolfe wrote that Glenn \"came out of it as tops among seven very fair-haired boys. He had the hottest record as a pilot, he was the most quotable, the most photogenic, and the lone Marine.\" The magnitude of the challenge ahead of them was made clear a few weeks later, on the night of May 18, 1959, when the seven astronauts gathered at Cape Canaveral to watch their first rocket launch, of an SM-65D Atlas, which was similar to the one that was to carry them into orbit. A few minutes after liftoff, it exploded spectacularly, lighting up the night sky. The astronauts were stunned. Shepard turned to Glenn and said: \"Well, I'm glad they got that out of the way.\"\nGlenn remained an officer in the Marine Corps after his selection, and was assigned to the NASA Space Task Group at Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia. The task force moved to Houston, Texas, in 1962, and became part of the NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. A portion of the astronauts' training was in the classroom, where they learned space science. The group also received hands-on training, which included scuba diving and work in simulators. Astronauts secured an additional role in the spaceflight program: to provide pilot input in design. The astronauts divided the various tasks between them. Glenn's specialization was cockpit layout design and control functioning for the Mercury and early Apollo programs. He pressed the other astronauts to set a moral example, living up to the squeaky-clean image of them that had been portrayed by \"Life\" magazine, a position that was not popular with the other astronauts.\n\"Friendship 7\" flight.\nGlenn was the backup pilot for Shepard and Grissom on the first two crewed Project Mercury flights, the sub-orbital missions Mercury-Redstone 3 and Mercury-Redstone 4. Glenn was selected for Mercury-Atlas 6, NASA's first crewed orbital flight, with Carpenter as his backup. Putting a man in orbit would achieve one of Project Mercury's most important goals. Shepard and Grissom had named their spacecraft \"Freedom 7\" and \"Liberty Bell 7\". The numeral\u00a07 had originally been the production number of Shepard's spacecraft, but had come to represent the Mercury 7. Glenn named his spacecraft, number 13, \"Friendship 7\", and had the name hand-painted on the side like the one on his F-86 had been. Glenn and Carpenter completed their training for the mission in January 1962, but postponement of the launch allowed them to continue rehearsing. Glenn spent 25 hours and 25 minutes in the spacecraft performing hangar and altitude tests, and 59 hours and 45 minutes in the simulator. He flew 70 simulated missions and reacted to 189 simulated system failures.\nAfter a long series of delays, \"Friendship 7\" lifted off from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station on February 20, 1962. During the countdown, there were eleven delays due to equipment malfunctions and improvements and the weather. During Glenn's first orbit, a failure of the automatic-control system was detected. This forced Glenn to operate in manual mode for the second and third orbits, and for re-entry. Later in the flight, telemetry indicated that the heat shield had loosened. If this reading had been accurate, Glenn and his spacecraft would have burned up on re-entry. After a lengthy discussion on how to deal with this problem, ground controllers decided that leaving the retrorocket pack in place might help keep the loose heat shield in place. They relayed these instructions to Glenn, but did not tell him the heat shield was possibly loose; although confused at this order, he complied. The retrorocket pack broke up into large chunks of flaming debris that flew past the window of his capsule during re-entry; Glenn thought this might have been the heat shield. He told an interviewer, \"Fortunately it was the rocket pack\u2014or I wouldn't be answering these questions.\" After the flight, it was determined that the heat shield was not loose; the sensor was faulty due to an improperly rigged switch.\n\"Friendship 7\" safely splashed down southeast of Cape Canaveral after Glenn's 4-hour, 55-minute flight. He carried a note on the flight which read, \"I am a stranger. I come in peace. Take me to your leader and there will be a massive reward for you in eternity\" in several languages, in case he landed near southern Pacific Ocean islands. The original procedure called for Glenn to exit through the top hatch, but he was uncomfortably warm and decided that egress through the side hatch would be faster. During the flight, he endured up to 7.8 g of acceleration and traveled at about . The flight took Glenn to a maximum altitude (apogee) of about and a minimum altitude (perigee) of . Unlike the crewed missions of Soviet Union's Vostok programme, Glenn remained within the spacecraft during landing. The flight made Glenn the first American to orbit the Earth, the third American in space, and the fifth human in space. The mission, which Glenn called the \"best day of his life\", renewed U.S. confidence. His flight occurred while the U.S. and the Soviet Union were embroiled in the Cold War and competing in the Space Race.\nAs the first American in orbit, Glenn became a national hero, met President John F. Kennedy, and received a ticker-tape parade in New York reminiscent of those honoring Charles Lindbergh and other heroes. He became \"so valuable to the nation as an iconic figure\", according to NASA administrator Charles Bolden, that Kennedy would not \"risk putting him back in space again.\" Glenn's fame and political potential were noted by the Kennedys, and he became a friend of the Kennedy family. On February 23, 1962, President Kennedy gave him the NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his \"Friendship 7\" flight. Upon receiving the award, Glenn said, \"I would like to consider I was a figurehead for this whole big, tremendous effort, and I am very proud of the medal I have on my lapel.\" Glenn also received his sixth Distinguished Flying Cross for his efforts. He was among the first group of astronauts to be awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. The award was presented to him by President Jimmy Carter in 1978. After his 1962 spaceflight, NASA proposed giving Glenn the Medal of Honor, but Glenn did not think that would be appropriate. Instead, he was awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor. His military and space awards were stolen from his home in 1978, and he remarked that he would keep this medal in a safe.\nComments about women in space.\nIn 1962, NASA contemplated recruiting women to the astronaut corps via the Mercury 13, but Glenn gave a speech before the House Space Committee detailing his opposition to sending women into space, in which he said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn May 1965, after he left NASA, Glenn was quoted in the \"Miami Herald\" as saying NASA \"offer a serious chance for space women\" as scientist astronauts.\nNASA had no official policy prohibiting women, but the requirement that astronauts had to be test pilots or have jet pilot experience effectively excluded them. NASA dropped this requirement when it selected scientist astronauts in 1965, but did not select any women as astronauts until 1978, when six women were selected, none as pilots. In June 1963, the Soviet Union launched a female cosmonaut, Valentina Tereshkova, into orbit. After Tereshkova, no women of any nationality flew in space again until August 1982, when the Soviet Union launched pilot-cosmonaut Svetlana Savitskaya. During the late 1970s, Glenn reportedly supported Space Shuttle Mission Specialist Judith Resnik in her career.\nPolitical campaigning.\n1964 Senate campaign.\nAt 42, Glenn was the oldest member of the astronaut corps and would likely be close to 50 by the time the lunar landings took place. During Glenn's training, NASA psychologists determined that he was the astronaut best suited for public life. Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy suggested to Glenn and his wife in December 1962 that he run for the 1964 United States Senate election in Ohio, challenging aging incumbent Stephen M. Young (1889\u20131984) in the Democratic primary election. As it seemed unlikely that he would be selected for Project Apollo missions, he resigned from NASA on January 16, 1964, and announced his Democratic Party candidacy for the U.S. Senate from his home state of Ohio the following day, becoming the first astronaut-politician. Glenn was still a Marine and had plenty of unused leave time, so he elected to use it while he waited for his retirement papers to go through.\nTo avoid partisanship, NASA quickly closed Glenn's agency office. \"The New York Times\" reported that while many Ohioans were skeptical of Glenn's qualifications for the Senate, he could defeat Young in the Democratic primary; whether he could defeat Representative Robert Taft Jr., the likely Republican candidate, in the general election was much less clear. In late February he was hospitalized for a concussion sustained in a fall against a bathtub while attempting to fix a mirror in a hotel room; an inner-ear injury from the accident left him unable to campaign. Both his wife and Scott Carpenter campaigned on his behalf during February and March, but doctors gave Glenn a recovery time of one year. Glenn did not want to win solely because of his astronaut fame, so he dropped out of the race on March 30.\nGlenn was still on leave from the Marine Corps, and he withdrew his papers to retire so he could keep a salary and health benefits. Glenn was on the list of potential candidates to be promoted to full colonel, but he notified the Commandant of the Marine Corps of his intention to retire so another Marine could receive the promotion. President Johnson later decided to promote Glenn to full colonel status without taking someone else's slot. He retired as a colonel on January 1, 1965. Glenn was approached by RC Cola to join their public relations department, but Glenn declined it because he wanted to be involved with a business and not just the face of it. The company revised their offer and offered Glenn a vice president of corporate development position, as well as a place on the board of directors. The company later expanded Glenn's role, promoting him to president of Royal Crown International. A Senate seat was open in 1968, and Glenn was asked about his current political aspirations. He said he had no current plan, and \"Let's talk about it one of these days.\" Glenn also said that a 1970 Senate run was a possibility.\nIn 1973, he and a friend bought a Holiday Inn near Disney World. The success of Disney World expanded to their business, and the pair built three more hotels. One of Glenn's business partners was Henri Landwirth, a Holocaust survivor who became his best friend. He remembered learning about Landwirth's background: \"Henri doesn't talk about it much. It was years before he spoke about it with me and then only because of an accident. We were down in Florida during the space program. Everyone was wearing short-sleeved Ban-Lon shirts\u2014everyone but Henri. Then one day I saw Henri at the pool and noticed the number on his arm. I told Henri that if it were me I'd wear that number like a medal with a spotlight on it.\"\n1970 Senate campaign.\nGlenn remained close to the Kennedy family, and campaigned for Robert F. Kennedy during his 1968 presidential campaign. In 1968, Glenn was in Kennedy's hotel suite when Kennedy heard he had won California. Glenn was supposed to go with him to celebrate but decided not to as there would be many people there. Kennedy went downstairs to make his victory speech and was assassinated. Glenn and Annie went with Kennedy to the hospital, and the next morning took Kennedy's children home to Virginia. Glenn was later a pallbearer at the funeral in New York.\nIn 1970, Young did not seek reelection and the seat was open. Businessman Howard Metzenbaum, Young's former campaign manager, was backed by the Ohio Democratic party and major labor unions, which provided him a significant funding advantage over Glenn. Glenn's camp persuaded him to be thrifty during the primary so he could save money for the general election. By the end of the primary campaign, Metzenbaum was spending four times as much as Glenn. Glenn was defeated in the Democratic primary by Metzenbaum (who received 51 percent of the vote to Glenn's 49 percent). Some prominent Democrats said Glenn was a \"hapless political rube\", and one newspaper called him \"the ultimate square\".\nMetzenbaum lost the general election to Robert Taft Jr. Glenn remained active in the political scene following his defeat. Governor John J. Gilligan appointed Glenn to be the chairman of the Citizens Task Force on Environmental Protection in 1970. The task force was created to survey environmental problems in the state and released a report in 1971 detailing the issues. The meetings and the final report of the task force were major contributors to the formation of Ohio's Environmental Protection Agency.\n1974 Senate campaign.\nIn 1973, President Nixon ordered Attorney General Elliot Richardson to fire Watergate special prosecutor Archibald Cox. Richardson refused and resigned in protest, triggering the Saturday Night massacre. Ohio Senator William Saxbe, elected in 1968, was appointed attorney general. Both Glenn and Metzenbaum sought the vacated seat, which was to be filled by Governor John Gilligan. Gilligan was planning on a presidential or vice-presidential run in the near future, and offered Glenn the lieutenant governor position, with the thought that Glenn would ascend to governor when Gilligan was elected to a higher position. The Ohio Democratic party backed this solution to avoid what was expected to be a divisive primary battle between Metzenbaum and Glenn. He declined, denouncing their attempts as \"bossism\" and \"blackmail\". Glenn's counteroffer suggested that Gilligan fill the position with someone other than Metzenbaum or Glenn so neither would have an advantage going into the 1974 election. Metzenbaum's campaign agreed to back Gilligan in his governor re-election campaign, and Metzenbaum was subsequently appointed in January 1974 to the vacated seat. At the end of Saxbe's term, Glenn challenged Metzenbaum in the primary for the Ohio Senate seat.\nGlenn's campaign changed their strategy after the 1970 election. In 1970, Glenn won most of the counties in Ohio but lost in those with larger populations. The campaign changed its focus, and worked primarily in the large counties. In the primary, Metzenbaum contrasted his strong business background with Glenn's military and astronaut credentials and said that his opponent had \"never held a payroll\". Glenn's reply became known as the \"Gold Star Mothers\" speech. He told Metzenbaum to go to a veterans' hospital and \"look those men with mangled bodies in the eyes and tell them they didn't hold a job. You go with me to any Gold Star mother and you look her in the eye and tell her that her son did not hold a job\". He defeated Metzenbaum 54 to 46 percent before defeating Ralph Perk (the Republican mayor of Cleveland) in the general election, beginning a Senate career which would continue until 1999.\n1976 vice presidential consideration.\nAfter Jimmy Carter became the presumptive Democratic nominee for president in the 1976 election, Glenn was reported to be in consideration to be Carter's running mate because he was a senator in a pivotal state and for his fame and straightforwardness. Some thought he was too much like Carter, partially because they both had military backgrounds, and he did not have enough experience to become president. Barbara Jordan was the first keynote speaker at the Democratic National Convention. Her speech electrified the crowd and was filled with applause and standing ovations. Glenn's keynote address immediately followed Jordan's, and he failed to impress the delegates. Walter Cronkite described it as \"dull\", and other delegates complained that he was hard to hear. Carter called Glenn to inform him the nomination was going to another candidate and later nominated the veteran politician Walter Mondale. It was also reported that Carter's wife thought Annie Glenn, who had a stutter, would hurt the campaign.\n1980 Senate campaign.\nIn his first reelection campaign, Glenn ran opposed in the primary for the 1980 Senate election. His opponents, engineer Francis Hunstiger and ex-teacher Frances Waterman, were not well-known and poorly funded. His opponents spent only a few thousand dollars on the campaign, while Glenn spent $700,000. Reporters noted that for a race he was likely to win, Glenn was spending a lot of time and money on the campaign. His chief strategist responded to the remarks saying, \"It's the way he does things. He takes nothing for granted.\" Glenn won the primary by a landslide, with 934,230 of the 1.09\u00a0million votes.\nJim Betts, who ran unopposed in the Republican primary, challenged Glenn for his seat. Betts publicly stated that Glenn's policies were part of the reason for inflation increases and a lower standard of living. Betts's campaign also attacked Glenn's voting record, saying that he often voted for spending increases. Glenn's campaign's response was that he has been a part of over 3,000 roll calls and \"any one of them could be taken out of context\". Glenn was projected to win the race easily, and won by the largest margin ever for an Ohio Senator, defeating Betts by over 40 percent.\n1984 presidential campaign.\nGlenn was unhappy with how divided the country was, and thought labels like conservative and liberal increased the divide. He considered himself a centrist. Glenn thought a more centrist president would help unite the country. Glenn believed his experience as a senator from Ohio was ideal because of the state's diversity. Glenn thought that Ted Kennedy could win the election, but after Kennedy's announcement in late 1982 that he would not seek the presidency, Glenn thought he had a much better chance of winning. He hired a media consultant to help him with his speaking style.\nGlenn announced his candidacy for president on April 21, 1983, in the John Glenn High School gymnasium. He started out the campaign out-raising the front-runner, Mondale. He also polled the highest of any Democrat against Reagan. During the fall of 1983, \"The Right Stuff\", a film about the Mercury Seven astronauts, was released. Reviewers saw Ed Harris's portrayal of Glenn as heroic and his staff began to publicize the film to the press. One reviewer said that \"Harris's depiction helped transform Glenn from a history-book figure into a likable, thoroughly adoration-worthy Hollywood hero,\" turning him into a big-screen icon. Others considered the movie to be damaging to Glenn's campaign, serving as only a reminder that Glenn's most significant achievement had occurred decades earlier. Glenn's autobiography said the film \"had a chilling effect on the campaign.\"\nWilliam White managed Glenn's campaign until his replacement by Jerry Vento on January 26, 1984. Glenn's campaign decided to forgo the traditional campaigning in early caucuses and primaries and focus on building campaign offices nationwide. He opened offices in 43 states by January 1984. Glenn's campaign spent a significant amount of money on television advertising in Iowa, and Glenn chose not to attend an Iowan debate on farm issues. He finished fifth in the Iowa caucus and went on to lose New Hampshire. Glenn's campaign continued into Super Tuesday, and he lost there as well. He announced his withdrawal from the race on March 16, 1984. After Mondale defeated him for the nomination, Glenn carried $3\u00a0million in campaign debt for over 20\u00a0years before receiving a reprieve from the Federal Election Commission.\n1986 Senate campaign.\nGlenn's Senate seat was challenged by Thomas Kindness. Kindness was unopposed in his primary, while Glenn faced Lyndon LaRouche supporter Don Scott. LaRouche supporters had been recently elected in Illinois, but the Ohio Democratic Party chairman did not think it was likely they would see the same success in Ohio. LaRouche was known for his fringe theories, such as the queen of England being a drug dealer. Kindness spoke to his supporters and warned them against LaRouche candidates. He issued a statement telling voters to reject LaRouche candidates in both Republican and Democratic primaries. Glenn won the primary contest with 88% of the vote.\nWith the primary complete, Glenn began his campaign against Kindness. Glenn believed he and other Democrats were the targets of a negative campaign thought up by the GOP strategists in Washington. Kindness focused on Glenn's campaign debts for his failed presidential run and the fact he stopped payments on it while campaigning for the Senate seat. After winning the race with 62% of the vote, Glenn remarked, \"We proved that in 1986, they couldn't kill Glenn with Kindness.\"\n1992 Senate campaign.\nIn 1992, Republican Mike DeWine won the Republican primary and challenged Glenn in the Senate election. Glenn ran unopposed in the primary. DeWine's campaign focused on the need for change and for term limits for senators. This would be Glenn's fourth term as senator. DeWine also criticized Glenn's campaign debts, using a bunny dressed as an astronaut beating a drum, with an announcer saying, \"He just keeps owing and owing and owing,\" a play on the Energizer Bunny. During a debate, Glenn asked DeWine to stop his negative campaign ads, saying \"This has been the most negative campaign.\" DeWine responded that he would if Glenn would disclose how he spent the money he received from Charles Keating, fallout from Glenn being named one of the Keating Five. Glenn won the Senate seat, with 2.4\u00a0million votes to DeWine's 2 million votes. It was DeWine's first-ever campaign loss. DeWine later worked on the intelligence committee with Glenn and watched his second launch into space.\nSenate career.\nCommittee on Governmental Affairs.\nGlenn requested to be assigned to two committees during his first year as senator: the Government Operations Committee (later known as the Committee on Governmental Affairs), and the Foreign Relations Committee. He was immediately assigned to the Government Operations Committee and waited for a seat on the Foreign Relations Committee. In 1977, Glenn wanted to chair the Energy, Nuclear Proliferation, and Federal Services Subcommittee of the Governmental Affairs Committee. Abraham Ribicoff, chair of the Governmental Affairs Committee, said he could chair the subcommittee if he also chaired the less popular Federal Services Subcommittee, which was in charge of the U.S. Postal Service. Previous chairs of the Federal Services Subcommittee had lost elections in part because of negative campaigns associated with the poorly regarded mail service to the chairmen, but Glenn accepted the offer and became the chair of both subcommittees. One of his goals as a new senator was developing environmental policies. Glenn introduced bills on energy policy to try to counter the energy crisis in the 70s. Glenn also introduced legislation promoting nuclear non-proliferation and was the chief author of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978, the first of six major pieces of legislation that he produced on the subject.\nGlenn chaired the Committee on Governmental Affairs from 1987 to 1995. It was in this role that he discovered safety and environmental problems with the nation's nuclear weapons facilities. Glenn was made aware of the problem at the Fernald Feed Materials Production Center near Cincinnati and soon found that it affected sites across the nation. Glenn requested investigations from the General Accounting Office of Congress and held several hearings on the issue. He also released a report on the potential costs of hazardous waste cleanup at former nuclear weapons manufacturing facilities, known as the Glenn Report. He spent the remainder of his Senate career acquiring funding to clean up the nuclear waste left at the facilities.\nGlenn also focused on reducing government waste. He created legislation to mandate CFOs for large governmental agencies. Glenn wrote a bill to add the office of the inspector general to federal agencies, to help find waste and fraud. He also created legislation intended to prevent the federal government from imposing regulations on local governments without funding. Glenn founded the Great Lakes Task Force, which helped protect the environment of the Great Lakes.\nIn 1995 Glenn became the ranking minority member of the Committee on Governmental Affairs. Glenn disputed the focus on illegal Chinese donations to the Democrats and asserted that Republicans also had egregious fundraising issues. The committee chair, Fred Thompson of Tennessee, disagreed and continued the investigation. Thompson and Glenn continued to work together poorly for the duration of the investigation. Thompson would give Glenn only information he was legally required to. Glenn would not authorize a larger budget and tried to expand the scope of the investigation to include members of the GOP. The investigation concluded with a Republican-written report, which Thompson described as, \"...\u00a0a lot of things strung together that paint a real ugly picture.\" The Democrats, led by Glenn, said the report \"...\u00a0does not support the conclusion that the China plan was aimed at, or affected, the 1996 presidential election.\"\nGlenn was the vice chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, a subcommittee of the Committee on Governmental Affairs. When the Republican Party regained control of the Senate in 1996, Glenn became the ranking minority member on the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations until he was succeeded by Carl Levin. During this time, the committee investigated issues such as fraud on the Internet, mortgage fraud, and day trading of securities.\nOther committees and activities.\nGlenn's father spent his retirement money battling cancer and would have lost his house if Glenn had not intervened. His father-in-law also had expensive treatments for Parkinson's disease. These health and financial issues motivated him to request a seat on the Special Committee on Aging.\nGlenn was considered an expert in matters of science and technology. He was a supporter of continuing the B-1 bomber program, which he considered successful. This conflicted with President Carter's desire to fund the B-2 bomber program. Glenn did not fully support development of the B-2 because he had doubts about the feasibility of the stealth technology. He drafted a proposal to slow down the development of the B-2, which could have potentially saved money, but the measure was rejected.\nGlenn joined the Foreign Relations Committee in 1978. He became the chairman of the East Asian and Pacific Affairs Subcommittee, for which he traveled to Japan, Korea, the Republic of China, and the People's Republic of China. Glenn helped to pass the Taiwan Enabling Act of 1979. The same year, Glenn's stance on the SALT II treaty caused another dispute with President Carter. Given the loss of radar listening posts in Iran, Glenn did not believe that the U.S. had the capability to monitor the Soviet Union accurately enough to verify compliance with the treaty. During the launching ceremony for the , he spoke about his doubts about verifying treaty compliance. First Lady Rosalynn Carter also spoke at the event, during which she criticized Glenn for speaking publicly about the issue. The Senate never ratified the treaty, in part because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Glenn served on the committee until 1985, when he traded it for the Armed Services Committee.\nGlenn became chairman of the Manpower Subcommittee of the Armed Services Committee in 1987. He introduced legislation such as increasing pay and benefits for American troops in the Persian Gulf during the Gulf War. He served as chairman until 1993, becoming chairman of the Armed Services Subcommittee on Military Readiness and Defense Infrastructure.\nKeating Five.\nGlenn was one of the Keating Five\u2014the U.S.\u00a0Senators involved with the savings and loan crisis\u2014after he accepted a $200,000 campaign contribution from Lincoln Savings and Loan Association head Charles Keating. During the crisis, the senators were accused of delaying the seizure of Keating's S&amp;L, which cost taxpayers an additional $2\u00a0billion. The combination of perceived political pressure and Keating's monetary contributions to the senators led to an investigation.\nThe Ethics Committee's outside counsel, Robert Bennett, wanted to eliminate Republican senator John McCain and Glenn from the investigation. The Democrats did not want to exclude McCain, as he was the only Republican being investigated, which means they could not excuse Glenn from the investigation either. McCain and Glenn were reprimanded the least of the five, as the Senate commission found that they had exercised \"poor judgment\". The GOP focused on Glenn's \"poor judgment\" rather than what Glenn saw as complete exoneration. GOP chairman Robert Bennett said, \"John Glenn misjudged Charles Keating. He also misjudged the tolerance of Ohio's taxpayers, who are left to foot the bill of nearly $2 billion.\" After the Senate's report, Glenn said, \"They so firmly put this thing to bed\u00a0... there isn't much there to fuss with. I didn't do anything wrong.\" In his autobiography, Glenn wrote, \"outside of people close to me dying, these hearings were the low point of my life.\" The case cost him $520,000 in legal fees. The association of his name with the scandal made Republicans hopeful that he could be defeated in the 1992 campaign, but Glenn defeated Lieutenant Governor Mike DeWine to retain his seat.\nRetirement.\nOn February 20, 1997, which was the 35th anniversary of his Friendship 7 flight, Glenn announced that his retirement from the Senate would occur at the end of his term in January 1999. Glenn retired because of his age, noting that he would have been 83 at the end of another term and quipping that \"... there is still no cure for the common birthday\".\nReturn to space.\nAfter the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster in 1986, Glenn criticized putting a \"lay person in space for the purpose of gaining public support ... while the shuttle is still in its embryonic stage\". He supported flying research scientists. In 1995, Glenn read \"Space Physiology and Medicine\", a book written by NASA doctors. He realized that many changes that occur to physical attributes during space flight, such as loss of bone and muscle mass and blood plasma, are the same as changes that result from aging. Glenn thought NASA should send an older person on a shuttle mission, and that it should be him. Starting in 1995, he began lobbying NASA director Dan Goldin for the mission. Goldin said he would consider it if there was a scientific reason, and if Glenn could pass the same physical examination the younger astronauts took. Glenn performed research on the subject and passed the physical examination. On January 16, 1998, NASA Administrator Dan Goldin announced that Glenn would be part of the STS-95 crew; this made him, at age 77, the oldest person to fly in space at that time.\nNASA and the National Institute of Aging (NIA) planned to use Glenn as a test subject for research, with biometrics taken before, during, and after his flight. Some experiments (in circadian rhythms, for example) compared him with the younger crew members. In addition to these tests, he was in charge of the flight's photography and videography. Glenn returned to space on the Space Shuttle on October 29, 1998, as a payload specialist on Space Shuttle \"Discovery\". Shortly before the flight, researchers disqualified Glenn from one of the flight's two major human experiments (on the effect of melatonin) for undisclosed medical reasons; he participated in experiments on sleep monitoring and protein use. On November 6, President Bill Clinton sent a congratulatory email to Glenn aboard the \"Discovery\". This is often cited as the first email sent by a sitting U.S. president, but records exist of emails being sent by President Clinton several years earlier.\nHis participation in the nine-day mission was criticized by some members of the space community as a favor granted by Clinton; John Pike, director of the Federation of American Scientists' space-policy project, said: \"If he was a normal person, he would acknowledge he's a great American hero and that he should get to fly on the shuttle for free\u00a0... He's too modest for that, and so he's got to have this medical research reason. It's got nothing to do with medicine\".\nIn a 2012 interview, Glenn said he regretted that NASA did not continue its research on aging by sending additional elderly people into space. After STS-95 returned safely, its crew received a ticker-tape parade. On October 15, 1998, NASA Road 1 (the main route to the Johnson Space Center) was temporarily renamed John Glenn Parkway for several months. Glenn was awarded the NASA Space Flight Medal in 1998 for flying on STS-95. In 2001, Glenn opposed sending Dennis Tito, the world's first space tourist, to the International Space Station because Tito's trip had no scientific purpose.\nPersonal life.\nGlenn and Annie had two children\u2014John David and Carolyn Ann\u2014and two grandchildren, and remained married for 73 years until his death.\nA Freemason, Glenn was a member of Concord Lodge No. 688 in New Concord, Ohio. He received all his degrees in full in a Mason at Sight ceremony from the Grand Master of Ohio in 1978, 14 years after petitioning his lodge. In 1999, Glenn became a 33rd-degree Scottish Rite Mason in the Valley of Cincinnati (NMJ). As an adult, he was honored as part of the DeMolay Legion of Honor by DeMolay International, a Masonic youth organization for boys.\nGlenn was an ordained elder of the Presbyterian Church. His religious faith began before he became an astronaut and was reinforced after he traveled in space. \"To look out at this kind of creation and not believe in God is to me impossible\", said Glenn after his second (and final) space voyage. He saw no contradiction between belief in God and the knowledge that evolution is \"a fact\" and believed evolution should be taught in schools: \"I don't see that I'm any less religious that I can appreciate the fact that science just records that we change with evolution and time, and that's a fact. It doesn't mean it's less wondrous and it doesn't mean that there can't be some power greater than any of us that has been behind and is behind whatever is going on.\"\nPublic appearances.\nGlenn was an honorary member of the International Academy of Astronautics and a member of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots, Marine Corps Aviation Association, Order of Daedalians, National Space Club board of trustees, National Space Society board of governors, International Association of Holiday Inns, Ohio Democratic Party, State Democratic Executive Committee, Franklin County (Ohio) Democratic Party and the 10th District (Ohio) Democratic Action Club. In 2001 he guest-starred as himself on the American television sitcom \"Frasier\".\nOn September 5, 2009, John and Annie Glenn dotted the \"i\" in Ohio State University's Script Ohio marching band performance during the Ohio State\u2013Navy football-game halftime show, which is normally reserved for veteran band members. To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the \"Friendship 7\" flight on February 20, 2012, he had an unexpected opportunity to speak with the orbiting crew of the International Space Station when he was onstage with NASA Administrator Charlie Bolden at Ohio State University. On April 19, 2012, Glenn participated in the ceremonial transfer of the retired Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" from NASA to the Smithsonian Institution for permanent display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center. He used the occasion to criticize the \"unfortunate\" decision to end the Space Shuttle program, saying that grounding the shuttles delayed research.\nIllness and death.\nGlenn was in good health for most of his life. He retained a private pilot's license until 2011 when he was 90. In June 2014, Glenn underwent successful heart valve replacement surgery at the Cleveland Clinic. In early December 2016, he was hospitalized at the James Cancer Hospital of Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center in Columbus. According to a family source, Glenn had been in declining health, and his condition was grave; his wife and their children and grandchildren were at the hospital.\nGlenn died on December 8, 2016, at the OSU Wexner Medical Center; he was 95 years old. No cause of death was disclosed. After his death, his body lay in state at the Ohio Statehouse. There was a memorial service at Mershon Auditorium at Ohio State University. Another memorial service was performed at Kennedy Space Center near the Heroes and Legends building. His body was interred at Arlington National Cemetery on April 6, 2017. At the time of his death, Glenn was the last surviving member of the Mercury Seven.\nThe \"Military Times\" reported that William Zwicharowski, a senior mortuary official at Dover Air Force Base, had offered to let visiting inspectors view Glenn's remains, sparking an official investigation. Zwicharowski has denied the remains were disrespected. At the conclusion of the investigation, officials said the remains were not disrespected as inspectors did not accept Zwicharowski's offer, and that Zwicharowski's actions were improper. No administrative action was taken as he had retired.\nPresident Barack Obama said that Glenn, \"the first American to orbit the Earth, reminded us that with courage and a spirit of discovery there's no limit to the heights we can reach together\". Tributes were also paid by Vice President Joe Biden, President-elect Donald Trump and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.\nThe phrase \"Godspeed, John Glenn\", which fellow Mercury astronaut Scott Carpenter had used to hail Glenn's launch into space, became a social-media hashtag: #GodspeedJohnGlenn. Former and current astronauts added tributes; so did NASA Administrator and former shuttle astronaut Charles Bolden, who wrote: \"John Glenn's legacy is one of risk and accomplishment, of history created and duty to country carried out under great pressure with the whole world watching.\" President Obama ordered flags to be flown at half-staff until Glenn's burial. On April 5, 2017, President Donald Trump issued presidential proclamation , titled \"Honoring the Memory of John Glenn\".\nAwards and honors.\nGlenn was awarded the John J. Montgomery Award in 1963. Glenn received the National Geographic Society's Hubbard Medal in 1962. Glenn, along with 37 other space race astronauts, received the Ambassador of Space Exploration Award in 2006. He was also awarded the General Thomas D. White National Defense Award and the Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation. In 1964, Glenn received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In 2004, he received the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service from the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars of the Smithsonian Institution and was awarded the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Theodore Roosevelt Award for 2008.\nGlenn earned the Navy's astronaut wings and the Marine Corps' Astronaut Medal. He was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2011 and was among the first group of astronauts to be granted the distinction. In 2012, President Barack Obama presented Glenn with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. Glenn was the seventh astronaut to receive this distinction. The Congressional Gold Medal and the Presidential Medal of Freedom are considered the two most prestigious awards that can be bestowed on a civilian. The Society of Experimental Test Pilots awarded Glenn the Iven C. Kincheloe award in 1963, and he was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame in 1968, National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1976, the International Space Hall of Fame in 1977, and the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame in 1990. In 2000, he received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for public service by an elected or appointed official, one of the annual Jefferson Awards.\nIn 1961, Glenn received an honorary LL.D from Muskingum University, the college he attended before joining the military in World War II. He also received honorary doctorates from Nihon University in Tokyo; Wagner College in Staten Island, New York; Ohio Northern University; Williams College; and Brown University. In 1998, he helped found the John Glenn Institute for Public Service and Public Policy at Ohio State University to encourage public service. The institute merged with OSU's School of Public Policy and Management to become the John Glenn School of Public Affairs. He held an adjunct professorship at the school. In February 2015, it was announced that it would become the John Glenn College of Public Affairs in April.\nThe Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field in Cleveland is named after him, and the Senator John Glenn Highway runs along a stretch of I-480 in Ohio across from the Glenn Research Center. Colonel Glenn Highway (which passes Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and Wright State University near Dayton, Ohio), John Glenn High School in his hometown of New Concord, Elwood-John H. Glenn High School in the hamlet of Elwood, Town of Huntington, Long Island, New York, and the former Col. John Glenn Elementary in Seven Hills, Ohio, were also named for him. Colonel Glenn Road in Little Rock, Arkansas, was named for him in 1962. High schools in Westland and Bay City, Michigan; Walkerton, Indiana; and Norwalk, California bear Glenn's name. The fireboat \"John H. Glenn Jr.\", operated by the District of Columbia Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department and protecting sections of the Potomac and Anacostia Rivers which run through Washington, D.C., was named for him, as was , a mobile landing platform delivered to the U.S. Navy on March 12, 2014. In June 2016, the Port Columbus International Airport in Columbus, Ohio, was renamed John Glenn Columbus International Airport. Glenn and his family attended the ceremony, during which he spoke about how visiting the airport as a child had kindled his interest in flying. On September 12, 2016, Blue Origin announced the New Glenn, a rocket. Orbital ATK named the Cygnus space capsule used in the NASA CRS OA-7 mission to the international space station \"S.S. \"John Glenn\"\" in his honor. The mission successfully lifted off on April 16, 2017.\nAlthough never a Scout himself, Glenn heavily endorsed the Boy Scouts. His son, John David, attained the coveted rank of Eagle Scout that many of Glenn's aviator peers also achieved.\nLegacy.\nGlenn's public life and legacy began when he received his first ticker-tape parade for breaking the transcontinental airspeed record. As a senator, he used his military background to write legislation to reduce nuclear proliferation. He also focused on reducing government waste. Buzz Aldrin wrote that Glenn's \"Friendship 7\" flight \"... helped to galvanize the country's will and resolution to surmount significant technical challenges of human spaceflight.\"\nPresident Barack Obama said, \"With John's passing, our nation has lost an icon and Michelle and I have lost a friend. John spent his life breaking barriers, from defending our freedom as a decorated Marine Corps fighter pilot in World War II and Korea, to setting a transcontinental speed record, to becoming, at age 77, the oldest human to touch the stars.\" Obama issued a presidential proclamation on December 9, 2016, ordering the U.S. flag to be flown at half-staff in Glenn's memory. NASA administrator Charles Bolden said: \"Senator Glenn's legacy is one of risk and accomplishment, of history created and duty to country carried out under great pressure with the whole world watching\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58703", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58703", "title": "1911 encyclopedia", "text": ""}
{"id": "58704", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58704", "title": "Arbor Day Foundation", "text": "U.S. nonprofit that encourages tree planting\nThe Arbor Day Foundation is an American 501(c)(3) nonprofit membership organization dedicated to planting trees. The Arbor Day Foundation has more than one million members and has planted more than 500 million trees in neighborhoods, communities, cities and forests throughout the world. The Foundation's stated mission is \"to inspire people to plant, nurture, and celebrate trees.\"\nHistory.\nThe Arbor Day Foundation was founded in 1972, the centennial of the first Arbor Day observance (1872). John Rosenow founded the organization to plant trees and educate the public on their importance. Throughout the years the organization has evolved into a global symbol of conservation with a variety of programs aimed at \"inspiring people to plant, nurture, and celebrate trees.\"\nPrograms.\nThrough the global reforestation program, the Arbor Day Foundation and international partners have replanted more than 108 million trees lost to fire, insects, disease, and weather in forests in the United States and around the world. These rejuvenated forests help to protect watersheds, stabilize soil, restore wildlife habitats, improve air quality and create jobs.\nTree City USA.\nFounded in 1976 and co-sponsored by the National Association of State Foresters and the United States Forest Service, the Tree City USA program provides a framework for communities to manage and expand their public trees. More than 3,900 communities have achieved Tree City USA status by meeting four core standards of sound urban forestry management: maintaining a tree board or department, having a community tree ordinance, spending at least $2 per capita on urban forestry and celebrating Arbor Day. Today, in all fifty states, Washington, D.C., and Puerto Rico nearly half of Americans are living in Tree City USA towns and cities.\nTime for Trees.\nIn 2018, the Arbor Day Foundation launched the Time for Trees initiative to plant 500 million trees in forests and communities around the world and engage 5 million tree planters by the 50th Anniversary of the Foundation in 2022. This ambitious goal was successfully achieved, marking a powerful milestone in celebration of the Arbor Day Foundation\u2019s 50th anniversary. Related to this initiative, was the publication of the book, \"Now is the Time for Trees,\" by CEO of the Arbor Day Foundation, Dan Lambe. This book helps readers understand the importance of trees and learn how they can get involved in tree-planting.\nTeam Trees.\nIn 2019, Team Trees was formed when YouTube creators MrBeast and Mark Rober joined with the Arbor Day Foundation to raise $20 million to plant 20 million trees. The campaign crowdfunded $20 million in 56 days. More than 800,000 people donated from 200 countries and territories. The campaign set the record for the biggest YouTube collaboration and fundraiser in history with notable donors such as Elon Musk and Tobias L\u00fctke, who each donated over a million dollars. The goal to reach 20,000,000 trees was reached on December 19, 2019. and as of August 2025, #TeamTrees has raised $24.9 million.\nArbor Day Farm.\nArbor Day Farm is a 260-acre attraction located in Nebraska City, Nebraska, where the mission of the Arbor Day Foundation comes to life. Amenities at Arbor Day Farm include a 140-room hotel (Lied Lodge), outdoor play and educational center (Tree Adventure), the historic home of Julius Sterling Morton (Arbor Lodge State Park) and many more amenities designed to immerse patrons into the outdoors and the beauty of trees.\nArbor Day Carbon.\nArbor Day Carbon, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Arbor Day Foundation, was founded in 2021. Arbor Day Carbon works with corporations and developers to advance high-integrity, nature-based carbon removal projects and accelerate global reforestation efforts. As of March 10, 2025, Arbor Day Carbon had retired more forestry carbon credits on the American Carbon Registry than any other nonprofit (over 1.6 million).\nArbor Day Impact Fund.\nIn 2024, the Arbor Day Foundation launched the Arbor Day Impact Fund. A venture capital firm that invests in founders and startups related to environmental causes. This was done in an effort to boost and fund innovation in the tree-planting and climate solution spaces. In 2025, the Impact Fund invested in Funga PBC, an innovative climate start-up that combines the use of advanced data analytics, DNA sequencing and fungal communities to revitalize landscapes and soil. Initial results have shown that Funga's methods can increase survival rate and increase tree growth by an average of 30%.\nWater Stewardship.\nThe Arbor Day Foundation has recently expanded its offerings to include water stewardship initiatives. CEO Dan Lambe emphasized the connection, stating, \"Water and trees are two natural resources that are inextricably linked. In order to protect water health, we must protect tree health.\" The Arbor Day Foundation uses trees to play a vital role in filtering pollutants and recharging underground aquifers. The Arbor Day Foundation has worked with various corporations to help them reach their water stewardship goals, including Niagara Bottling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58705", "revid": "19087974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58705", "title": "Oats", "text": ""}
{"id": "58706", "revid": "3810835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58706", "title": "Sunflower seed", "text": "Seed of the sunflower (Helianthus annuus)\nA sunflower seed is a seed from a sunflower (\"Helianthus annuus\"). There are three types of commonly used sunflower seeds: linoleic (most common), high oleic, and sunflower oil seeds. Each variety has its own unique levels of monounsaturated, saturated, and polyunsaturated fats. The information in this article refers mainly to the linoleic variety.\nFor commercial purposes, sunflower seeds are usually classified by the pattern on their husks. If the husk is solid black, the seeds are called black oil sunflower seeds. The crops may be referred to as oilseed sunflower crops. These seeds are usually pressed to extract their oil. Striped sunflower seeds are primarily eaten as a snack food; as a result, they may be called confectionery sunflower seeds.\nThe term \"sunflower seed\" is a misnomer when applied to the seed in its pericarp (hull). Botanically speaking, it is a cypsela. When dehulled, the edible remainder is called the sunflower kernel or heart.\nProduction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2022, global production of sunflower seeds added up to 54 million tonnes, led by Russia and Ukraine with 51% of the world total combined (table). Argentina, China, Turkey, Bulgaria, and Romania also contributed significant volumes.\nUsage.\nSunflower seeds are commonly eaten as a snack, but can also be consumed as part of a meal. They can be used as garnishes or ingredients in various recipes. The seeds may be sold as in-shell seeds or dehulled kernels or be sprouted and eaten in salads.\nWhen in-shell seeds are processed, they are first dried. Afterwards, they may be roasted or dusted with salt or flour for the preservation of flavor.\nSunflower seeds sold by the bag are either eaten plain, salted (sometimes called 'plain') or with flavoring added by the manufacturer. Flavor examples include barbecue, pickle, hot sauce, bacon, ranch, and nacho cheese.\nIn-shell, sunflower seeds are particularly popular in Mediterranean, Eastern European, and Asian countries where they can be bought freshly roasted and are commonly consumed as street food, the hull being cracked open with the teeth and spat out, while in many countries, they can be bought freshly packed in various roasted flavors. In the United States, they are commonly eaten by baseball players as an alternative to chewing tobacco.\nMechanically dehulled kernels are sold raw or roasted and are sometimes added to bread and other baked goods for their flavor. Sunflower seed brittle is produced by embedding the kernels in hard sugar candy. In Belarus, Russia, Ukraine, Bulgaria and Romania, roasted ground seeds are used to make a type of halva. \nSunflower butter is similar to peanut butter, but made from sunflower seeds instead of peanuts, and may be a substitute for those with nut allergies. However, sunflower seeds may also cause allergies in rare cases.\nSunflower seeds are commonly used as food for pets, typically being included in birdseed mix for bird feeders.\nNutrition.\nDried sunflower seeds are 5% water, 20% carbohydrates, 51% fat, and 21% protein (table). In a reference amount of , sunflower seeds provide 584\u00a0kilocalories of food energy, and are a rich source (20% or higher of the Daily Value, DV) of protein (42% DV), dietary fiber (36% DV), several B vitamins (23\u2013129% DV), and vitamin E (234% DV) (table). The seeds contain high levels of dietary minerals, including potassium, magnesium, manganese, phosphorus, iron, zinc, and copper (22\u2013200% DV, table).\nHalf of the weight of sunflower seeds is fat, mainly monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats, principally linoleic acid. Additionally, the seeds contain phytosterols which may contribute toward lower levels of blood cholesterol.\nPressed oil.\nSunflower oil is popular worldwide. The oil may be used as is, or may be processed into polyunsaturated margarines. The oil is typically extracted by applying high pressure to the sunflower seeds and collecting the oil. The protein-rich cake remaining after the seeds have been processed for oil is used as livestock feed.\nThe original sunflower oil (linoleic sunflower oil) is high in polyunsaturated fatty acids (about 68% linoleic acid) and low in saturated fats, such as palmitic acid and stearic acid. However, various hybrids have been developed to alter the fatty acid profile of the crop for various purposes.\nHulls.\nThe hulls, or shells, mostly composed of cellulose, decompose slowly and may be burned as biomass fuel. Sunflower hulls of the cultivated sunflower (\"Helianthus annuus\") contain allelopathic compounds which are toxic to grasses and the vast majority of cultivated garden plants. Only a small number of garden plants, such as day lilies, are unaffected by the allelopathic compounds found in sunflower hulls.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58708", "revid": "6518951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58708", "title": "Water buffalo", "text": "Species of large bovine\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe water buffalo (Bubalus bubalis), also called domestic water buffalo, Asian water buffalo and Asiatic water buffalo, is a large bovine originating in the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia. Today, it is also kept in Italy, the Balkans, Australia, the Americas, and some African countries. Two extant types of water buffalo are recognized, based on morphological and behavioural criteria: the river buffalo of the Indian subcontinent and further west to the Balkans, Egypt, and Italy; and the swamp buffalo from Assam in the west through Southeast Asia to the Yangtze Valley of China in the east.\nThe wild water buffalo (\"Bubalus arnee\") is most probably the ancestor of the domestic water buffalo. Results of a phylogenetic study indicate that the river-type water buffalo probably originated in western India and was domesticated about 6,300 years ago, whereas the swamp-type originated independently from Mainland Southeast Asia and was domesticated about 3,000 to 7,000 years ago. The river buffalo dispersed west as far as Egypt, the Balkans, and Italy; while swamp buffalo dispersed to the rest of Southeast Asia and up to the Yangtze Valley.\nWater buffaloes were traded from the Indus Valley Civilisation to Mesopotamia, in modern Iraq, in 2500\u00a0BC by the Meluhhas. The seal of a scribe employed by an Akkadian king shows the sacrifice of water buffaloes.\nWater buffaloes are especially suitable for tilling rice fields, and their milk is richer in fat and protein than that of dairy cattle. A large feral population became established in northern Australia in the late 19th century, and there are smaller feral herds in Papua New Guinea, Tunisia and northeastern Argentina. Feral herds are also present in New Britain, New Ireland, Irian Jaya, Colombia, Guyana, Suriname, Brazil, and Uruguay.\nTaxonomy.\nCarl Linnaeus first described the genus \"Bos\" and the water buffalo under the binomial \"Bos bubalis\" in 1758; the species was known to occur in Asia and was held as a domestic form in Italy. Ellerman and Morrison-Scott treated the wild and domestic forms of the water buffalo as conspecifics, whereas others treated them as different species. The nomenclatorial treatment of the wild and domestic forms has been inconsistent and varies between authors and even within the works of single authors.\nIn March 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature achieved consistency in the naming of the wild and domestic water buffaloes by ruling that the scientific name \"Bubalus arnee\" is valid for the wild form. \"B. bubalis\" continues to be valid for the domestic form and applies also to feral populations.\nIn the early 1970s, different names were proposed for the river and swamp types of water buffaloes; the river type was referred to as \"Bubalus bubalis bubalis\" (Linnaeus, 1758), while the swamp type was referred to as \"Bubalus bubalis carabanensis\" (Castillo, 1971). However, \"Bubalus carabanensis\" is considered a junior synonym of \"Bubalus kerabau\" (Fitzinger, 1860).\nCharacteristics.\nThe skin of the river buffalo is black, but some specimens may have dark, slate-coloured skin. Swamp buffaloes have grey skin at birth, which becomes slate blue later. Albinoids are present in some populations. River buffaloes have longer faces, smaller girths, and bigger limbs than swamp buffaloes. Their dorsal ridges extend further back and taper off more gradually. Their horns grow downward and backward, then curve upward in a spiral. Swamp buffaloes are heavy-bodied and stockily built, with a short body and large belly. The forehead is flat, the eyes are prominent, the face is short, and the muzzle is wide. The neck is comparatively long, and the withers and croup are prominent. A dorsal ridge extends backward and ends abruptly just before the end of the chest. Their horns grow outward and curve in a semicircle, but always remain more or less on the plane of the forehead. The tail is short, reaching only to the hocks. The size of the body and shape of the horns may vary greatly among breeds. Height at the withers is for bulls and for cows, but large individuals may attain . Head-lump length at maturity typically ranges from with a long tail. They range in weight from , but weights of over have also been observed.\n\"Tedong bonga\" is a piebald water buffalo with a unique black and white coloration favoured by the Toraja of Sulawesi.\nThe swamp buffalo has 48 chromosomes, while the river buffalo has 50 chromosomes. The two types do not readily interbreed, but fertile offspring can occur. Water buffalo-cattle hybrids have not been observed to occur, but the embryos of such hybrids reach maturity in laboratory experiments, albeit at lower rates than non-hybrids.\nThe rumen of the water buffalo differs from the rumen of other ruminants. It contains a larger population of bacteria, particularly the cellulolytic bacteria, lower protozoa, and higher fungi zoospores. In addition, higher levels of the rumen ammonia nitrogen (NH4-N) and pH have been found compared to those in cattle.\nEcology and behavior.\nRiver buffaloes prefer deep water. Swamp buffaloes prefer to wallow in mudholes, which they make with their horns. During wallowing, they acquire a thick coating of mud. Both are well-adapted to a hot and humid climate with temperatures ranging from in the winter to and greater in the summer. Water availability is important in hot climates, since they need wallows, rivers, or splashing water to assist in thermoregulation. Some water buffalo breeds are adapted to saline seaside shores and saline sandy terrain.\nDiet.\nGreen fodders are widely used for intensive milk production and for fattening. Many fodder crops are conserved as hay, chaffed, or pulped. Fodders include alfalfa, banana plants, cassava, maize, oats, and sorghum. During floods, the animals can graze under water, feeding on aquatic plants such as reeds, sedges, and species of marsh grasses. They can help to keep waterways open by eating water hyacinth.\nReproduction.\nSwamp buffaloes generally become reproductive at an older age than river breeds. Young males in Egypt, India, and Pakistan are first mated around 3.0\u20133.5 years of age, but in Italy, they may be used as early as 2 years of age. Successful mating behaviour may continue until the animal is 12 years or even older. A good river buffalo male can impregnate 100 females in a year. A strong seasonal influence on mating occurs. Heat stress reduces libido.\nAlthough water buffaloes are polyoestrous, their reproductive efficiency shows wide variation throughout the year. The cows exhibit a distinct seasonal change in displaying oestrus, conception rate, and calving rate. The age at the first oestrus of heifers varies between breeds from 13 to 33 months, but mating at the first oestrus is often infertile and usually deferred until they are 3 years old. Gestation lasts from 281 to 334 days, but most reports give a range between 300 and 320 days. Swamp buffaloes carry their calves for one or two weeks longer than river buffaloes. Finding water buffaloes that continue to work well at the age of 30 is not uncommon, and instances of a working life of 40 years have been recorded.\nDomestication and breeding.\nThe most probable ancestor of domesticated water buffalo is the wild water buffalo (\"Bubalus arnee\"), which is native to the Indian subcontinent and tropical Southeast Asia. Two types of domesticated water buffalo are recognized, based on morphological and behavioural criteria \u2013 the river buffalo (of the western Indian subcontinent and west to the Levant, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean) and the swamp buffalo (found from Assam and East India in the west, east to the Yangtze Valley of China, and south through Indochina and Southeast Asia).\nRiver- and swamp-type water buffalo are believed to have been domesticated independently. Results of a phylogenetic study indicate that the river-type water buffalo probably originated in western India and was probably domesticated about 6,300 years ago; the swamp-type originated independently from Mainland Southeast Asia, being domesticated between 3\u20137,000 years ago. The river buffalo dispersed west as far as Egypt, southern Europe, the Levant, and the Mediterranean regions; swamp buffalo dispersed in the opposite direction, to the rest of Southeast Asia, and as far as the Yangtze Valley in China.\nSwamp-type water buffalo entered Island Southeast Asia from at least 2,500 years ago through the northern Philippines, where butchered remains of domesticated water buffalo have been recovered from the Neolithic Nagsabaran site (part of the Lal-lo and Gattaran Shell Middens, c.\u20092200 BCE to 400 CE). These became the ancestors of the distinctly swamp-type carabao buffalo breed of the Philippines which, in turn, spread to Guam, Indonesia, and Malaysia, among other smaller islands.\nThe present-day river buffalo is the result of complex domestication processes involving more than one maternal lineage and a significant maternal gene flow from wild populations after the initial domestication events. Twenty-two breeds of the river buffalo are known, including the Murrah, Nili-Ravi, Surti, Carabao, Anatolian, Mediterranean, and Egyptian buffaloes. China has a huge variety of water buffalo genetic resources, with 16 local swamp buffalo breeds in various regions.\nGenetic studies.\nMitochondrial DNA analyses indicate that the two types were domesticated independently. Sequencing of cytochrome b (\"CytB\") genes of \"Bubalus\" species implies that the water buffalo originated from at least two populations, and that the river-type and the swamp-type have differentiated at the full species level. The genetic distance between the two types is so large that a divergence time of about 1.7 million years has been suggested. The swamp-type was noticed to have the closest relationship with the tamaraw of the northern Philippines.\nA 2008 DNA analysis of Neolithic water buffalo remains in northern China (previously used as evidence of a Chinese domestication origin) found that the remains were of the extinct \"Bubalus mephistopheles\" and are not genetically related to modern domesticated water buffaloes. Another study in 2004 also concluded that the remains were from wild specimens. Both indicate that water buffaloes were first domesticated outside of China. Analyses of mitochondrial DNA and single-nucleotide polymorphism indicate that swamp and river buffaloes were crossbred in China.\nA 2020 analysis of the genomes of 91 swamp and 30 river buffaloes showed that they separated already before domestication about https://\u00a0million years ago. A 2021 analysis of water buffalo and lowland anoa genomes unexpectedly found the anoa branching somewhere between swamp and river buffaloes. A 2023 Filipino study using the \"CytB\" gene instead found the tamaraw branching between the two.\nPopulations.\nBy 2011, the global water buffalo population was about 172 million. The estimated global population of water buffalo is 208,098,759 head distributed in 77 countries in five continents.\nHusbandry.\nThe husbandry system of water buffaloes depends on the purpose for which they are bred and maintained. Most are kept by people who work on small farms in family units. Their water buffaloes live in close association with them, and are often their greatest capital asset. In India, the women and girls generally look after the milking buffaloes, while the men and boys are concerned with the working animals. Throughout Asia, they are commonly tended by children who are often seen leading or riding their charges to wallows. Water buffaloes are the ideal animals for work in the deep mud of paddy fields because of their large hooves and flexible foot joints. They are sometimes called \"the living tractor of the East\". They are an efficient and economical means of cultivation of small fields. In many rice-producing countries, they are used for threshing and for transporting the sheaves during the rice harvest. They provide power for oilseed mills, sugarcane presses, and devices for raising water. They are widely used as pack animals and, in India and Pakistan, also for heavy haulage. In their invasions of Europe, the Ottoman Turks used water buffaloes for hauling heavy battering rams. Their dung is used as a fertilizer, and as a fuel when dried.\nProducts.\nAround 26 million water buffaloes are slaughtered each year for meat worldwide. They contribute 72 million tonnes of milk and three million tonnes of meat annually to world food, much of it in areas that are prone to nutritional imbalances. In India, river buffaloes are kept mainly for milk production and for transport, whereas swamp buffaloes are kept mainly for work and a small amount of milk.\nMeat, skin, bone, and horn.\nWater buffalo meat or carabeef is a major source of export revenue for India. The hides provide tough and useful leather.\nThe bones and horns are often made into jewellery, especially earrings. Horns are used for the embouchure of musical instruments, such as the \"ney\" and the \"kaval\".\nDairy.\nWater buffalo milk presents physicochemical features different from those of other ruminant species, such as a higher content of fatty acids and proteins. The physical and chemical parameters of swamp-type and river-type water buffalo milk differ.\nWater buffalo milk contains higher levels of total solids, crude protein, fat, calcium, and phosphorus, and slightly higher content of lactose compared with those of cow milk. The high level of total solids makes water buffalo milk ideal for processing into value-added dairy products such as cheese. The conjugated linoleic acid content in water buffalo milk ranged from 4.4\u00a0mg/g fat in September to 7.6 mg/g fat in June. Seasons and genetics may play a role in variation of CLA level and changes in gross composition of water buffalo milk.\nWater buffalo milk is processed into a large variety of dairy products, including:\nEnvironmental effects.\nWildlife conservation scientists have started to recommend and use introduced populations of feral water buffaloes to manage uncontrolled vegetation growth in and around natural wetlands. Introduced water buffaloes at home in such environs provide cheap service by regularly grazing the uncontrolled vegetation and opening up clogged water bodies for waterfowl, wetland birds, and other wildlife. Grazing water buffaloes are sometimes used in Great Britain for conservation grazing, such as in the Chippenham Fen National Nature Reserve. The water buffaloes can better adapt to wet conditions and poor-quality vegetation than cattle. In uncontrolled circumstances, though, water buffaloes can cause environmental damage, such as trampling vegetation, disturbing bird and reptile nesting sites, and spreading exotic weeds.\nReproductive research.\nIn vitro fertilization.\nIn 2004, Philippine Carabao Center in Nueva Ecija produced the first swamp-type water buffalo born from an \"in vitro\"-produced, vitrified embryo. It was named \"Glory\" after President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo. Joseph Estrada's most successful project as an opposition senator, the PCC was created through Republic Act 3707, the Carabao Act of 1992.\nThere have been many attempts at creating hybrids between domestic cattle and domestic water buffaloes. To date, none have been successful; the embryos usually only get to the 8-cell stage before failing.\nCloning.\nThe first cloned swamp-type water buffaloes were born in 2007 using micromanipulation-based somatic cell nuclear transfer; three calves were born, and two died.\nIn 2009, National Dairy Research Institute cloned a river-type water buffalo using a simplified somatic cell nuclear transfer procedure called \"handmade cloning\".\nThe Central Institute for Research on Buffaloes cloned a water buffalo in 2016.\nIn culture.\nThe Minangkabau people of West Sumatra adorn their houses and clothing with motifs based on the buffalo's horns as a tribute to the legend that pitted a buffalo () chosen by their kingdom against one by (traditionally) the Majapahit empire, to which their kingdom won.\nIn Chinese tradition, the water buffalo is associated with a contemplative life. In the Thai and Sinhalese animal and planetary zodiac, the water buffalo is the third animal zodiac of the Thai and the fourth animal zodiac of the Sinhalese people of Sri Lanka. A water buffalo head was a symbol of death in Tibet. The carabao is considered a national symbol of the Philippines, although this has no basis in Philippine law. In Indian mythology, the Hindu god of death, Yama, rides on a water buffalo. A male water buffalo is sacrificed in India during Shaktism festivals.\nIn the early 19th century in Australia, water buffalo escaped British colonies on the Cobourg Peninsula and became feral. Later Aboriginal Australians of Arnhem Land discovered these herds and perceived these never-before-known animals \u2013 \"nganaparru\" \u2013 as a new manifestation of their dreaming or \"djang\"; Indigenous Australian art depicting these water buffalo were resurfaced in a cave within a site named Djarrng near Gunbalanya in 1979.\nFighting festivals.\nThe Moh juj Water Buffalo Fighting Festival is held every year in Bhogali Bihu in Assam. The Do Son Water Buffalo Fighting Festival of Vietnam is held each year on the ninth day of the eighth month of the lunar calendar at Do Son Township, Haiphong City, Vietnam. It is one of the most popular Vietnam festivals and events in Haiphong City. The preparations for this buffalo fighting festival begin from the two to three months earlier. The competing water buffalo are selected and trained months in advance. The festival is linked with worship of the Water God and the \"Hien Sinh\" custom to show the martial spirit of the people of Do Son, Haiphong. \nThe Ko Samui Water Buffalo Fighting Festival of Thailand is a popular event held on special occasions such as New Year's Day in January, and Songkran in mid-April. This festival features head-wrestling bouts in which two male water buffaloes are pitted against one another. Unlike in Spanish-style bullfighting, wherein bulls get killed while fighting sword-wielding men, the festival held at Ko Samui is a fairly harmless contest. The fighting season varies according to ancient customs and ceremonies. The first water buffalo to turn and run away is considered the loser; the winning water buffalo becomes worth several million baht.\nRacing festivals.\nThe Kambala races of Karnataka, India, take place between October and March. \nBuffalo racing in Kerala is similar to the Kambala races.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58710", "revid": "1909773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58710", "title": "Zea", "text": "Zea may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58712", "revid": "14940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58712", "title": "Mutton (disambiguation)", "text": "Mutton usually refers to sheep meat.\nMutton may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58713", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58713", "title": "Jumping gene", "text": ""}
{"id": "58714", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58714", "title": "College American football", "text": ""}
{"id": "58715", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58715", "title": "1066 and All That", "text": "1930 book by W. C. Sellar &amp; R. J. Yeatman\n1066 and All That: A Memorable History of England, Comprising All the Parts You Can Remember, Including 103 Good Things, 5 Bad Kings and 2 Genuine Dates is a tongue-in-cheek reworking of the history of England. Written by W. C. Sellar and R. J. Yeatman and illustrated by John Reynolds, it first appeared serially in \"Punch\" magazine, and was published in book form by Methuen &amp; Co. Ltd. in 1930.\nSetting and background.\nRaphael Samuel saw \"1066 and All That\" as a product of the post-First World War debunking of British greatness, very much in the tradition of \"Eminent Victorians\" (1918): as he put it, \"that much underrated anti-imperialist tract \"1066 and All That\" punctured the more bombastic claims of drum-and-trumpet history\".\nBoth the Tory view of a 'great man' history, and the liberal pieties of Whig history are undermined in the work, in the (then contemporary) style of such serious historians as Namier and Herbert Butterfield. With its conflation of history and memory, and its deconstruction of \"standard\" historical narrative lines, the book can also be seen as an early post-modernist text.\nOverview.\nThe book is a parody of the style of history teaching in English schools at the time, in particular of \"Our Island Story\". It purports to contain \"all the History you can remember\", and, in sixty-two chapters, covers the history of England from Roman times through 1066 \"and all that\", up to the end of World War I, at which time \"America was thus clearly Top Nation, and history came to a .\". The book is full of examples of half-remembered and mixed-up facts.\nAlthough the subtitle states that the book comprises \"103 Good Things, 5 Bad Kings and 2 Genuine Dates\", the book's preface mentions that originally four dates were planned, but last-minute research revealed that two of them were \"not memorable\". The two dates that are referenced in the book are 1066, the date of the Battle of Hastings and the Norman conquest of England (Chapter XI), and 55 BC, the date of the first Roman invasion of Britain under Julius Caesar (Chapter I). However, when the date of the Roman invasion is given, it is immediately followed by the date that Caesar was \"compelled to invade Britain again the following year (54 BC, not 56, owing to the peculiar Roman method of counting)\". Despite the confusion of dates the Roman Conquest is the first of 103 historical events in the book characterised as a \"Good Thing\", \"since the Britons were only natives at that time\".\nChapter II begins \"that long succession of Waves of which History is chiefly composed\", the first of which, here, is composed of Ostrogoths, Visigoths, mere Goths, Vandals, and Huns. Later examples are the \"Wave of Saints\", who include the Venomous Bead (Chapter III); \"Waves of Pretenders\", usually divided into smaller waves of two: an Old Pretender and a Young Pretender (Chapter XXX); plus the \"Wave of Beards\" in the Elizabethan era (Chapter XXXIII).\nAccording to Sellar and Yeatman, in English history kings are either \"Good\" or \"Bad\". The first \"Good King\" is the confusingly differentiated King Arthur/Alfred (Chapter V). Bad kings include King John, who when he came to the throne showed how much he deserved this epithet when he \"lost his temper and flung himself on the floor, foaming at the mouth and biting the rushes\" (Chapter XVIII). The death of Henry I from \"a surfeit of palfreys\" (recorded in other historical works as a \"surfeit of lampreys\", Chapter XIII) proves to be a paradigmatic case of the deaths of later monarchs through a surfeit of over-eating or other causes (so, for example, in Chapter XVII, Richard the Lion Heart dies \"of a surfeit of Saladins\"). Other \"memorable\" monarchs include the Split King (Henry IV, Part 1 and Henry IV, Part 2) and Broody Mary.\n\"Memorable\" events in English history include the Disillusion of the Monasteries (Chapter XXXI); the struggle between the Cavaliers (characterised as \"Wrong but Wromantic\") and the Roundheads (characterised as \"Right but Repulsive\") in the English Civil War (Chapter XXXV); and The Industrial Revelation (Chapter XLIX).\nThe book also contains five joke \"Test Papers\" interspersed among the chapters, which contain nonsense instructions including the famous \"Do not on any account attempt to write on both sides of the paper at once\" (Test Paper V), and \"Do not attempt to answer more than one question at a time\" (Test Paper I) and such unanswerable questions as \"How far did the Lords Repellent drive Henry III into the arms of Pedro the Cruel? (Protractors may not be used.)\" (Test Paper II).\nMusical comedy.\nIn 1935, the musical comedy \"1066\u00a0\u2013 and all that: A Musical Comedy based on that Memorable History by Sellar and Yeatman\" was produced. The book and lyrics were by Reginald Arkell; the music was composed by Alfred Reynolds. It was revived at the Palace Theatre, London, in 1945.\nWorks inspired by \"1066\".\n\"1066 and All That\" inspired Paul Manning's \"1984 and All That\", dealing with the subsequent history of Britain and the rest of the world up to 1984, and written in the same style, with similar prose, illustrations and tests. (\"What caused the Wall Street crash? Speculate wildly.\") The title references George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\".\nNed Sherrin and Neil Shand wrote a sequel \"1956 and All That\", with the subtitle \"a memorable history of England since the war to end all wars (Two)\".\nIn 2005 Craig Brown released \"1966 and All That\", which copied the book's style (including elements like the end of chapter tests), recounting the remainder of the 20th century. In 2006 the book was adapted for BBC Radio 4 in four parts.\nRichard Armour's book \"It All Started With Columbus\" (1953, revised 1961) treats the history of the United States, from 1492 to the presidency of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, in a manner that owes a great deal to Sellar and Yeatman (\"Ferdinand and Isabella refused to believe the world was round, even when Columbus showed them an egg\"). Acknowledging the debt, Armour dedicated his book to Sellar and Yeatman.\nDave Barry's 1989 book \"\" is another treatment of American history reminiscent of \"1066 and All That\", though Sellar and Yeatman are not acknowledged. (\"The first major president to be elected after the War of 1812 was President Monroe Doctrine, who became famous by developing the policy for which he is named.\")\nMatthew Sturgis' book \"1992 and All This\" (Macmillan, 1991) is a \"humorous look at Europe in preparation for 1992 when Britain officially becomes part of the Continent. Much of the humour focuses on the differences between the British and the Europeans.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58716", "revid": "49116891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58716", "title": "Gulf of Aden", "text": "Gulf between the Horn of Africa and Yemen in the Arabian Peninsula\nThe Gulf of Aden (; ) is a deepwater gulf of the Indian Ocean between Yemen to the north, the Arabian Sea to the east, Djibouti to the west, and the Guardafui Channel, the Socotra Archipelago, Puntland in Somalia and Somaliland to the south. In the northwest, it connects with the Red Sea through the Bab-el-Mandeb strait, and it connects with the Arabian Sea to the east. To the west, it narrows into the Gulf of Tadjoura in Djibouti. The Aden Ridge lies along the middle of the gulf, and tectonic activity at the ridge is causing the gulf to widen by about per year.\nThe ancient Greeks regarded the gulf as one of the most important parts of the \"Erythraean Sea\". It later came to be dominated by Muslims, as the area around the gulf converted to Islam. From the late 1960s onwards, there was an increased Soviet naval presence in the Gulf. The importance of the Gulf of Aden declined while the Suez Canal was closed, but it was revitalized when the canal was reopened in 1975, after being deepened and widened by the Egyptian government.\nThe waterway is part of the important Suez Canal shipping route between the Mediterranean Sea and the Arabian Sea in the Indian Ocean, with 21,000 ships crossing the gulf annually. This route is often used for the delivery of Persian Gulf oil, making the gulf an integral waterway in the world economy. Important cities along the Gulf of Aden include the namesake Aden in Yemen. Other Yemeni cities are Zinjibar, Shuqrah, Ahwar, Balhaf, Mukalla, Ash-Shihr, al-Hami, Hadibu, and Qulensya. On the African side are the cities of Djibouti, Berbera and Bosaso.\nDespite a lack of large-scale commercial fishing facilities, the coastline supports many isolated fishing towns and villages. The Gulf of Aden is richly supplied with fish, turtles, and lobsters. Local fishing takes place close to the shore; sardines, tuna, kingfish, and mackerel make up the bulk of the annual catches. Crayfish and sharks are also fished locally.\nHistorical names.\nIn antiquity, the ancient Greeks viewed what is now called the Gulf of Aden as an extension of the Erythraean Sea (Red Sea) , \"Erythr\u00e0 Th\u00e1lassa\". They named several of the islands in the gulf, including one they called Stratonis, although it is no longer clear which Greek name referred to which island.\nIn Abu'l-Fida's \"A Sketch of the Countries\" (), the present-day Gulf of Aden was called the Gulf of Berbera, which shows how important Berbera was in both regional and international trade during the medieval period.\nLegendary navigator Ibn Majid also referred to the Gulf of Aden as the Gulf of Berbera in his 15th century magnum opus \"The Book of the Benefits of the Principles and Foundations of Seamanship\". Berbera has been a prominent port since antiquity.\nGeography.\nLimits.\nThe International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Gulf of Aden as follows:\n\"On the northwest\" \u2013 the southern limit of the Red Sea [a line joining Hisn Murad () and Ras Siyyan ()]\n\"On the east\" \u2013 the meridian of Cape Guardafui\nThe Gulf of Tadjoura is part of the Gulf of Aden, forming its western end.\nHydrography.\nThe temperature of the Gulf of Aden varies between and , depending on the season and the monsoons. The salinity of the gulf at depth varies from 35.3 \u2030 along the eastern Somali coast to as high as 37.3 \u2030 in the gulf's center, while its oxygen content at the same depth is typically between 4.0 and 5.0\u00a0mg/L.\nExclusive economic zone.\nExclusive economic zones in Gulf of Aden:\nEconomy.\nThe Gulf of Aden is a vital waterway for shipping, especially for Persian Gulf oil, making it an integral waterway in the world economy. Approximately 11% of the world's seaborne petroleum passes through the Gulf of Aden on its way to the Suez Canal or to regional refineries. The main ports along the gulf are Aden, Balhaf, Bir Ali, Mukalla, and Shokra in Yemen; Djibouti City in Djibouti; Zeila in Somaliland, Berbera in Somaliland, and Bosaso in Somalia.\nIn antiquity, the gulf was a thriving area of international trade between Ptolemaic Egypt and Rome in the west and Classical India, its Indonesian colonies, and Han China in the east. It was not limited to transshipment, as Yemeni incense, tortoiseshell, and other goods were in high demand in both directions. After Egyptian sailors discovered the monsoon winds and began to trade directly with India, caravan routes and their associated kingdoms began to collapse, leading to a rise in piracy in the area. The 1st-century \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\" documents one Egyptian captain's experiences during this era.\nAfter the collapse of the Roman economy, direct trade ceased but the Awsan I port Crater, located just south of the modern city of Aden, remained an important regional center. In late antiquity and the early medieval period, there were several invasions of Yemen from Ethiopia; after the rise of Islam, the gulf permitted repeated migrations of northwest Africa by Arab settlers.\nIn the first decade of the 2000s, especially during the war in Somalia, the gulf evolved into a hub of pirate activity. By 2013, attacks in the waters had steadily declined due to private security and international navy patrols. India receives US$50\u00a0billion in imports \u2013 and sends US$60\u00a0billion in exports \u2013 through this area annually. To protect its trade and that of other countries, India keeps a warship escort in the area.\nEcology.\nA geologically young body of water, the Gulf of Aden has a unique biodiversity that includes many varieties of fish, coral, seabirds and invertebrates. This rich ecological diversity has benefited from a relative lack of pollution by humans in the past. However, environmental groups fear that the lack of a coordinated effort to control pollution may jeopardize the gulf's ecosphere. Whales, dolphins, and dugongs were once common before being severely reduced by commercial hunts, including by mass illegal hunts by the Soviet Union and Japan in the 1960s and 1970s. The now critically endangered Arabian humpback whales were once seen here in large numbers, but only a few large whales still appear in the gulf waters, including Bryde's whales, blue whales, and deep-sea toothed whales such as sperm whales and tropical bottlenose whales.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58717", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58717", "title": "Hume", "text": "Hume most commonly refers to:\nHume may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58718", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58718", "title": "Presidant", "text": ""}
{"id": "58719", "revid": "50715898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58719", "title": "Judy Garland", "text": "American actress and singer (1922\u20131969)\nJudy Garland (born Frances Ethel Gumm; June10, 1922\u00a0\u2013 June22, 1969) was an American actress and singer. Possessing a strong contralto voice, Garland was celebrated for her emotional depth and versatility across film, stage, and concert performance. She achieved international recognition for her portrayal of Dorothy Gale in the musical film \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939). Her rendition of \"Over the Rainbow\" won the Academy Award for Best Original Song, and became Garland's signature song. Garland's resilience, artistic range and enduring recordings have ensured her lasting impact on popular culture and her reputation as a cultural icon. She is often credited by others singers, including Barbra Streisand, as possessing the greatest voice in music history.\nGarland began her career at the age of two: performing with her two older sisters as a vaudeville act called the Gumm Sisters. In 1935, aged 13, she signed a contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) and was initially cast in supporting roles in ensemble musicals such as \"Broadway Melody of 1938\" (1937) and \"Thoroughbreds Don't Cry\" (1937). The success of \"The Wizard of Oz\" propelled her into leading roles in MGM musicals, including \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" (1944), \"Easter Parade\" (1948), and \"Summer Stock\" (1950). In the 1950s and early 1960s, she expanded her range with dramatic performances in \"A Star Is Born\" (1954) and \"Judgment at Nuremberg\" (1961), both of which earned Academy Award nominations and demonstrated her capacity to convey vulnerability and resilience on screen.\nBeyond her film work, Garland had a distinguished singing career in recordings and live performance. Between 1939 and 1962, she recorded 11 studio albums. Several of her recordings were later inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. Her 1961 live album \"Judy at Carnegie Hall\" won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. In the same year she became the first woman to receive the Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement in motion pictures (aged 39 at the time, she remains the youngest recipient of that award). Her honors also include a Golden Globe Award, an Academy Juvenile Award for her early contributions, and a Special Tony Award for her role in reviving vaudeville. In 1997 she was posthumously awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, and in 1999 the American Film Institute ranked her eighth among the greatest female screen legends of classic Hollywood cinema.\nGarland's personal life was marked by both public fascination and private struggle. She married five times and had three children, including actresses and singers Liza Minnelli and Lorna Luft. From her teenage years onward, she faced health challenges exacerbated by studio pressures on her appearance and performance. She developed dependencies on prescription medications that affected her physical and mental well-being. Financial difficulties, including substantial tax debts, added to her burdens. She died from an accidental barbiturate overdose at age 47 in 1969.\nEarly life.\nGarland was born Frances Ethel Gumm on June 10, 1922, in Grand Rapids, Minnesota. She was the youngest child of vaudevillians Ethel Marion Milne and Francis Avent Gumm. She was named after both of her parents and baptized at a local Episcopal church. Her parents had met and married in Wisconsin, and then settled in Grand Rapids, where they operated a movie theater showcasing vaudeville acts. She was of Irish, English, Scottish, and Huguenot ancestry. \n\"Baby\" (as she was called by her parents and sisters) shared her family's flair for song and dance. Her first appearance came at the age of two, when she joined her elder sisters Mary Jane \"Suzy/Suzanne\" Gumm and Dorothy Virginia \"Jimmie\" Gumm on the stage of her father's movie theater during a Christmas show to sing a chorus of \"Jingle Bells.\" The Gumm Sisters performed there for the next few years, accompanied by their mother on piano.The family relocated to Lancaster, California, in June 1926, following rumors that her father had homosexual inclinations. Frank bought and operated another theater in Lancaster, and Ethel began managing her daughters and working to get them into motion pictures.\nCareer.\n1928\u20131935: The Gumm/Garland Sisters.\nIn 1928, the Gumm Sisters enrolled in a dance school run by Ethel Meglin, proprietor of the Meglin Kiddies dance troupe, and appeared with the troupe at its annual Christmas show. Through the Meglin Kiddies, the sisters made their film debut in a short subject called \"The Big Revue\" (1929), where they performed a song-and-dance number called \"That's the Good Old Sunny South.\" This was followed by appearances in two Vitaphone shorts the following year: \"A Holiday in Storyland,\" featuring Garland's first on-screen solo, and \"The Wedding of Jack and Jill\". They next appeared together in \"Bubbles\" (1930). Their final on-screen appearance was in an MGM Technicolor short entitled \"La Fiesta de Santa Barbara\" (1935).\nThe trio had toured the vaudeville circuit as \"The Gumm Sisters\" for many years by the time they performed in Chicago at the Oriental Theater with George Jessel in 1934. He encouraged the group to choose a more appealing name after \"Gumm\" was met with laughter from the audience. According to theater legend, their act was once erroneously billed at a Chicago theater as \"The Glum Sisters.\"\nSeveral stories persist regarding the origin of their use of the name Garland. One is that it was originated by Jessel after Carole Lombard's character Lily Garland in the film \"Twentieth Century\" (1934), which was then playing at the Oriental in Chicago; another is that the girls chose the surname after drama critic Robert Garland. Garland's daughter Lorna Luft stated that her mother selected the name when Jessel announced that the trio \"looked prettier than a garland of flowers.\" In a TV special filmed in Hollywood at the Pantages Theatre premiere of \"A Star Is Born\" on September 29, 1954, Jessel stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think that I ought to tell the folks that it was I who named Judy Garland, \"Judy Garland.\" Not that it would have made any difference\u00a0\u2013 you couldn't have hid[den] that great talent if you'd called her \"Tel Aviv Windsor Shell\", you know, but her name when I first met her was Frances Gumm and it wasn't the kind of a name that so sensitive a great actress like that should have;\u00a0... and so we called her Judy Garland and I think she's a combination of Helen Hayes and Al Jolson and maybe Jenny Lind and Sarah Bernhardt.\nA later explanation surfaced when Jessel was a guest on Garland's television show in 1963. He said that he had sent actress Judith Anderson a telegram containing the word \"garland\" and it stuck in his mind. However, Garland asked Jessel just moments later if this story was true and he blithely replied, \"No.\"\nBy late 1934, the Gumm Sisters had changed their name to the Garland Sisters. Soon afterward, Frances changed her name to \"Judy,\" inspired by a popular Hoagy Carmichael song. The group broke up by August 1935, when Mary Jane \"Suzanne\" Garland flew to Reno, Nevada and married musician Lee Kahn, a member of the Jimmy Davis orchestra playing at Cal-Neva Lodge, Lake Tahoe.\n1935\u20131938: Early years at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer.\nIn September 1935, Louis B. Mayer asked songwriter Burton Lane to go to the Orpheum Theater in downtown Los Angeles to watch the Garland Sisters' vaudeville act and to report to him. A few days later, Garland and her father were brought for an impromptu audition at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios in Culver City. Garland performed \"Zing! Went the Strings of My Heart\" and \"Eli, Eli,\" a Yiddish song written in 1896 and regularly performed in vaudeville. The studio immediately signed Garland to a contract with MGM, presumably without a screen test, though she had made a test for the studio several months earlier. The studio did not know what to do with her; aged 13, she was older than the traditional child star, but too young for adult roles.\nHer physical appearance was a dilemma for MGM. She was only and her \"cute\" or \"girl-next-door\" looks did not match the glamorous persona then required of female leading performers. She was self-conscious and anxious about her appearance. Garland went to school at the studio with Ava Gardner, Lana Turner, and Elizabeth Taylor\u2014\"real beauties,\" said Charles Walters, who directed her in a number of films. \"Judy was the big money-maker at the time, a big success, but she was the ugly duckling\u00a0... I think it had a very damaging effect on her emotionally for a long time. I think it lasted forever, really.\" Her insecurity was exacerbated by the attitude of studio chief Mayer, who referred to her as his \"little hunchback.\"\nDuring her early years at the studio, she was photographed and dressed in plain clothing or frilly juvenile gowns and costumes to match the \"girl-next-door\" image created for her. She was also asked to wear removable caps on her teeth and rubberized discs to reshape her nose.\nOn November 16, 1935, the young teen Garland was in the midst of preparing for a radio performance on the \"Shell Chateau Hour,\" when she learned that her father had been hospitalized with meningitis and that his medical condition had taken a turn for the worse. He died the following morning at age 49, leaving her devastated.\nGarland's song for the \"Shell Chateau Hour\" was her first professional rendition of \"Zing! Went the Strings of My Heart,\" a song that became a standard in many of her concerts. She performed at various studio functions and was eventually cast opposite Deanna Durbin in the musical short \"Every Sunday\" (1936). The film contrasted her vocal range and swing style with Durbin's operatic soprano and served as an extended screen test for them, as studio executives were questioning the wisdom of having two girl singers on the roster.Garland's first feature-length film was a loan-out to Fox titled \"Pigskin Parade\", a football-themed musical comedy, where she was billed tenth after Stuart Erwin, Jack Haley, Patsy Kelly, Betty Grable, and others. Garland sang three solos, including \"The Texas Tornado\" and \"The Balboa.\"Garland came to the attention of studio executives when she sang a special arrangement of \"You Made Me Love You (I Didn't Want to Do It)\" to Clark Gable at a birthday party that the studio arranged for the actor. Her rendition was so well-regarded that she performed the song in the all-star extravaganza \"Broadway Melody of 1938\" (1937), singing to a photograph of Gable.\nMGM found a winning formula when it paired Garland with Mickey Rooney in a string of what were known as \"backyard musicals.\" The duo first appeared together as supporting characters in \"Thoroughbreds Don't Cry\" (1937), a B movie. Garland was then cast in the fourth of the Hardy Family movies, \"Love Finds Andy Hardy\" (1938), as a literal girl next door to Rooney's character Andy Hardy, although Hardy's love interest was played by Lana Turner. They were cast as lead characters for the first time in \"Babes in Arms\" (1939), ultimately appearing in five additional films, including Hardy films \"Andy Hardy Meets Debutante\" (1940) and \"Life Begins for Andy Hardy\" (1941).\nGarland stated that she, Rooney, and other young performers were constantly prescribed amphetamines to stay awake and keep up with the frantic pace of making one film after another. They were also given barbiturates to take before going to bed so they could sleep. This regular use of drugs, she said, led to addiction and a life-long struggle. She came to resent the hectic schedule and believed MGM stole her youth. Rooney, however, denied their studio was responsible for her addiction: \"Judy Garland was never given any drugs by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Mr. Mayer didn't sanction anything for Judy. No one on that lot was responsible for Judy Garland's death. Unfortunately, Judy chose that path.\"\nGarland's weight was within a healthy range, but the studio demanded she constantly diet. They even went so far as to serve her only a bowl of chicken soup and black coffee when she ordered a regular meal. She was plagued with self-doubt throughout her life. Despite successful film and recording careers, awards, critical praise, and ability to fill concert halls worldwide, she required constant reassurance that she was talented and attractive.\n1938\u20131939: \"The Wizard of Oz\".\nIn 1938, when Garland was sixteen, she was cast as Dorothy Gale in \"The Wizard of Oz\" (1939), a film based on the 1900 children's book by L. Frank Baum. In the film, she sang the song with which she would be constantly identified afterward, \"Over the Rainbow.\" She frequently used an excerpt from it as her entrance music during later concerts and television appearances, and named it her favorite of all the songs she had ever recorded, showing how \"inextricably linked\" her career itself was with it.\nJudy was not the first pick for Dorothy. Although producers Arthur Freed and Mervyn LeRoy had wanted to cast her in the role from the outset, studio chief Mayer first tried to borrow Shirley Temple from 20th Century Fox but was declined. Deanna Durbin was then asked but was unavailable, and this resulted in the casting of Garland.\nShe was initially outfitted in a blonde wig for the part, but Freed and LeRoy decided against it shortly into filming. Her blue gingham dress was chosen for its blurring effect on her figure, which made her look younger. Shooting commenced on October 13, 1938, and was completed on March 16, 1939, at a final cost of more than $2 million (equivalent to $ million in 2024). With the conclusion of filming, MGM kept Garland busy with promotional tours and the shooting of \"Babes in Arms\" (also in 1939), directed by Busby Berkeley. She and Rooney were sent on a cross-country promotional tour, culminating in the New York City premiere at the Capitol Theater on August 17, which included a five-show-a-day appearance schedule for the two stars.\nGarland was reportedly put on a diet consisting of cigarettes, chicken soup, and coffee during filming in a further attempt to minimize her curves. However, historians Jay Scarfone and William Stillman have clarified that at the time Garland was an anti-smoker and was allowed solid food. In any event, her diet was accompanied by swimming and hiking outings, plus tennis and badminton matches with her stunt double Bobbie Koshay.\n\"The Wizard of Oz\" was a tremendous critical success, though its high budget and estimated promotion costs of $4 million (equivalent to $ million in 2024), coupled with the lower revenue that was generated by discounted children's tickets, meant that the film did not return a profit until it was re-released in the 1940s. At the 1939 Academy Awards ceremony, Garland received her only Academy Award, an Academy Juvenile Award for her performances in 1939, including \"The Wizard of Oz\" and \"Babes in Arms\". She was the fourth recipient of the award as well as only one of 12 actors ever to be presented with one. After \"The Wizard of Oz\", Garland was one of the most bankable actresses in the United States.\n1940\u20131946: Adult stardom.\nGarland starred in three films released in 1940: \"Andy Hardy Meets Debutante\", \"Strike Up the Band,\" and \"Little Nellie Kelly\". In the last of these, she played her first adult role, a dual role of both mother and daughter. \"Little Nellie Kelly\" was purchased from George M. Cohan as a vehicle for her to display both her audience appeal and her physical appearance. The role was a challenge for her, requiring the use of an accent, her first adult kiss, and the only death scene of her career. Her co-star George Murphy regarded the kiss as embarrassing, commenting that it felt like being \"a hillbilly with a child bride.\"\nDuring that time, still a teenager, Garland experienced her first serious adult romance with bandleader Artie Shaw. She was deeply devoted to him and was devastated when he eloped with Lana Turner in early 1940. In the early 1940s, Garland began a relationship with musician David Rose, who was 12 years her senior. He proposed to her on her eighteenth birthday, despite being married to actress and singer Martha Raye. MGM disapproved of the relationship, so he and Garland agreed to wait a year to allow for his divorce to become final. During that time, Garland had a brief affair with songwriter Johnny Mercer. After her breakup with Mercer, Garland and Rose were wed on July 27, 1941, when she was only 19. \nThe media called the relationship \"a true rarity.\" Garland and Rose moved into a house in Bel Air, Los Angeles, where Rose had room to build miniature trains in the back yard. Though their life together was initially enjoyable, MGM still disapproved of the relationship and allegedly tried to separate them, fearing\u2014along with Garland's mother\u2014that the relationship would ruin Garland's image. In 1941, while Garland was pregnant with Rose's child, she had an abortion at the insistence of her mother and studio executives. According to \"Woman's World\", Rose was even hostile toward Garland. The couple agreed to a trial separation in January 1943 and were divorced in 1944.\nIn her next film, \"For Me and My Gal\" (1942), Garland performed with Gene Kelly in his first screen appearance. She was given the \"glamor treatment\" in \"Presenting Lily Mars\" (1943), in which she was dressed in \"grown-up\" gowns. Her lightened hair was also pulled up in a stylish fashion. However, no matter how glamorous or beautiful she appeared on screen or in photographs, she was never confident about her appearance and never escaped the \"girl-next-door\" image that the studio had created for her. She had a second abortion in that same year when she became pregnant during an affair with actor Tyrone Power.\nOne of Garland's most successful films for MGM was \"Meet Me in St. Louis\" (1944), in which she introduced three standards: \"The Trolley Song,\" \"The Boy Next Door,\" and \"Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas.\" This was one of the first films in her career that gave her the opportunity to be an attractive leading lady. When Vincente Minnelli was assigned to direct the film, he requested that Garland be assigned make-up artist Dorothy Ponedel, who refined Garland's appearance in several ways: extending and reshaping her eyebrows; changing her hairline; modifying her lip line; and removing her nose discs and dental caps. Garland appreciated the results so much that Ponedel was written into her contract for all her remaining pictures at MGM.\nAround the same time, Garland had a brief affair with actor and film director Orson Welles, who was then married to actress Rita Hayworth. They ended the affair in early 1945 but remained on good terms afterwards.\nDuring the filming of \"Meet Me in St. Louis\", Garland and Minnelli had some initial conflicts, but they entered into a relationship and married on June 15, 1945. On March 12, 1946, her daughter Liza was born.\n\"The Clock\" (1945) was Garland's first straight dramatic film, with Robert Walker cast in the main male role. Though the film was critically praised and earned a profit, most movie fans expected her to sing; and she did not act again in a non-singing dramatic role for many years. Her other films of the 1940s include \"The Harvey Girls\" (1946), in which she introduced the Academy Award-winning song \"On the Atchison, Topeka and the Santa Fe\"; and \"Till the Clouds Roll By\" (1946).\n1947\u20131950: Last MGM motion pictures.\nDuring the filming of \"The Pirate\", Garland suffered a nervous breakdown and was admitted to a private sanatorium. She was able to complete filming, but in July 1947 she made her first suicide attempt, making minor cuts to her wrist with a broken glass. During this period, she spent two weeks in treatment at the Austen Riggs Center, a psychiatric hospital in Stockbridge, Massachusetts. \"The Pirate\", released in May 1948, was the first of Garland's films not to make a profit since she had starred in \"The Wizard of Oz\". The main reasons for its failure were its cost, the increasing expense of the shooting delays while Garland was ill, and the general public's unwillingness to accept her in a sophisticated film. \nFollowing her work in \"The Pirate\", she co-starred for the first and only time with Fred Astaire, who replaced Gene Kelly after Kelly broke his ankle, in \"Easter Parade\" (1948), which was Hollywood's highest-grossing musical that year.\nThrilled by the huge box-office receipts of \"Easter Parade\", MGM immediately teamed Garland and Astaire in \"The Barkleys of Broadway\". During the initial filming, Garland was taking prescription barbiturate sleeping pills along with illicitly obtained pills containing morphine. Around this time, she also developed a serious problem with alcohol. These issues, in combination with migraine headaches, caused her to miss several shooting days in a row. After being advised by her doctor that she would be able to work only in four- to five-day increments with extended rest periods in between, MGM executive Arthur Freed made the decision to suspend her on July 18, 1948. She was replaced in the film by Ginger Rogers.When Garland's suspension was over, she was summoned back to work. She performed two songs as a guest in the Rodgers and Hart biopic \"Words and Music\" (1948), which was her last appearance with Mickey Rooney. Despite the all-star cast, \"Words and Music\" barely broke even at the box office. \nHaving regained her strength during her suspension, Garland was able to return to MGM in the fall of 1948 to replace June Allyson in the musical film \"In the Good Old Summertime\" (1949) co-starring Van Johnson. Although Garland was sometimes late arriving at the studio during the making of this picture, she managed to complete it five days ahead of schedule. Her daughter Liza made her film debut at the age of two and a half at the end of the film. \"In the Good Old Summertime\" was enormously successful at the box office.\nGarland was then cast in the film adaptation of \"Annie Get Your Gun\" in the title role of Annie Oakley. She was nervous at the prospect of taking on a role strongly identified with Ethel Merman, anxious about appearing in an unglamorous part after breaking from juvenile parts for several years, and disturbed by her treatment at the hands of director Busby Berkeley. He was disappointed by Garland's lack of effort, attitude, and enthusiasm. She complained to Mayer, trying to have Berkeley fired from the feature. She began arriving late to the set and sometimes failed to appear at all. At this time, she was also undergoing electroconvulsive therapy for depression. She was finally fired from the picture on May 10, 1949, and was replaced by Betty Hutton, who stepped in to perform all the musical routines as staged by Robert Alton.\nGarland then underwent an extensive hospital stay at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston, Massachusetts, where she was weaned off her medication. After a while, she was able to eat and sleep normally.She returned to Los Angeles in the fall of 1949 having gained weight, and was cast opposite Gene Kelly in \"Summer Stock\" (1950), which took six months to complete. To lose weight, Garland went back on pills and a pattern of behavior resurfaced as she began showing up on the set late or not at all. \nWhen principal photography on the film was completed in the spring of 1950, it was decided that Garland needed an additional musical number. She agreed to do it provided the song was \"Get Happy.\" In addition, she insisted that director Charles Walters choreograph and stage the number. By that time, Garland had lost 15\u00a0pounds and looked more slender. \"Get Happy\" was the last segment of the film to be filmed. When it was released in the fall of 1950, \"Summer Stock\" drew big crowds and racked up very respectable box-office receipts; but because of the costly shooting delays caused by Garland, the film posted a loss of $80,000 to the studio. It was her final picture for MGM.\nShe was next cast in the film \"Royal Wedding\" with Fred Astaire in 1950 after June Allyson became pregnant. However, because Garland failed to report to the set on multiple occasions, the studio suspended her contract on June 17, 1950, replacing her with Jane Powell. Reputable biographies published following Garland's death stated that after this dismissal, she slightly grazed her neck with a broken glass, requiring only a bandage. At the time, however, the public was informed that a despondent Garland had slashed her throat. \"All I could see ahead was more confusion,\" she later said of this suicide attempt. \"I wanted to black out the future as well as the past. I wanted to hurt myself and everyone who had hurt me.\" In September 1950, after 15 years with the studio, Garland and MGM parted company.\n1950\u20131952: Radio appearances and stage comeback.\nGarland was a frequent guest on \"Kraft Music Hall\", hosted by her friend Bing Crosby. Following Garland's second suicide attempt, Crosby, knowing that she was depressed and running out of money, invited her on his radio show\u2014the first of the new season\u2014on October 11, 1950. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She was standing in the wings of it trembling with fear. She was almost hysterical. She said, \"I cannot go out there because they're all gonna be looking to see if there are scars and it's gonna be terrible.\" Bing said \"What's going on?\" and I told him what happened and he walked out on stage and he said: \"We got a friend here, she's had a little trouble recently. You probably heard about it\u2014everything is fine now, she needs our love. She needs our support. She's here\u2014let's give it to her, OK? Here's Judy.\" And she came out and that place went crazy. And she just blossomed.\u2014\u200a\nGarland made eight appearances during the 1950\u201351 season of \"The Bing Crosby\u2013Chesterfield Show\", which immediately reinvigorated her career. Soon after, she toured for four months to sell-out crowds in Europe. In 1951, she began a four-month concert tour of Britain and Ireland, where she played to sold-out audiences throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland. The successful concert tour was the first of her many comebacks, with performances centered on songs by Al Jolson and the revival of vaudevillian tradition. Garland performed complete shows as tributes to Jolson in her concerts at the London Palladium in April and at New York's Palace Theater later that year.After the Palladium show, Garland said: \"I suddenly knew that this was the beginning of a new life... Hollywood thought I was through; then came the wonderful opportunity to appear at the London Palladium, where I can truthfully say Judy Garland was reborn.\" Her appearances at the Palladium lasted four weeks, where she received rave reviews and an ovation described by the Palladium manager as the loudest he had ever heard.\nGarland's engagement at the Palace Theatre in Manhattan in October 1951 exceeded all previous records for both the theater and for Garland, and she was called \"one of the greatest personal triumphs in show business history.\" She was honored with a Special Tony Award for her contribution to the revival of vaudeville.\nThat same year, she divorced Minnelli, and on June 8, 1952, she married her tour manager and producer Sidney Luft in Hollister, California. On November 21 that same year, Garland gave birth to her second daughter, Lorna Luft, who became an actress and singer. On March 29, 1955, she gave birth to a son, Joey Luft.\n1954\u20131963: Hollywood return, concerts, and television.\nGarland appeared with James Mason in the Warner Bros. film \"A Star Is Born\" (1954), the first remake of the 1937 film. She and her then-husband Sidney Luft produced the film through their production company, Transcona Enterprises, while Warner Bros. supplied finances, production facilities, and crew. Directed by George Cukor, the film was a large undertaking to which Garland initially fully dedicated herself.\nAs shooting progressed, however, she began making the same pleas of illness that she had so often made during her final films at MGM. Production delays led to cost overruns and angry confrontations with Warner Bros. head Jack L. Warner. Principal photography wrapped on March 17, 1954. At Luft's suggestion, the \"Born in a Trunk\" medley was filmed as a showcase for her and inserted into the edit despite director Cukor's objections, who feared the additional length would lead to cuts in other areas. The film was completed on July 29.\nUpon its world premiere on September 29, 1954, the film was met with critical and popular acclaim. Before its release, it was edited at the instruction of Jack Warner, as theater operators\u2014concerned that they were losing money because they were able to run the film for only three or four shows per day instead of five or six\u2014pressured the studio to make additional reductions. After its first-run engagements, about 30 minutes of footage were cut, sparking outrage among critics and filmgoers. Although the film was still popular, drawing huge crowds and grossing over $6 million (equivalent to $ million in 2024) in its first release, \"A Star is Born\" did not make back its cost and ended up losing money. As a result, the secure financial position Garland had expected from the profits did not materialize. Transcona made no more films with Warner.\nGarland was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and, in the run-up to the 27th Academy Awards, was generally expected to win for \"A Star Is Born\". She could not attend the ceremony because she had just given birth, so a television crew was stationed in her hospital room with cameras and wires to broadcast her anticipated acceptance speech. The Oscar was won, however, by Grace Kelly for \"The Country Girl\" (1954). The camera crew packed up before Kelly could even reach the stage. Groucho Marx sent Garland a telegram after the awards ceremony, declaring her loss \"the biggest robbery since Brinks.\" \"Time\" labeled her performance as \"just about the greatest one-woman show in modern movie history.\" However, Garland did win the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Musical for her role.\nGarland's films after \"A Star Is Born\" included \"Judgment at Nuremberg\" (1961), for which she was Oscar- and Golden Globe-nominated for Best Supporting Actress; the animated feature \"Gay Purr-ee\" (1962); and \"A Child Is Waiting\" (1963), with Burt Lancaster. Her final film was \"I Could Go On Singing\" (1963), with Dirk Bogarde.\nBeginning in 1955, Garland appeared in a number of television specials. The first was the 1955 debut episode of \"Ford Star Jubilee,\" which was the first full-scale color broadcast on CBS and a ratings triumph, scoring a 34.8 Nielsen rating. She signed a three-year, US$ () contract with the network. Only one additional special was broadcast, however: a live concert-edition of \"General Electric Theater\" in 1956. The relationship between the Lufts and CBS then broke down in a dispute over the planned format of upcoming specials.\nIn 1956, Garland performed for four weeks at the New Frontier Hotel on the Las Vegas Strip for a salary of US$ () per week, making her the highest-paid entertainer to work in Las Vegas at the time. Despite a brief bout of laryngitis, when Jerry Lewis filled in for her for one performance while she watched from a wheelchair, her performances there were so successful that her run was extended an extra week. Later that year, she returned to the Palace Theatre, site of her 1951 triumph. She opened in September, once again to rave reviews and popular acclaim.\nIn November 1959, Garland was hospitalized after being diagnosed with acute hepatitis. Over the next few weeks, several quarts of fluid were drained from her until she was released from the hospital in January 1960, still in weak condition. She was told by doctors that she probably had five years or less to live and that, even if she did survive, she would be a semi-invalid and would never sing again. She initially felt \"greatly relieved\" at the diagnosis, commenting, \"The pressure was off me for the first time in my life.\" Over the next few months, however, she recovered enough to be able to return to the stage at the London Palladium in August 1960. She felt so warmly embraced by the British that she announced her intention to move permanently to England.\nAt the beginning of 1960, Garland signed a contract with Random House to write her autobiography. The book was to be called \"The Judy Garland Story,\" a collaboration with Fred F. Finklehoffe. She was paid an advance of US$ (), and she and Finklehoffe recorded conversations about her life to be used in producing a manuscript. Garland worked on her autobiography on and off throughout the 1960s, but never completed it. Portions of her unfinished autobiography were included in the 2014 biography, \"Judy Garland on Judy Garland: Interviews and Encounters\" by Randy L. Schmidt.\nHer concert appearance at Carnegie Hall on April 23, 1961, was a considerable highlight, called by many \"the greatest night in show business history.\" The two-record album \"Judy at Carnegie Hall\" was certified gold, charting for 95 weeks on \"Billboard\", including 13 weeks at number one. It won four Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year; Best Female Vocal of the Year; Best Album Cover; and Best Engineering Contribution.\n1961\u20131964: \"The Judy Garland Show\".\nIn 1961, Garland and CBS settled their contract disputes with the help of her new agent, Freddie Fields, and negotiated a new round of specials. The first, \"The Judy Garland Show\", aired on February 25, 1962, with guests Frank Sinatra and Dean Martin. Following this success, CBS made a $24 million offer (equivalent to $ million in 2024) to Garland for a weekly television series of her own, also to be called \"The Judy Garland Show\", which was deemed by the press at the time to be \"the biggest talent deal in TV history.\" Although she had said as early as 1955 that she would never do a weekly television series, she was in a financially precarious situation in the early 1960s. She was several hundred thousand dollars in debt to the Internal Revenue Service, having failed to pay taxes in 1951 and 1952; and the failure of \"A Star is Born\" meant that she received nothing from that investment.\nFollowing a third special, \"Judy Garland and Her Guests Phil Silvers and Robert Goulet\", Garland's weekly series debuted September 29, 1963. \"The Judy Garland Show\" was critically praised, but for a variety of reasons (including being placed in the time slot opposite \"Bonanza\" on NBC), the show lasted only one season and was canceled in 1964 after 26 episodes. Despite its short run, the series was nominated for four Emmy Awards, including Best Variety Series.\nDuring this time, Garland had a six-month affair with actor Glenn Ford. Garland's biographer Gerald Clarke, Ford's son Peter, singer Mel Torm\u00e9, and her husband Sid Luft all wrote about the affair in their respective biographies. The relationship began in 1963 while Garland was doing her television show. Ford would sit in the front row during tapings of the show while Garland sang. He is credited with giving Garland one of the more stable relationships of her later life. The affair was ended by Ford (a notorious womanizer, according to his son Peter) when he realized Garland wanted to marry him.\nPersonal life.\nAs she rose to fame, Garland's personal life became a complex blend of public adoration and private struggles. Her career, while filled with legendary performances, was often overshadowed by her continuing struggles with self-image, addiction, and mental health, which were exacerbated by Hollywood's grueling expectations. Garland was married five times and had three children: Liza Minnelli (with director Vincente Minnelli), and Lorna Luft and Joey Luft (with producer Sidney Luft). Her relationships were often turbulent, influenced by her intense fame and personal challenges.\nDespite her struggles, Garland had a deep bond with her children, who would each go on to develop a connection to the entertainment industry. Garland's resilience through hardship, paired with her immense talent, secured her a lasting place in popular culture and a legacy that continues.\nPolitical views.\nGarland was a life-long and active Democrat. During her career, she was a member of the Hollywood Democratic committee and a financial and moral supporter of various causes, including the Civil Rights Movement. She donated money to the campaigns of Democratic presidential candidates Franklin D. Roosevelt, Adlai Stevenson II, John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy, and Progressive candidate Henry A. Wallace.\nIn April 1944, Garland escorted Brigadier General Benjamin O. Davis Sr. to a reception honoring him at the home of Ira Gershwin. Davis, the first black general and highest-ranking black officer in the U.S. military, was in Los Angeles for the premiere of Frank Capra's documentary about black Americans serving in World War II. \nIn September 1947, Garland joined the Committee for the First Amendment, a group formed by Hollywood celebrities in support of the Hollywood Ten during the hearings of the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), an investigative committee of the United States House of Representatives, led by J. Parnell Thomas. HUAC was formed to investigate alleged disloyalty and subversive activities on the part of private citizens, public employees, and organizations suspected of having communist ties. The Committee for the First Amendment sought to protect the civil liberties of those accused. Other members included Humphrey Bogart, Lauren Bacall, Dorothy Dandridge, John Garfield, Katharine Hepburn, Lena Horne, John Huston, Gene Kelly, and Billy Wilder. Garland took part in recording an all-star radio broadcast on October 26, 1947, \"Hollywood Fights Back\", during which she exhorted listeners to action: \"Before every free conscience in America is subpoenaed, please speak up! Say your piece! Write your congressman a letter\u2014air mail special. Let the Congress know what you think of its Un-American Committee.\"\nGarland was a friend of President John F. Kennedy and his wife Jacqueline Kennedy, and she often vacationed in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts. The house she stayed in during her vacations in Hyannis Port is known today as The Judy Garland House because of her association with the property. Garland would call Kennedy weekly, often ending her phone calls by singing the first few lines of \"Over the Rainbow.\"\nOn August 28, 1963, Garland and other celebrities such as James Garner, Josephine Baker, Sidney Poitier, Lena Horne, Paul Newman, Rita Moreno, and Sammy Davis Jr. took part in the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, a demonstration organized to advocate for the civil and economic rights of black people. She had been photographed by the press in Los Angeles earlier in the month alongside Eartha Kitt, Marlon Brando, and Charlton Heston as they planned their participation in the march on the nation's capital.\nOn September 16, 1963, Garland\u2014along with daughter Liza Minnelli, Carolyn Jones, June Allyson, and Allyson's daughter Pam Powell\u2014held a press conference to protest the previous day's bombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama, that had resulted in the death of four young black girls. They expressed their shock and outrage at the attack and requested funds for the families of the victims. During the press conference, Powell and Minnelli both announced their intention to attend the funeral of the victims.\nFinal years.\nIn 1963, Garland sued Sidney Luft for divorce on the grounds of mental cruelty. She also asserted that he had repeatedly struck her while he was drinking and that he had attempted to take their children from her by force. She had filed for divorce from Luft on several previous occasions, even as early as 1956, but they had reconciled each time.\nAfter her television series was canceled, Garland returned to work on the stage. She returned to the London Palladium in November 1964, performing with her then-18-year-old daughter Liza Minnelli. One of her final appearances at the venue, the concert was also shown on the British television network ITV. \nGarland also made guest appearances on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" and \"The Tonight Show\". She moved into guest-hosting for an episode of \"The Hollywood Palace\" with Vic Damone and was invited back for a second episode in 1966 with Van Johnson as her guest, but problems with her behavior ended her appearances on that show.\nA 1964 tour of Australia also ended badly. Garland's first two concerts in Sydney were held in the Sydney Stadium because no concert hall could accommodate the overflow crowds who wanted to see her. Both went well, receiving positive reviews. However, her third performance, in Melbourne, started an hour late, angering the crowd of 7,000. Believing she was drunk, they booed and heckled her, and she fled the stage after 45 minutes. She later characterized the Melbourne crowd as \"brutish.\" Her appearance was covered negatively in the press.\nGarland's tour promoter Mark Herron announced that they had married aboard a freighter off the coast of Hong Kong, although she was not officially divorced from Luft at the time the ceremony was performed. When the divorce became final on May 19, 1965, she and Herron legally married on November 14 of that year. They separated five months later. During the divorce proceedings, Garland testified that Herron had beaten her; he claimed that he \"only hit her in self defense.\"\nAlthough Sidney Luft was Garland's manager for much of her career throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, they eventually parted ways professionally when she signed with agents Freddie Fields and David Begelman. By the fall of 1966, Garland had also split from them too. Their mismanagement of Garland's money, as well as their embezzlement of much of her earnings, resulted in her owing around US$ () in total to the IRS and to personal creditors. The IRS placed tax liens on her home in Brentwood, Los Angeles, her recording contract with Capitol Records, and any other business deals from which she could derive an income. She was left in a desperate financial situation that saw her sell her Brentwood home at a price far below its value. \nIn February 1967, Garland was cast in the role of Helen Lawson in \"Valley of the Dolls\" by 20th Century Fox. According to co-star Patty Duke, she had been hired primarily to augment publicity for the film and was treated poorly on the set by director Mark Robson. After Garland's dismissal from the film, author Jacqueline Susann said in the 1967 television documentary \"Jacqueline Susann and the Valley of the Dolls\", \"I think Judy will always come back. She kids about making a lot of comebacks, but I think Judy has a kind of a thing where she has to get to the bottom of the rope and things have to get very, very rough for her. Then with an amazing inner strength that only comes of a certain genius, she comes back bigger than ever.\"\nReturning to the stage, Garland made her last US appearances in a 27-show run at New York's Palace Theatre in July 1967, performing with her children Lorna and Joey Luft. Garland's 75% share of the profits generated by her engagement earned her more than US$ (). On closing night at the Palace, however, federal tax agents seized the majority of her earnings.\nBy early 1969, Garland's health had deteriorated. However, she was able to do a five-week run of performances at the Talk of the Town nightclub in London, for which she was paid \u00a32,500 per week. She made her last concert appearance in Copenhagen during March of that year. After her divorce from Herron was finalized on February 11, she married her fifth and final husband, nightclub manager Mickey Deans, at Chelsea Register Office, London, on March 15, 1969.\nDeath and funeral.\nOn June 22, 1969, Deans found Garland dead in the bathroom of her rented house in Cadogan Lane, Belgravia, London. She was 47 years old. At the inquest, Coroner Gavin Thurston stated that the cause of death was \"an incautious self-overdosage\" of barbiturates; her blood contained the equivalent of ten Seconal capsules. Thurston stressed that the overdose had been unintentional and no evidence suggested that she had intended to kill herself. \nGarland's autopsy showed no inflammation of her stomach lining and no drug residue in her stomach, which indicated that the drug had been ingested over a long period of time rather than in a single dose. Her death certificate stated that her death was \"accidental.\" Supporting the accidental cause, Garland's physician noted that a prescription of 25 barbiturate pills was found by her bedside half-empty, and another bottle of 100 barbiturate pills was still unopened.\nA British specialist who had attended Garland's autopsy stated that she had nevertheless been living on borrowed time owing to cirrhosis, although a second autopsy conducted later reported no evidence of alcoholism or cirrhosis. As her \"Wizard of Oz\" co-star Ray Bolger commented at her funeral, \"She just plain wore out.\" \nAfter Garland's body had been embalmed and clothed in the same gray silk gown she wore at her wedding to Deans, he traveled with her remains to New York City on June 26, 1969, where an estimated 20,000 people lined up to pay their respects at the Frank E. Campbell Funeral Chapel in Manhattan. It remained open all night long to accommodate the overflowing crowd. \nThe next day, her \"A Star Is Born\" co-star James Mason gave a eulogy at the funeral, an Episcopal service led by the Rev. Peter Delaney of St Marylebone Parish Church, London, who had officiated at her marriage to Deans three months earlier. The public and press were barred. \"Judy's great gift,\" Mason said in his eulogy, \"was that she could wring tears out of hearts of rock... She gave so richly and so generously, that there was no currency in which to repay her.\" \nGarland was interred in a crypt in the community mausoleum at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York, a town north of midtown Manhattan. However, at the request of her children, her remains were disinterred in January 2017 and re-interred across the country at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Los Angeles.\nUpon Garland's death, despite her having earned millions during her career, her estate came to just US$ (). Years of mismanagement of her financial affairs by her representatives and staff, along with her generosity toward her family and various causes, resulted in her poor financial situation at the end of her life. In her last will, signed and sealed in early 1961, Garland made many generous bequests that could not be fulfilled because her estate had been in debt for many years. Her daughter Liza Minnelli worked to pay off her mother's debts with the help of family friend Frank Sinatra. In 1978, a selection of Garland's personal items was auctioned off by her ex-husband Sidney Luft with the support of their daughter Lorna and son Joey. Almost 500 items, ranging from copper cookware to musical arrangements, were offered for sale; and the auction raised US$ () for her heirs.\nStrassler observed that Garland \"created one of the most storied cautionary tales in the industry, thanks to her many excesses and insecurities that led to her early death by overdose.\"\nArtistry.\nGarland's singing voice has been described as brassy, powerful, effortless and resonant, often demonstrating a tremulous, powerful vibrato. Although her range was comparatively small, Garland was capable of alternating between female and male-sounding timbres with little effort. The \"Richmond Times-Dispatch\" correspondent Tony Farrell described her as the \"possessor of a deep, velvety contralto voice that could turn on a dime to belt out the high notes.\" Ron O'Brien, producer of tribute album \"The Definitive Collection\u2014Judy Garland\" (2006), wrote that her combination of natural phrasing, elegant delivery, mature pathos \"and powerful dramatic dynamics she brings to ... songs make her [renditions] the definitive interpretations.\" \n\"The Huffington Post\" writer Joan E. Dowlin called the period of Garland's music career between 1937 and 1945 the \"innocent years,\" during which the critic believed her voice was \"vibrant and her musical expression exuberant,\" resonant and distinct, with a \"rich yet sweet\" quality \"that grabs you and pulls you in.\" Garland's voice would often vary to suit the song she was interpreting, ranging from soft, engaging, and tender during ballads to humorous on some of her duets with other artists. Her more joyful, belted performances have been compared to entertainers Sophie Tucker, Ethel Merman, and Al Jolson. Although her musical repertoire consisted largely of cast recordings, show tunes, and traditional pop standards, she was also capable of singing soul, blues and jazz music, which Dowlin compared to singer Elvis Presley.\nGarland always claimed that her talent as a performer was innate, commenting: \"Nobody ever taught me what to do onstage.\" Critics agree that even when she debuted as a child, she had always sounded mature for her age, particularly on her earlier recordings. From an early age, Garland had been billed as \"the little girl with the leather lungs,\" a designation the singer later admitted to having felt humiliated by because she would have much preferred to have been known to audiences as a \"pretty\" or \"nice little girl.\"\nJessel recalled that even at only 12 years old, Garland's singing voice resembled that of \"a woman with a heart that had been hurt.\" \"The Kansas City Star\" contributor Robert Trussell cited Garland's singing voice among the reasons why her role in \"The Wizard of Oz\" remains memorable, writing that although \"[s]he might have been made up and costumed to look like a little girl ... she didn't sing like one,\" due to her \"powerful contralto command[ing] attention.\"\nCamille Paglia, writing for \"The New York Times\", joked that even in Garland's adult life, \"her petite frame literally throbbed with her huge voice,\" making it appear as though she were \"at war with her own body.\" Musical theater actress and director Donna Thomason opined that Garland was an \"effective\" performer because of her ability to make her singing voice \"a natural extension of [her] speaking voice,\" an asset that Thomason believed all musical theater actors should at least strive to achieve. Trussell agreed that \"Garland's singing voice sounded utterly natural. It never seemed forced or overly trained.\"\nWriting for Turner Classic Movies, biographer Jonathan Riggs observed that Garland had a tendency to imbue her vocals with a paradoxical combination of \"fragility and resilience\" that eventually became a signature trademark of hers, marked with power in her voice, pronounced enunciation, and projection of a sense of vulnerability through her singing and body language. As Michael Bronski remarked in his book \"Culture Clash: \"\"There was a hurt in her voice and an immediacy to her performance that gave the impression that it was her pain.\" \nLouis Bayard of \"The Washington Post\" described Garland's voice as \"throbbing,\" believing it to be capable of \"connect[ing] with [audiences] in a way no other voice does.\" Bayard also believed that listeners \"find it hard to disentwine the sorrow in her voice from the sorrow that dogged her life,\" a comment echoed by Dowlin: \"Listening to Judy sing ... makes me forget all of the angst and suffering she must have endured.\"\n\"The New York Times\" obituarist observed that during Garland's later performances, whether intentionally or not, she \"brought with her ... all the well-publicized phantoms of her emotional breakdown, her career collapses and comebacks\" on stage, going on to comment that Garland's voice changed and lost some of its quality as she aged but that she retained much of her personality. Contributing to the \"Irish Independent\", Julia Molony observed that by the time Garland performed at Carnegie Hall in 1961, her voice\u2014although \"still rich with emotion\"\u2014had finally begun to \"creak with the weight of years of disappointment and hard-living.\"\nSimilarly, the essay accompanying the live record's entry in the National Recording Registry notes that \"while her voice was still strong, it had also gained a bit of heft and a bit of wear\"; author Cary O'Dell believes Garland's rasp and \"occasional quiver\" only \"upped the emotional quotient of many of her numbers,\" particularly on her signature songs \"Over the Rainbow\" and \"The Man That Got Away.\" For her part, Garland stated that regardless of the condition of her voice, she always felt most safe and at home while performing onstage. \nHer musical talent was commended by her peers. Opera singer Maria Callas once said that Garland possessed \"the most superb voice she had ever heard.\" Singer and actor Bing Crosby said that \"no other singer could be compared to her\" when she was rested. Aretha Franklin praised Garland as \"one of the greatest singers there was.\"\nFred Astaire later commented on co-starring with Garland: \"Judy's the greatest entertainer who ever lived\u2014or probably will ever live\u2014an amazing girl,\" and that \"[s]he could do things\u2014anything\u2014without rehearsing and come off perfectly.\"\nGarland was known for interacting with her audiences during live performances. \"The New York Times\" obituarist wrote that she possessed \"a seemingly unquenchable need for her audiences to respond with acclaim and affection. And often, they did, screaming, 'We love you, Judy \u2013 we love you.'\" Garland herself explained: \"A really great reception makes me feel like I have a great big warm heating pad all over me ... I truly have a great love for an audience and I used to want to prove it to them by giving them blood. But I have a funny new thing now, a real determination to make people enjoy the show.\"\nPublic image.\nGarland was nearly as famous for her personal struggles as she was for her entertainment career. She has been closely associated with her carefully cultivated girl-next-door image. Early in her career during the 1930s, Garland's public image had earned her the title \"America's favorite kid sister\" as well as the title \"Little Miss Showbusiness.\" \nIn a review for the \"Star Tribune\", Graydon Royce wrote that Garland's public image remained that of \"a Midwestern girl who couldn't believe where she was,\" despite having been a well-established celebrity for over 20 years. Royce believes that fans and audiences insisted on preserving their memory of Garland as Dorothy no matter how much she matured, calling her \"a captive not of her own desire to stay young, but a captive of the public's desire to preserve her that way,\" accounting for why Garland was continually cast in roles significantly younger than her actual age.\nBut Ruhlmann wrote that the singer's personal life \"contrasted so starkly with the exuberance and innocence of her film roles.\" According to Malony, Garland was one of Hollywood's hardest-working performers during the 1940s, using that as a coping mechanism after her first marriage imploded. However, studio employees recall that Garland had a tendency to be quite intense, headstrong, and volatile; David Shipman, author of \"Judy Garland: The Secret Life of an American Legend\", claims that several individuals were frustrated by Garland's \"narcissism\" and \"growing instability.\" Millions of fans were said to find her public demeanor and psychological state \"fragile,\" as she appeared neurotic in interviews. \"Entertainment Weekly\" columnist Gene Lyons observed that both audiences and fellow members of the entertainment industry \"tended either to love her or to hate her.\" Farrell called her \"[a] grab bag of contradictions\" that \"has always been a feast for the American imagination,\" with a public persona \"awkward yet direct, bashful yet brash.\" \nMGM called Garland consistently tardy and her behavior erratic\u2014which resulted in several delays and disruptions to filming schedules\u2014thus unreliable and difficult to manage, resulting in her finally being dismissed from the studio. \nDescribing the singer as \"tender and endearing yet savage and turbulent,\" Paglia wrote that Garland \"cut a path of destruction through many lives. And out of that chaos, she made art of still-searing intensity.\" According to Paglia, the more Garland performed \"Over the Rainbow,\" the more it \"became her tragic anthem ... a dirge for artistic opportunities squandered and for personal happiness permanently deferred.\"\nDespite her success as a performer, Garland suffered from low self-esteem, particularly with regard to her weight, because of which she constantly dieted to maintain at the behest of the studio and Mayer; critics and historians believe this was a result of having been told that she was an \"ugly duckling\" by studio executives. \nAt one point, Stevie Phillips, who had worked as an agent for Garland for four years, described her client as \"a demented, demanding, supremely talented drug-addict.\" Royce argues that Garland maintained \"astonishing strength and courage,\" even during difficult times. English actor Dirk Bogarde once called Garland \"the funniest woman I have ever met.\" \nDespite her personal struggles, Garland disagreed with the public's opinion that she was a tragic figure. Her younger daughter Lorna agreed that Garland \"hated\" being referred to as a tragic figure, explaining, \"We all have tragedies in our lives, but that does not make us tragic. She was funny and she was warm and she was wonderfully gifted. She had great highs and great moments in her career. She also had great moments in her personal life. Yes, we lost her at 47 years old. That was tragic. But she was not a tragic figure.\" \nRuhlmann argues that Garland actually used the public's opinion of her tragic image to her advantage towards the end of her career. \nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nGarland has been called a triple threat due to her ability to sing, act, and dance, arguably equally well. Doug Strassler, a critic for the \"New York Press\", used the \"triple threat\" description in characterizing her as one who \"bounced between family musicals and adult dramas with a precision and a talent that remains largely unmatched.\" In terms of Garland's acting, Peter Lennon, writing for \"The Guardian\" in 1999, identified her as a \"chameleon\" due to her ability to alternate between comedic, musical and dramatic roles, citing \"The Wizard of Oz\", \"The Clock\", \"A Star is Born\", and \"I Could Go On Singing\u2014\"her final film role\u2014as prominent examples. Michael Musto, a journalist for \"W\" magazine, wrote that in her film roles, Garland \"could project decency, vulnerability and spunk like no other star and she wrapped it up with a tremulously beautiful vocal delivery that could melt even the most hardened troll.\"\nBy the time of her death in 1969, Garland had appeared in more than 35 films. She has been called one of the greats of entertainment and her reputation has endured. In 1992, Gerald Clarke of \"Architectural Digest\" dubbed Garland \"probably the greatest American entertainer of the twentieth century.\" Record producer Ron O'Brien believed that \"No one in the history of Hollywood ever packed the musical wallop that Garland did,\" and that \"She had the biggest, most versatile voice in movies. Her Technicolor musicals... defined the genre. The songs she introduced were Oscar gold. Her film career frames the Golden Age of Hollywood musicals.\"\nTurner Classic Movies dubbed Garland \"history's most poignant voice.\" \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Gene Lyons named her \"the Madonna of her generation.\" The American Film Institute placed her eighth among the greatest female stars of Golden Age Hollywood cinema. In June 1998, in \"The New York Times\", Paglia wrote, \"Garland was a personality on the grand scale who makes our current crop of pop stars look lightweight and evanescent.\" Garland's live performances towards the end of her career are still remembered by fans who attended them as \"peak moments in 20th-century music.\" \n\"The New York Times\" obituarist described Garland as both \"an instinctive actress and comedienne,\" and that her performance style resembled that of \"a music hall performer in an era when music halls were obsolete.\" Close friends of Garland's insisted that she never truly wanted to be a movie star and would have much rather devoted her career entirely to singing and recording records. AllMusic biographer William Ruhlmann believes that her ability to maintain a successful career as a recording artist even after her film appearances became less frequent was unusual for an artist at the time.In recent years, Garland's legacy has been sustained for fans of different ages, both younger and older. In 2010, \"The Huffington Post\" contributor Joan E. Dowlin concluded that Garland possessed a distinct \"it\" quality by \"exemplif[ying] the star quality of charisma, musical talent, natural acting ability and, despite what the studio honchos said, good looks (even if they were the girl next door looks).\" Ruhlmann commented that \"the core of her significance as an artist remains her amazing voice and emotional commitment to her songs\" and that \"her career is sometimes viewed more as an object lesson in Hollywood excess than as the remarkable string of multimedia accomplishments it was.\" In 2012, Strassler described Garland as \"more than an icon... Like Charlie Chaplin and Lucille Ball, she created a template that the powers that be [sic] have forever been trying, with varied levels of success, to replicate.\"\nGarland was posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997. Several of her recordings have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame. These include \"Over the Rainbow,\" which was ranked as the number one movie song of all time in the American Film Institute's \"100 Years...100 Songs\" list; and four more Garland songs are featured on the list: \"Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas\" (No. 76), \"Get Happy\" (No. 61), \"The Trolley Song\" (No. 26) and \"The Man That Got Away\" (No. 11).\nShe has twice been honored on U.S. postage stamps, in 1989 (as Dorothy) and in 2006 (as Vicki Lester from \"A Star Is Born\"). On June 10, 2022, the centennial of her birth, she was honored with a perfume named after her, entitled \"Judy\u2014A Garland Fragrance\", created by Vincenzo Spinnato.\nIn the media.\nSubsequent celebrities who have suffered from personal struggles with drug addiction and substance use disorder have been compared to Garland, particularly Michael Jackson. Garland's elder daughter Liza Minnelli had a personal life that was almost parallel to that of her mother's, having struggled with substance use disorder and several unsuccessful marriages. Paglia observed that actress Marilyn Monroe would exhibit behavior similar to Garland's a decade earlier in \"Meet Me in St. Louis\", particularly tardiness; and also compared Garland to entertainer Frank Sinatra due to their shared \"emblematic personality... into whom the mass audience projected its hopes and disappointments,\" but found that Garland lacked Sinatra's survival skills.\nGarland has been portrayed on television by Andrea McArdle in \"Rainbow\" (1978); Tammy Blanchard (young Judy) and Judy Davis (older Judy) in ' (2001); and Sigrid Thornton in ' (2015). Harvey Weinstein optioned \",\" based on which a stage show and film were slated to star Anne Hathaway, although this did not take place. Ren\u00e9e Zellweger played Garland in the biopic \"Judy\" (2019), for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress.\nOn stage, Garland is a character in the musical \"The Boy from Oz\" (1998), acted by Chrissy Amphlett in the original Australian production and by Isabel Keating on Broadway in 2003. \"End of the Rainbow\" (2005) featured Caroline O'Connor as Garland and Paul Goddard as Garland's pianist. Adrienne Barbeau played Garland in \"The Property Known as Garland\" (2006). \"The Judy Monologues\" (2010) initially featured male actors reciting Garland's words before it was revamped as a one-woman show.\nIn music, she is referenced in the 1992 Tori Amos song \"Happy Phantom,\" in which Garland is imagined to be taking Buddha by the hand. Amos also refers to Garland as \"Judy G\" in her 1996 song \"Not the Red Baron.\" Garland is also the titular subject of Frog's \"Judy Garland\" single from 2015.\nGarland has been the subject of over 30 biographies since her death, including the well-received ' by her daughter, Lorna Luft, whose memoir was later adapted into the television miniseries ', which won Emmy Awards for the two actresses who portrayed her (Tammy Blanchard and Judy Davis).\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58721", "revid": "992015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58721", "title": "Chemical industry", "text": "Industry (branch), which is engaged in the manufacturing of chemical products\nThe chemical industry comprises the companies and other organizations that develop and produce industrial, specialty and other chemicals. Central to the modern world economy, the chemical industry converts raw materials (oil, natural gas, air, water, metals, and minerals) into commodity chemicals for industrial and consumer products. It includes industries for petrochemicals such as polymers for plastics and synthetic fibers; inorganic chemicals such as acids and alkalis; agricultural chemicals such as fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides; and other categories such as industrial gases, speciality chemicals and pharmaceuticals.\nVarious professionals are involved in the chemical industry including chemical engineers, chemists and lab technicians.\nHistory.\nAlthough chemicals were made and used throughout history, the birth of the heavy chemical industry (production of chemicals in large quantities for a variety of uses) coincided with the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nOne of the first chemicals to be produced in large amounts through industrial processes was sulfuric acid. In 1736 pharmacist Joshua Ward developed a process for its production that involved heating sulfur with saltpeter, allowing the sulfur to oxidize and combine with water. It was the first practical production of sulphuric acid on a large scale. John Roebuck and Samuel Garbett were the first to establish a large-scale factory in Prestonpans, Scotland, in 1749, which used leaden condensing chambers for the manufacture of sulfuric acid.\nIn the early 18th century, cloth was bleached by treating it with stale urine or sour milk and exposing it to sunlight for long periods of time, which created a severe bottleneck in production. Sulfuric acid began to be used as a more efficient agent as well as lime by the middle of the century, but it was the discovery of bleaching powder by Charles Tennant that spurred the creation of the first great chemical industrial enterprise. His powder was made by reacting chlorine with dry slaked lime and proved to be a cheap and successful product. He opened the St Rollox Chemical Works, north of Glasgow, and production went from just 52 tons in 1799 to almost 10,000 tons just five years later.\nSoda ash was used since ancient times in the production of glass, textile, soap, and paper, and the source of the potash had traditionally been wood ashes in Western Europe. By the 18th century, this source was becoming uneconomical due to deforestation, and the French Academy of Sciences offered a prize of 2400 livres for a method to produce alkali from sea salt (sodium chloride). The Leblanc process was patented in 1791 by Nicolas Leblanc who then built a Leblanc plant at Saint-Denis. He was denied his prize money because of the French Revolution.\nIn Britain, the Leblanc process became popular. William Losh built the first soda works in Britain at the Losh, Wilson and Bell works on the River Tyne in 1816, but it remained on a small scale due to large tariffs on salt production until 1824. When these tariffs were repealed, the British soda industry was able to rapidly expand. James Muspratt's chemical works in Liverpool and Charles Tennant's complex near Glasgow became the largest chemical production centres anywhere. By the 1870s, the British soda output of 200,000 tons annually exceeded that of all other nations in the world combined.\nThese huge factories began to produce a greater diversity of chemicals as the Industrial Revolution matured. Originally, large quantities of alkaline waste were vented into the environment from the production of soda, provoking one of the first pieces of environmental legislation to be passed in 1863. This provided for close inspection of the factories and imposed heavy fines on those exceeding the limits on pollution. Methods were devised to make useful byproducts from the alkali.\nThe Solvay process was developed by the Belgian industrial chemist Ernest Solvay in 1861. In 1864, Solvay and his brother Alfred constructed a plant in Charleroi Belgium. In 1874, they expanded into a larger plant in Nancy, France. The new process proved more economical and less polluting than the Leblanc method, and its use spread. In the same year, Ludwig Mond visited Solvay to acquire the rights to use his process, and he and John Brunner formed Brunner, Mond &amp; Co., and built a Solvay plant at Winnington, England. Mond was instrumental in making the Solvay process a commercial success. He made several refinements between 1873 and 1880 that removed byproducts that could inhibit the production of sodium carbonate in the process.\nThe manufacture of chemical products from fossil fuels began at scale in the early 19th century. The coal tar and ammoniacal liquor residues of coal gas manufacture for gas lighting began to be processed in 1822 at the Bonnington Chemical Works in Edinburgh to make naphtha, pitch oil (later called creosote), pitch, lampblack (carbon black) and sal ammoniac (ammonium chloride). Ammonium sulphate fertiliser, asphalt road surfacing, coke oil and coke were later added to the product line.\nExpansion and maturation.\nThe late 19th century saw an explosion in both the quantity of production and the variety of chemicals that were manufactured. Large chemical industries arose in Germany and later in the United States.\nProduction of artificial manufactured fertilizer for agriculture was pioneered by Sir John Lawes at his purpose-built Rothamsted Research facility. In the 1840s he established large works near London for the manufacture of superphosphate of lime. Processes for the vulcanization of rubber were patented by Charles Goodyear in the United States and Thomas Hancock in England in the 1840s. The first synthetic dye was discovered by William Henry Perkin in London. He partly transformed aniline into a crude mixture which, when extracted with alcohol, produced a substance with an intense purple colour. He also developed the first synthetic perfumes. German industry quickly began to dominate the field of synthetic dyes. The three major firms BASF, Bayer, and Hoechst produced several hundred different dyes. By 1913, German industries produced almost 90% of the world's supply of dyestuffs and sold approximately 80% of their production abroad. In the United States, Herbert Henry Dow's use of electrochemistry to produce chemicals from brine was a commercial success that helped to promote the country's chemical industry.\nThe petrochemical industry can be traced back to the oil works of Scottish chemist James Young, and Canadian Abraham Pineo Gesner. The first plastic was invented by Alexander Parkes, an English metallurgist. In 1856, he patented Parkesine, a celluloid based on nitrocellulose treated with a variety of solvents. This material, exhibited at the 1862 London International Exhibition, anticipated many of the modern aesthetic and utility uses of plastics. The industrial production of soap from vegetable oils was started by William Lever and his brother James in 1885 in Lancashire based on a modern chemical process invented by William Hough Watson that used glycerin and vegetable oils.\nBy the 1920s, chemical firms consolidated into large conglomerates; IG Farben in Germany, Rh\u00f4ne-Poulenc in France and Imperial Chemical Industries in Britain. Dupont became a major chemicals firm in the early 20th century in America.\nProducts.\nPolymers and plastics such as polyethylene, polypropylene, polyvinyl chloride, polyethylene terephthalate, polystyrene and polycarbonate comprise about 80% of the industry's output worldwide. Chemicals are used in many different consumer goods, and are also used in many different sectors. This includes agriculture manufacturing, construction, and service industries. Major industrial customers include rubber and plastic products, textiles, apparel, petroleum refining, pulp and paper, and primary metals. Chemicals are nearly a $5 trillion global enterprise, and the EU and U.S. chemical companies are the world's largest producers.\nSales of the chemical business can be divided into a few broad categories, including basic chemicals (about 35% \u2013 37% of dollar output), life sciences (30%), specialty chemicals (20% \u2013 25%) and consumer products (about 10%).\nOverview.\nBasic chemicals, or \"commodity chemicals\" are a broad chemical category including polymers, bulk petrochemicals and intermediates, other derivatives and basic industrials, inorganic chemicals, and fertilizers.\nPolymers are the largest revenue segment and includes all categories of plastics and human-made fibers. The major markets for plastics are packaging, followed by home construction, containers, appliances, pipe, transportation, toys, and games. \nPrincipal raw materials for polymers are bulk petrochemicals like ethylene, propylene and benzene.\nPetrochemicals and intermediate chemicals are primarily made from liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), natural gas and crude oil fractions. Large volume products include ethylene, propylene, benzene, toluene, xylenes, methanol, vinyl chloride monomer (VCM), styrene, butadiene, and ethylene oxide. These basic or commodity chemicals are the starting materials used to manufacture many polymers and other more complex organic chemicals particularly those that are made for use in the specialty chemicals category.\nOther derivatives and basic industrials include synthetic rubber, surfactants, dyes and pigments, turpentine, resins, carbon black, explosives, and rubber products and contribute about 20 percent of the basic chemicals' external sales.\nInorganic chemicals (about 12% of the revenue output) make up the oldest of the chemical categories. Products include salt, chlorine, caustic soda, soda ash, acids (such as nitric acid, phosphoric acid, and sulfuric acid), titanium dioxide, and hydrogen peroxide.\nFertilizers are the smallest category (about 6 percent) and include phosphates, ammonia, and potash chemicals.\nLife sciences.\nLife sciences (about 30% of the dollar output of the chemistry business) include differentiated chemical and biological substances, pharmaceuticals, diagnostics, animal health products, vitamins, and pesticides. While much smaller in volume than other chemical sectors, their products tend to have high prices \u2013 over ten dollars per pound \u2013 growth rates of 1.5 to 6 times GDP, and research and development spending at 15 to 25% of sales. Life science products are usually produced with high specifications and are closely scrutinized by government agencies such as the Food and Drug Administration. Pesticides, also called \"crop protection chemicals\", are about 10% of this category and include herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides.\nSpecialty chemicals.\nSpecialty chemicals are a category of relatively high-valued, rapidly growing chemicals with diverse end product markets. Typical growth rates are one to three times GDP with prices over a dollar per pound. They are generally characterized by their innovative aspects. Products are sold for what they can do rather than for what chemicals they contain. Products include electronic chemicals, industrial gases, adhesives and sealants as well as coatings, industrial and institutional cleaning chemicals, and catalysts. In 2012, excluding fine chemicals, the $546 billion global specialty chemical market was 33% Paints, Coating and Surface Treatments, 27% Advanced Polymer, 14% Adhesives and Sealants, 13% additives, and 13% pigments and inks.\nSpeciality chemicals are sold as effect or performance chemicals. Sometimes they are mixtures of formulations, unlike \"fine chemicals\", which are almost always single-molecule products.\nConsumer products.\nConsumer products include direct product sales of chemicals such as soaps, detergents, and cosmetics. Typical growth rates are 0.8 to 1.0 times GDP.\nConsumers rarely come into contact with basic chemicals. Polymers and specialty chemicals are materials that they encounter everywhere daily. Examples are plastics, cleaning materials, cosmetics, paints and coatings, electronics, automobiles and the materials used in home construction. These specialty products are marketed by chemical companies to the downstream manufacturing industries as pesticides, specialty polymers, electronic chemicals, surfactants, construction chemicals, industrial cleaners, flavours and fragrances, specialty coatings, printing inks, water-soluble polymers, food additives, paper chemicals, oil field chemicals, plastic adhesives, adhesives and sealants, cosmetic chemicals, water management chemicals, catalysts, and textile chemicals. Chemical companies rarely supply these products directly to the consumer.\nAnnually the American Chemistry Council tabulates the US production volume of the top 100 chemicals. In 2000, the aggregate production volume of the top 100 chemicals totaled 502 million tons, up from 397 million tons in 1990. Inorganic chemicals tend to be the largest volume but much smaller in dollar revenue due to their low prices. The top 11 of the 100 chemicals in 2000 were sulfuric acid (44 million tons), nitrogen (34), ethylene (28), oxygen (27), lime (22), ammonia (17), propylene (16), polyethylene (15), chlorine (13), phosphoric acid (13) and diammonium phosphates (12).\nCompanies.\nThe largest chemical producers today are global companies with international operations and plants in numerous countries. Below is a list of the top 25 chemical companies by chemical sales in 2015. (Note: Chemical sales represent only a portion of total sales for some companies.)\nTop chemical companies by chemical sales in 2015.\nTechnology.\nFrom the perspective of chemical engineers, the chemical industry involves the use of chemical processes such as chemical reactions and refining methods to produce a wide variety of solid, liquid, and gaseous materials. Most of these products serve to manufacture other items, although a smaller number go directly to consumers. Solvents, pesticides, lye, washing soda, and portland cement provide a few examples of products used by consumers.\nThe industry includes manufacturers of inorganic- and organic-industrial chemicals, ceramic products, petrochemicals, agrochemicals, polymers and rubber (elastomers), oleochemicals (oils, fats, and waxes), explosives, fragrances and flavors. Examples of these products are shown in the Table below.\nRelated industries include petroleum, glass, paint, ink, sealant, adhesive, pharmaceuticals and food processing.\nChemical processes such as chemical reactions operate in chemical plants to form new substances in various types of reaction vessels. In many cases, the reactions take place in special corrosion-resistant equipment at elevated temperatures and pressures with the use of catalysts. The products of these reactions are separated using a variety of techniques including distillation especially fractional distillation, precipitation, crystallization, adsorption, filtration, sublimation, and drying.\nThe processes and products or products are usually tested during and after manufacture by dedicated instruments and on-site quality control laboratories to ensure safe operation and to assure that the product will meet required specifications. More organizations within the industry are implementing chemical compliance software to maintain quality products and manufacturing standards. The products are packaged and delivered by many methods, including pipelines, tank-cars, and tank-trucks (for both solids and liquids), cylinders, drums, bottles, and boxes. Chemical companies often have a research-and-development laboratory for developing and testing products and processes. These facilities may include pilot plants and such research facilities may be located at a site separate from the production plant(s).\nWorld chemical production.\nThe scale of chemical manufacturing tends to be organized from largest in volume (petrochemicals and commodity chemicals), to specialty chemicals, and the smallest, fine chemicals.\nThe petrochemical and commodity chemical manufacturing units are on the whole single product continuous processing plants. Not all petrochemical or commodity chemical materials are made in one single location, but groups of related materials often are to induce industrial symbiosis as well as material, energy and utility efficiency and other economies of scale.\nThose chemicals made on the largest of scales are made in a few manufacturing locations around the world, for example in Texas and Louisiana along the Gulf Coast of the United States, on Teesside (United Kingdom), and in Rotterdam in the Netherlands. The large-scale manufacturing locations often have clusters of manufacturing units that share utilities and large-scale infrastructure such as power stations, port facilities, and road and rail terminals. To demonstrate the clustering and integration mentioned above, some 50% of the United Kingdom's petrochemical and commodity chemicals are produced by the Northeast of England Process Industry Cluster on Teesside.\nSpecialty chemical and fine chemical manufacturing are mostly made in discrete batch processes. These manufacturers are often found in similar locations but in many cases, they are to be found in multi-sector business parks.\nContinents and countries.\nIn the U.S. there are 170 major chemical companies. They operate internationally with more than 2,800 facilities outside the U.S. and 1,700 foreign subsidiaries or affiliates operating. The U.S. chemical output is $750 billion a year. The U.S. industry records large trade surpluses and employs more than a million people in the United States alone. The chemical industry is also the second largest consumer of energy in manufacturing and spends over $5 billion annually on pollution abatement.\nIn Europe, the chemical, plastics, and rubber sectors are among the largest industrial sectors. Together they generate about 3.2 million jobs in more than 60,000 companies. Since 2000 the chemical sector alone has represented 2/3 of the entire manufacturing trade surplus of the EU.\nIn 2012, the chemical sector accounted for 12% of the EU manufacturing industry's added value. Europe remains the world's biggest chemical trading region with 43% of the world's exports and 37% of the world's imports, although the latest data shows that Asia is catching up with 34% of the exports and 37% of imports. Even so, Europe still has a trading surplus with all regions of the world except Japan and China where in 2011 there was a chemical trade balance. Europe's trade surplus with the rest of the world today amounts to 41.7 billion Euros.\nOver the 20 years between 1991 and 2011, the European Chemical industry saw its sales increase from 295 billion Euros to 539 billion Euros, a picture of constant growth. Despite this, the European industry's share of the world chemical market has fallen from 36% to 20%. This has resulted from the huge increase in production and sales in emerging markets like India and China. The data suggest that 95% of this impact is from China alone. In 2012 the data from the European Chemical Industry Council shows that five European countries account for 71% of the EU's chemicals sales. These are Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy and the Netherlands.\nThe chemical industry has seen growth in China, India, Korea, the Middle East, South East Asia, Nigeria and Brazil. The growth is driven by changes in feedstock availability and price, labor and energy costs, differential rates of economic growth and environmental pressures.\nJust as companies emerge as the main producers of the chemical industry, we can also look on a more global scale at how industrialized countries rank, with regard to the billions of dollars' worth of production a country or region could export. Though the business of chemistry is worldwide in scope, the bulk of the world's $3.7 trillion chemical output is accounted for by only a handful of industrialized nations. The United States alone produced $689 billion, 18.6 percent of the total world chemical output in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58722", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58722", "title": "Manioc", "text": ""}
{"id": "58723", "revid": "14464528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58723", "title": "Fatimid dynasty", "text": "Ruling dynasty of the Fatimid Caliphate\nThe Fatimid dynasty () was an Arab dynasty that ruled the Fatimid Caliphate, between 909 and 1171 CE. Descended from Fatima and Ali, and adhering to Isma'ili Shi'ism, they held the Isma'ili imamate, and were regarded as the rightful leaders of the Muslim community. The line of Nizari Isma'ili imams, represented today by the Aga Khans, claims descent from a branch of the Fatimids. The Alavi Bohras, predominantly based in Vadodara, also claim descent from the Fatimids.\nThe Fatimid dynasty emerged as the leaders of the clandestine early Isma'ili missionary movement () in the ninth century CE, ostensibly acting on behalf of a hidden imam, implied at the time to be Muhammad ibn Isma'il. The Isma'ili spread widely across the Islamic world, then ruled by the Abbasid Caliphate. In 899, the future first Fatimid caliph, Abdallah, proclaimed himself to be the expected imam, causing a rift in the Isma'ili as the Qarmatians, who did not recognize his imamate, split off. In the meantime, Isma'ili agents had managed to conquer large parts of Yemen and Ifriqiya, as well as launch uprisings in Syria and Iraq. Fleeing Abbasid persecution to Ifriqiya, Abdallah proclaimed himself openly and established the Fatimid Caliphate in 909. From there, the Fatimid imam\u2013caliphs extended their rule over most of the Maghreb as well as Sicily, before conquering Egypt in 969. Founding Cairo as their new capital, for the next two centuries, the Fatimids would be based in Egypt and identified with the country. At their height, the Fatimids claimed control or suzerainty over much of North Africa, Sicily, Egypt, the Levant, the Hejaz, Yemen, and Multan.\nThe Fatimids' claimed pedigree of descent from Fatima and Ali was central to their legitimacy as the legitimate imams in an unbroken, divinely ordained line from Ali onwards. Their initial obscurity, and the publication of conflicting and incorrect genealogies by the first Fatimid caliph, Abdallah al-Mahdi Billah (known by the diminutive Ubayd Allah by his detractors), cast doubt on the accuracy of these claims, which were usually rejected by contemporary Sunni and Twelver Shi'a alike, who considered them impostors and usurpers. As a result, many sources into the 20th century referred to the Fatimids by the derogatory name Ubaydids.\nFatimid expansion into the Levant, and the ideological challenge that the ascendancy of Shi'a regimes represented, resulted in the Sunnis rallying around the Abbasid Caliphate in response, triggering the Sunni revival of the 11th century. Faced with internal turmoil, and the arrival of the Seljuk Turks and then the Crusades, Fatimid power began to decline in the later 11th century. the dynasty was saved by passing power to powerful military viziers, but this also meant that the imam\u2013caliphs often were mere puppet rulers. The initial dynamism of the was diminished by bitter succession disputes, which resulted in large parts of the Isma'ili community, such as the Druze, Nizaris, and Tayyibis, breaking off from the Fatimid allegiance, and tarnished the prestige and authority of the dynasty. The last of the Fatimid imam\u2013caliphs were powerless child rulers that were pawns in the hands of their viziers. The last of these viziers, Saladin, deposed the dynasty in 1171, after the death of Caliph al-Adid. The remaining members of the dynasty and their offspring were placed under house arrest in Cairo until their deaths; the last members of the dynasty died in the mid-13th century.\nOrigin.\nBackground: early Shi'ism.\nSince the death of Caliph Ali (r.\u2009656\u00a0\u2013\u00a0661) in 661, which led to the establishment of the Umayyad Caliphate, a part of the Muslim community rejected the Umayyads as usurpers and called for the establishment of a regime led by a member of the , the family of Muhammad. The Abbasids, who claimed descent from Muhammad's paternal uncle Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib and thus claimed membership of the wider family, profited from this during their rise to power against the Umayyads; but their claim was rejected by the Shia, who insisted on the exclusive right of the descendants of Hasan (d.\u2009670) and Husayn (d.\u2009680), Ali's sons by Muhammad's daughter Fatima. A line of imams emerged from the offspring of Husayn, who did not openly lay claim to the caliphate, but were considered by their followers as the true representatives of God on earth. This doctrine was founded on the designation () of Ali by Muhammad at Ghadir Khumm, and later pro-Fatimid scholars held that an unbroken chain of designated imams would follow until the end of the world; indeed, these scholars argued that the imams' existence was an inevitable necessity.\nThe sixth of these imams, Ja'far al-Sadiq, appointed () his son Isma'il al-Mubarak as his successor, but Isma'il died before his father, and when al-Sadiq himself died in 765, the succession was left open. One faction of al-Sadiq's followers held that he had designated another son, Musa al-Kazim, as his heir. Others followed other sons, Muhammad al-Dibaj and Abd Allah al-Aftah\u2014as the latter died soon after, his followers went over to Musa's camp\u2014or even refused to believe that al-Sadiq had died, and expected his return as a messiah. Musa's adherents, who constituted the majority of al-Sadiq's followers, followed his line down to a twelfth imam who supposedly vanished in 874. Adherents of this line are known as the Twelvers. Another branch believed that Ja'far al-Sadiq was followed by a seventh imam, who also had gone into hiding; hence this party is known as the Seveners. The exact identity of that seventh imam was disputed, but by the late ninth century had commonly been identified with Muhammad, son of Isma'il and grandson of al-Sadiq. From Muhammad's father, Isma'il, the sect receives its name of 'Isma'ili'. Neither Isma'il's nor Muhammad's lives are well known, and after Muhammad's reported death during the reign of Harun al-Rashid (r.\u2009786\u00a0\u2013\u00a0809), the history of the early Isma'ili movement becomes obscure.\nFatimid genealogies and controversies.\nOfficial Fatimid doctrine claimed an uninterrupted line of succession between the first Fatimid caliph, Abd Allah al-Mahdi Billah (r.\u2009909\u00a0\u2013\u00a0934), and Ali and Fatima, via Muhammad ibn Isma'il. This descent was both accepted and challenged already in the Middle Ages, and remains a topic of debate among scholars today. As the historian of Shi'a Islam Heinz Halm comments, \"The alleged descent of the dynasty from Ali ibn Abi Talib and Muhammad's daughter Fatima has been called into question by contemporaries from the very beginning and cannot be proven\", while Michael Brett, an expert on the Fatimids, asserts that \"a factual answer to the question of their identity is impossible\".\nThe main problem arises with the succession linking al-Mahdi with Ja'far al-Sadiq. According to Isma'ili doctrine, the imams that followed Muhammad ibn Isma'il were in concealment (), but early Isma'ili sources do not mention them, and even later, official Isma'ili genealogies diverge on the number, names and identities of these 'hidden imams' (), a problem complicated by the Isma'ili claims that the hidden imams assumed various aliases for safety. Thus the pro-Isma'ili Prince Peter Hagop Mamour, in his 1934 apologetic work \"Polemics on the Origin of the Fatimi Caliphs\", lists no fewer than fifty variations of the line of the four hidden imams between Isma'il ibn Ja'far and al-Mahdi, claiming that the various names represent pseudonyms. Early Isma'ili sources tend to be silent on the matter, from a mixture of both religious imperative\u2014since God has decreed his imams to be hidden, they should remain so\u2014and apparent ignorance. Al-Mahdi himself, in a letter sent to the Isma'ili community in Yemen, even claimed not to be descended from Isma'il ibn Ja'far, but from his older brother Abdallah al-Aftah, who is generally held to not have had any descendants at all. Notably, later official Fatimid genealogies rejected this version. In addition, it appears that the first known ancestor of the Fatimid line, Abdallah al-Akbar, the great-grandfather of the first Fatimid caliph, initially claimed descent not from Ali at all, but from his brother Aqil ibn Abi Talib, and was accepted as such by the Aqilids of Basra. According to Brett, the line of descent claimed by the Fatimid between Ja'far al-Sadiq and al-Mahdi reflects \"historical beliefs rather than historical figures, for which there is little or no independent confirmation\", as even Isma'il ibn Ja'far is an obscure figure, let alone his supposed hidden successors.\nWhile pro-Fatimid sources emphasize their Alid descent\u2014the dynasty named itself simply as the 'Alid dynasty' ()\u2014many Sunni sources instead refer to them as the 'Ubaydids' (), after the diminutive form Ubayd Allah for al-Mahdi's name, commonly used in Sunni sources with an apparently pejorative intent. Medieval anti-Fatimid polemicists, starting with Ibn Rizam and Akhu Muhsin, were keen to discredit Isma'ilism as an antinomian heresy and generally considered Fatimid claims to Alid descent fraudulent. Instead, they put forth a counter claim that al-Mahdi descended from Abdallah, the son of a certain Maymun al-Qaddah from Khuzistan, that al-Mahdi's real name was Sa'id, or that al-Mahdi's father was in reality a Jew (a common antisemitic trope among medieval Arab authors). While several medieval Sunni authors and contemporary potentates\u2014including the impeccably Alid sharifs of Mecca and Medina\u2014accepted or appeared to accept Fatimid claims at face value, this anti-Isma'ili 'black legend', as the modern scholar Farhad Daftary calls it, influenced Sunni historiographers throughout the following centuries, and became official doctrine with the Baghdad Manifesto of 1011. Due to the paucity of actual Isma'ili material until Isma'ili sources started to become available and undergo scholarly examination during the 20th century, the Sunni version was adopted even by some early modern Orientalists.\nEarly Isma'ili sources ignore the existence of Maymun al-Qaddah, but later, Fatimid-era sources were forced to confront their opponents' claims about his person, and tried to reconcile the conflicting genealogies accordingly. Some sectarian Isma'ili\u2014especially Druze\u2014sources even claimed that during the period of concealment of the Isma'ili imams, the Isma'ili movement was actually led by the descendants of Maymun al-Qaddah, until the restoration of the true line with the Fatimid caliphs. Later Tayyibi Isma'ili authors also used the figures of Maymun al-Qaddah and his son Abdallah to argue for the legality of there being a substitute or representative of the imam, whenever the latter was underage. A further controversy that emerged already in medieval times is whether the second Fatimid caliph, Muhammad al-Qa'im bi-Amr Allah, was the son of al-Mahdi, or whether the latter was merely usurping the position of a still-hidden imam; that would mean that al-Qa'im was the first true Fatimid imam-caliph.\nModern authors have tried to reconcile the genealogies. In \"Origins of Ism\u0101\u02bf\u0131\u0304lism\", the Arabist Bernard Lewis suggested the existence of two parallel series of imams: trustee () imams, descended from Maymun al-Qaddah, whose task was to hide and protect the existence of the real (, lit.\u2009'permanent') imams. Lewis posited that al-Mahdi was the last of that line, and that al-Qa'im was the first of the imams to sit on the throne. Research by Vladimir Ivanov, on the other hand, has conclusively shown that the supposed Qaddahite descent of the Fatimids is a legend, likely invented by Ibn Rizam himself: the historical Maymun al-Qaddah is now known to have been a disciple of Muhammad al-Baqir (recognized by both Isma'ilis and Twelvers as an imam), and both he and his son Abdallah hailed from the Hejaz. For reasons of chronology alone, Ibn Rizam's version is thus proven to be untenable. Access to more sources has furthermore led to the partial reconciliation of the conflicting accounts by positing that some of the variant names in the genealogies were indeed cover names for the Isma'ili imams: thus Maymun ('the Fortunate One') is suggested as the sobriquet for Muhammad ibn Isma'il, especially since a source connects him with a sect known as the Maymuniyya. This explanation is also present in an epistle by the fourth Fatimid caliph, al-Mu'izz, in 965. This would make the claim of al-Mahdi's descent from an 'Abdallah ibn Maymun' actually correct, and lead hostile sources to confuse him with the earlier Shi'a figure. Another suggestion, by Abbas Hamdani and F. de Blois, is that the officially published genealogies represent a compromise between two different lines of descent from Ja'far al-Sadiq, one from Isma'il and another (per al-Mahdi's letter to the Yemenis) from Abdallah al-Aftah. Other scholars, such as Halm, remain skeptical, while Omert Schrier and Michael Brett dismiss the Fatimid claims of Alid descent entirely as a pious fiction.\nThe Fatimids and the early Isma'ili.\nBoth the Twelvers and the Seveners held that their final imams were not dead, but had simply gone into concealment, and that they would soon return as a messiah, the ('the Rightly Guided One') or ('He Who Arises'), to usher in the end times. The would rapidly overthrow the usurping Abbasids and destroy their capital Baghdad, restore the unity of the Muslims, conquer Constantinople, ensure the final triumph of Islam and establish a reign of peace and justice. The Isma'ilis in particular believed that the would reveal the true, 'inner' () meaning of religion, which was until then reserved for a few select initiates. The would abolish the 'outer' () forms and strictures of Islam, since henceforth the true religion, the religion of Adam, would be manifested without the need for symbols and other mediating devices.\nWhile the Muhammad ibn Isma'il remained hidden, however, he would need to be represented by agents, who would gather the faithful, spread the word (, 'invitation, calling'), and prepare his return. The head of this secret network was the living proof of the imam's existence, the (lit.\u2009'seal'). The first known was Abdallah al-Akbar, a wealthy merchant from Askar Mukram, in what is now southwestern Iran. Apart from improbable stories circulated by later anti-Isma'ili polemicists, his exact origin is unknown. His teachings led to his being forced to flee his native city to escape persecution by the Abbasid authorities, and seek refuge in Basra. Once again, his teachings attracted the attention of the authorities, and he moved on to the small town of Salamiyah on the western edge of the Syrian Desert. There he settled as a merchant from Basra, and had two sons, Ahmad and Ibrahim. When Abdallah died c.\u2009827/8, Ahmad succeeded his father as the head of the Isma'ili movement, and was in turn succeeded by his younger son, Muhammad, known as Abu'l-Shalaghlagh. In later Fatimid doctrine, Abdallah al-Akbar was presented as the eldest son of Muhammad ibn Isma'il, and his successor as imam, followed by Ahmad. While Muhammad Abu'l-Shalaghlagh was the head of the , however, the imamate passed to another son, al-Husayn (d. 881/2), and thence to al-Husayn's son, Abdallah or Sa'id, the future Caliph al-Mahdi, who was born in 873/4. Isma'ili texts suggest that Abu'l-Shalaghlagh was the guardian and tutor of al-Mahdi, but also that he tried to usurp the succession for his own sons but failed, as the latter all died prematurely.\nDuring the late ninth century, millennialist expectations increased in the Muslim world, coinciding with a deep crisis of the Abbasid Caliphate during the decade-long Anarchy at Samarra, the rise of breakaway and autonomous regimes in the provinces, and the large-scale Zanj Rebellion, whose leader claimed Alid descent and proclaimed himself as the . In this chaotic atmosphere, and with the Abbasids preoccupied with suppressing the Zanj uprising, the Isma'ili spread rapidly, aided by dissatisfaction among Twelver adherents with the political quietism of their leadership and the recent disappearance of their twelfth imam. Missionaries (s) like Hamdan Qarmat and his brother-in-law Abu Muhammad Abdan spread the network of agents to the area round Kufa in the late 870s, and from there to Yemen (Ibn Hawshab, 882) and thence India (884), Bahrayn (Abu Sa'id al-Jannabi, 899), Persia, and Ifriqiya (Abu Abdallah al-Shi'i, 893). The real leadership of the movement remained hidden at Salamiyah, and only the chief s of each region, such as Hamdan Qarmat, knew and corresponded with it. The true head of the movement remained hidden even from the senior missionaries, however, and a certain Fayruz functioned as chief missionary () and 'gateway' () to the hidden leader.\nQarmatian schism and flight to the Maghreb.\nIn about 899, Abdallah ibn al-Husayn assumed the leadership of the . Soon, he began making alterations to the doctrine, which worried Hamdan Qarmat. Abdan went to Salamiyah to investigate the matter, and learned that Abdallah claimed that the expected was not Muhammad ibn Isma'il, as commonly propagated, but Abdallah himself, and that Abdallah's ancestors, far from being simply the s of the imams, were actually the imams themselves. In a letter to the Yemeni community, Abdallah claimed that 'Muhammad ibn Isma'il' was actually a cover name assumed by each incumbent imam, and denied any particular role of Muhammad ibn Isma'il as the expected who was to usher in the end times. These doctrinal innovations caused a major rift in the movement, as Hamdan denounced the leadership in Salamiyah, gathered the Iraqi s and ordered them to cease the missionary effort. Shortly after this Hamdan \"disappeared\" from his headquarters, and Abdan was assassinated by Zakarawayh ibn Mihrawayh, who had remained loyal to Salamiyah.\nThe schism left the early Isma'ili divided into two factions: those who accepted Abdallah's claims, and continued to follow him, and became the Isma'ilis proper, and those who rejected them and continued to believe in the return of Muhammad ibn Isma'il as , who became known as the Qarmatians (although anti-Fatimid sources also used the label for the Fatimids themselves). In Iraq and Persia, the community was split between the two factions, but in Bahrayn, the local s split off from Salamiyah and established an independent Qarmatian state that lasted into the 1070s. On the other hand, Zakarawayh and his loyalists now began a series of anti-Abbasid uprisings in Iraq and Syria in 902\u2013907, with the support of the Bedouin tribes. Calling themselves the , the uprisings enjoyed some ephemeral success, but were eventually suppressed by the still potent Abbasid army. Zakarawayh apparently moved without Abdallah's authorization or prior knowledge, and thus placed him in danger: the Abbasid authorities began a crackdown on the , and Zakarawayh's sons unwittingly revealed the location and identity of Abdallah to the Abbasids, who launched a man-hunt against him. Already in 902, Abdallah with his household left Salamiyah for Ramla. As the revolts instigated by Zakarawayh were suppressed, Abdallah moved to Tulunid Egypt in early 904. As the Abbasids recovered control of Egypt in the next year, the small party fled again. While his companions expected to head to Yemen, where the Isma'ili had enjoyed great success, Abdallah turned westward, and established himself at the oasis town of Sijilmasa, in what is now southwestern Morocco, in August 905.\nRuling an empire.\nEstablishment of the Fatimid Caliphate.\nIn the meantime, in Ifriqiya, the Abu Abdallah al-Shi'i had managed to convert the Berber tribe of the Kutama to the Isma'ili cause. From 902 on, the Kutama had gradually conquered the region from its Abbasid clients, the Aghlabids. On 25 March 909, Abu Abdallah and his Kutama entered the Aghlabid palace city of Raqqada in triumph. The proclaimed a Shi'a regime, but kept the name of his master secret as yet, only using the title , 'God's proof'; and soon set out westward, at the head of a large army, to bring his imam to Ifriqiya. The Kutama army destroyed the Kharijite Rustamid emirate on its way, and arrived at Sijilmasa in August 909. There Abdallah was acclaimed caliph by the troops. On 4 January 910, Abdallah entered Raqqada, where he publicly proclaimed himself caliph with the regnal title of , 'the imam rightly guided by God'.\nThe first crisis of the new regime occurred quickly. Abu Abdallah al-Shi'i and his brother demanded proof of Abdallah being the , or resented the limitations on their authority placed by the new ruler. Al-Mahdi Billah was able to eliminate them in 911, but this led to a Kutama revolt, led by a child as a figurehead. The uprising was defeated, and the Fatimid control over the Kutama consolidated. Nevertheless, Fatimid power remained fragile, as it was based almost exclusively on the\u2014often truculent\u2014Kutama, and later the Sanhaja tribe as well. Conversely, the local Arabs of Ifriqiya were Maliki Sunnis, while most Berber tribes further west\u2014notably the Zenata confederation\u2014adhered to various forms of Kharijism, and thus opposed to the Isma'ili regime of the Fatimids.\nImperial expansion.\nGiven the semi-divine status they claimed as the rightful imams of Islam, the Fatimids' ambitions were not limited to Ifriqiya. The Fatimid caliphs aimed to overthrow not only the rival Muslim monarchs\u2014the Abbasids of Baghdad and the Umayyads of Cordoba\u2014but also the Byzantine Empire, claiming a divine right to universal sovereignty.\nFatimid power quickly expanded across the sea to Sicily, which had been conquered by the Aghlabids from the Byzantines, but Fatimid rule was established there only after a series of revolts by the local Muslims, who at times declared for the Abbasids, were suppressed. Sicily was also important as a battleground against the Byzantines, which among other things allowed the Fatimids to present themselves as champions of Islam, engaged in holy war against the infidels. In practice, relations were often more pragmatic, and warfare alternated with periods of truce. From 948 on, a series of hereditary governors, the Kalbid dynasty, governed Sicily on the Fatimids' behalf.\nThe Fatimids also expanded west to the rest of the Maghreb, where Fez and Sijilmasa were captured in 920\u2013921, although these conquests were difficult to hold, and brought the Fatimids into conflict with the Umayyads of Cordoba. In an attempt to supplant the Abbasids, al-Mahdi's son and heir, al-Qa'im bi-Amr Allah, led campaigns eastward to capture Egypt in 914 and 919. Both endeavours failed, leaving only the Cyrenaica in Fatimid hands.\nRevolt of Abu Yazid.\nBetween 916 and 921, al-Mahdi built a new residence, the fortified palace city of Mahdiyya, on a rocky promontory on the Ifriqiyan coast. When Al-Mahdi died in 934, he was succeeded by his son, al-Qa'im (r.\u2009934\u00a0\u2013\u00a0946), who continued his father's policies. Another attempted invasion of Egypt in 935 was defeated by the country's new strongman ruler, Muhammad ibn Tughj al-Ikhshid.\nThe most notable event of al-Qa'im's reign was the revolt of the Zenata Berbers under the Khariji preacher Abu Yazid in 943/44: almost all of Ifriqiya succumbed to the rebels, and in January 945, the rebels laid siege to Mahdiyya itself. Al-Qa'im died during the siege, and was succeeded by his son, Abu Tahir Isma'il (r.\u2009946\u00a0\u2013\u00a0953). The new caliph concealed his father's death, took to the field, and in a series of battles defeated the rebel armies and captured Abu Yazid in August 947. The victory over the rebel leader, who had almost destroyed the Fatimid state and was symbolically called the ('the false Messiah') by the Isma'ili , was the moment when Abu Tahir declared himself as the imam and caliph in succession to his father, with the name of al-Mansur bi-Nasr Allah ('The Victor with the Help of God'). Al-Mansur moved the Fatimid court to a new palace city, al-Mansuriyya near Kairouan, but died soon after, and was succeeded by his son, al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah (r.\u2009953\u00a0\u2013\u00a0975).\nConquest of Egypt and move of the capital to Cairo.\nAl-Mu'izz was an excellent planner and organizer, and the state he inherited had regained internal stability, after the turmoils of Abu Yazid's revolt. His early reign saw successes against the Byzantines, where the last remaining Byzantine strongholds were extinguished with the Fall of Rometta in 965, as well as the reconquest of the western Maghreb by the Fatimid general Jawhar in 958\u2013960, temporarily expelling Umayyad influence from the region and extending Fatimid rule to the shores of the Atlantic Ocean.\nAfter these successes, al-Mu'izz once again turned to the abandoned project of the conquest of Egypt. Meticulous military and political preparations were undertaken, and the agents of the Isma'ili engaged to promote the Fatimid cause in Egypt and suborn officials of the weakened Ikhshidid regime. As a result, when the Fatimid army under Jawhar arrived in Egypt in summer 969, it faced little organized resistance. Jawhar entered the Egyptian capital, Fustat, in July 969, and claimed the country for his master. Immediately he began establishing a new capital city near Fustat, which came to be known as ('the Victorious One of al-Mu'izz'), modern Cairo.\nJawhar governed Egypt for the next four years as viceroy of al-Mu'izz, restoring the country's finances. It was not until August 972 that al-Mu'izz left Ifriqiya, appointing the Berber Buluggin ibn Ziri as his viceroy there. In June 973, the Fatimid court arrived in Egypt and al-Mu'izz took up residence in Cairo.\nExpansion into Syria.\nIn the meantime, immediately after the conquest if Egypt Jawhar had tried to extend Fatimid rule into Syria. The first Fatimid invasion failed largely due to the opposition of the Qarmatians of Bahrayn, who did not hesitate to align themselves with the Abbasid caliph and denounce al-Mu'izz in public. The Qarmatian leader al-Hasan al-A'sam led two invasions of Egypt in 971 and again, despite al-Mu'izz's efforts to win him over, in 974. Both invasions were beaten back at the gates of Cairo, forcing the Qarmatians to retreat to Bahrayn, and opening the path for a renewed Fatimid attempt to conquer Syria. At the same time, around 970/71, the two holy cities of Mecca and Medina, recognized Fatimid suzerainty, an important symbolic victory for the Fatimids.\nIn 978, Caliph al-Aziz (r.\u2009975\u00a0\u2013\u00a0996) captured Damascus, but Fatimid power in Syria continued to be challenged, whether by powerful generals or by the restive Bedouin of Palestine under the Jarrahids. Al-Aziz's attempts to capture the Hamdanid emirate of Aleppo brought the Fatimids into conflict with the Byzantines, who considered the city their protectorate. Attempts to take Aleppo failed in 983, 992/3 and 994/5, and effective Fatimid power reached little past Tripoli in the north. In 987, the Fatimid suzerainty was recognized by the Ya'furids in Yemen, but Fatimid attempts to induce the fellow Shi'a rulers of Iraq, the Buyids, to recognize their suzerainty, failed; the Buyids rejected the Fatimids' claims of Alid descent. Al-Aziz's reign saw also a transformation in the structure and nature of the Fatimid state: the Kutama, who had been the main pillar of the early Fatimid regime, were now complemented by Turkish military slaves () as well as Black African slave soldiers, while under the guidance of Ya'qub ibn Killis, the Fatimid administration became organized and regularized.\nReign of al-Hakim.\nAl-Aziz died in 996, while preparing a major campaign against the Byzantines and Hamdanids. He was succeeded by his eleven-year-old son, al-Hakim (r.\u2009996\u00a0\u2013\u00a01021). Initially under the tutelage of powerful officials, al-Hakim managed to seize the reins of power for himself in 1000. The early years of his reign saw the conclusion of peace with Byzantium in 1001, as well as the great tribal revolts of Abu Rukwa in Cyrenaica in 1005, and of Mufarrij ibn Daghfal in Palestine in 1012\u201313. In the north, the Uqaylids of Mosul briefly acknowledged Fatimid suzerainty in 1010, and in 1015, Aleppo did the same, with Fatimid troops entering the city and imposing direct control in 1017. Relations with the Zirids, who quickly had begun distancing themselves from Cairo's authority, became more strained under al-Hakim due to disputes over Cyrenaica and Tripoli, and in 1016/7, the new Zirid emir, al-Mu'izz ibn Badis, launched a pogrom against the remaining Isma'ilis in Ifriqiya.\nFrom 1015 on, the Fatimid Caliphate, and the Isma'ili community, were confronted by a rise in sectarianism: a series of preachers who propagated extremist versions of Isma'ilism appeared, preaching the imminence of the end times, the divinity of al-Hakim, and the abolition of the Sharia. The Fatimid religious establishment opposed such antinomian views, but al-Hakim seems to have tolerated, if not encouraged them. Although al-Hakim never officially espoused their views, the teachings of men such as al-Darzi and Hamza ibn Ali resulted in the birth of the Druze faith. At the same time, al-Hakim made curious innovations in the succession, by splitting up his office in two: one to succeed the caliphate, i.e. the secular office, and one to succeed as imam, i.e. as leader of the Isma'ili community. Furthermore, he sidelined his own son and appointed two cousins to the posts, thereby arousing the hostility of the Fatimid elites. As a result of a conspiracy among the latter, al-Hakim was murdered during one of his night rides outside Cairo, and his corpse disposed of, never to be found.\nThe dynasty in power.\nMembers of the dynasty were carefully kept out of public affairs; even princes and princesses of the blood did not have a special position at court, let alone being entrusted with the governance of provinces or the command of armies as in other medieval states, which might result in an independent power base that could threaten the orderly father-to-son succession of the imamate and caliphate. The sole exception was the designated successor, such as al-Qa'im, al-Mansur and Abdallah ibn al-Mu'izz, and that only in the early decades of the dynasty; as the caliphs increasingly ascended the throne as children, this practice was also dropped. This did not remove inter-family feuds, however, most notably in the sidelining of Nizar and the other sons of al-Mustansir at the accession of al-Musta'li, which was followed by repeated attempts by Nizar's descendants to raise a revolt and reclaim power. This led to differences in rank: a detailed list of court precedence from 1122, during the reign of al-Amir, the caliph's single full brother (), Ja'far, is accorded first place in the hierarchy, while their half-brothers from other women are listed much lower, after the caliph's own concubines, followed by the \"sons and daughters of cousins\".\nFor similar reasons, Fatimid princesses were usually not wed outside the family, and the caliphs themselves did not usually engage in a full marriage, but had slave concubines, who could rise to the high status of an upon the birth of a son. Several caliphal daughters are not even known by name, and for those that are, it is likely that they never married at all as a matter of policy, even though they are often mentioned only by their teknonyms.\nAlthough politically inactive, the members of the dynasty enjoyed immense riches, founded on the possession of properties in the capital, Cairo, and its environs, as well as commerce. The caliph himself was not above such enrichment, and owned extensive parts of Cairo; according to the mid-11th traveller Nasir Khusraw, all 20,000 shops in the city, as well as its caravanserais and baths, and 8,000 other buildings that paid a monthly rent to the caliph's private purse () or the private treasury (). Fatimid princesses are likewise recorded as being extremely wealthy, in part from estates allocated to them, and in part due to their own commercial and entrepreneurial activities. Thus at their death in 1050/51, two daughters of Caliph al-Mu'izz left estates of about 1.7 million gold dinars each, while Sitt al-Mulk is known to have employed an extensive staff of able administrators of both sexes for her far-flung economic interests.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58724", "revid": "37740198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58724", "title": "Proper superset", "text": ""}
{"id": "58725", "revid": "44721228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58725", "title": "Physical security", "text": "Measures designed to deny unauthorized access\nPhysical security describes security measures that are designed to deny unauthorized access to facilities, equipment, and resources and to protect personnel and property from damage or harm (such as espionage, theft, or terrorist attacks). Physical security involves the use of multiple layers of interdependent systems that can include CCTV surveillance, security guards, protective barriers, locks, access control, perimeter intrusion detection, deterrent systems, fire protection, and other systems designed to protect persons and property.\nOverview.\nPhysical security systems for protected facilities can be intended to:\nIt is up to security designers, architects and analysts to balance security controls against risks, taking into account the costs of specifying, developing, testing, implementing, using, managing, monitoring and maintaining the controls, along with broader issues such as aesthetics, human rights, health and safety, and societal norms or conventions. Physical access security measures that are appropriate for a high security prison or a military site may be inappropriate in an office, a home or a vehicle, although the principles are similar.\nElements and design.\nDeterrence.\nThe goal of deterrence methods is to convince potential attackers that a successful attack is unlikely due to strong defenses.\nThe initial layer of security for a campus, building, office, or other physical space can use crime prevention through environmental design to deter threats. Some of the most common examples are also the most basic: warning signs or window stickers, fences, vehicle barriers, vehicle height-restrictors, restricted access points, security lighting and trenches.\nPhysical barriers.\nFor example, tall fencing, topped with barbed wire, razor wire or metal spikes are often emplaced on the perimeter of a property, generally with some type of signage that warns people not to attempt entry. However, in some facilities imposing perimeter walls or fencing will not be possible (e.g. an urban office building that is directly adjacent to public sidewalks) or it may be aesthetically unacceptable (e.g. surrounding a shopping center with tall fences topped with razor wire); in this case, the outer security perimeter will be generally defined as the walls, windows and doors of the structure itself.\nSecurity lighting.\nSecurity lighting is another effective form of deterrence. Intruders are less likely to enter well-lit areas for fear of being seen. Doors, gates, and other entrances, in particular, should be well lit to allow close observation of people entering and exiting. When lighting the grounds of a facility, widely distributed low-intensity lighting is generally superior to small patches of high-intensity lighting, because the latter can have a tendency to create blind spots for security personnel and CCTV cameras. It is important to place lighting in a manner that makes it difficult to tamper with (e.g. suspending lights from tall poles), and to ensure that there is a backup power supply so that security lights will not go out if the electricity is cut off. The introduction of low-voltage LED-based lighting products has enabled new security capabilities, such as instant-on or strobing, while substantially reducing electrical consumption.\nSecurity lighting for nuclear power plants in the United States.\nFor nuclear power plants in the United States (U.S.), per the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 10 CFR Part 73, \"[security] lighting\" is mentioned four times. The most notable mentioning contained in https://, which clearly identifies that licensees \"-shall provide a minimum illumination level of 0.2 foot-candles, measured horizontally at ground level, in the isolation zones and appropriate exterior areas within the protected area-\". https://] This is also the minimum illumination level specified in https://, for night firing. Per https:// \"-Tactical Response Team members, armed response personnel, and guards shall qualify and requalify, at least every 12 months, for day and night firing with assigned weapons in accordance with Appendix H-\"; therefore on said respective shooting range [at night] per https://, \"-all courses [shall have] 0.2 foot-candles at center mass of target area-\" applicable to handguns, shotguns, and rifles. https://] 1 foot-candle is approximately 10.76 lux, therefore the minimum illumination requirements for the above sections also reflect 2.152 lux.\nIntrusion detection and electronic surveillance.\nAlarm systems and sensors.\nSecurity alarms can be installed to alert security personnel when unauthorized access is attempted. Alarm systems work in tandem with physical barriers, mechanical systems, and security guards, serving to trigger a response when these other forms of security have been breached. They consist of sensors including perimeter sensors, motion sensors, contact sensors, and glass break detectors.\nHowever, alarms are only useful if there is a prompt response when they are triggered. In the reconnaissance phase prior to an actual attack, some intruders will test the response time of security personnel to a deliberately tripped alarm system. By measuring the length of time it takes for a security team to arrive (if they arrive at all), the attacker can determine if an attack could succeed before authorities arrive to neutralize the threat. Loud audible alarms can also act as a psychological deterrent, by notifying intruders that their presence has been detected.\nIn some U.S. jurisdictions, law enforcement will not respond to alarms from intrusion detection systems unless the activation has been verified by an eyewitness or video. Policies like this one have been created to combat the 94\u201399 percent rate of false alarm activation in the United States.\nVideo surveillance.\nSurveillance cameras can be a deterrent when placed in highly visible locations and are useful for incident assessment and historical analysis. For example, if alarms are being generated and there is a camera in place, security personnel assess the situation via the camera feed. In instances when an attack has already occurred and a camera is in place at the point of attack, the recorded video can be reviewed. Although the term closed-circuit television (CCTV) is common, it is quickly becoming outdated as more video systems lose the closed circuit for signal transmission and are instead transmitting on IP camera networks.\nVideo monitoring does not necessarily guarantee a human response. A human must be monitoring the situation in real time in order to respond in a timely manner; otherwise, video monitoring is simply a means to gather evidence for later analysis. However, technological advances like video analytics are reducing the amount of work required for video monitoring as security personnel can be automatically notified of potential security events.\nAccess control.\nAccess control methods are used to monitor and control traffic through specific access points and areas of the secure facility. This is done using a variety of methods, including CCTV surveillance, identification cards, security guards, biometric readers, locks, doors, turnstiles and gates.\nMechanical access control systems.\n\"Mechanical access control systems\" include turnstiles, gates, doors, and locks. Key control of the locks becomes a problem with large user populations and any user turnover. Keys quickly become unmanageable, often forcing the adoption of electronic access control.\nElectronic access control systems.\nElectronic access control systems provide secure access to buildings or facilities by controlling who can enter and exit. Some aspects of these systems can include:\nElectronic access control uses credential readers, advanced software, and electrified locks to provide programmable, secure access management for facilities. Integration of cameras, alarms and other systems is also common.\nAn additional sub-layer of mechanical/electronic access control protection is reached by integrating a key management system to manage the possession and usage of mechanical keys to locks or property within a building or campus.\nIdentification systems and access policies.\nAnother form of access control (\"procedural\") includes the use of policies, processes and procedures to manage the ingress into the restricted area. An example of this is the deployment of security personnel conducting checks for authorized entry at predetermined points of entry. This form of access control is usually supplemented by the earlier forms of access control (i.e. mechanical and electronic access control), or simple devices such as physical passes.\nSecurity personnel.\n\"Security personnel\" play a central role in all layers of security. All of the technological systems that are employed to enhance physical security are useless without a security force that is trained in their use and maintenance, and which knows how to properly respond to breaches in security. Security personnel perform many functions: patrolling facilities, administering electronic access control, responding to alarms, and monitoring and analyzing video footage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58726", "revid": "10103788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58726", "title": "Margaret I of Denmark", "text": "Scandinavian queen regnant, founder of the Kalmar Union (1353\u20131412)\nMargaret I (; March 1353 \u2013 28 October 1412) was Queen regnant of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden (which included Finland) from the late 1380s until her death, and the founder of the Kalmar Union that joined the Scandinavian kingdoms together for over a century. She had been queen consort of Norway from 1363 to 1380 and of Sweden from 1363 to 1364 by marriage to Haakon VI. Margaret was known as a wise, energetic and capable leader, who governed with \"farsighted tact and caution\", earning the nickname \"Semiramis of the North\". Also known famously and derisively as \"King Breechless\", one of several derogatory nicknames once thought to have been invented by her rival Albert, King of Sweden, she was also called \"Lady King\" by her subjects, widely used in recognition of her capabilities. Knut Gjerset calls her \"the first great ruling queen in European history\".\nThe youngest daughter of Valdemar IV of Denmark, Margaret was born at S\u00f8borg Castle. She was a practical, patient administrator and diplomat, albeit one of high aspirations and a strong will, who intended to unite Scandinavia forever into one single entity with the strength to resist and compete against the might of the Hanseatic League. In 1363, aged ten, Margaret married Haakon VI. In 1370, they had a son, Olaf. Following the deaths of her husband and son, Margaret was proclaimed queen of the Scandinavian kingdoms. She was ultimately succeeded by a grandnephew, Erik of Pomerania. Although Erik came of age in 1401, Margaret continued for the remaining 11 years of her life to be sole ruler in all but name. Her regency marked the beginning of a Dano-Norwegian union which was to last for more than four centuries.\nSome Norwegian and Swedish historians have criticized Margaret for favouring Denmark and being too autocratic, though she is generally thought to have been highly regarded in Norway and respected in Denmark and Sweden. She was painted in a negative light in contemporary religious chronicles, as she had no qualms suppressing the Church to promote royal power. Margaret is known in Denmark as \"Margrethe I\" to distinguish her from Margrethe II.\nEarly years and marriage.\nMargaret was born in March 1353 as the sixth and youngest child of King Valdemar IV and Queen Helvig of Denmark. She was born in the prison of S\u00f8borg Castle, where her father had already confined her mother. She was baptised in Roskilde and in 1359, at the age of six, engaged to the 18-year-old King Haakon VI, the youngest son of the Swedish-Norwegian king Magnus IV &amp; VII. As part of the marriage contract, it is presumed that a treaty was signed ensuring Magnus the assistance of King Valdemar in a dispute with his second son, Erik \"XII\" of Sweden, who in 1356 held dominion over Southern Sweden. Margaret's marriage was thus a part of the Nordic power struggle. There was dissatisfaction with this in some circles, and the political activist Bridget of Sweden described the agreement in a letter to the Pope as \"children playing with dolls\". The goal of the marriage for King Valdemar was regaining Scania, which since 1332 had been mortgaged to Sweden. Per contemporary sources, the marriage contract contained an agreement to give Helsingborg Castle back to Denmark, but that was not enough for Valdemar, who in June 1359 took a large army across \u00d8resund and soon occupied Scania. The attack was ostensibly to support Magnus against Erik, but in June 1359, Erik died. As a result, the balance of power changed, and all agreements between Magnus and Valdemar were terminated, including the marriage contract between Margaret and Haakon.\nThis did not result in the withdrawal of Valdemar from Scania; he instead continued his conquests on the island of Gotland in the Baltic Sea. Visby, which was populated by Germans, was the main town on the island and was the key to domination of the Baltic Sea. On 27 July 1361 a battle was fought between a well-equipped Danish army and an array of local Gotland peasants. The Danes won the battle and took Visby, while the Germans did not take part. King Magnus and the Hanseatic League could not disregard this provocation, and a trade embargo against Denmark was immediately enacted, with agreement about necessary military action. At the same time, negotiations opened between King Magnus and Henry of Holstein about a marriage between Haakon and the latter's sister Elizabeth. On 17 December 1362, a ship left with Elizabeth bound for Sweden. A storm, however, diverted her to the Danish island Bornholm, where the archbishop of Lund declared the wedding a violation of church law because Haakon had already been engaged to Margaret. The Swedish and Hanseatic armies also ultimately withdrew from their siege of Helsingborg. Following this, a truce was concluded. The Hanseatic States and King Magnus abandoned the war, and the previous engagement of the now 10-year-old Margaret and King Haakon became relevant again. The wedding was held in Copenhagen on 9 April 1363.\nThe marriage of Haakon and Margaret was an alliance, and Margaret likely remained in Denmark for some time after the wedding, but ultimately was taken to Akershus in Oslo Fjord where she was raised by Merete Ulvsdatter. Merete Ulvsdatter was a distinguished noblewoman and daughter of Bridget of Sweden, as well as the wife of Knut Algotsson, who was one of King Magnus's faithful followers. Margaret was brought up with Merete's daughter Ingegerd, who likely instructed her in matters of religion and monarchy. Merete's daughters, Ingegerd and Catherine, became her closest female friends, with Margaret later showing favoritism to Ingegerd, who became an abbess, as well as her monastery. It is also likely, though, that her promotion of the Bridgettines was also out of piety and political interest to help the process of integration. Her academic studies were probably limited, but it is assumed that in addition to reading and writing she also was instructed in statecraft. She displayed an early talent for ruling and appears to have held real power.\nIn the years after Margaret's wedding Scandinavia saw a series of major political upheavals. A few months after her wedding, her only brother, Christopher, Duke of Lolland, died, leaving her father without an obvious male heir. In 1364 the Swedish nobles deposed Margaret's husband and father-in-law from the Swedish throne and elected Albert of Mecklenburg as king of Sweden.\nRegency.\nHer first act after her father's death in 1375 was to procure the election of her infant son Olaf as king of Denmark, despite the claims of her elder sister Ingeborg's husband Henry III, Duke of Mecklenburg, and their son Albert. Margaret insisted that Olaf be proclaimed rightful heir of Sweden, among his other titles. He was too young to rule in his own right, and Margaret proved herself a competent and shrewd ruler in the years that followed. On the death of Haakon in 1380, Olaf succeeded him as King of Norway. Olaf died suddenly in 1387, aged 16, and Margaret, who had ruled both kingdoms in his name, was chosen Regent of Norway and Denmark in the following year. She had already proven her keen statesmanship by recovering possession of Schleswig from the Holstein-Rendsburg Counts. The Counts had held it for more than a generation and received it back as a fief by the Compact of Nyborg in 1386, but under such stringent conditions that the Danish Crown received all the advantages of the arrangement. By this compact, the often rebellious Jutish nobility lost the support they had previously enjoyed in Schleswig and Holstein. Margaret, free from fear of domestic sedition, could now give her undivided attention to Sweden, where mutinous nobles, led by Birger (son of Bridget and brother of Martha), were already in arms against their unpopular King Albert. Several of the powerful nobles wrote to Margaret that if she would help rid Sweden of Albert, she would become their regent. She quickly gathered an army and invaded Sweden.\nAt a conference held at Dalaborg Castle in March 1388, the Swedes were compelled to accept all of Margaret's conditions, elected her \"Sovereign Lady and Ruler\", and committed themselves to accept any king she chose to appoint. Albert, who had called her \"King Pantsless\" returned from Mecklenburg with an army of mercenaries. On 24 February 1389, the decisive battle took place at either Aasle or Falan near Falk\u00f6ping. General Henrik Parow, the Mecklenburger commander of Margaret's forces, was killed in battle, but he managed to win it for her. Margaret was now the omnipotent mistress of three kingdoms.\nStockholm, then almost entirely a German city, still held out. Fear of Margaret induced both the Mecklenburg princes and the Wendish towns to hasten to its assistance; and the Baltic and the North Sea speedily swarmed with the privateers of the Victual Brothers. The Hanseatic League intervened, and under the Compact of Lindholm (1395), Margaret released Albert on his promise to pay 60,000 marks within three years. Meanwhile, the Hansa were to hold Stockholm as surety. Albert failed to pay his ransom within the stipulated time, and the Hansa surrendered Stockholm to Margaret in September 1398 in exchange for commercial privileges.\nErik of Pomerania.\nIt had been understood that Margaret should, at the first convenient opportunity, provide the three kingdoms with a king who was to be a kinsman of all the three old dynasties, although in Norway it was specified that she would continue ruling alongside the new king, while in Sweden, the nobles assured Margaret that they were content to do without a king throughout her lifetime, which they hoped would be long. In 1389 she proclaimed her great-nephew, Bogislav, who changed his name to Erik of Pomerania (grandson of Henry of Mecklenburg), king of Norway, having adopted him and his sister Catherine. In 1396, homage was rendered to him in Denmark and Sweden, while Margaret once again assumed the regency during his minority.\nUnion of Kalmar.\nOn 20 July, Margaret capitalized on the general rejoicing by publishing the famous Treaty of Kalmar, \"a masterly document that sealed the union of Norway, Sweden and Denmark\". The date she chose was no coincidence \u2013 it was the Feast Day of St. Margaret of Antioch, who like the Lady King herself, was cast off by her father and thrown into prison. The treaty proposed \"everlasting union\", which reflected her dearest ambition, that \"all three realms should exist together in harmony and love, and whatever befalleth one, war and rumors of war, or the onslaught of foreigners, that shall be for all three, and each kingdom shall help the others in all fealty ...and hereafter the Nordic realms shall have one king, and not several.\"\nWell aware of regional pride and prejudice, Margaret played a careful strategy, assuring her subjects that each state would be governed according to the laws and customs of each, no new laws would be introduced without the consent of the subjects, officials from governors to soldiers would be recruited from the native populations, thus showing her subjects that they would enjoy every benefit of union without any threat to national identity. To weld the united kingdoms still more closely together, Margaret summoned a congress of the three Councils of the Realm to Kalmar in June 1397, and on Trinity Sunday, 17 June, Erik was crowned king of Denmark, Norway and Sweden. The Act of Union resulting from this was never completed. Scholars continue to debate the reasons, but the Union existed \"de facto\" through the early 16th century reign of King Christian II, and the union of Denmark and Norway continued until 1814.\nA few years after the Kalmar Union, the 18-year-old Erik was declared of age and homage was rendered to him in all his three kingdoms, although Margaret was the effective ruler of Scandinavia throughout her lifetime.\nKalmar Union and royal policy.\nSo long as the union was insecure, Margaret had tolerated the presence of the Riksr\u00e5d, but their influence was minor and the Royal authority remained supreme. The offices of High Constable and Earl Marshal were left vacant; the Danehof fell into ruin, and \"the great Queen, an ideal despot\", ruled through her court officials, who served as a superior kind of clerk. In any event, law and order were well maintained and the licence of the nobility was sternly repressed. The kingdoms of Sweden and Norway were treated as integral parts of the Danish State, and national aspirations were frowned upon or checked, though Norway, being more loyal, was treated more indulgently than Sweden.\nIn 1396, according to Grethe Jacobsen, she issued an ordinance that one should to a higher degree than hitherto respect and enforce peace towards church (\"pax dei\"), houses, farms, legal assemblies, workers in the fields \u2013 and women, expressed in the word \"kvindefred\". Jacobsen believes that as punishment for rape was normally not associated with the other forms for upholding peace in the tradition of pax dei, this may be an expression of Margrete's perception of women as being particularly vulnerable in times of unrest, and for her own interpretation of the ruler as protector of \"personae miserabiles\", which included maidens and widows. Another testament was her dispositions of 1411 through which she distributed the sum of 500 marcs among the women who had been 'violated and debased' during the wars between Sweden and Denmark 1388\u20131389.\nMargaret recovered for the Crown all the landed property that had been alienated in the troubled times before the reign of Valdemar IV. This so-called \"reduktion\", or land-recovery, was carried out with the utmost rigour, and hundreds of estates fell into the hands of the crown. She also reformed the Danish currency, substituting good silver coins for the old and worthless copper tokens, to the great advantage both of herself and of the state. She always had large sums of money at her disposal, and much of it was given to charity.\nAccording to Thomas Kingston Derry, Margaret tried to provide the union with a sound economic basis. In the process, each of her measures (recovery of crown lands from nobility and the church, new taxes and new coins) hurt the interests of powerful classes, but she prevented them from having leadership by making little use of separate councils of her three kingdoms, relying on a body of civil and ecclesiastical officials she chose with great skills instead. She placed Danes in Swedish and Norwegian bishoprics, while royal estates and castles were managed by castellans and bailiffs of foreign extraction. While this has been criticized as promoting Danes at the expense of Swedish and Norwegian people, Derry opines that considering she employed more Germans in her native Denmark than elsewhere, she was mainly interested in securing a loyal and efficient administration.\nShe travelled much, in her later years is said to have spent more time in Sweden than in Denmark. She encouraged intermarriages among the nobility of three realms. Her piety is well-known, and she gave strong backing to the canonisation of St.Brigitta, helped to make Vadstena into a strong cultural centre and encouraged the spread of \"Brigittine language\", which led to many Swedish expressions coming into use among Danes and Norwegians.\nIn contrast with the foreign policy of her venturesome father, Margaret's was circumspect and unswervingly neutral in the bloody war between France and England as well as other European conflicts. However, she spared no pains to recover lost Danish territory. She purchased the island of Gotland from its actual possessors, Albert of Mecklenburg and the Livonian Order, and the greater part of Schleswig was regained in the same way.\nIn 1402 Margaret entered into negotiations with King Henry IV of England about the possibility of a double-wedding alliance between England and the Nordic Union. The proposal was for King Erik to marry Henry's daughter Philippa, and for Henry's son, the Prince of Wales and future Henry V of England, to marry Erik's sister Catherine. According to Marc Shell, Margaret's vision was that one day, two unions would unite to recreate Cnut the Great's Empire of the North. The English side wanted these weddings to seal an offensive alliance that could have led the Nordic kingdoms to become involved in the Hundred Years' War against France. Margaret followed a consistent policy of not becoming involved in binding alliances and foreign wars, and therefore rejected the English proposals. However, although there was no double wedding, Erik married the 13-year-old Philippa, daughter of Henry IV of England and Mary de Bohun, at Lund on 26 October 1406, sealing a purely defensive alliance. For Erik's sister Catherine, a wedding was arranged with John, Count Palatine of Neumarkt. Margaret thus acquired a South German ally, who could be useful as a counterweight to the North German Princes and cities.\nDeath.\nIn 1412, Margaret tried to recover Schleswig, and thus entered a war with Holstein. Before that she had managed the recovery of Finland and Gotland. While winning the war, Margaret died suddenly on board her ship in Flensburg Harbor.\nIn October 1412, she set sail from Seeland in her ship. She attended several debates, which reportedly had brought matters to a state of promising forwardness. On retiring to her vessel though, with the intention of leaving the port, \"she was seized with sudden and violent illness\". Margaret apparently foresaw the end of her life, as she ordered thirty seven marks to be paid to the nearby monastery of Campen for a perpetual mass for her soul. Beyond this, there is no discussion in the historical record regarding her demise. She died on the night of 28 October 1412, the vigil of St. Simon and St. Jude. Possible scenarios that have been suggested include plague, shock from the death of Abraham Brodersson (whom 18th-century authors have alleged was the father of a daughter Margareta had, while 19th-century authors have blamed the story on a mistranslation), or poisoning by Erik.\nHer sarcophagus, made by the L\u00fcbeck sculptor Johannes Junge in 1423, is situated behind the high altar in Roskilde Cathedral, near Copenhagen. She had left property to the cathedral on the condition that Masses for her soul would be said regularly in the future. This was discontinued in 1536 during the Protestant Reformation, though a special bell is still rung twice daily in commemoration.\nAppearance and personality.\nShe has been described as a beautiful woman with dark hair, dark eyes, an intimidating gaze and the aura of absolute authority. She was highly energetic well into her old age, autocratic and indomitable, at the same time also described as wise, just, tactful, and kind. Hudson Strode writes \"Margaret, who, like St. Bridget, possessed the masculine quality of indomitability, was undoubtedly the strongest. No male public official ever worked harder at his job. She used her constructive ability, her diplomacy, and her force of will to make the Union a success and to maintain the royal prerogative.\"\nAmbiguities concerning titles.\nIn Denmark Margaret was called \"sovereign lady and lord and guardian of the entire kingdom of Denmark\" (Norway and Sweden later bestowed on her similar titles). This special, double-gendered title bestowed upon the holder the power and authority of a man (lord), of a woman (sovereign lady) and of the gender-neutral guardian. Later, when Erik was elected King of Norway in 1392, she renounced this title in Norway, and in 1396, when he was crowned as King of Denmark and Sweden, she stopped the use of this title altogether, although she continued as Regent.\nShe only styled herself Queen of Denmark in 1375, usually referring to herself as \"Margaret, by the grace of God, daughter of Valdemar King of Denmark\" and \"Denmark's rightful heir\" when referring to her position in Denmark. Her title in Denmark was derived from her father King Valdemar IV of Denmark. Others simply referred to her as the \"Lady Queen\", without specifying what she was queen of, but not so Pope Boniface IX, who in his letter on 9 September 1390 styled her \"our beloved daughter in Christ, Margaret, most excellent queen of Denmark, Sweden and Norway\". (\"Carissime in Christo filie Margarete Dacie Suecie et Norwegie regine illustri\".)\nWhen she married Haakon VI of Norway in 1363, he was co-King of Sweden, making Margaret briefly queen consort of Sweden and queen consort of Norway until Haakon's death. From 24 February 1389 to 28 October 1412, she was Queen of Denmark, Norway and Sweden and founder of the Kalmar Union, which united the Scandinavian countries for over a century. She acted as queen regnant of Denmark, although in those days it was not the Danish custom for a woman to reign.\nReputation and legacy.\nE.C. Otte writes in 1874, that \"[i]f Margaret could have been certain of being followed on the throne by rulers as able and just as she had been, this Act of the Union of Calmar might have worked for the good of the three kingdoms. For it was quite true, as the Queen said, that each one alone was a poor weak state, open to danger from every side, but that the three united would make a monarchy, strong enough to defy the attacks and schemes of the Hanse traders and all foes from the side of Germany, and would keep the Baltic clear of danger from foreigners. However no ruler came after Queen Margaret equal to her, as there had been none before her to be compared to her.\"\nAccording to Imsen, her political genius has never been contested, but her motives have always been the target of much debate. During the first half of the nineteenth century, she was usually depicted as an idealist who fought to counterbalance the German influence. After the defeat of Denmark by the Prussians in 1864, the image of Margaret the nationalist prevailed. Later she was increasingly regarded as a Machiavellist who primarily fought for her power and dynastic interests.\nIn Sweden, such a republican (opposed to monarchy) as Vilhelm Moberg lauded Margaret as adverse to warfare and called her the greatest monarch the Nordic countries ever had. Professor Kjell Kumlien wrote in 1949:\nShe made reality of political plans and aspirations which had previously been tried without nearly as much success by both Swedish and Danish kings. The reason why she succeeded must be sought in no small part in her own eminent political talent, distinguished by strength and endurance as well as flexible and winning negotiating skill. In an uncanny way, her person and deeds are united in the deeply felt communality of the Nordic kingdoms ...\nIn \"The Middle Ages: Dictionary of World Biography\", Volume 2, McFadden opines that \"Margaret's achievement at a time when all Scandinavia was being threatened by German cultural and economic domination was to unite the kingdoms and not only hold back the Germans but also regain lands lost to the south. At the time of her death, the Scandinavian Union was by far the most powerful force in the Baltic; it was also the second largest accumulation of European territory under a single sovereign.\"\nHenrik O. Lunde writes that she was \"the most far-sighted ruler in Scandinavia in the pre-Vasa period\". Lunde remarks that the reason she united Scandinavia was that she wanted to end the continual warfare between Scandinavian states. Thomas Heeb\u00f8ll-Holm writes that she created the third Danish empire, which was preceded by those of Cnut the Great and Valdemar I.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 2021 semi-fictional film \"\" (Danish: ) tells the story of her reign, especially the creation of the Nordic Union army, and speculates about how she dealt with False Olaf.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58727", "revid": "1095935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58727", "title": "Alum", "text": "Family of double sulfate salts of aluminium\nAn alum () is a type of chemical compound, usually a hydrated double sulfate salt of aluminium with the general formula (SO4)2\u00b712\u202fH2O, such that X is a monovalent cation such as potassium or ammonium. By itself, \"alum\" often refers to potassium alum, with the formula KAl(SO4)2\u00b712\u202fH2O. Other alums are named after the monovalent ion, such as sodium alum and ammonium alum.\nThe name \"alum\" is also used, more generally, for salts with the same formula and structure, except that aluminium is replaced by another trivalent metal ion like chromiumIII, or sulfur is replaced by another chalcogen like selenium. The most common of these analogs is chrome alum KCr(SO4)2\u00b712\u202fH2O.\nIn most industries, the name \"alum\" (or \"papermaker's alum\") is used to refer to aluminium sulfate, Al2(SO4)3, which is used for most industrial flocculation766 (the variable n is an integer whose size depends on the amount of water absorbed into the alum). For medicine, the word \"alum\" may also refer to aluminium hydroxide gel used as a vaccine adjuvant.\nHistory.\nAlum found at archaeological sites.\nThe western desert of Egypt was a major source of alum substitutes in antiquity. These evaporites were mainly FeAl2(SO4)4\u00b722\u202fH2O, MgAl2(SO4)4\u00b722\u202fH2O, NaAl(SO4)2\u00b76\u202fH2O, MgSO4\u00b77H2O and Al2(SO4)3\u00b717\u202fH2O. \nThe Ancient Greek Herodotus mentions Egyptian alum as a valuable commodity in \"The Histories\".\nThe production of potassium alum from alunite is archaeologically attested on the island Lesbos.\nThe site was abandoned during the 7th\u00a0century\u00a0CE, but dates back at least to the 2nd\u00a0century\u00a0CE. Native \"alumen\" from the island of Melos appears to have been a mixture mainly of alunogen (Al2(SO4)3\u00b717\u202fH2O) with potassium alum and other minor sulfates.\nAlumen in Pliny and Dioscorides.\nA detailed description of a substance termed \"alumen\" occurs in the Roman Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History\".\nBy comparing Pliny's description with the account of \"stypteria\" (\u03c3\u03c4\u03c5\u03c0\u03c4\u03b7\u03c1\u03af\u03b1) given by Dioscorides, it is obvious the two are identical. Pliny informs us that a form of \"alumen\" was found naturally in the earth, and terms it \"salsugoterrae\".\nPliny wrote that different substances were distinguished by the name of \"alumen\", but they were all characterised by a certain degree of astringency, and were all employed for dyeing and medicine. Pliny wrote that there is another kind of alum that the ancient Greeks term \"schiston\", and which \"splits into filaments of a whitish colour\". From the name \"schiston\" and the mode of formation, it seems that this kind was the salt that forms spontaneously on certain salty minerals, as alum slate and bituminous shale, and consists mainly of sulfates of iron and aluminium. One kind of \"alumen\" was a liquid, which was apt to be adulterated; but when pure it had the property of blackening when added to pomegranate juice. This property seems to characterize a solution of ironII sulfate in water; a solution of ordinary (potassium) alum would possess no such property. Contamination with iron sulfate was greatly disliked as this darkened and dulled dye colours. In some places the iron sulfate may have been lacking, so the salt would be white and would be suitable, according to Pliny, for dyeing bright colors.\nPliny describes several other types of alumen but it is not clear as to what these minerals are. The \"alumen\" of the ancients, then, was not always potassium alum, not even an alkali aluminum sulfate.\nAlum described in medieval texts.\nAlum and green vitriol (iron sulfate) both have sweetish and astringent taste, and they had overlapping uses. Therefore, through the Middle Ages, alchemists and other writers do not seem to have distinguished the two salts accurately. In the writings of the alchemists we find the words \"misy\", \"sory\", and \"chalcanthum\" applied to either compound; and the name \"atramentum sutorium\", which one might expect to belong exclusively to green vitriol, applied indiscriminately to both.\nAlum was the most common mordant (substance used to set dyes on fabrics) used by the dye industry, especially in Islamic countries, during the middle ages. It was the main export of the Chad region, from where it was transported to the markets of Egypt and Morocco, and then to Europe. Less significant sources were found in Egypt and Yemen.\nModern understanding of the alums.\nDuring the early 1700s, G. E. Stahl claimed that reacting sulfuric acid with limestone produced a sort of alum. The error was soon corrected by Johann Heinrich Pott and Andreas Sigismund Marggraf, who showed that the precipitate obtained when an alkali is poured into a solution of alum, namely alumina, is quite different from lime and chalk, and is one of the ingredients in common clay.\nMarggraf also showed that perfect crystals with properties of alum can be obtained by dissolving alumina in sulfuric acid and adding potash or ammonia to the concentrated solution.76631\u201340 In 1767, Torbern Bergman observed the need for potassium or ammonium sulfates to convert aluminium sulfate into alum, while sodium or calcium would not work.766\nThe composition of common alum was determined finally by Louis Vauquelin in 1797. As soon as Martin Klaproth discovered the presence of potassium in leucite and lepidolite,\nVauquelin demonstrated that common alum is a double salt, composed of sulfuric acid, alumina, and potash. In the same journal volume, Chaptal published the analysis of four different kinds of alum, namely, Roman alum, Levant alum, British alum, and an alum manufactured by himself, confirming Vauquelin's result.\nProduction.\nSome alums occur as minerals, the most important being alunite.\nThe most important alums \u2013 potassium, sodium, and ammonium \u2013 are produced industrially. Typical recipes involve combining aluminium sulfate and the sulfate monovalent cation. The aluminium sulfate is usually obtained by treating minerals like alum schist, bauxite and cryolite with sulfuric acid.767\nTypes.\nAluminium-based alums are named by the monovalent cation. Unlike the other alkali metals, lithium does not form alums; a fact attributed to the small size of its ion.\nThe most important alums are\nChemical properties.\nAluminium-based alums have a number of common chemical properties. They are soluble in water, have a sweetish taste, react as acid by turning blue litmus to red, and crystallize in regular octahedra. In alums each metal ion is surrounded by six water molecules. When heated, they liquefy, and if the heating is continued, the water of crystallization is driven off, the salt froths and swells, and at last an amorphous powder remains.766 They are astringent and acidic.\nCrystal structure.\nAlums crystallize in one of three different crystal structures. These classes are called \u03b1-, \u03b2- and \u03b3-alums. The first X-ray crystal structures of alums were reported in 1927 by James M. Cork and Lawrence Bragg, and were used to develop the phase retrieval technique isomorphous replacement.\nSolubility.\nThe solubility of the various alums in water varies greatly, sodium alum being soluble readily in water, while caesium and rubidium alums are only slightly soluble. The various solubilities are shown in the following table.767\nAt temperature T, 100\u00a0parts water dissolve:\nUses.\nIndustrial processes.\nAluminium-based alums have been used since antiquity, and are still important for many industrial processes. The most widely used alum is potassium alum. It has been used since antiquity as a flocculant to clarify cloudy liquids, as a mordant (or binder) in dyeing, and in tanning. It is still widely used in water treatment, for medicine, for cosmetics (in deodorant), for food preparation (in baking powder and pickling), and to fire-proof paper and cloth.\nTopical Antihemorrhagic.\nAlum is used as a styptic (to stop bleeding) in styptic pencils available from pharmacists. Alum blocks, available from barber shops and gentlemen's outfitters, are used to stem bleeding from shaving nicks; and as an astringent.\nPowdered alum are also used in Southeast Asian traditional medicine for open wounds and sores.\nDeodorant.\nAn alum block can be used directly as a perfume-free deodorant (antiperspirant), and unprocessed mineral alum is sold in Indian bazaars for that purpose. Throughout Island Southeast Asia, potassium alum is most widely known as \"tawas\" and has numerous uses. It is used as a traditional antiperspirant and deodorant. The crystals are usually ground into a fine powder before use.\nBread.\nIn Britain alum has been used as a way of preserving flour and bleaching it. Bakers used small amounts to make the fine white manchet bread produced for the rich. In times of poor harvest, more alum was added. In 1758 the British government banned the use of alum in bread, although some bakers continued to use it and many people continued to demand white bread adulterated with alum.\nDuring the 19th century, alum was used along with other substances like plaster of Paris to adulterate certain food products, particularly bread. It was used to make lower-grade flour appear whiter, allowing the producers to spend less on whiter flour. Because it retains water, it would make the bread heavier, meaning that merchants could charge more for it in their shops. The amount of alum present in each loaf of bread could reach concentrations that would be toxic to humans and cause chronic diarrhoea, which could result in the death of young children.\nTextiles and paper.\nAlum is used as a mordant in traditional textiles; For traditional Japanese art, alum and animal glue were dissolved in water, forming a liquid known as \"dousa\" (), and used as an undercoat for paper sizing.\nJewellery.\nIn Indonesia and the Philippines, solutions of \"tawas\", salt, borax, and organic pigments were used to change the color of gold ornaments.\nAlum in the form of potassium aluminium sulphate or ammonium aluminium sulfate in a concentrated bath of hot water is regularly used by jewelers and machinists to dissolve hardened steel drill bits that have broken off in items made of aluminum, copper, brass, gold (any karat), silver (both sterling and fine) and stainless steel. This is because alum does not react chemically to any significant degree with any of these metals, but will corrode carbon steel. When heat is applied to an alum mixture holding a piece of work that has a drill bit stuck in it, if the lost bit is small enough, it can sometimes be dissolved or removed within hours.\nOther.\nIn the Philippines, alum crystals were also burned and allowed to drip into a basin of water by \"babaylan\" for divination. It is also used in other rituals in the animistic anito religions of the islands.\nRelated compounds.\nMany trivalent metals are capable of forming alums. The general form of an alum is SO4)22O, where X is an alkali metal or ammonium, Y is a trivalent metal, and n often is 12. The most important example is chrome alum, KCr(SO4)2\u00b712\u202fH2O, a dark violet crystalline double sulfate of chromium and potassium, was used in tanning.\nIn general, alums are formed more easily when the alkali metal atom is larger. This rule was first stated by Locke in 1902, who found that if a trivalent metal does not form a caesium alum, it neither will form an alum with any other alkali metal or with ammonium.\nSelenate-containing alums.\n\"Selenium\" or \"selenate alums\" are also known that contain selenium in place of sulfur in the sulfate anion, making selenate (SeO42-) instead. They are strong oxidizing agents.\nMixed alums.\nIn some cases, solid solutions of alums with different monovalent and trivalent cations may occur.\nOther hydrates.\nIn addition to the alums, which are dodecahydrates, double sulfates and selenates of univalent and trivalent cations occur with other degrees of hydration. These materials may also be referred to as alums, including the undecahydrates such as mendozite and kalinite, hexahydrates such as guanidinium [CH6N3+] and dimethylammonium [(CH3)2NH2+] \"alums\", tetrahydrates such as goldichite, monohydrates such as thallium plutonium sulfate and anhydrous alums (yavapaiites). These classes include differing, but overlapping, combinations of ions.\nOther double sulfates.\nA pseudo alum is a double sulfate of the typical formula 42(SO4)3\u00b722\u202fH2O, such that\n X is a divalent metal ion, such as cobalt (wupatkiite), manganese (apjohnite), magnesium (pickingerite) or iron (halotrichite or feather alum), and Y is a trivalent metal ion.\nDouble sulfates with the general formula 2SO42(SO4)3\u00b724\u202fH2O are also known, where X is a monovalent cation such as sodium, potassium, rubidium, caesium, thalliumI, ammonium, or (NH4+), methylammonium (CH3NH3+), hydroxylammonium (HONH3+) or hydrazinium (N2H5+) and Y is a trivalent metal ion, such as aluminium, chromium, titanium, manganese, vanadium, ironIII, cobalt, gallium, molybdenum, indium, ruthenium, rhodium, or iridium.\nAnalogous selenates also occur. The possible combinations of univalent cation, trivalent cation, and anion depends on the sizes of the ions.\nA Tutton salt is a double sulfate of the typical formula 2SO4\u00b7SO4\u00b76H2O, where X is a monovalent cation, and Y a divalent metal ion.\nDouble sulfates of the composition 2SO4SO4, such that X is a monovalent cation and Y is a divalent metal ion are referred to as langbeinites, after the prototypical potassium magnesium sulfate.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58728", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58728", "title": "Good (disambiguation)", "text": "Good is that which is to be preferred and prescribed; not evil.\nGood or Goods may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58730", "revid": "39191556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58730", "title": "Perth, Scotland", "text": "City in central Scotland\nPerth (; ) is a centrally located Scottish city, on the banks of the River Tay. It is the administrative centre of Perth and Kinross council area and is the historic county town of Perthshire. It had a population of about \n in 2020.\nThere has been a settlement at Perth since prehistoric times. It is a natural mound raised slightly above the flood plain of the Tay. The area surrounding the modern city is known to have been occupied ever since the arrival of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers. Nearby Neolithic standing stones and circles date from about 4000\u00a0BC, a period that followed the introduction of farming into the area. Close to Perth is Scone Abbey, which formerly housed the Stone of Scone (also known as the Stone of Destiny), on which the King of Scots were traditionally crowned. This enhanced the early importance of the city, and Perth became known as a \"capital\" of Scotland due to the frequent residence there of the royal court. Royal burgh status was given to the city by King William the Lion in the early 12th century. The city became one of the richest burghs in the country, engaging in trade with France, the Low Countries, and the Baltic countries, and importing goods such as Spanish silk and French wine.\nThe Scottish Reformation had a strong impact on the city: the Houses of the Greyfriars and Blackfriars, two of Perth's four monastic institutions at the time of the Reformation, were ransacked after a sermon given by John Knox in St John's Kirk in 1559. The 1701 Act of Settlement brought about Jacobite uprisings. The city was occupied by Jacobite supporters on three occasions: in 1689, 1715 and 1745. The founding of Perth Academy in 1760 helped to bring major industries to the city, including the production of linen, leather, bleach and whisky. Perth was fortuitously placed to become a key transport centre with the coming of the railways, and its first station was built in 1848.\nPerth has been known as \"The Fair City\" since the publication of the novel \"Fair Maid of Perth\" by Scottish writer Sir Walter Scott in 1828. During the later medieval period the city was also called St John's Toun or Saint Johnstoun by its inhabitants\u2014a reference to its principal church, which was dedicated to St John the Baptist. This name is preserved in the name of the city's football club, St Johnstone F.C. The city often refers to itself using the promotional nickname \"Gateway to the Highlands\", a reference to its location.\nToday, Perth serves as a retail centre for the surrounding area, and in 2018 the city was named \"Scotland's Food Town of 2018\" by the Scottish Food Awards. Following the decline of the local whisky industry, the city diversified its economy, building on its long-established presence in the insurance industry to increase its standing in the banking industry.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Perth\" derives from a Pictish word for 'wood' or 'copse', related to the Welsh , meaning 'hedge' or 'thicket'. During much of the later medieval period, it was known colloquially by its Scots-speaking inhabitants as \"St John's Toun\" or \"Saint Johnstoun\" because the church at the centre of the parish was dedicated to St John the Baptist. Perth was referred to as \"St John's ton\" up until the mid-1600s with the name \"Perthia\" being reserved for the wider area. At this time, \"Perthia\" became \"Perth Shyre\" and \"St John's ton\" became known as \"Perth\".\nPerth's Pictish name, and some archaeological evidence, indicate that there must have been a settlement here from earlier times, probably at a point where a river crossing or crossings coincided with a slightly raised natural mound on the west bank of the Tay (which at Perth flows north\u2013south), thus giving some protection for settlement from the frequent flooding. Finds in and around Perth show that it was occupied by the Mesolithic hunter-gatherers who arrived in the area more than 8,000 years ago. Nearby Neolithic standing stones and circles followed the introduction of farming from about 4000\u00a0BC, and a remarkably well preserved Bronze Age log boat dated to around 1000\u00a0BC was found in the mudflats of the River Tay at Carpow to the east of Perth.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nPerth developed from an initial plan of two parallel streets: High Street and South Street, linked by several vennels leading north and south. The names of these vennels have historic origins, and many\u2014such as Cow Vennel and Fleshers' Vennel\u2014recall the trades associated with their foundation. South Street was originally terminated at its eastern end by Gowrie House (site of today's Perth Sheriff Court). Upon its demolition in the early 19th century, direct access was granted to the river.\nThe presence of Scone two miles (3\u00a0km) northeast, the main royal centre of the Kingdom of Alba from at least the reign of Kenneth I (843\u2013858), and later the site of the major Augustinian abbey of the same name founded by Alexander I (1107\u20131124), enhanced Perth's early importance. Perth was considered the effective capital of Scotland, due to the frequent residence of the royal court. Royal burgh status was awarded to the city by King William the Lion in the early 12th century. During the 12th and 13th centuries, Perth was one of the richest trading burghs in the kingdom (along with such places as Berwick-upon-Tweed, Aberdeen and Roxburgh), a residence of numerous craftsmen, organised into guilds (the Hammermen and Glovers, for example). Perth also carried out an extensive trade with France, The Low Countries and the Baltic Countries with luxury goods being brought back in return, such as Spanish silk and French pottery and wine. The royal castle (on or near the site of the present multi-storey car park adjacent to the new council offices), was destroyed by a flood of the Tay in 1209, one of many that have afflicted Perth over the centuries. It was never rebuilt, and Perth was protected at this time only by partial walls and an inventive water system, Perth Lade, sourced from the River Almond, which divided and flowed to the north on one side and the west and south on the other, eventually joining the Tay.\nKing Edward I brought his armies to Perth in 1296, and with only a ditch for defence and little fortification, the city fell quickly. Stronger fortifications were quickly built by the English, and plans to wall the city took shape in 1304. They remained standing until Robert the Bruce's recapture of Perth in 1312. As part of a plan to make Perth a permanent English base within Scotland, Edward III of England made six monasteries in Perthshire and Fife pay for the construction of stone defensive walls, towers and fortified gates around the city in 1336. These defences were the strongest of any city in Scotland in the Middle Ages. The last remnant of the wall can be seen in Albert Close, near to the main entrance to the Royal George Hotel.\n15th\u201319th centuries.\nKing James I of Scotland was assassinated in Perth in 1437, by followers of Walter Stewart, Earl of Atholl, at Blackfriars church.\nIn May 1559, John Knox instigated the Scottish Reformation at grass-roots level with a sermon against 'idolatry' in the burgh kirk of St John the Baptist. An inflamed mob quickly destroyed the altars in the kirk, and attacked the Houses of the Greyfriars and Blackfriars, and the Carthusian Priory. Scone Abbey was sacked shortly afterwards. The regent of infant Mary, Queen of Scots, her mother Marie de Guise, was successful in quelling the rioting but presbyterianism in Perth remained strong. Perth played a part in the Covenanting struggle and Perth was sacked for two days by Royalist troops after the Battle of Tippermuir in 1644. In 1651, Charles II was crowned at nearby Scone Abbey, the traditional site of the investiture of Kings of Scots. That same year, Oliver Cromwell came to Perth following his victory in the Battle of Dunbar and established a fortified citadel on the South Inch, one of five occupation forts built to control Scotland. The restoration of Charles II was not without incident, and with the Act of Settlement in 1701, came the Jacobite uprisings. The city was occupied by Jacobite soldiers in 1689, 1715 and 1745.\nIn 1760, Perth Academy was founded, and major industry came to the city, now with a population of 15,000. Linen, leather, bleached products and whisky were its major exports. Given its location, Perth was perfectly placed to become a key transport centre with the coming of the railways. The first railway station in Perth was built in 1848. Horse-drawn carriages became popular in the 1890s; they were quickly replaced by electric trams of Perth Corporation Tramways.\n20th and 21st centuries.\nDespite being a garrison city and undergoing major social and industrial developments during the First World War, Perth remained relatively unchanged. In 1829, with the settlement of the Swan River Colony, in Western Australia, Sir George Murray wanted it to be named Perth after the place where he was born. The ship \"Parmelia\" sailed to Australia to found the new settlement. The old Municipal Buildings were completed in 1881, although the Perth and Kinross District Council moved to the former head office of General Accident at No. 2 High Street in 1984.\nToday, Perth serves as a retail centre for the surrounding area. This includes a main shopping centre\u2014St John's Centre\u2014along with a pedestrianised high street and many independent and specialist shops. The city also has \"an embarrassing abundance of public houses\". Main employers in the city now include Aviva, Royal Bank of Scotland and Scottish and Southern Energy.\nGovernance.\nRepresentation.\nPerth forms part of the county constituency of Perth and Kinross-shire, electing one Member of Parliament (MP) to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom by the first past the post system. Pete Wishart of the Scottish National Party (SNP) is the MP for Perth and Kinross-shire.\nFor the purposes of the Scottish Parliament, Perth forms part of the constituencies of Perthshire North and Perthshire South and Kinross-shire. These two constituencies were created in 2011 as two of the nine constituencies within the Mid Scotland and Fife electoral region. Each constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system of election, and the region elects seven additional members to produce a form of proportional representation. Perthshire North is currently represented by John Swinney (SNP) and Perthshire South and Kinross-shire is currently represented by Jim Fairlie (SNP).\nJudicial system.\nPerth's Sheriff Court, on Tay Street, is a Category A listed building. The building was designed by London architect Sir Robert Smirke, built in 1819 and stands on the site of Gowrie House, the place where a plot to kill King James VI was hatched in 1600.\nPerth is also home to a large prison, HM Prison Perth.\nCity status.\nThe classic definition of Perth has been as a city. In the late 1990s, the UK Government and the devolved Scottish Executive re-examined the definition of a city and produced a list of approved cities, from which Perth was omitted. It was therefore considered to be a \"former city\", like Brechin and Elgin.\nYet road signs around the borders used the term \"The City of Perth\", and directional signs within indicated \"City Centre\". In June 2007, Alex Salmond, then the First Minister of Scotland, backed a campaign to confer city status on Perth, saying it should be granted \"at the next commemorative opportunity\". The local authority, Perth and Kinross, stated that the 800th anniversary of the city in 2009 should create \"a foundation for Perth to bid for formal city status\".\nPerth was one of the 26 bidders for city status to mark the Queen's Diamond Jubilee in 2012. On 14 March 2012, Perth's city status was successfully reinstated, along with Chelmsford and St Asaph. It became Scotland's seventh city. The Queen visited Perth on 6 July 2012, for what was the culmination of the Scottish leg of her Diamond Jubilee tour. Her previous visit to the city had been to open the Perth Concert Hall, in 2005.\nHeraldry.\nThe coat of arms of Perth shows a paschal lamb holding a saltire, within a royal tressure. The shield is borne on the breast of a double-headed eagle. The motto is \"pro lege rege et grege\" (Latin for \"for the law, king and people\").\nThe coat of arms dates back to at least the 14th century, and is first recorded, as described, on a seal of 1378. Red and silver are the colours of John the Baptist, the town's patron saint, and the lamb is his symbol. The double-headed eagle, originally a Roman symbol, may refer to a former Roman settlement called \"Bertha\" near where Perth now stands.\nThe double-headed eagle was adopted as the supporter of the arms of Perth and Kinross when that council area was created in 1975.\nDemography.\nPopulation.\nIn 1891, the population of Perth was 30,768. In 1901, it was 32,872, an increase of 2,104 in ten years. According to the 2022 Census for Scotland, ONS data for Perth and Kinross increased to 151,120.\nAccording to the 2001 UK Census, Perth had a total population of 43,450. A more recent population estimate of the city has been recorded as 44,820 in 2008. The demographic make-up of the population is much in line with the rest of Scotland. The age group from 30 to 44 forms the largest portion of the population (22%). The median age of males and females living in Perth was 37 and 40 years respectively, compared to 37 and 39 years for those in the whole of Scotland.\nTrends.\nThe place of birth of the city's residents was 95.42% United Kingdom (including 87.80% from Scotland), 0.52% Republic of Ireland, 1.18% from other European Union countries, and 1.88% from elsewhere in the world. The economic activity of residents aged 16\u201374 was 57.10% in full-time employment, 12.90% in part-time employment, 6.08% self-employed, 3.29% unemployed, 2.37% students with jobs, 2.84% students without jobs, 14.75% retired, 4.93% looking after home or family, 5.94% permanently sick or disabled, and 4.07% economically inactive for other reasons. Compared with the average demography of Scotland, Perth has low proportions of people born outside the European Union, but has both higher proportions born within the European Union and those over 75 years old.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the most common religion in the city. In Census 2011, over half of the population of the council area of Perth and Kinross stated that they belonged to one of the Christian denominations. The most popular denomination is the Church of Scotland, which is organised through the Presbytery of Perth. It has nine churches throughout the city. The largest of these is St John's Kirk, in St John's Place. The second most popular Christian denomination is the Roman Catholic Church, which has three churches in the city organised through the Diocese of Dunkeld. There is also St Mary's Monastery, at Kinnoull on the eastern edge of the city, which is home to a Redemptorist congregation. The Scottish Episcopal Church is organised through the Diocese of St Andrews, Dunkeld and Dunblane and has two churches in the city (St Ninian's Cathedral and Church of St. John the Baptist).\nThere are several other Christian churches in the city; these include the Methodist Church, Free Presbyterian Church of Scotland, the Elim Pentecostal Church, the Salvation Army and several smaller Protestant churches. There is also a Quaker community in the city, as well as a Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nThe Perth Islamic community meet at a mosque on Glasgow Road.\nThe number of adherents to these religions is in decline. In the 2011 census, almost 40% of respondents indicated that they did not adhere to any religion.\nGeography and climate.\nSituated at the southern extremity of a spacious and fertile plain, Perth itself is flat (as are the areas immediately to the north, east and west), but it is nestled between the following hills (includes distance from Perth and summit height):\nAs with most of the British Isles, Perth has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\") with cool summers and mild winters. The nearest Met Office weather station is at Strathallan, around from the centre of Perth.Temperatures extremes since 1960 have ranged from in January 1963 to in July 2022. However, a temperature of was recorded on 14 November 1919. As well as this, the temperature reached on 28 June 2018. The coldest temperature recorded in recent years is in December 2010. However, nearby Strathallan reported in February 2021. In an average year, the warmest day rises to around , and about four days exceed .\nEconomy.\nThe strength of Perth's economy lies in its diversity, with a balance of large companies, the public sector, a broad range of small and medium-sized enterprises and many self-employed business people. The development in renewable energy, insurance, manufacturing, leisure, health and transport is stimulating employment. The largest employer in the city is Perth and Kinross Council which employ 6,000 people. Other main employers include NHS Tayside, SSE plc, and Perth College UHI (part of the University of the Highlands and Islands). The leading international transportation company Stagecoach Group also has its global headquarters in the city.\nPerth was formerly headquarters of insurance firm General Accident; however, since General Accident merged with Norwich Union to form Aviva, the office has been primarily used as a call centre.\nPerth's city centre is situated to the west of the banks of the River Tay. The pedestrianised portion of the High Street, which runs from the junction of St John Street to Scott Street, is the main focus of the shopping area. The centre has a variety of major and independent retailers. The major retailers are largely based on the High Street, St John Street and in the St John's Centre. Independent retailers can be found on George Street, St John Street, Princes Street, Methven Street, the Old High Street and Canal Street. A \u00a33\u00a0million pound project for the High Street and King Edward Street provided new seating, lighting and the laying of natural stone in 2010. A retail park, constructed in 1988, exists to the north-west of the city centre on St Catherine's Road, and provides eight purpose-built units.\nMcEwens department store was in business on St John's Street for almost 150 years. It closed in March 2016.\nBefore the credit crisis, Perth's economy was growing at 2.6% per year, considerably above the Scottish average of 2.1%. Since the credit crisis, growth has slowed considerably, though still remained above the Scottish average.\nThe Perth economy is ranked in the Top 10 enterprising demographics in Scotland, with an average of 42.6 registered enterprises per 10,000 residents putting it well above the Scottish average of 30.1.\nCulture.\nPerth Art Gallery, at the eastern end of George Street, is recognised as one of the oldest provincial museums in Scotland. Another museum, known as the Fergusson Gallery, has, since 1992, been located in the Category A listed former Perth Water Works building on Tay Street. This contains the major collection of the works of the artist John Duncan Fergusson.\nPerth Theatre opened in 1900.\nIt underwent a \u00a310\u00a0million redevelopment to house new studio space, a youth theatre, construction workshop and a series of front of house performance areas and new main entrance from Mill Street in addition to the main focus of the conservation and restoration of the historic Victorian auditorium.\nPerth Concert Hall, which opened in 2005, was built on the site of the former Horsecross Market.\nPerth City Hall has been used as a venue for several high-profile concerts over the years, including Morrissey, as well as Conservative Party conferences. The hall now contains Perth Museum.\nThe new-wave band Fiction Factory formed in Perth, and had some success with their hit \"(Feels Like) Heaven\" in 1984. The song, which reached number six in the charts, was their biggest hit.\nThe Perth Festival of the Arts is an annual collection of art, theatre, opera and classical music events in the city. The annual event lasts for a couple of weeks and is usually held in May. In recent years, the festival has broadened its appeal by adding comedy, rock and popular music acts to the bill. Perth also has a number of twin cities around the world. These are: Aschaffenburg in Germany, Bydgoszcz in Poland, Haikou, Hainan in China, Perth in Australia, Perth in Canada, Pskov in Russia and Cognac in France.\nPerth has hosted the National M\u00f2d in 1896, 1900, 1924, 1929, 1947, 1954, 1963, 1980 and 2004.\nLandmarks and tourism.\nThe Category A listed St John's Kirk, on St John's Place, is architecturally and historically one of the most significant buildings in Perth. The settlement of the original church dates back to the mid-12th century. During the middle of the 12th century, the church was allowed to fall into disrepair, when most of the revenues were used by David I to fund Dunfermline Abbey. The majority of the present church was constructed between 1440 and 1500. Though much altered, its tower and lead-clad spire continue to dominate the Perth skyline. The Church has lost its medieval south porch and sacristy, and the north transept was shortened during the course of the 19th century during street-widening. A rare treasure, a unique survival in Scotland, is a 15th-century brass candelabrum or chandelier, imported from the Low Countries. The survival of this object is all the more remarkable as it includes a statuette of the Virgin Mary. It is thought to have been hung in the Skinner's aisle. An inventory of 1544 lists another hanging brass chandelier as an ornament of the altar of Our Lady.\nAnother Category A listed building is the former King James VI Hospital, built in 1750 on the site of the former Perth Charterhouse, which was burned in 1559 during the Reformation.\nThe spire of Category B listed St Paul's Church, which was completed in 1807 is a major focus point around St Paul's Square at the junction of Old High Street and North Methven Street. The development of the church led to an expansion of the city to the west. Pullar House on Mill Street was once used by J. Pullar and Sons dyeworks, the largest industry in Perth at one time, and has since been converted into office use for Perth and Kinross Council in 2000.\nThe Category B listed Fair Maid's House, in North Port, is the oldest surviving secular building in Perth. Built on the foundations of previous buildings, parts of the structure date back from 1475. The building was used as the home of Catherine Glover in the novel \"The Fair Maid of Perth\", which was written by Sir Walter Scott in 1828.\nAnother bard, Robert Burns, is memorialised with a small statue in a niche above the Robert Burns Lounge Bar, at 5 County Place. It is the work of a local sculptor William Anderson, the son of noted painter David Anderson, who was active in the mid-19th century. The statue was installed in 1854 on what was then the sculptor's house. It was later moved to North Methven Street until 1886, then to the 1 Albert Place home of photographer John Henderson, but was returned after Anderson's death.\nThe nearby City Mills, built to serve Perth Lade from the River Almond, was once the site of industry until the early 19th century. Only the Upper and Lower City Mills survive to this day. The Category A listed Lower City Mills, which date from 1805, were used for barley and oatmeal, while the Category A listed Upper Mills, of 1792, consisted of two wheat mills connected to a granary.\nConservation.\nAfter Perth reclaimed its city status in 2012, Perth and Kinross Heritage Trust began the process of conserving the city's historic buildings and structures via the Perth City Heritage Fund (PCHF), which is funded by the Scottish Government. Its aim is to encourage owners of historic buildings within the bounds of Perth Central and Kinnoull Conservation Areas by assisting their repair and renovation work with grants.\nFunds have, thus far, been received in three phases: 2012\u20132015, 2015\u20132018, and (the most recent) 2018\u20132021. Funding for the latter part of 2021 and 2022 is expected.\nPhases 1 and 2 provided just over \u00a31 million of grant assistance for almost fifty projects.\nMedia.\nThe sole newspaper based in the city is the \"Perthshire Advertiser\", owned by Trinity Mirror. The newspaper's offices are based in Watergate, but the newspaper itself is printed in Blantyre. It outlasted both the \"Perthshire Courier\" (established in 1809) and the \"Perthshire Constitutional and Journal\" (1832).\nTelevision signals are received from the Angus TV transmitter and the local relay TV transmitter situated south east of the city.\nOne of Britain's most successful radio stations, Hospital Radio Perth, broadcasts to Perth Royal Infirmary and Murray Royal Hospital. The Hospital Broadcasting Association have awarded Hospital Radio Perth the title of \"British Station of the Year\" in 1996, 1997, 1999 and 2007.\nThe city is also served by nation-wide stations, BBC Radio Scotland, Greatest Hits Radio Tayside and Fife and Original 106 (formerly Wave FM).\nSport and recreation.\nSt Johnstone is the city's professional football club. The team play in the Scottish Premiership at their home ground, McDiarmid Park, in the Tulloch area of the city. They won the Scottish Cup for the first time in 2014, after 130 years without a major trophy. There are also two East of Scotland League clubs based in Perth \u2013 Jeanfield Swifts and Kinnoull.\nThe senior rugby team, Perthshire RFC, play their games on the North Inch in Scottish National League Division Three. Between 1995 and 1998, professional side Caledonia Reds played some of their home matches at McDiarmid Park before they merged with Glasgow Warriors.\nOn the western edge of the North Inch is Bell's Sports Centre. Prior to the building of the Greenwich Dome, it was the largest domed building in Britain.\nPerth Leisure Pool, to the west of the railway station on the Glasgow Road, is the city's swimming centre. The modern leisure pool complex was built in the mid-1980s to replace the traditional public swimming baths (established 1887), which used to sit just off the Dunkeld Road.\nAdjacent to Perth Leisure Pool is the Dewar's Centre, which includes an eight-lane ice rink. It has long been a main centre of curling in Scotland, and many top teams compete in this arena and many major events are held here each year. Curling is available from September to April annually. There is an indoor bowling hall, hosting major competitions. Historically, Perth had a successful ice hockey team, Perth Panthers, who played at the old ice rink on Dunkeld Road. The rink at Dewars is the wrong shape for ice hockey, so when the team reformed in 2000 for two seasons, they played their home games at Dundee Ice Arena. The Dewar's distillery that stood on the site until 1988 was one of the country's \"big three\" blenders. Its location was chosen due to its proximity to the General Railway Station, whose tracks behind the western side of the building. The distillery was one of the city's largest employers.\nIn 2024, plans were announced to close Perth Leisure Pool, Bell's Sports Centre and Dewar's Centre and replace them with a single new sports centre. This new facility would not include an ice rink.\nPerth hosts Scotland's largest volleyball event every May \u2013 the Scottish Open Volleyball Tournament. There is a highly competitive indoor competition held inside Bell's Sports Centre alongside both a competitive and fun outdoor event played on the North Inch. Teams competing traditionally camp alongside the outdoor courts with the campsite being administered by local cadets. The Scottish Volleyball Association's annual general meeting is also held at the same time as the tournament.\nParks and gardens.\nPerth is also home to two main parks, namely the North Inch and South Inch (the word \"Inch\" being an anglicisation of the Gaelic \"innis\" meaning island or meadow). The Inches were given to the city in 1377 by King Robert III.\nThe North Inch is directly north of the city centre, bordered to the south by Charlotte Street and Atholl Street and to the southwest by Rose Terrace, named for Rose Anderson, the wife of Thomas Hay Marshall, whose house was on the Atholl Street corner. A recreational path circumnavigates the entire park.\nThe River Tay bounds it to the east. A little farther to the north is the Inch's eponymous golf course.\nSituated south of the North Inch, directly across the city centre, is the South Inch. The Inches are linked by Tay Street, which runs along the western banks of the Tay. The South Inch is bordered to the north by Marshall Place and Kings Place; to the east by Shore Road; to the south by South Inch View and South Inch Terrace; and to the west by the rear of the houses on St Leonards Bank. The Edinburgh Road passes through its eastern third. The South Inch offers various activities, including bowling, an adventure playground, a skate park, and, in the summer, a bouncy castle. The Perth Show takes place annually on the section of the Inch between the Edinburgh Road and Shore Road.\nAnother park in the city, Norie-Miller Walk, is located across the Tay.\nEducation.\nThere are many primary schools in Perth, while secondary education includes Perth Academy, Perth Grammar School, Perth High School, St John's Academy and Bertha Park High School.\nFurther and higher education, including a range of degrees, is available through Perth College UHI, one of the largest partners in the University of the Highlands and Islands. It ran a network of learning centres across the area, in Blairgowrie, Crieff, Kinross and Pathways in Perth, although these closed in 2019. In 2000, an interdisciplinary Centre for Mountain Studies was established at the college. It also owns AST (Air Service Training) which delivers a range of aircraft engineering courses.\nTransport.\nRoad.\nPerth remains a key transport hub for journeys by road and rail throughout Scotland. The M90 motorway, the northernmost motorway in Great Britain, runs south from the city to Edinburgh; the A9 road connects it to Stirling and Glasgow in the south west and Inverness in the north. Other major roads serving the city include the A85 to Crieff and Crianlarich (and ultimately Oban), the A93 to Blairgowrie and Braemar, the A94 to Coupar Angus and Forfar and the A90 to Dundee and Aberdeen.\nThe city itself was bypassed to the south and east by the M90 in the 1970s and to the west by the A9 in 1986. The M90, A9 and A93 all meet at Broxden Junction, one of the busiest and most important road junctions in Scotland. Uniquely, all seven of Scotland's cities are signposted from here: Glasgow and Stirling via the A9 southbound, Dundee and Aberdeen via the A90, Edinburgh via the M90, Inverness via the A9 northbound, and Perth itself via the A93 through the city centre. The final part of the M90 included the construction of the Friarton Bridge in 1978 to facilitate travel to Dundee and Aberdeen to the east of the city, finally removing inter-city traffic from the centre. The bridge is the most northerly piece of the motorway network in the United Kingdom.\nThere are four bridges that cross the River Tay in Perth. The northernmost structure is Smeaton's Bridge (also known as Perth Bridge and, locally, the Old Bridge), completed in 1771 and widened in 1869, which carries the automotive and pedestrian traffic of West Bridge Street (the A85). A former tollbooth building, on the southern side of the bridge at the Bridgend end of the bridge, is a category C listed building dating from around 1800. It was J. S. Lees Fish &amp; Poultry Shop later in its life.\nNext, some downstream, is Queen's Bridge, which also carries vehicular and pedestrian traffic, this time of South Street and Tay Street. Queen's Bridge was completed in 1960, replacing the old Victoria Bridge (1902\u20131960), and was opened by Queen Elizabeth II in October of that year. The third bridge in the centre of Perth is the Tay Viaduct, a single-track railway bridge carrying trains to and from the railway station, to the north-west. It was completed in 1863. A pedestrian walkway lies on its northern side. Finally, the southernmost crossing of the Tay inside Perth's boundary is the aforementioned Friarton Bridge.\nThe construction of a fifth bridge farther upstream (north) from the existing bridges was being considered in 2012.\nRail.\nPerth railway station has regular services to Fife and Edinburgh Waverley via the Forth Bridge, east to Dundee and Aberdeen, south to Stirling and Glasgow Queen Street, and north to Inverness; however, as a result of the Beeching Axe, the main line to Aberdeen through Strathmore via Coupar Angus and Forfar was closed to passenger traffic in 1967; Aberdeen services have since taken the less direct route via Dundee. Similarly, the direct main line to Edinburgh via Glenfarg, Dunfermline and the Forth Bridge was abandoned in 1970 in favour of the longer, more circuitous route via Stirling. This closure was not recommended by Beeching, but allowed the M90 motorway to be built on top of the former the railway alignment in the Glenfarg area. In 1975, most Edinburgh trains were re-routed via Ladybank and the Forth Bridge, with some improvement in journey time.\nThere are two direct trains per day to London: the \"Highland Chieftain\", operated by London North Eastern Railway to King's Cross (from Inverness), and the \"Caledonian Sleeper\", which runs overnight to Euston.\nA railway station also existed on Princes Street, which was built in the late 18th century to connect the Edinburgh Road to the new bridge. Perth Princes Street railway station opened on 24 May 1847 on the Dundee and Perth Railway. It closed to regular passenger traffic on 28 February 1966. The line passes behind Marshall Place and is carried over cross streets by several bridges.\nMuirton railway station's existence, on the Scottish Midland Junction Railway, was relatively brief, from 1936 to 1959.\nBus.\nLocal buses are run by Stagecoach East Scotland. Inter-city bus travel is made from Leonard Street bus station and connects to most major destinations in Scotland. The budget Megabus service is centred on Broxden Junction, outside the city centre, and runs direct buses to Scotland's largest cities plus Manchester and London in England. In addition, there is a park and ride service from the services at Broxden to the city centre.\nAir.\nPerth has a small airport. Although it is named Perth Airport, it is located at New Scone, north-east of the city. There are no commercial flights out of this airport, but it is used by private aircraft and for pilot training. The nearest major commercial airports are Edinburgh Airport, Glasgow Airport and Aberdeen Airport. Dundee Airport, which lies around 20 miles (32\u00a0km) away, is also an option, the latter is served by Loganair.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people, military units, organisations, and groups have received the Freedom of the City of Perth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58731", "revid": "2102840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58731", "title": "Peter Naur", "text": "Danish computer science pioneer\nPeter Naur (25 October 1928 \u2013 3 January 2016) was a Danish computer science pioneer and 2005 Turing Award winner. He is best remembered as a contributor, with John Backus, to the Backus\u2013Naur form (BNF) notation used in describing the syntax for most programming languages. He also contributed to creating the language ALGOL 60.\nBiography.\nNaur began his career as an astronomer for which he received his Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degree in 1957, but his encounter with computers led to a change of profession. From 1959 to 1969, he was employed at Regnecentralen, the Danish computing company, while at the same time giving lectures at the Niels Bohr Institute and the Technical University of Denmark. From 1969 to 1998, Naur was a professor of computer science at University of Copenhagen.\nHe was a member of the International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) IFIP Working Group 2.1 on Algorithmic Languages and Calculi, which specified, supports, and maintains the languages ALGOL 60 and ALGOL 68. Between the years 1960 and 1993 he was a member of the editorial board for \"BIT Numerical Mathematics\", a journal focused on numerical analysis.\nNaur's main areas of inquiry were design, structure, and performance of computer programs and algorithms. He also pioneered in software engineering and software architecture. In his book \"Computing: A Human Activity\" (1992), which is a collection of his contributions to computer science, he rejected the formalist school of programming that views programming as a branch of mathematics. He did not like being associated with the Backus\u2013Naur form (attributed to him by Donald Knuth) and said that he would prefer it to be called the \"Backus normal form\".\nNaur was married to computer scientist Christiane Floyd.\nNaur disliked the term \"computer science\" and suggested it be called \"datalogy\" or \"data science\". The former term has been adopted in Denmark and Sweden as \"datalogi\", while the latter term is now used for data analysis, including statistics and databases.\nSince the middle 1960s, computer science has been practiced in Denmark under Peter Naur's term \"datalogy\", the science of data processes. Starting at Regnecentralen and the University of Copenhagen, the Copenhagen Tradition of Computer Science has developed its own special characteristics by means of a close connection with applications and other fields of knowledge. The tradition is not least visible in the area of education. Comprehensive project activity is an integral part of the curriculum, thus presenting theory as an aspect of realistic solutions known primarily through actual experience. Peter Naur early recognized the particular educational challenges presented by computer science. His innovations have shown their quality and vitality also at other universities. There is a close connection between computer science training as it has been formed at Copenhagen University, and the view of computer science which characterized Peter Naur's research.\nIn later years, he was quite outspoken of the pursuit of science as a whole: Naur can possibly be identified with the empiricist school, that tells that one shall not seek deeper connections between things that manifest themselves in the world, but keep to the observable facts. He has attacked both certain strands of philosophy and psychology from this viewpoint. He was also developing a theory of human thinking which he called \"Synapse-State Theory of Mental Life\".\nNaur won the 2005 Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) A.M. Turing Award for his work on defining the programming language ALGOL 60. In particular, his role as editor of the influential \"Report on the Algorithmic Language ALGOL 60\" with its pioneering use of BNF was recognized. Naur is the only Dane to have won the Turing Award.\nNaur died on 3 January 2016 after a short illness. His former home in Gentofte was subsequently owned by the sociologist Claire Maxwell.\nBibliography.\nNumbers refer to the bibliography published by E. Sveinsdottir and E. Fr\u00f8kj\u00e6r. Naur published a large number of articles and chapters on astronomy, computer science, issues in society, classical music, psychology, and education.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58732", "revid": "50722724", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58732", "title": "James I of Scotland", "text": "King of Scots from 1406 to 1437\nJames I (late July 1394 \u2013 21 February 1437) was King of Scots from 1406 until his assassination in 1437. The youngest of three sons, he was born in Dunfermline Abbey to King Robert III and Annabella Drummond. His eldest brother David, Duke of Rothesay, died under suspicious circumstances while detained by his uncle, Robert, Duke of Albany. James's other brother, Robert, died young. Concerns for James's safety deepened in the winter of 1405\u20131406 prompting plans to send him to France. In February 1406, James took refuge in the castle of the Bass Rock in the Firth of Forth after his escort was attacked by supporters of Archibald, 4th Earl of Douglas. He remained there until mid-March when he boarded a vessel bound for France. On 22 March, an English vessel captured the ship and delivered James to Henry IV of England. The ailing Robert III died on 4 April and the 11-year-old James, now the uncrowned King of Scotland, would remain in captivity for eighteen years.\nJames was educated well during his imprisonment in England, where he was often kept in the Tower of London, Windsor Castle, and other English castles. He was generally well-treated and developed respect for English forms of governance. James joined Henry V of England in his military campaigns in France between 1420 and 1421. His cousin, Murdoch Stewart (Albany's son), an English prisoner since 1402, was traded for Henry Percy, 2nd Earl of Northumberland, in 1416. However, Albany refused to negotiate James's release. James married Joan Beaufort, daughter of the Earl of Somerset, in February 1424, shortly before his release in April. His return to Scottish affairs was not altogether popular due to his service to Henry V in France, sometimes against Scottish forces. Noble families faced increased taxes to fund the ransom payments, and to provide family hostages as security. James, who excelled in sports, literature, and music, aimed to impose law and order on his subjects but sometimes he applied such order selectively.\nTo secure his position in the Scottish court, James launched pre-emptive attacks on some of his nobles beginning in 1425 with his close kinsmen, the Albany Stewarts. This led to the execution of Duke Murdoch and his sons. In 1427 James summoned the Highland clans to a sitting of parliament in Inverness, and they came in great numbers. There, James unscrupulously had some murdered and imprisoned others, including Alexander, Lord of the Isles, along with his mother, Mariota, Countess of Ross. This betrayal effectively destroyed any peace he might have had with them. \nArchibald, 5th Earl of Douglas, was arrested in 1431, followed by George, Earl of March, in 1434. The fate of the hostages in England was ignored by Scotland's ruling elite and the repayment money was diverted into the construction of Linlithgow Palace and other schemes. In August 1436, James's siege of Roxburgh Castle failed, and he subsequently faced an ineffective attempt by Sir Robert Graham to arrest him at a general council. On the night of 20/21 February 1437, James was assassinated in Perth during a failed coup by his uncle Walter Stewart, Earl of Atholl. Queen Joan, though wounded, escaped the attackers and reached Edinburgh Castle to be reunited with her son, the new King James II.\nPrince and Steward of Scotland.\nJames was probably born in late July 1394 at Dunfermline Abbey, 27 years after the marriage of his parents, Robert III and Annabella Drummond. It was also at Dunfermline under his mother's care that James would have spent most of his early childhood. He was seven years old when his mother died in 1401, and a year later his elder brother David, Duke of Rothesay, was probably murdered by their uncle Robert Stewart, Duke of Albany, after being held at Albany's Falkland Castle. James, now heir to the throne, was the only barrier to the Albany Stewarts' royal ambitions. In 1402 Albany and his close ally Archibald, 4th Earl of Douglas, were absolved of Rothesay's death allowing Albany's reappointment as King's Lieutenant.\nAlbany rewarded Douglas for his support by allowing him to resume hostilities with England but their fortunes suffered a serious reversal in September 1402 when English troops defeated their large army at the Battle of Homildon Hill. Numerous Scottish nobles and their followers were captured, including Douglas himself, Albany's son Murdoch, and the earls of Moray, Angus and Orkney. 1402 also saw the death of Rothesay, that of Alexander Leslie, Earl of Ross and Malcolm Drummond, Lord of Mar. This power vacuum was inevitably filled by individuals who were not involved in national politics. In the years between 1402 and 1406, the northern earldoms of Ross, Moray and Mar were without adult leadership and with Murdoch Stewart, the justiciar for the territory north of the Forth in an English prison, Albany found himself reluctantly having to ally with his brother the Earl of Buchan, and Buchan's son, Alexander, to counter the ambitions of the Lord of the Isles. Douglas's absence allowed King Robert's allies Henry Sinclair, Earl of Orkney, and Sir David Fleming of Biggar to become the main political force in the Lothians and Scottish Marches.\nIn December 1404 the king granted the royal Stewart lands in the west (Ayrshire and around the Firth of Clyde), to James in regality, protecting them from outside interference and providing the prince with a territorial centre should the need arise. Yet in 1405, James was under the protection and tutelage of Bishop Henry Wardlaw of St Andrews on the country's east coast. The animosity of the Douglas affinity was intensifying due to Orkney's and Fleming's expanding influence in border politics and relations with England. Although a decision to send the young prince to France and out of Albany's reach was taken in the winter of 1405\u20131406, James's departure from Scotland was unplanned. In February 1406 Bishop Wardlaw released James to Orkney and Fleming who, with their large force of Lothian adherents, proceeded into hostile Douglas east Lothian. James's custodians may have been displaying royal approval to further their interests in Douglas country. This provoked a fierce response from James Douglas of Balvenie and his supporters who, at a place called Long Hermiston Muir, engaged with and killed Fleming while Orkney and James escaped to the comparative safety of the Bass Rock islet in the Firth of Forth. They endured more than a month there before boarding the France-bound \"Maryenknyght\", a ship from Danzig. On 22 March 1406, the ship was captured by an English vessel that was under the partial ownership of English politician Hugh Fenn; the vessel's crew delivered James to Henry IV of England, who kept him as a hostage. Robert III was at Rothesay Castle when he learned of his son's capture and he died soon after, on 4 April 1406, and was buried in the Stewart foundation abbey of Paisley.\nKing in captivity.\nJames, now the uncrowned King of Scots, began what proved to be his 18-year period as a hostage while, simultaneously, Albany transitioned from lieutenant to governor. Albany took James's lands under his control, depriving the king of income and any of the regalia of his position, and James was referred to in records as 'the son of the late king'. The king had a small household of Scots that included Henry Sinclair, Earl of Orkney, Alexander Seaton, the nephew of Sir David Fleming, and Orkney's brother John Sinclair, following the earl's return to Scotland. In time, James's household \u2014 now paid for by the English \u2014 changed from high-ranking individuals to less notable men. Henry IV treated the young James well, providing him with a good education.\nJames was ideally placed to observe Henry's methods of kingship and political control, having probably been admitted into the royal household upon reaching adulthood. James used personal visits from his nobles, coupled with letters to individuals, to maintain his visibility in his kingdom. Henry died in 1413 and his son, Henry V, immediately ended James's comparative freedom by initially holding him in the Tower of London along with the other Scottish prisoners. One of these prisoners was James's cousin, Murdoch Stewart, Albany's son, who had been captured in 1402 at the Battle of Homildon Hill. Initially held apart, from 1413 until Murdoch's release in 1415, they were together in the Tower and at Windsor Castle.\nBy 1420, James's standing at Henry V of England's court improved greatly; he ceased to be regarded as a hostage and more of a guest. James's value to Henry became apparent in 1420 when he accompanied Henry to France where his presence was used against the Scottish troops fighting alongside the French. Following the English victory at the siege of Melun, a town southeast of Paris, Scottish prisoners of war captured after the siege were hanged for treason against their king. James attended the coronation of Catherine of Valois on 23 February 1421 and was honoured by sitting immediately on the left of the queen at the coronation banquet. In March, Henry began a circuit of the important towns in England as a show of strength, and during this tour James was knighted on Saint George's Day. By July, the two kings were back campaigning in France where James, evidently approving of Henry's methods of kingship, seemed content to endorse his claims to the French crown. Henry appointed the Duke of Bedford and James as the joint commanders of the siege of Dreux on 18 July 1421 and, on 20 August, they received the surrender of the garrison. Henry died of dysentery on 31 August 1422 and, in September, James was part of the escort taking Henry's body back to London.\nThe regency council of the infant Henry VI of England was inclined to have James released as soon as possible. In the early months of 1423, their attempts to resolve the issue met with little response from the Scots, clearly influenced by the Albany Stewarts and adherents. Archibald, Earl of Douglas was an astute and adaptable power in Southern Scotland whose influence even eclipsed that of the Albany Stewarts. Despite his complicity in James's brother's death in Albany's castle in 1402, Douglas could still engage with the king. From 1421, Douglas had been in regular contact with James and they formed an alliance that was to prove pivotal in 1423. Although Douglas was the pre-eminent Scottish magnate, his position in the borders and Lothians was jeopardised \u2014 not only did he have to forcibly retake Edinburgh Castle from his own designated warden, but was very likely under threat from the Earls of Angus and March. In return for James's endorsement of Douglas's position in the kingdom, the earl was able to deliver his affinity in the cause of the king's homecoming. Also, the relationship between Murdoch\u2014now Duke of Albany following his father's death in 1420 \u2014 and his own appointee, Bishop William Lauder, seemed to be under strain, perhaps evidence of an influential grouping at odds with Murdoch's stance. Pressure from these advocates for the king almost certainly compelled Murdoch to agree to a general council in August 1423, where it was agreed that a mission should be sent to England to negotiate James's release. James's relationship with the House of Lancaster changed in February 1424 when he married Joan Beaufort, a cousin of Henry VI and the niece of Thomas Beaufort, 1st Duke of Exeter, and Henry, Bishop of Winchester. A ransom treaty of \u00a340,000 sterling (less a dowry remittance of 10,000 marks) was agreed at Durham on 28 March 1424, to which James attached his own seal. The king and queen, escorted by English and Scottish nobles, reached Melrose Abbey on 5 April and were met by Albany, who relinquished his governor's seal of office.\nPersonal rule.\nFirst acts.\nThroughout the 15th century, Scottish kings were financially constrained and James's reign was no exception. The Albany regency had been similarly limited, with Duke Robert's governorship fees remaining unpaid. Royal patronage ceased entirely following James's capture, leading to irregular forms of political favours, such as Albany allowing nobles like the Earl of Douglas and his brother James to withdraw funds from the customs. James's coronation at Scone on 21 May 1424 occurred against this backdrop. The coronation parliament of the Three Estates witnessed the king perform a knighthood ceremony for eighteen prominent nobles, including Alexander Stewart, Murdoch's son, likely aimed at fostering loyalty to the crown within the political community.\nThe parliament convened primarily to discuss issues related to ransom payments and heard James emphasize his authority as monarch. He successfully enabled legislation aimed at boosting crown income by revoking royal predecessors' and guardians' patronage. This move immediately impacted the earls of Douglas and Mar by preventing them from withdrawing large sums from customs.\nDespite this action, James still relied on noble support\u2014especially from Douglas\u2014and initially took a less confrontational approach. Walter Stewart, Albany's son, was an early exception to this. Walter was heir to the earldom of Lennox and had been in open revolt against his father in 1423 for not giving way to his younger brother Alexander for this title. He also made no secret of his disagreement with his father's allowing James's return to Scotland.\nJames had Walter arrested on 13 May 1424 and imprisoned on the Bass Rock\u2014a move likely favourable both for Murdoch\u2019s interests as well as James\u2019s. Although hesitant about taking action against other members of the Albany Stewarts while Murdoch's brother, John Stewart, Earl of Buchan, and Archibald, 4th Earl of Douglas, were fighting against English forces in France. Buchan was a leader with an international reputation and commanded the large Scottish army, but both he and Douglas were killed by English troops at the Battle of Verneuil in August 1424 and his army was crushed. The loss of Buchan, Douglas and the large fighting force left Murdoch exposed politically.\nA ruthless and acquisitive king.\nThe death of Douglas at Verneuil would also weaken his son Archibald, the fifth earl. On 12 October 1424, the king and Archibald met at Melrose Abbey, ostensibly to agree to the appointment of John Fogo, a monk of Melrose, to the abbacy. The meeting may also have been intended as an official acceptance of Douglas, but it signalled a change in the Black Douglas predominance vis-a-vis the crown and other nobles. Important Douglas allies died in France and some of their heirs realigned with rival nobles through blood ties, while at the same time, Douglas experienced a loosening of allegiances in the Lothians and, with the loss of his command over Edinburgh Castle, this all served to improve James's position. James continued to retain Black Douglas support, allowing him to begin a campaign of political alienation of Albany and his family. The king's bitterness, directed at Duke Murdoch, had its roots in the past\u2014Duke Robert was responsible for his brother David's death. Moreover, neither Robert nor Murdoch exerted themselves in negotiating James's release and must have left the king with the suspicion that they held aspirations for the throne. Buchan's lands did not fall to the Albany Stewarts but were forfeited to the crown, Albany's father-in-law, Duncan, Earl of Lennox, was imprisoned, and in December, the duke's main ally, Alexander Stewart, 1st Earl of Mar, settled his differences with the king. An acrimonious sitting of parliament in March 1425 precipitated the arrest of Murdoch, Isabella, his wife, and his son Alexander \u2014 of Albany's other sons, Walter was already in prison and James, his youngest, also known as James the Fat, escaped into the Lennox.\nJames the Fat led the men of Lennox and Argyll in open rebellion against the crown and may have been what the king needed to bring a charge of treason against the Albany Stewarts. Murdoch, his sons Walter and Alexander, and Duncan, Earl of Lennox were in Stirling Castle for their trial on 18 May at a specially convened parliament. An assize of seven earls and fourteen lesser nobles was appointed to hear the evidence that linked the prisoners to the rebellion in the Lennox. The four men were condemned, Walter on 24 May and the others on 25 May, and immediately beheaded in 'front of the castle'. James demonstrated a ruthless and avaricious side to his nature in the destruction of his close family, the Albany Stewarts, that yielded the three forfeited earldoms of Fife, Menteith and Lennox. An inquiry set up by James in 1424 into the dispersal of crown estates since the reign of Robert I exposed legal defects in several transactions where the earldoms of Mar, March and Strathearn, together with the Black Douglas lordships of Selkirk and Wigtown, were found to be problematic. Strathearn and March were forfeited in 1427 and 1435, respectively. Mar was forfeited in 1435 on the earl's death without an heir, which also meant that the lordships of Garioch and Badenoch reverted to the crown. James sought to boost his income further through taxation and succeeded in getting parliament to pass legislation in 1424 for a tax to go towards paying off the ransom \u2014 \u00a326,000 was raised but James sent only \u00a312,000 to England. By 1429, James stopped the ransom payments completely and used the remainder of the taxation income on cannons and luxury goods from Flanders. Following a fire in the castle of Linlithgow in 1425, funds were also diverted to the building of Linlithgow Palace, which continued until James died in 1437, and absorbed an estimated one-tenth of royal income.\nRelations with the church.\nJames asserted his authority over the Church as well as the nobility and regretted that King David I's benevolence towards the Church proved costly to his successors and that he was \"a sair sanct to the croun\". James also considered that the monastic institutions particularly needed improvement and that they should return to being strictly ordered communities. Part of James's solution was to create an assembly of overseeing abbots and followed this up by establishing a Carthusian priory at Perth to provide other religious houses with an example of internal conduct. He also sought to influence church attitudes to his policies by having his own clerics appointed to the bishoprics of Dunblane, Dunkeld, Glasgow and Moray.\nIn March 1425, James's parliament directed that all bishops must instruct their clerics to offer up prayers for the king and his family; a year later, parliament toughened up this edict, insisting that the prayers be given at every mass, under the sanction of a fine and severe rebuke. This same parliament legislated that every person in Scotland should \"be governed under the king's laws and statutes of this realm only\". From this, laws were enacted in 1426 to restrict the actions of prelates whether it was to regulate their need to travel to the Roman Curia or their ability to purchase additional ecclesiastical positions while there. In James's parliament of July 1427, it is evident that the statute being enacted was to limit the authority of church jurisdiction.\nOn 25 July 1431, the general council of the Church convened in Basel, but the initial full meeting did not take place until 14 December 1431, by which time Pope Eugene IV and the council were in complete disagreement. It was the council and not the pope who requested that James send representatives of the Scottish church, and it is known that two delegates \u2014 Abbot Thomas Livingston of Dundrenanan and John de Winchester, canon of Moray and a servant of the king \u2014 were in attendance in November and December 1432. In 1433 James, this time in response to a summons by the pope, appointed two bishops, two abbots and four dignitaries to attend the council. Twenty-eight Scottish ecclesiastics attended at intervals from 1434 to 1437, but the majority of the higher-ranking churchmen sent proxy attendees; Bishops John Cameron of Glasgow and John de Crannach of Brechin, however, attended in person, as did Abbot Patrick Wotherspoon of Holyrood. Even during the Basel general council, Pope Eugenius instructed his legate, Bishop Antonio Altan of Urbino, to meet with James to raise the issue of the king's controversial anti-barratry laws of 1426. The Bishop of Urbino arrived in Scotland in December 1436 and an apparent reconciliation between James and the papal legate had taken place by the middle of February 1437, but the events of 21 February, when James was assassinated, prevented the legate from completing his commission.\nHighland problem.\nThe king called a general council in July 1428 in Perth to raise funds for an expedition into the Highlands against the semi-autonomous Lord of the Isles. The council initially resisted granting James the funds \u2014 even with royal support from the powerful Earls of Mar and Atholl \u2014 but eventually gave in to the king's wishes. Although it seemed that an all-out attack on the Gaels of the north was not the king's intention, James had resolved to use a degree of force to strengthen royal authority. He told the assembly:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I shall go and see whether they have fulfilled the required service; I shall go I say and I will not return while they default. I will chain them so that they are unable to stand and lie beneath my feet.\nThe leaders of the Gaelic kindreds in the north and west were summoned by James ostensibly to a sitting of parliament in Inverness. Of those assembled the king arrested around 50 of them including Alexander, the third Lord of the Isles, and his mother, Mariota, Countess of Ross, around 24 August. A few were executed but the remainder, except Alexander and his mother, were quickly released.\nDuring Alexander's captivity, James attempted to split Clann D\u00f2mhnall \u2014 Alexander's uncle John M\u00f3r was approached by an agent of the king to take the clan leadership but he refused to have any dealings with the king while his nephew was held prisoner led to John M\u00f3r's arrest and murder by the king's agent.\nThe king's need for allies in the west and north led him to soften his approach towards the Lord of the Isles and, hoping that Alexander would now become a loyal servant of the crown, he was given his freedom. Alexander, probably under pressure from his close kinsmen Donald Balloch, John M\u00f3r's son, and Alasdair Carrach of Lochaber, led an attack on the castle and burgh of Inverness in the spring of 1429. The crisis deepened when a fleet from the Lordship was dispatched to bring James the Fat back from Ulster 'to convey him home that he might be king'. With James's intention to form an alliance with the Ulster O'Donnells of Tyreconnell against the MacDonalds, the English distrusted the Scottish king's motives and tried to bring James the Fat to England. Before he could become an active player, James the Fat died suddenly, releasing James to prepare for decisive action against the Lordship.\nThe armies met on 21 June in Lochaber and Alexander, suffering the defection of Clan Chattan (the MacKintoshes) and Clan Cameron, was heavily defeated. Alexander escaped probably to Islay but James continued his assault on the Lordship by taking the strongholds of Dingwall and Urquhart castles in July. The king pushed home his advantage when an army reinforced with artillery was dispatched to the Isles. Alexander probably realised that his position was hopeless and tried to negotiate terms of surrender but James demanded and received his total submission. From August 1429 the king delegated royal authority to Alexander Stewart, Earl of Mar to keep the peace in the north and west.\nThe Islesmen rose again in September 1431 and inflicted two important defeats on the king's men \u2014 Mar's army was beaten at Inverlochy and Angus Moray's in a fierce battle near Tongue in Caithness. This was a serious setback for James and his credibility was adversely affected.\nIn 1431, before the September uprising, the king had arrested two of his nephews, John Kennedy of Carrick and Archibald, Earl of Douglas, possibly because of a conflict between John and his uncle, Thomas Kennedy in which Douglas may have become involved. Douglas's arrest had raised tensions in the country and James acted to reduce the unrest by freeing the earl on 29 September \u2014 it was quite likely that the king made the earl's release conditional on support at the forthcoming parliament at Perth at which James intended to push for further funding for the campaign against the Lordship. Parliament was in no mood to allow James unconditional backing \u2014 he was allowed a tax to fund his Highland campaign but parliament retained full control over the levy. The rules parliament attached to the taxation indicated a robust stand against further conflict in the north and probably led to the turnaround that took place on 22 October when the king 'forgave the offence of each earl, namely Douglas and Ross [i.e. Alexander]'. For Douglas, this was a formal acknowledgement of his having been freed three weeks earlier, but for Alexander, this was a total reversal of crown policy towards the Lordship. Four summer campaigns against the Lordship were now officially at an end with James's wishes having effectively been blocked by parliament.\nForeign policy.\nJames's release in 1424 did not herald a new phase relationship in Anglo-Scottish relations. Contrary to the English council's hopes, the king emerged as a confident and independently-minded European monarch. The only substantive matters of contention between the two kingdoms were the payments due under the terms of James's release and the renewal of the truce that would expire in 1430. In 1428 after setbacks on the battlefield Charles VII of France sent his ambassador Regnault de Chartres, Archbishop of Rheims, to Scotland to persuade James to renew the Auld Alliance \u2014 the terms were to include the marriage of the princess Margaret to Louis, the dauphin of France, and a gift of the province of Saintonge to James. The ratification of the treaty by Charles took place in October 1428 and James, now with the intended marriage of his daughter into the French royal family and the possession of French lands, had his political importance in Europe boosted.\nThe effectiveness of the alliance with France had virtually ceased after Verneuil and its renewal in 1428 did not alter that \u2014 James adopted a much more non-aligned position with England, France and Burgundy while at the same time opening up diplomatic contacts with Aragon, Austria, Castile, Denmark, Milan, Naples and the Vatican.\nGenerally, Anglo-Scottish relations were relatively amicable and the truce, extended until 1436, helped the English position in France. Promises made in 1428 of a Scottish army to help Charles VII and the marriage of James's eldest daughter to the French king's son Louis were unrealised. James had to balance his European responses carefully, because England's key ally, the Duke of Burgundy, was in possession of the Low Countries, a major trading partner of Scotland causing James's support for France to be muted. The truce with England expired in May 1436, but James's perception of the Anglo-French conflict changed following a realignment of the combatants. The breakdown of the talks between England and France in 1435 precipitated an alliance between Burgundy and France, a request from France for Scottish involvement in the war, and for the fulfilment of the promised marriage of Princess Margaret to the Dauphin.\nIn the spring of 1436 Princess Margaret sailed to France, and in August Scotland entered the war, with James leading a large army to lay siege to the English enclave of Roxburgh Castle. The campaign was to prove pivotal, the \"Book of Pluscarden\" describes ' \"a detestable split and most unworthy difference arising from jealosy\" ' within the Scottish camp and the historian Michael Brown explains that a contemporary source has James appointing his young and inexperienced cousin, Robert Stewart of Atholl, as the constable of the host ahead of the experienced march wardens, the earls of Douglas and Angus. Brown explains that both earls possessed considerable local interests and that the effects of such a large army living off the land may have created resentment and hostility in the area. When the militant prelates of York and Durham, together with the Earl of Northumberland, took their forces into the marches to relieve the fortress, the Scots swiftly retreated\u2014a chronicle written a year later said that the Scots 'had fled wretchedly and ignominiously' \u2014 but what is certain is that the effects and manner of the defeat, together with the loss of their expensive artillery, was a major reversal for James both in terms of foreign policy and internal authority.\nDeath.\nBackground.\nWalter Stewart was the youngest of Robert II's sons and the only one not to have been provided with an earldom during his father's lifetime. Walter's brother, David, Earl of Strathearn and Caithness, had died before 5 March 1389 when his daughter Euphemia was first recorded as Countess of Strathearn. Walter, now guardian of his niece, administered Strathearn for the next decade and a half, during which time he aided his brother Robert, Earl of Fife and Guardian of Scotland, by enforcing law and order upon another brother, Alexander, lord of Badenoch \u2014 he again supported Robert (now Duke of Albany) against their nephew, David, Duke of Rothesay in 1402. Albany most likely engineered the marriage of Euphemia to one of his affinity, Patrick Graham, and, by doing so, ended Walter's involvement in Strathearn. Duke Robert, possibly to make up for the loss of the benefits of Strathearn, made Walter Earl of Atholl and Lord of Methven. In 1413, Graham was killed in a quarrel with his own principal servant in the earldom, John Drummond.\nThe Drummond kindred was close to Atholl and the Earl's renewed involvement in Strathearn as ward to Graham's son, despite strong opposition from Albany, hinted at Atholl's possible involvement in the murder. The bad blood now existing between Albany and Atholl led James on his return to Scotland in 1424 to ally himself with Earl Walter, his uncle. Atholl participated at the assize that sat over the 24/25 May 1425 trials which found the prominent members of the Albany Stewarts guilty of rebellion \u2014 their executions followed swiftly.\nJames granted Atholl the positions of Sheriff of Perth and Justiciar, as well as the earldom of Strathearn, but this, significantly, in life-use only, acts that confirmed Earl Walter's policing remit given by Albany, and his already effective grip on Strathearn. Atholl's elder son, David, had been one of the hostages sent to England as a condition of James's release and had died there in 1434; his younger son Alan died in the king's service at the Battle of Inverlochy in 1431. David's son Robert was now Atholl's heir and both were now in line to the throne after the young Prince James. James continued to show favour to Atholl and appointed his grandson Robert as his personal chamberlain, but by 1437 after a series of setbacks at the hands of James, the earl and Robert probably viewed the king's actions as a prelude to further acquisitions at Atholl's expense. Atholl's authority over the wealthy earldom of Strathearn was tenuous, and both he and Robert would have realised that Strathearn would have returned to the crown upon Atholl's death. This meant that Robert's holdings would have been the relatively impoverished earldoms of Caithness and Atholl and amounted to no more than what was in Earl Walter's possession in the years between 1406 and 1416.\nThe retreat from Roxburgh exposed the king to questions regarding his control over his subjects, his military competence and his diplomatic abilities yet he remained determined to continue with the war against England. Just two months after the Roxburgh fiasco, James called a general council in October 1436 to finance further hostilities through more taxation. The estates firmly resisted this and their opposition was articulated by their speaker Sir Robert Graham, a former Albany attendant but now a servant of Atholl. The council then witnessed an unsuccessful attempt by Graham to arrest the king resulting in the knight's imprisonment followed by banishment but James failed to see Graham's actions as part of an extended threat. In January 1437, Atholl received yet another rebuff in his own heartlands when James overturned the chapter of Dunkeld Cathedral whose nominee was replaced by the king's nephew and firm supporter, James Kennedy.\nConspiracy and regicide.\nThe reaction against the king at the general council had shown Atholl that not only was James on the back foot but his political standing had received a huge setback and may have convinced the earl that James's killing was now a viable course of action. Atholl had seen how assertive action by two of his brothers at different times had allowed them to take control of the kingdom and that as James's nearest adult relative, the earl must have considered that decisive intervention on his part at this time could prove to be equally successful.\nThe conspiracy against the king seems to have been heavily influenced by the Albany Stewarts' destruction in 1425. Their judicial killing and forfeiture of their lands influenced the servants who administered and depended on these estates for their living. Atholl, under whose service several of these disgruntled Albany men appear, filled the void created by this. Among them were the brothers Robert and Christopher Chambers, and Sir Robert Graham, who only three months before had tried to arrest the king at the Perth council. Even though Robert Chambers was a member of the Royal household, the old Albany ties were stronger.\nA general council was held in Atholl's heartland in Perth on 4 February 1437 and crucially for the conspirators, the king and queen had remained in the town at their lodgings in the Blackfriars monastery. In the evening of 20 February 1437 the king and queen were in their rooms and separated from most of their servants. Atholl's grandson and heir Robert Stewart, the king's chamberlain, allowed his co-conspirators \u2014 thought to number about thirty and led by Robert Graham and the Chambers brothers \u2014 access to the building. James was alerted to the men's presence, giving the king time to hide in a sewer tunnel, but with its exit recently blocked off to prevent tennis balls from getting lost, James was trapped and murdered.\nAftermath.\nThe assassins had achieved their priority in killing the king, but the queen \u2014 although wounded \u2014 had escaped. Importantly, the six-year-old prince, now King James II, had been safeguarded from Atholl's control by the removal of the earl's associate, John Spens, from his role as James's custodian. Spens vanished from the records following the regicide but the re-allocation of his positions and lands immediately following the murder indicate his part in the plot. Yet, in the chaos following the murder, it appeared that the queen's attempt to position herself as regent was not guaranteed.\nNo surviving documentation exists that suggests that there was any general feeling of horror or condemnation aimed at the murderers. Possibly had the botched attempt at killing the queen succeeded and had Atholl taken control of the young king his attempted coup might have succeeded. The queen's small group of loyal supporters including the Earl of Angus and William Crichton ensured her continued hold of James. This in itself greatly reinforced her situation but Atholl still had followers. By the first week of March, neither side seemed to have the ascendancy and the Bishop of Urbino, the pope's envoy, called for the council to pursue a peaceful outcome. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n... Yitte dowte I nott but theat yee schulle see the daye and tyme that ye schulle pray for my sowle, for the grete good that I have done to yow, and to all this reume of Scotteland, that I have thus slayne and deliverde yow of so crewell a tyrant...\u00a0 ... \"Yet I do not doubt but that you shall see the day and time that you shall pray for my soul, for the great good that I have done to you, and to all in this realm of Scotland, that I have thus slain and delivered you of so cruel a tyrant...\"\n\u2013 Sir Robert Graham\nDespite this, by the middle of March, both Angus and Crichton had probably mobilised to move against Atholl. It is equally likely that Atholl had gathered his forces to resist incursions into his heartlands \u2014 on 7 March the queen and the council entreated the burgess' of Perth to resist the forces of the \"feloune traitors\".\nThe position of Atholl and his circle of close supporters only collapsed after Earl Walter's heir Robert Stewart had been captured and who, in Shirley's account, confessed to his part in the crime. Walter was taken prisoner by Angus and held at the Edinburgh Tolbooth where he was tried and beheaded on 26 March 1437, the day after the coronation of the young James II. Sir Robert Graham, the leader of the band of assassins, was captured by former Atholl allies and was tried at a session of the council sitting at Stirling Castle and subsequently executed sometime shortly after 9 April.\nQueen Joan's pursuit of the regency ended probably at the council of June 1437 when Archibald, 5th Earl of Douglas, was appointed lieutenant-general of the kingdom.\nKing James's embalmed heart may have been taken on a pilgrimage to the Holy Land following his interment at Perth Charterhouse, as the Exchequer Rolls of Scotland for 1443 note the payment of \u00a390 to cover the costs of a knight of the Order of St John who had returned it to the Charterhouse from the Island of Rhodes.\nThe King's heart was returned to Perth in 1443. His doublet (with evidence of dagger holes) was kept at Perth for two centuries, but his tomb at the Charterhouse was destroyed at the Scottish Reformation in 1559.\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe king, was of medium height, a little on the short side, with a well-proportioned body and large bones, strong limbed and unbelievably active, so that he ... would challenge any one of his magnates of any size to wrestle with him.\u2013 Walter Bower, Abbot of Inchcolm (written c. 1424)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n ... [the king was] stocky and weighed down with fat [with] clear and piercing eyes \u2013 future Pope Pius II, Eneas Silvius Piccolomini (written 1435)\nJames was a paradoxical figure. Although a prisoner of England he still received a good education and developed into a cultured individual becoming a poet, an accomplished musician and skilled in sports. Walter Bower, abbot of Inchcolm, lists James's qualities as a musician \u2014 \"not just as an enthusiastic amateur\" but a master, \"another Orpheus\". His mastery included the organ, drum, flute and lyre. James's sporting abilities such as wrestling, hammer throwing, archery and jousting are also listed by Bower. He described James as possessing an 'eagerness' in 'literary composition and writing', the best known of which is his love poem, \"The Kingis Quair\". Bower characterised the king as \"a tower, a lion, a light, a jewel, a pillar and a leader \"and was our law giver king\" who ended the 'thieving, dishonest conduct and plundering\".\nAbbot Bower also described the king as capable of stabbing a near relative through the hand for creating a disturbance at court. The abbot was generally supportive of James but he and others regretted the demise of the Albany Stewarts, and he was confounded by James's greed for territory and wealth. Although Bower did not dwell at length on the negative aspects of James's character, he alluded to the dismay of even those close to the king at his harsh regime. John Shirley's account of the events leading up to James's murder in the work \"The Dethe of the Kynge of Scotis\" provided an accurate narrative of politics in Scotland and which must have depended upon knowledgeable witnesses. \"The Dethe\" describes James as \"tyrannous\" and whose actions were motivated by revenge and \"covetise ... than for anny laweful cawse\". Shirley agrees with Bower as far as the Albany Stewarts were concerned when he wrote that the Albanys . Writing nearly a century later both the chroniclers John Mair and Hector Boece relied extensively on Bower for their own narratives. They described James as the embodiment of good monarchy with Mair's eulogy that James \"...indeed excelled by far in virtue his father, grandfather and his great-grandfather nor will I give precedence over the first James to any of the Stewarts\", while Boece, in a similar vein, calls James the . Late in the 16th century the early historians George Buchanan and Bishop John Lesley from opposite ends of the religious spectrum both looked favourably on James's reign but were uneasily mindful of an enduring aggressive history regarding the king.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nO happie realme! governit with so kinglie a king; O cruel creatures quha dang doune sa strang a stay piller, and uphold of the Realme! Thir tratoris, like howlets culd nocht suffir to sie the bricht lycht of sa mervellous vertue. \"Oh happy realm! Governed by so kingly a king. Oh cruel creatures who struck down so strong a pillar, and upholder of the realm! The traitors, like owls could not suffer to see the bright light of so marvellous virtue.\"\n \u2013 Bishop John Lesley\nThe first 20th century history of James I was written by E.W.M. Balfour-Melville in 1936 and continued the theme of James as the strong upholder of law and order and, when describing Albany's trial and execution, he writes \"the King had proved that high rank was no defence for lawlessness; the crown was enriched by the revenues of Fife, Menteith and Lennox\". Balfour-Melville views James as a lawmaker and a \"reformer\" whose legislation was aimed at not only increasing the position of the king but of parliament. Michael Lynch describes how James's positive reputation began immediately after his death when the Bishop of Urbino kissed James's wounds and declared him to be a martyr. He suggests that the praise of the pro-James Scottish chroniclers and also of some modern historians to \"find strong king to applaud\" should not diminish the extent of parliament's ability to restrain the king nor minimise the confrontation that took place between James and a more self-assured parliament. Stephen Boardman takes the view that by the time of his death James had succeeded in breaking down the constraints on the exercise of royal authority which were rooted in the \"settlement of the kingdom\" by Robert II. Christine McGladdery describes how opposing views were the result of \"competing propaganda after the murder\". To those who were glad to see the king dead, James was a tyrant who, without reason, aggressively assailed the nobility, imposing forfeiture on their estates and who \"failed to deliver justice to his people\". She also provides the opposite viewpoint that the king was seen as giving \"strong leadership against magnate excesses\" and that the murder \"was a disaster for the Scottish people, leaving them to endure the instability of years of consequent faction fighting\". McGladdery continues that James was the example for the Stewart kings to follow by putting \"Scotland firmly within a European context\".\nMichael Brown describes James as an \"able, aggressive and opportunistic politician\" whose chief aim was to establish a monarchy that had stature and was free from the confrontations that had beset his father's reign. He characterises James as \"capable of highly effective short-term interventions\" yet has failed to achieve a position of unqualified authority. Brown writes that James had come to power after \"fifty years when kings looked like magnates and magnates acted like kings\" and succeeded in completely changing the outlook and objectives of the monarchy. His policy of reducing the power and influence of the magnates, continued by his son James II, led to a more subordinate nobility. Alexander Grant repudiates James's reputation as the \"law giver\" and explains that nearly all of the king's legislation were reconstructions of laws laid down by previous monarchs and concludes that \"the idea of James's return in 1424 marks a turning point in the development of Scots law is an exaggeration\". At James's death, only the Douglases of the predominant magnate houses were left and, according to Grant, this reduction was the most far-reaching change to the nobility and was \"by far the most important consequence of James I's reign\".\nMarriage and issue.\nIn London, on 12 February 1424, James married Joan Beaufort, daughter of John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset and Margaret Holland. They had eight children, six daughters and twin sons:\nFictional portrayals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJames I has been depicted in plays, historical novels and short stories. They include:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58733", "revid": "15865", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58733", "title": "Staffordshire", "text": "County of England\nStaffordshire (; postal abbreviation \"Staffs\".) is a ceremonial county in the West Midlands of England. It borders Cheshire to the north-west, Derbyshire and Leicestershire to the east, Warwickshire to the south-east, the West Midlands county and Worcestershire to the south, and Shropshire to the west. The largest settlement is the city of Stoke-on-Trent.\nThe county has an area of and a population of 1,131,052. Stoke-on-Trent is located in the north and is immediately adjacent to the town of Newcastle-under-Lyme. Stafford is in the centre of the county, Burton upon Trent in the east, and the city of Lichfield and Tamworth in the south-east. For local government purposes Staffordshire comprises a non-metropolitan county, with nine districts, and the unitary authority area of Stoke-on-Trent. The county historically included the north-west of the West Midlands county, including Walsall, West Bromwich, and Wolverhampton.\nStaffordshire is hilly to the north and south. The southern end of the Pennines is in the north, containing part of the Peak District National Park, while the Cannock Chase AONB and part of the National Forest are in the south. The River Trent and its tributaries drain most of the county. From its source, near Biddulph, the river flows through Staffordshire in a southwesterly direction, meeting the Sow just east of Stafford; it then meets the River Tame and turns north-east, exiting into Derbyshire immediately downstream of Burton upon Trent.\nStaffordshire contains a number of Iron Age tumuli and Roman camps, and was settled by the Angles in the sixth century; the oldest Stafford knot, the county's symbol, can be seen on an Anglian cross in the churchyard of Stoke Minster. The county was formed in the early tenth century, when Stafford became the capital of Mercia. The county was relatively settled in the following centuries, and rapidly industrialised during the Industrial Revolution, when the North Staffordshire coalfield was exploited and fuelled the iron and automobilie industries in the south of the county. Pottery is the county's most famous export; a limited amount is still produced in Stoke-on-Trent.\nHistory.\nHistorically, Staffordshire was divided into five hundreds: Cuttlestone, Offlow, Pirehill, Seisdon, and Totmonslow.\nThe historic boundaries of Staffordshire cover much of what is now the metropolitan county of West Midlands. An administrative county of Staffordshire was set up in 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888 covering the county, except for the county boroughs of Wolverhampton, Walsall, and West Bromwich in the south (the area known as the Black Country), and Hanley in the north. The Act also saw the towns of Tamworth (partly in Warwickshire) and Burton upon Trent (partly in Derbyshire) united entirely in Staffordshire. In 1553, Queen Mary made Lichfield a county corporate, meaning it was administered separately from the rest of Staffordshire, remaining so until 1888.\nHandsworth and Perry Barr became part of the county borough of Birmingham, and thus Warwickshire, in 1911 and 1928 respectively. Burton, in the east of the county, became a county borough in 1901, and was followed by Smethwick, another town in the Black Country in 1907. In 1910 the six towns of the Staffordshire Potteries, including Hanley, became the single county borough of Stoke-on-Trent.\nA significant boundary change occurred in 1926 when the east of Sedgley was transferred to Worcestershire to allow the construction of the new Priory Estate on land purchased by Dudley County Borough council.\nA major reorganisation in the Black Country in 1966, under the recommendation of the Local Government Commission for England, led to the creation of an area of contiguous county boroughs. The County Borough of Warley was formed by the merger of the county borough of Smethwick and municipal borough of Rowley Regis with the Worcestershire borough of Oldbury: the resulting county borough was associated with Worcestershire. Meanwhile, the county borough of Dudley, historically a detached part of Worcestershire, expanded and became associated with Staffordshire instead. This reorganisation led to the administrative county of Staffordshire having a thin protrusion passing between the county boroughs (to the east) and Shropshire, to the west, to form a short border with Worcestershire.\nUnder the Local Government Act 1972, on 1 April 1974, the county boroughs of the Black Country and the Aldridge-Brownhills Urban District of Staffordshire became, along with Birmingham, Solihull, and Coventry and other districts, a new metropolitan county of West Midlands. County boroughs were abolished, with Stoke becoming a non-metropolitan district in Staffordshire, and Burton forming an unparished area in the district of East Staffordshire. On 1 April 1997, under a recommendation of the Banham Commission, Stoke-on-Trent became a unitary authority independent of Staffordshire once more.\nIn July 2009, the largest hoard of Anglo-Saxon gold ever found in Britain was discovered in a field near Lichfield. The artefacts, known as The Staffordshire Hoard, have tentatively been dated to the 7th or 8th centuries, placing the origin of the items in the time of the Kingdom of Mercia.\nEducation.\nStaffordshire has a completely comprehensive system with eight independent schools. Most secondary schools are from 11 to 16 or 18, but two in Staffordshire Moorlands and South Staffordshire are from 13 to 18. Resources are shared where appropriate.\nThere are two universities in the county, Keele University, west of Newcastle-under-Lyme, and the University of Staffordshire, which has campuses in Stoke-on-Trent, Stafford, London, Lichfield and Shrewsbury.\nSport.\nThe modern county of Staffordshire currently has three professional football clubs \u2013 Stoke City and Port Vale, both from Stoke-on-Trent, and Burton Albion, who play in Burton upon Trent.\nStoke City, one of the oldest professional football clubs in existence, were founded in 1863 and played at the Victoria Ground for 119 years from 1878 until their relocation to the Britannia Stadium (now named the Bet365 Stadium) in 1997. They were among the 12 founder members of the Football League in 1888. By the late 1930s, they were established First Division members and boasted arguably the finest footballer in England at the time in right-winger Stanley Matthews, who had two spells with the club between 1930 and his retirement in 1965 at the age of 50. In 1972, the club finally won a major trophy when they lifted the Football League Cup, but after relegation from the First Division in 1985 they would not experience top flight football for 23 years. After spending some two decades bouncing between the second and third tiers of the English league, they finally reclaimed their top flight status in 2008 by securing promotion to the Premier League. Stoke City reached their first FA Cup final in 2011, but lost 1\u20130 to Manchester City.\nPort Vale, who like Stoke City play in Stoke-on-Trent, were formed in 1876 and became members of the Football League in 1892. After more than 70 years at various stadiums around the city, the club moved to its present home, Vale Park, in 1950. In early 1936, they had eliminated First Division champions Sunderland from the FA Cup. Another FA Cup success came in February 1988 when they eliminated seven-time winners Tottenham Hotspur from the competition. Promotion to the Second Division for the first time since the 1960s was secured in 1989, and Vale would spend nine of the next 11 years at this level. However, the club has been less successful since the turn of the 21st century, and suffered relegation to League Two \u2013 the fourth tier of the English league \u2013 in 2008. The club has seen an upturn in its fortunes as the club was promoted to League One in the 2012\u201313 season. In the 2016\u201317 season Port Vale were relegated back to League Two.\nWest Bromwich Albion, Wolverhampton Wanderers and Walsall are also notable clubs based in the historic county boundaries.\nThe county's other professional football team is Burton Albion, based in Burton upon Trent, who currently play in League One.\nThe county has a number of non-league football clubs, including Tamworth, Stafford Rangers, Hednesford Town, Chasetown and Leek Town.\nIn cricket, Staffordshire is one of the nineteen Minor counties of English and Welsh cricket. It is represented in Minor counties cricket by Staffordshire County Cricket Club who have played in the Minor Counties Championship since 1895, a competition which it has won outright eleven times, making it the most successful Minor counties team. Famous international cricketers produced by the county include Sydney Barnes, Bob Taylor and Dominic Cork, all of whom went on to represent England.\nGeography.\nIn the north and in the south, the county is hilly, with the southern foothills and uplands of the Pennines in the north, with parts of it in the Peak District National Park. Most of the northern upland terrain is in the Staffordshire Moorlands district. Cannock Chase, an area of natural beauty, and part of the National Forest are in the south. In the middle regions, the landscape is low and undulating. In parts of the county are once significant coalfields, including the South Staffordshire coalfield. In the southern part, there are also rich iron ore deposits. The soil is chiefly clay and agriculture was not highly developed until the mechanisation of farms.\nStaffordshire is home to the highest village in Britain, Flash. The village, in the Staffordshire Moorlands, stands at above sea level. This record was confirmed in 2007 by the Ordnance Survey after Wanlockhead in Scotland also claimed the record. The BBC's \"The One Show\" investigated the case in a bid to settle the argument and Flash was confirmed as the higher of the two. The highest point in Staffordshire is Cheeks Hill. The largest river is the River Trent, which drains most of the county along with its tributaries. From its source, near Biddulph, the Trent flows through Staffordshire in a southwesterly direction and meets the River Sow just east of Stafford. It then meets the River Tame and turns north-east, exiting into Derbyshire immediately downstream of Burton upon Trent.\nGreen belt.\nStaffordshire contains sectors of three green belt areas, two of which surround the large conurbations of Stoke-on-Trent and the West Midlands, and were first drawn up from the 1950s. All the county's districts contain some portion of belt.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2001 Census the population of the Non-metropolitan Staffordshire is 806,744 and the population of Stoke-on-Trent was 240,636 making a total population of 1,047,380. In non-metropolitan Staffordshire, White British is the largest ethnicity, making up 96% of the population. This is followed by Irish, making up 0.6%. Non-White citizens make up 2% of the population. The largest Non-White ethnic group are British Pakistanis. 94% of the population was born in England, and those born in Scotland and Wales together make up 1% of the total population.\nEconomy.\nThe brewing companies such as Coors Brewers are in Burton on Trent, as well as Marmite, Marston's Brewery, GNC UK (health supplements). Branston is the original home of Branston Pickle, where the original factory can still be seen on Burton Road. Spirit Pub Company is near the A5121/A38 junction, with Punch Taverns slightly further north.\nNewell Rubbermaid UK (owner of Parker Pen, Berol, Paper Mate and DYMO), a large RDC of Tesco, and Zytek (motorsport) is at Fradley Park, on an old airfield. Norgren was an international pneumatic technology company on Eastern Avenue, Lichfield.\nMichelin Tyres are made at Sideway in Stoke-on-Trent. Royal Doulton and Wedgwood were/are based at Burslem and Barlaston respectively. Portmeirion Pottery, which owns the Royal Worcester brand, is in Stoke. Steelite International (pottery) is based at Middleport, in west Burslem, next to the Trent and Mersey Canal. Wade Ceramics is at Etruria to the east of Wolstanton, near the HQ of \"The Sentinel\" newspaper (Harmsworth Printing). Premier Foods make Mr Kipling slices and Cherry Bakewells at Trent Vale in the south of Stoke-on-Trent.\nBet365 is situated at Festival Park in Etruria, and is Stoke-on-Trent's largest private sector employer. Dechra Pharmaceuticals makes veterinary pharmaceuticals at Talke. Churchill China is at Sandyford near Tunstall. Sumitomo Electrical Wiring Systems (Europe), which supplies wiring for the automotive industry, is at Silverdale. At Kidsgrove, Converteam make variable speed drives (VSDs); AAH Pharmaceuticals has its Enterprise and Trident divisions in Talke, in the west of Kidsgrove. Andritz UK is at Wolstanton, in the north of Newcastle.\nMann+Hummel UK, at Featherstone, make air and oil filters. Armitage Shanks (owned by Ideal Standard International) is to the east of Rugeley in Armitage with Handsacre; JCB Cab Systems was next to the A51 on the Riverside Industrial Estate. The UK headquarters of GE Grid Solutions is based at Stafford as well as a factory and the UK headquarters of Bostik on Common Road, in the north of the town.\nNumark Pharmacy is at Tamworth. Bristan based in Dordon and Baddesley Ensor on the Birch Coppice Business Park south-west of Tamworth, next to a new Ocado distribution centre, is the UK's largest supplier of kitchen and bathroom taps; Volkswagen Group (VAG UK) have their main UK distribution facility there, the site of Birch Coppice Colliery before 1987. Ansell UK (medical gloves, from Australia) is on Tamworth Enterprise Park. Whittington Barracks (DMS Whittington) near to the west is the home of the Defence Medical Services, Defence Dental Service, and the Defence Medical Services Training Centre.\nPremier Foods make Bird's Custard, Angel Delight and Marvel powdered milk in Knighton, west of Eccleshall near the Shropshire boundary. Ornua, best known for the Kerrygold brand, have a large cheese production site in Leek on Sunnyhills Road.\nThis is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of the non-metropolitan county of Staffordshire at current basic prices by \"Office for National Statistics\" with figures in millions of British pounds sterling.\nSome nationally and internationally known companies have their base in Staffordshire. They include the Britannia Building Society which is based in Leek. JCB is based in Rocester near Uttoxeter and Bet365 which is based in Stoke-on-Trent. The theme park Alton Towers is in the Staffordshire Moorlands and several of the world's largest pottery manufacturers are based in Stoke-on-Trent. The town of Burton upon Trent is known for its beer brewing industry with several major brands such as Carling, Cobra and Marston's brewed there.\nGovernment.\nWestminster parliamentary.\nThe ceremonial county of Staffordshire (including the unitary authority of Stoke-on-Trent) is represented by twelve Members of Parliament (MPs) in the House of Commons. Nine of the MPs represent the Labour Party and three MPs represent the Conservative Party. The current membership of each constituency as of 2024 is as follows:\nCounty council.\nStaffordshire County Council is the top-tier local council for the non-metropolitan county. For Eurostat purposes, it is a NUTS 3 region (code UKG22).\nStaffordshire operates a cabinet-style council. There are 62 councillors for Staffordshire. The Full Council elects a cabinet of 10 councillors, including the council leader, from the majority party. Each cabinet member has their own portfolio about which they make the \"day to day\" decisions.\nAreas.\nHistoric.\nSome settlements were formerly governed as part of the county, these are now under the West Midlands county:\nReligion.\nIn the 2011 United Kingdom census, the population of Staffordshire reported their religion as follows:\nChurch of England.\nThe only cathedral in the county is Lichfield Cathedral in the city of Lichfield. The Diocese of Lichfield covers the whole county with the exception of Stapenhill and Amington, the north of the nearby county of Shropshire and the Black Country area of the West Midlands. The county is covered by the archdeaconries of Stoke-upon-Trent and Lichfield. The current Bishop of Lichfield is Michael Ipgrave and the current Bishop of Stafford Geoff Annas. There are 298 Church of England churches in the county.\nRoman Catholic Church.\nStaffordshire is part of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Birmingham. The current archbishop is Bernard Longley.\nMethodism.\nPrimitive Methodism was founded in Staffordshire by Hugh Bourne, a native of Stoke-on-Trent, at a public gathering in the village of Mow Cop. He originally followed the Wesleyan form of Methodism but in 1801 he reformed the Methodist service by conducting it outside. By 1811 with his brother he founded the first chapel in the Tunstall area of Stoke-on-Trent. Since 1932 the Primitive and Wesleyan movements have been a single organisation, the Methodist Church of Great Britain. The Methodist Churches of Staffordshire fall within three Districts: Birmingham District, Wolverhampton and Shrewsbury District and Chester &amp; Stoke-on-Trent District.\nJudaism.\nThe most popular synagogue in the county is on London Road in Newcastle-Under-Lyme, which opened in 2006 and replaced the former Birch Terrace synagogue in Hanley. According to the 2001 census there were 407 Jews in the non-metropolitan county of Staffordshire, and 83 in Stoke-on-Trent.\nIslam.\nThere are 15 mosques in Stoke-on-Trent, 5 in Burton-upon-Trent and 1 in both Stafford and Lichfield. As of 2019 a new https:// has finished construction in the Hanley area of Stoke-on-Trent and is the first purpose-built mosque in the area. At the 2001 census there were 7,658 Muslims in Stoke-on-Trent and 6,081 in the rest of Staffordshire, with a total of 13,739 making up 1.3% of the population. 62.9% (3823) of the Muslims in the rest of Staffordshire are from the town of Burton-upon-Trent.\nTransport.\nCanals.\nStaffordshire has an extensive network of canals including the Birmingham and Fazeley Canal, Caldon Canal, Coventry Canal, Shropshire Union Canal, Staffordshire and Worcestershire Canal and Trent and Mersey Canal.\nRailways.\nStaffordshire has several railways that pass through and serve settlements within the county. The most important of these is the West Coast Main Line, which facilitates through services between London and Scotland, Manchester and Liverpool. \nLocated on the West Coast Main Line, Stafford railway station is at a junction with the line to Birmingham New Street, a major hub, and is predominantly served by London Northwestern Railway. Rugeley Trent Valley, Lichfield Trent Valley and Penkridge are also on mainline railway routes.\nStoke-on-Trent railway station is the busiest station in Staffordshire and is served by long-distance CrossCountry and Avanti West Coast trains to Manchester, Birmingham, London, Oxford, Reading, Bristol, Southampton and Bournemouth. This station is also the terminus of the North Staffordshire line to Derby and Nottingham via Uttoxeter, which narrowly avoided closure in the 1960s. It also offers local commuter services to Manchester with Northern Railways.\nStone railway station reopened in 2008.\nRoads.\nThe county has relatively good links to the national roads network. Several major roads intersect the county, making it a popular location for commuters working in Birmingham. The M42 junction 10 is in Tamworth and the motorway heads southwest towards Birmingham. The M6 runs north\u2013south through the county, which contains junctions 10A\u201316. The M6 Toll, the UK's first toll motorway, runs through the county with junctions in Weeford near Lichfield, Cannock and joins the M6 south of Stafford.\nThe A5 and A34 run through the county. The former has been significantly widened to a dual carriageway at several sections, although much of it remains single carriageway.\nAir.\nThere are currently no airports with scheduled flights in the county, with the nearest ones being Birmingham, East Midlands and Manchester. Depending on the location, there is, however, Wolverhampton Airport in Bobbington and Tatenhill Airfield near Burton-upon-Trent, both of which are small airports catering for general aviation.\nBus.\nServices within the county are chiefly provided by Arriva Midlands, D&amp;G Bus and First Potteries. National Express coaches serve towns and cities on a daily basis.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nDaily Newspapers in Staffordshire are \"The Sentinel\", covering Stoke-on-Trent, Newcastle-under-Lyme and the Staffordshire Moorlands, \"Burton Mail\" which covers the town of Burton-upon-Trent and the \"Express &amp; Star\" which has several editions covering Tamworth, Lichfield, Cannock Chase and Stafford.\nRadio.\nThe local BBC radio stations covering Staffordshire are BBC Radio Stoke covering Mid and North Staffordshire, BBC Radio WM covering the south of the county and BBC Radio Derby covering East Staffordshire. The local commercial radio stations are Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp; Cheshire and Greatest Hits Radio Staffordshire &amp; Cheshire which cover North and Mid Staffordshire, and Capital Mid-Counties, which covers Burton, Lichfield and Tamworth. Further stations which cover parts of Staffordshire include Heart, Smooth, and Greatest Hits Radio which cover the southern parts of the county. Hits Radio Birmingham covers Lichfield and Tamworth, and Hits Radio Black Country &amp; Shropshire covers the Cannock area.\nUnited Christian Broadcasters, which has facilities in Burslem and Hanchurch, has been involved in radio broadcasting since 1987. Today it is broadcast nationally in the UK through DAB digital radio.\nStaffordshire is served by a number of community radio stations. In North Staffordshire, there are four community radio stations \u2013 Moorlands Radio in Leek, 6 Towns Radio, based in Burslem, The Hitmix, based in Newcastle-under-Lyme and Cross Rhythms City Radio based in Hanley\nIn Stafford there are two community radio stations \u2013 Windmill Broadcasting, the UK's only radio station based in a Windmill, in the Broad Eye Windmill, and Stafford FM, which broadcasts to the town on 107.3 FM.\nIn the Cannock Chase District, there is Cannock Chase Radio, which broadcasts on 89.6, 89.8 and 94.0 FM, and in Tamworth, there is Radio Tamworth, which broadcasts on 106.8 FM.\nTelevision.\nStaffordshire is served by the ITV Central and BBC West Midlands television regions, both of which have their studios in Birmingham. The far north of the county, around Biddulph, is served by ITV Granada and BBC North West from MediaCityUK in Salford.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58735", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58735", "title": "Jean Paul Sartre", "text": ""}
{"id": "58738", "revid": "34128202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58738", "title": "Allergin", "text": ""}
{"id": "58739", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58739", "title": "Timeline of microscope technology", "text": " \nTimeline of microscope technology"}
{"id": "58740", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58740", "title": "Low-temperature technology timeline", "text": "The following is a timeline of low-temperature technology and cryogenic technology (refrigeration down to close to absolute zero, i.e. \u2013273.15\u00a0\u00b0C, \u2212459.67\u00a0\u00b0F or 0 K). It also lists important milestones in thermometry, thermodynamics, statistical physics and calorimetry, that were crucial in development of low temperature systems.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58741", "revid": "1312738253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58741", "title": "Timeline of rocket and missile technology", "text": "This article gives a concise timeline of rocket and missile technology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58742", "revid": "46866511", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58742", "title": "Timeline of materials technology", "text": "Tools\nMajor innovations in materials technology\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58743", "revid": "50842140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58743", "title": "Marburg virus disease", "text": "Human viral disease\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nMarburg virus disease (MVD), formerly known as Marburg hemorrhagic fever (MHF) is a viral hemorrhagic fever in human and non-human primates caused by either of the two Marburgviruses: Marburg virus (MARV) and Ravn virus (RAVV). Its clinical symptoms are very similar to those of Ebola virus disease (EVD).\nEgyptian fruit bats are believed to be the normal carrier in nature and Marburg virus RNA has been isolated from them.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe most detailed study on the frequency, onset, and duration of MVD clinical signs and symptoms was performed during the 1998\u20132000 mixed MARV/RAVV disease outbreak. A skin rash, red or purple spots (e.g. petechiae or purpura), bruises, and hematomas (especially around needle injection sites) are typical hemorrhagic manifestations. However, contrary to popular belief, hemorrhage does not lead to hypovolemia and is not the cause of death (total blood loss is minimal except during labor). Instead, death occurs due to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) due to fluid redistribution, hypotension, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and focal tissue necroses.\nClinical phases of Marburg hemorrhagic fever's presentation are described below. Note that phases overlap due to variability between cases.\nThe WHO also writes that at the phase of gastrointestinal symptoms' predomination, \"the appearance of patients...has been described as showing 'ghost-like' drawn features, deep-set eyes, expressionless faces, and extreme lethargy.\"\nCauses.\nMVD is caused by two viruses; Marburg virus (MARV) and Ravn virus (RAVV), family Filoviridae.\nMarburgviruses are endemic in arid woodlands of equatorial Africa. Most marburgvirus infections were repeatedly associated with people visiting natural caves or working in mines. In 2009, the successful isolation of infectious MARV and RAVV was reported from healthy Egyptian fruit bats caught in caves. This isolation strongly suggests that Old World fruit bats are involved in the natural maintenance of marburgviruses and that visiting bat-infested caves is a risk factor for acquiring marburgvirus infections. Further studies are necessary to establish whether Egyptian rousettes are the actual hosts of MARV and RAVV or whether they get infected via contact with another animal and therefore serve only as intermediate hosts. Another risk factor is contact with nonhuman primates, although only one outbreak of MVD (in 1967) was due to contact with infected monkeys.\nContrary to Ebola virus disease (EVD), which has been associated with heavy rains after long periods of dry weather, triggering factors for spillover of marburgviruses into the human population have not yet been described.\nTransmission.\nThe details of the initial transmission of MVD to humans remain incompletely understood. Transmission most likely occurs from Egyptian fruit bats or another natural host, such as non-human primates or through the consumption of bushmeat, but the specific routes and body fluids involved are unknown. Human-to-human transmission of MVD occurs through direct contact with infected bodily fluids such as blood. Transmission events are relatively rare \u2013 there have been only 11 recorded outbreaks of MARV between 1975 and 2011, with one event involving both MARV and RAVV.\nDiagnosis.\nMVD is clinically indistinguishable from Ebola virus disease (EVD), and it can also easily be confused with many other diseases prevalent in Equatorial Africa, such as other viral hemorrhagic fevers, falciparum malaria, typhoid fever, shigellosis, rickettsial diseases such as typhus, cholera, gram-negative sepsis, borreliosis such as relapsing fever or EHEC enteritis. Other infectious diseases that ought to be included in the differential diagnosis include leptospirosis, scrub typhus, plague, Q fever, candidiasis, histoplasmosis, trypanosomiasis, visceral leishmaniasis, hemorrhagic smallpox, measles, and fulminant viral hepatitis. Non-infectious diseases that can be confused with MVD are acute promyelocytic leukemia, hemolytic uremic syndrome, snake envenomation, clotting factor deficiencies/platelet disorders, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, Kawasaki disease, and even warfarin intoxication.\nThe most important indicator that may lead to the suspicion of MVD at clinical examination is the medical history of the patient, in particular the travel and occupational history (which countries and caves were visited) and the patient's exposure to wildlife (exposure to bats or bat excrements). MVD can be confirmed by isolation of marburgviruses from or by detection of marburgvirus antigen or genomic or subgenomic RNAs in patient blood or serum samples during the acute phase of MVD. Marburgvirus isolation is usually performed by inoculation of grivet kidney epithelial Vero E6 or MA-104 cell cultures or by inoculation of human adrenal carcinoma SW-13 cells, all of which react to infection with characteristic cytopathic effects. Filovirions can easily be visualized and identified in cell culture by electron microscopy due to their unique filamentous shapes, but electron microscopy cannot differentiate the various filoviruses alone despite some overall length differences. Immunofluorescence assays are used to confirm marburgvirus presence in cell cultures. During an outbreak, virus isolation and electron microscopy are most often not feasible options. The most common diagnostic methods are therefore RT-PCR in conjunction with antigen-capture ELISA, which can be performed in field or mobile hospitals and laboratories. Indirect immunofluorescence assays (IFAs) are not used for diagnosis of MVD in the field anymore.\nClassification.\nMarburg virus disease (MVD) is the official name listed in the World Health Organization's International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10 (ICD-10) for the human disease caused by any of the two marburgviruses; Marburg virus (MARV) and Ravn virus (RAVV). In the scientific literature, Marburg hemorrhagic fever (MHF) is often used as an unofficial alternative name for the same disease. Both disease names are derived from the German city Marburg, where MARV was first discovered.\nPrevention.\nMarburgviruses are highly infectious, but not very contagious. They do not get transmitted by aerosol during natural MVD outbreaks. Due to the absence of an approved vaccine, prevention of MVD therefore relies predominantly on quarantine of confirmed or high probability cases, proper personal protective equipment, and sterilization and disinfection.\nVaccine development.\nThere are currently no Food and Drug Administration-approved vaccines for the prevention of MVD. Many candidate vaccines have been developed and tested in various animal models. Of those, the most promising ones are DNA vaccines or based on Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus replicons, vesicular stomatitis Indiana virus (VSIV) or filovirus-like particles (VLPs) as all of these candidates could protect nonhuman primates from marburgvirus-induced disease. DNA vaccines have entered clinical trials.\nThere is not yet an approved vaccine, because of economic factors in vaccine development, and because filoviruses killed few before the 2010s.\nEndemic zones.\nThe natural maintenance hosts of marburgviruses remain to be identified unequivocally. However, the isolation of both MARV and RAVV from bats and the association of several MVD outbreaks with bat-infested mines or caves strongly suggests that bats are involved in Marburg virus transmission to humans. Avoidance of contact with bats and abstaining from visits to caves is highly recommended, but may not be possible for those working in mines or people dependent on bats as a food source.\nDuring outbreaks.\nSince marburgviruses are not spread via aerosol, the most straightforward prevention method during MVD outbreaks is to avoid direct (skin-to-skin) contact with patients, their excretions and body fluids, and any possibly contaminated materials and utensils. Patients should be isolated, but still are safe to be visited by family members. Medical staff should be trained in and apply strict barrier nursing techniques (disposable face mask, gloves, goggles, and a gown at all times). Traditional burial rituals, especially those requiring embalming of bodies, should be discouraged or modified, ideally with the help of local traditional healers.\nIn the laboratory.\nMarburgviruses are World Health Organization Risk Group 4 Pathogens, requiring Biosafety Level 4-equivalent containment, laboratory researchers have to be properly trained in BSL-4 practices and wear proper personal protective equipment.\nTreatment.\nThere is currently no effective marburgvirus-specific therapy for MVD. Treatment is primarily supportive in nature and includes minimizing invasive procedures, balancing fluids and electrolytes to counter dehydration, administration of anticoagulants early in infection to prevent or control disseminated intravascular coagulation, administration of procoagulants late in infection to control hemorrhaging, maintaining oxygen levels, pain management, and administration of antibiotics or antifungals to treat secondary infections.\nPrognosis.\nAlthough supportive care can improve survival chances, Marburg virus disease is fatal in the majority of cases. The case fatality rate has been estimated to be 61.9%.\nEpidemiology.\nPandemic potential.\nThe WHO identifies marburg virus disease as having pandemic potential.\nHistorical outbreaks.\nBelow is a table of outbreaks concerning MVD from 1967 to 2025:\n1967 outbreak.\nMVD was first documented in 1967, when 31 people became ill in the German towns of Marburg and Frankfurt am Main, and in Belgrade, Yugoslavia. The outbreak involved 25 primary MARV infections and seven deaths, and six nonlethal secondary cases. The outbreak was traced to infected grivets (species \"Chlorocebus aethiops\") imported from an undisclosed location in Uganda and used in developing poliomyelitis vaccines. The monkeys were received by Behringwerke, a Marburg company founded by the first winner of the Nobel Prize in Medicine, Emil von Behring. The company, which at the time was owned by Hoechst, was originally set up to develop sera against tetanus and diphtheria. Primary infections occurred in Behringwerke laboratory staff while working with grivet tissues or tissue cultures without adequate personal protective equipment. Secondary cases involved two physicians, a nurse, a post-mortem attendant, and the wife of a veterinarian. All secondary cases had direct contact, usually involving blood, with a primary case. Both physicians became infected through accidental skin pricks when drawing blood from patients.\n1975 cases.\nIn 1975, an Australian tourist became infected with MARV in Rhodesia (today Zimbabwe). He died in a hospital in Johannesburg, South Africa. His girlfriend and an attending nurse were subsequently infected with MVD, but survived.\n1980 cases.\nA case of MARV infection occurred in 1980 in Kenya. A French man, who worked as an electrical engineer in a sugar factory in Nzoia (close to Bungoma) at the base of Mount Elgon (which contains Kitum Cave), became infected by unknown means and died on 15 January shortly after admission to Nairobi Hospital. The attending physician contracted MVD, but survived. A popular science account of these cases can be found in Richard Preston's book \"The Hot Zone\" (the French man is referred to under the pseudonym \"Charles Monet\", whereas the physician is identified under his real name, Shem Musoke).\n1987 case.\nIn 1987, a single lethal case of RAVV infection occurred in a 15-year-old Danish boy, who spent his vacation in Kisumu, Kenya. He had visited Kitum Cave on Mount Elgon prior to travelling to Mombasa, where he developed clinical signs of infection. The boy died after transfer to Nairobi Hospital. A popular science account of this case can be found in Richard Preston's book \"The Hot Zone\" (the boy is referred to under the pseudonym \"Peter Cardinal\").\n1988 laboratory infection.\nIn 1988, researcher Nikolai Ustinov infected himself lethally with MARV after accidentally pricking himself with a syringe used for inoculation of guinea pigs. The accident occurred at the Scientific-Production Association \"Vektor\" (today the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology \"Vektor\") in Koltsovo, USSR (today Russia). Very little information is publicly available about this MVD case because Ustinov's experiments were classified. A popular science account of this case can be found in Ken Alibek's book \"Biohazard\".\n1990 laboratory infection.\nAnother laboratory accident occurred at the Scientific-Production Association \"Vektor\" (today the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology \"Vektor\") in Koltsovo, USSR, when a scientist contracted MARV by unknown means.\n1998\u20132000 outbreak.\nA major MVD outbreak occurred among illegal gold miners around Goroumbwa mine in Durba and Watsa, Democratic Republic of Congo from 1998 to 2000, when co-circulating MARV and RAVV caused 154 cases of MVD and 128 deaths. The outbreak ended with the flooding of the mine.\n2004\u20132005 outbreak.\nIn early 2005, the World Health Organization (WHO) began investigating an outbreak of viral hemorrhagic fever in Angola, which was centered in the northeastern U\u00edge Province but also affected many other provinces. The Angolan government had to ask for international assistance, as there were only approximately 1,200 doctors in the entire country and provinces that had few as two. Health care workers also complained about a shortage of basic personal protective equipment. M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res (MSF) reported that when their team arrived at the provincial hospital at the center of the outbreak, they found it operating without water and electricity. Contact tracing was complicated by the fact that the country's roads and other infrastructure were devastated after nearly three decades of civil war and the countryside remained littered with land mines.\nAmerico Boa Vida Hospital in the Angolan capital, Luanda, set up a special isolation ward to treat patients from the countryside. Due to the high fatality rate of MVD, some people came to be suspicious of and hostile towards hospitals and medical workers. For instance, a specially-equipped isolation ward at the provincial hospital in U\u00edge was reported to be empty during much of the epidemic, even though the facility was at the center of the outbreak. WHO was forced to implement what it described as a \"harm reduction strategy\" by distributing disinfectants to affected families who refused hospital care. Of the 252 people who contracted MVD, 227 died.\n2007 cases.\nIn 2007, four miners became infected with marburgviruses in Kamwenge District, Uganda. The first case, a 29-year-old man, became symptomatic on July 4, 2007, was admitted to a hospital on July 7, and died on July 13. Contact tracing revealed that the man had had prolonged close contact with two colleagues (a 22-year-old man and a 23-year-old man), who experienced clinical signs of infection before his disease onset. Both men had been admitted to hospitals in June and survived their infections, which were proven to be due to MARV. A fourth, 25-year-old man, developed MVD clinical signs in September and was shown to be infected with RAVV. He also survived the infection.\n2008 cases.\nOn July 10, 2008, the Netherlands National Institute for Public Health and the Environment reported that a 41-year-old Dutch woman, who had visited Python Cave in Maramagambo Forest during her holiday in Uganda, had MVD due to MARV infection, and had been admitted to a hospital in the Netherlands. The woman died under treatment in the Leiden University Medical Centre in Leiden on July 11. The Ugandan Ministry of Health closed the cave after this case. On January 9 of that year an infectious diseases physician notified the Colorado Department of Public Health and the Environment that a 44-year-old American woman who had returned from Uganda had been hospitalized with a fever of unknown origin. At the time, serologic testing was negative for viral hemorrhagic fever. She was discharged on January 19, 2008. After the death of the Dutch patient and the discovery that the American woman had visited Python Cave, further testing confirmed the patient demonstrated MARV antibodies and RNA.\n2017 Uganda outbreak.\nIn October 2017 an outbreak of Marburg virus disease was detected in Kween District, Eastern Uganda. All three initial cases (belonging to one family \u2013 two brothers and one sister) had died by 3 November. The fourth case \u2013 a health care worker \u2013 developed symptoms on 4 November and was admitted to a hospital. The first confirmed case traveled to Kenya before the death. A close contact of the second confirmed case traveled to Kampala. It is reported that several hundred people may have been exposed to infection.\n2021 Guinean cases.\nIn August 2021, two months after the re-emergent Ebola epidemic in the Gu\u00e9ck\u00e9dou prefecture was declared over, a case of the Marburg disease was confirmed by health authorities through laboratory analysis. Other potential case of the disease in a contact awaits official results. This was the first case of the Marburg hemorrhagic fever confirmed to happen in West Africa. The case of Marburg also has been identified in Gu\u00e9ck\u00e9dou. During the outbreak, a total of one confirmed case, who died (CFR=100%), and 173 contacts were identified, including 14 high-risk contacts based on exposure. Among them, 172 were followed for a period of 21 days, of which none developed symptoms. One high-risk contact was lost to follow up. Sequencing of an isolate from the Guinean patient showed that this outbreak was caused by the Angola-like Marburg virus. A colony of Egyptian rousettus bats (reservoir host of Marburg virus) was found in close proximity (4.5\u00a0km) to the village, where the Marburg virus disease outbreak emerged in 2021. Two sampled fruit bats from this colony were PCR-positive on the Marburg virus.\n2022 Ghanaian cases.\nIn July 2022, preliminary analysis of samples taken from two patients \u2013 both deceased \u2013 in Ghana indicated the cases were positive for Marburg. However, per standard procedure, the samples were sent to the Pasteur Institute of Dakar for confirmation. On 17 July 2022 the two cases were confirmed by Ghana, which caused the country to declare a Marburg virus disease outbreak. An additional case was identified, bringing the total to three.\n2023 Equatorial Guinea outbreak.\nA disease outbreak was first reported in Equatorial Guinea on 7 February 2023, and on 13 February 2023, it was identified as being Marburg virus disease. It was the first time the disease was detected in the country. Neighbouring Cameroon detected two suspected cases of Marburg virus disease on 13 February 2023, but they were later ruled out. On 25 February, a suspected case of Marburg was reported in the Spanish city of Valencia, however this case was subsequently discounted. As of 4 April 2023, there were 14 confirmed cases and 28 suspected cases, including ten confirmed deaths from the disease in Equatorial Guinea. On 8 June 2023, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak over. In total, 17 laboratory-confirmed cases and 12 deaths were recorded. All the 23 probable cases reportedly died. Four patients recovered from the virus and have been enrolled in a survivors programme to receive psychosocial and other post-recovery support.\n2023 Tanzania outbreak.\nA Marburg virus disease outbreak in Tanzania was first reported on 21 March 2023 by the Ministry of Health of Tanzania. This was the first time that Tanzania had reported an outbreak of the disease. On 2 June 2023, Tanzania declared the outbreak over. There were 9 total infections, resulting in 6 total deaths.\n2024 Rwanda outbreak.\nOn September 27, 2024, an outbreak of the Marburg virus was confirmed in Rwanda. As of September 29, 2024, six deaths and twenty cases had been confirmed. The Rwandan Minister of Health, Sabin Nsanzimana, confirmed that the infected were mostly healthcare workers and that contact tracing had been initiated in the country.\nResearch.\nExperimentally, recombinant vesicular stomatitis Indiana virus (VSIV) expressing the glycoprotein of MARV has been used successfully in nonhuman primate models as post-exposure prophylaxis. A vaccine candidate has been effective in nonhuman primates. Experimental therapeutic regimens relying on antisense technology have shown promise, with phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomers (PMOs) targeting the MARV genome New therapies from Sarepta and Tekmira have also been successfully used in humans as well as primates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58744", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58744", "title": "Timeline of lighting technology", "text": "Artificial lighting technology began to be developed tens of thousands of years ago and continues to be refined in the present day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58745", "revid": "12418561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58745", "title": "Albany", "text": "Albany, derived from the Gaelic for Scotland, most commonly refers to:\nAlbany may also refer to: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58746", "revid": "13560851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58746", "title": "Ardmore", "text": "Ardmore comes from the or the meaning \"great height\" and may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58747", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58747", "title": "Belleville", "text": "Belleville (French, literally \"beautiful town\"; ) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58748", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58748", "title": "Bedford (disambiguation)", "text": "Bedford is the county town of Bedfordshire, England.\nBedford may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58749", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58749", "title": "Timeline of general technology", "text": ""}
{"id": "58751", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58751", "title": "Butler (disambiguation)", "text": "A butler is a domestic worker, generally in a large household and usually the senior male servant.\nButler or Butlers may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58757", "revid": "842922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58757", "title": "Charles City", "text": ""}
{"id": "58758", "revid": "2576398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58758", "title": "Camden", "text": "Camden may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58759", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58759", "title": "Heike Kamerlingh-Onnes", "text": ""}
{"id": "58760", "revid": "1740026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58760", "title": "Cleveland (disambiguation)", "text": "Cleveland is a city in northeast Ohio, United States.\nCleveland may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58761", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58761", "title": "Heike Kamerlingh Onnes", "text": "Dutch experimental physicist (1853\u20131926)\nHeike Kamerlingh Onnes (; 21 September 1853 \u2013 21 February 1926) was a Dutch experimental physicist who became the first to liquefy helium, cooling it to near 1.5 kelvin (K). For this work, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1913.\nIn 1911, using liquid helium to investigate the electrical conductivity of solid mercury, Kamerlingh Onnes found that its electrical resistance vanishes at 4.2 K, i.e. superconductivity.\nBiography.\nHeike Kamerlingh Onnes was born on 21 September 1853 in Groningen, Netherlands, the son of Harm Kamerlingh Onnes, a brickworks owner, and Anna Gerdina Coers of Arnhem.\nIn 1870, Kamerlingh Onnes attended the University of Groningen, where he earned his B.Sc. the following year. From 1871 to 1873, he studied under Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff at the University of Heidelberg. He then returned to Groningen, obtaining an M.Sc. in 1878. The following year, he received his Ph.D. with a thesis on Earth's rotation.\nIn 1878, Kamerlingh Onnes became an assistant to Johannes Bosscha, the Director of the Delft Polytechnic, for whom he substituted as a lecturer in 1881 and 1882. From 1882 to 1923, he was Professor of Experimental Physics at Leiden University. In 1904, he founded a large cryogenics laboratory, and invited other researchers to the location\u2014which made him highly regarded in the scientific community. The laboratory is now known as the Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory.\nKamerlingh Onnes died on 21 February 1926 in Leiden at the age of 72.\nResearch.\nLiquefaction of helium.\nOn 10 July 1908, Kamerlingh Onnes was the first to liquefy helium, using several pre-cooling stages and the Hampson\u2013Linde cycle based on the Joule\u2013Thomson effect. This way he lowered the temperature to the boiling point of helium (\u2212269 \u00b0C, 4.2 K). By reducing the pressure of the liquid helium, he achieved a temperature near 1.5 K; this was the lowest temperature recorded on Earth at the time. The equipment employed is at the Museum Boerhaave in Leiden.\nKamerlingh Onnes received widespread recognition for this work, including the 1913 Nobel Prize in Physics \"for his investigations on the properties of matter at low temperatures which led, , to the production of liquid helium.\"\nFor further research on low-temperature, Kamerlingh Onnes needed large amounts of helium. This he obtained in 1911 from Welsbach's company, which processed thorianite to produce thorium for gas mantles. Helium is produced as a side product. Previously, he obtained helium from processing monazite, and used the processed monazite (which still contained thorium) to trade for the helium. On earth, helium is usually found in coexistence with radioactive material, since it is a product of radioactive decay.\nDiscovery of superconductivity.\nIn 1911, Kamerlingh Onnes measured the electrical conductivity of pure metals (mercury, and later tin and lead) at very low temperatures. Some scientists, such as Lord Kelvin, believed that electrons flowing through a conductor would come to a complete halt or, in other words, metal resistivity would become infinitely large at absolute zero. Others, including Kamerlingh Onnes, felt that a conductor's electrical resistance would steadily decrease and drop to nil. Augustus Matthiessen said that when the temperature decreases, the metal conductivity usually improves or in other words, the electrical resistivity usually decreases with a decrease of temperature.\nOn 8 April 1911, Kamerlingh Onnes found that at 4.2 K the resistance in a solid mercury wire immersed in liquid helium suddenly vanished. He immediately realized the significance of the discovery (as became clear when his notebook was deciphered a century later). He reported that \"Mercury has passed into a new state, which on account of its extraordinary electrical properties may be called the superconductive state\". He published more articles about the phenomenon, initially referring to it as \"supraconductivity\", and later adopting the modern-day term \"superconductivity\". On the same day he noted that \"Just before the lowest temperature [about 1.8 K] was reached, the boiling suddenly stopped and was replaced by evaporation in which liquid visibly shrank\" which was the first observation of superfluidity of the surrounding helium bath.\nFamily.\nIn 1887, Kamerlingh Onnes married Maria Adriana Wilhelmina Elisabeth Bijleveld, with whom he had one child, named Albert. His brother, Menso Kamerlingh Onnes (1860\u20131925), was a painter and the father of another painter, Harm Kamerlingh Onnes. Their sister, Jenny, married Floris Verster (1861\u20131927), also a painter.\nCommemorations.\nSome of the instruments Kamerlingh Onnes devised for his experiments can be seen at the Boerhaave Museum in Leiden. The apparatus he used to first liquefy helium is on display in the lobby of the physics department at Leiden University, where the low-temperature lab is also named in his honor. His student and successor as director of the lab Willem Hendrik Keesom was the first person who was able to solidify helium, in 1926. The former Kamerlingh Onnes laboratory building is currently the Law Faculty at Leiden University and is known as \"Kamerlingh Onnes Gebouw\" (Kamerlingh Onnes Building), often shortened to \"KOG\". The current science faculty has a \"Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratorium\" named after him, as well as a plaque and several machines used by Kamerling Onnes in the main hall of the physics department.\nThe Kamerlingh Onnes Award (1948) and the Kamerlingh Onnes Prize (2000) were established in his honor, recognizing further advances in low-temperature science.\nThe Onnes effect referring to the creeping of superfluid helium is named in his honor.\nKamerlingh Onnes crater on the Moon is named after him.\nKamerlingh Onnes is credited with coining the term \"enthalpy\".\nKamerlingh Onnes' discovery of superconductivity was named an IEEE Milestone in 2011.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58762", "revid": "50981263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58762", "title": "Clinton", "text": "Clinton is an English toponymic surname, indicating one's ancestors came from English places called Glympton or Glinton. Clinton has also been used as a given name since the late 19th century. \nNotable people with the name Clinton include: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "58763", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58763", "title": "Clifton", "text": "Clifton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58764", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58764", "title": "Timeline of classical mechanics", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe following is a timeline of the history of classical mechanics:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58766", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58766", "title": "Christian Andreas Doppler", "text": ""}
{"id": "58767", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58767", "title": "Corning", "text": "Corning may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nIn Canada:\nIn the United States of America:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58768", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58768", "title": "Vicente Aleixandre", "text": "Spanish poet (1898\u20131984)\nVicente P\u00edo Marcelino Cirilo Aleixandre y Merlo (; 26 April 1898 \u2013 14 December 1984) was a Spanish poet who was born in Seville. Aleixandre received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1977 \"for a creative poetic writing which illuminates man's condition in the cosmos and in present-day society, at the same time representing the great renewal of the traditions of Spanish poetry between the wars\". He was part of the Generation of '27.\nAleixandre's early poetry, which he wrote mostly in free verse, is highly surrealistic. It also praises the beauty of nature by using symbols that represent the earth and the sea. Many of Aleixandre's early poems are filled with sadness. They reflect his feeling that people have lost the passion and free spirit that he saw in nature. He was one of the greatest poets of Spanish literature alongside Cernuda and Lorca. The melancholia of his poetry was also the melancholy of failed or ephemeral love affairs.\nAleixandre's bisexuality was well known to his circle of friends, but he never admitted it publicly. He had a long-term love relationship with the poet Carlos Bouso\u00f1o.\nHe died on 14 December 1984 in Madrid, aged 86.\nHis works.\nHis early collections of poetry include \"Passion of the Earth\" (1935) and \"Destruction or Love\" (1933). In 1944, he wrote \"Shadow of Paradise\", the poetry where he first began to concentrate on themes such as fellowship, friendliness, and spiritual unity. His later books of poetry include \"History of the Heart\" (1954) and \"In a Vast Dominion\" (1962).\nAleixandre studied law at the University of Madrid. Selections of his work were translated into English in \"Twenty Poems of Vicente Aleixandre\" (1977) and \"A Longing for the Light: Selected Poems of Vincent Aleixandre\" (1979; Copper Canyon Press, 2007) translated by Lewis Hyde.\nDuring the Civil War Aleixandre was among the contributors of \"El Mono Azul\", a Republican cultural magazine.\nPure poetry.\nHis first book, \"\u00c1mbito\", written between 1924 and 1927 and published in M\u00e1laga in 1928, is the work of an incipient poet who has not yet found his own voice. The assonated short verse and art for art's sake aesthetics of Juan Ram\u00f3n Jim\u00e9nez and Jorge Guill\u00e9n prevail, in addition to the ultraistic echoes of classical Spanish poetry from the Golden Age, especially Fray Luis de Le\u00f3n and G\u00f3ngora.\nSurreal poetry.\nIn the following years, between 1928 and 1932, there is a radical change in Aleixandre's poetic conception. Inspired by the predecessors of surrealism (especially Arthur Rimbaud and Lautr\u00e9amont) and by Freud, he adopts prose poetry (\"Passion of the Earth\", 1935), free verse, and plainly surreal methods such as free verse and the visionary image (\"Swords like Lips\", 1932; \"Destruction or Love\", 1935; \"Shadow of Paradise\", 1944) as his form of expression. The aesthetics of these poems are irrational, and the expression comes close to \"flow\", even without accepting it as a dogma of faith. Along with surrealism, the poet does not take on any tradition, not even the metric, and frees himself. Luis Cernuda could say: \"Your verse is like nothing else.\" And in effect his style brings unpublished stylistic novelties such as the inverted simile (\"Swords like Lips\") or the equivalent disjunctive nexus (\"Destruction or Love\"), the hyperbole adds, the uncoded dream symbol, enriching without question the stylistic possibilities of the Spanish poetic language, just as Garcilaso, G\u00f3ngora and Rub\u00e9n Dar\u00edo, each one a great renovator of lyric language, did in the past. The poet celebrates love as a natural, ungovernable force that breaks down all human limitations and criticizes the conventionalism with which society attempts to conquer it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58769", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58769", "title": "William Murdoch", "text": "Scottish engineer and inventor (1754\u20131839)\nWilliam Murdoch (sometimes spelled Murdock) (21 August 1754 \u2013 15 November 1839) was a Scottish chemist, inventor, and mechanical engineer.\nMurdoch was employed by the firm of Boulton &amp; Watt and worked for them in Cornwall, as a steam engine erector for ten years, spending most of the rest of his life in Birmingham, England.\nMurdoch was the inventor of the oscillating cylinder steam engine, and gas lighting is attributed to him in the early 1790s, as well as the term \"gasometer\". However the Dutch-Belgian Academic Jean-Pierre Minckelers had already published on coal gasification and gas lighting in 1784, and had used gas to light his auditorium at the University of Leuven from 1785. Archibald Cochrane, 9th Earl of Dundonald, had also used gas for lighting his family estate from 1789 onwards.\nMurdoch also made innovations to the steam engine, including the sun and planet gear and D slide valve. He invented the steam gun and the pneumatic tube message system, and worked on one of the first British paddle steamers to cross the English Channel. Murdoch built a prototype steam locomotive in 1784, and made a number of discoveries in chemistry.\nMurdoch remained an employee, and later a partner, of Boulton and Watt until the 1830s, but his reputation as an inventor has been obscured by the reputations of Matthew Boulton, James Watt, and the firm they founded.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Murdoch was born in Bello Mill near Old Cumnock in Ayrshire, Scotland, the third of seven children and the first son to survive beyond infancy. A son of John Murdoch, a former Hanoverian artillery gunner and a Millwright and tenant of Bello Mill on the estate of James Boswell in Auchinleck, he was educated until the age of ten at the Old Cumnock Kirk School before attending Auchinleck school under William Halbert, author of a highly regarded arithmetic textbook. Murdoch excelled in mathematics.\nMurdoch also learned the principles of mechanics, practical experimentation and working in metal and wood by assisting in his father's work. Together with his father, he built a \"wooden horse\" about 1763. His \"Wooden Horse on Wheels\" was a tricycle propelled by hand cranks. There are reports that in his youth Murdoch was responsible for the construction of one of the bridges over the River Nith; this possibly derives from his father's work in building the Craikston Bridge over Lugar Water in 1774, which William would have been involved in. He is also said to have carried out experiments in coal gas, using coal heated in a copper kettle in a small cave near his father's mill. However, there is no contemporary documentation.\nBirmingham.\nIn 1777, at age 23, Murdoch walked to Birmingham, a distance of over , to ask for a job with James Watt, the steam engine manufacturer. Both Watt and Murdoch were probably aware of each other because of their connections with James Boswell, who had made several visits to Watt's workshop at Soho. Watt's partner Matthew Boulton was so impressed by Murdoch's wooden hat, made on a lathe of his own design, that he hired him. Murdoch began his career with Boulton and Watt in the pattern workshop of their Soho Foundry, making patterns for the casting of machine parts. By 1778 Watt wrote:\nif William Murdoch is not at home he should be sent for immediately as he understands the patterns and care must be taken to avoid mistakes of which our engine shop has been too guilty.\nHe Anglicised his name to \"Murdock\" when he settled in England. Murdoch progressed to work in fitting and erecting steam engines and was often sent from Soho for this purpose.\nBy 1779 Boulton was writing to Watt:\nI think Wm. Murdock a valuable man and deserves every civility and encouragement.\nOn his first solo job erecting an engine at Wanlockhead Mine, Murdoch made the first of many improvements to the standard Boulton and Watt engine by rearranging the gears to enable the steam valve to be worked automatically by the action of the exhaust shaft.\nCornwall.\nIn September 1779 Murdoch was sent to Redruth in Cornwall as a senior engine erector, responsible for the erection, maintenance &amp; repair of Boulton &amp; Watt engines. These were used for pumping water out of the Cornish Tin mines, and therefore the efficiency and efficacy of the engines was an important factor in the amount of tin, and money, which could be extracted from a mine. At that time steam engines were not simply sold to customers but operated, and maintained by the builders for groups or individuals known as 'adventurers' (shareholders). The engine manufacturers were paid not for a completed engine but through a complex formula calculated on the basis of that engine's performance, as Watt described:\nOur profits arise not from making the engine, but from a certain proportion of the savings in fuel which we make over any common engine, that raises the same quantity of water to the same height.\nTherefore, Murdoch's skill in getting the most out of his engines directly impacted upon Boulton and Watts profits. This he did so successfully that by 1782 Boulton was writing:\nWe want more Murdocks, for of all others he is the most active man and best engine erector I ever saw...When I look at the work done it astonishes me &amp; is entirely owing to the spirit and activity of Murdoch who hath not gone to bed 3 of the nights.\nDue to the frequent problems which could occur with steam engines Murdoch was kept busy travelling around the area repairing and attempting to improve the performance of the engines under his care.\nIndustrial espionage.\nIn Cornwall at that time there were a number of engine erectors competing with each other, each with different technical methods of achieving the same ends. As a result, a great deal of copying of mechanical innovations and violation of patents went on, often through the reporting of casual conversations between engineers and practical observations of engine modifications. The risk of his patents being infringed was something which particularly exercised Watt, and so Murdoch was, in addition to his other activities, called upon to make reports and swear out affidavits for legal actions against Boulton &amp; Watt's competitors. In the close knit and clannish Cornwall of the time this was sometimes at his own risk. As one of his colleagues stated to Watt:\nIf he makes an Affidavit against Carpenter or Penandrea, there will be no safety for him in Redruth.\nThis early industrial espionage did not operate all in one direction and Murdoch was often required to undertake inspections of competitors' engines, either to determine whether patents had been infringed or to assess the effectiveness of those engines.\nMechanical improvements and inventions.\nWhile based in Cornwall, Murdoch had to deal with a wide range of mechanical problems related to steam engines, and this led him to make practical improvements to the basic steam engine designs used by Boulton and Watt. From 1782 there is evidence that Murdoch was discussing and collaborating with Watt on a number of inventions and improvements. There is, however, a dearth of letters from Murdoch to Watt from 1780 until 1797 in the Watt archive, possibly, as argued by John Griffiths, due to an attempt by Watt's son, James Watt Junior, to uphold his father's reputation by removing any evidence of the origin of some of the inventions he patented. It is almost certain that Murdoch's contract of employment, in common with those for other employees of Boulton and Watt, specified that anything he invented would be the intellectual property of his employers, and frequently it was they who filed, and benefited from, patents on these inventions.\nOne of Murdoch's most significant inventions, for which evidence exists to attribute it to him, was the sun and planet gear which allowed steam power to be used to \"produce a continued Rotative or Circular Motion round an Axis or Centre, and thereby to give Motion to the Wheels of Mills or other Machines\". This gear converted the vertical motion of a beam, driven by a steam engine, into circular motion using a 'planet', a cogwheel fixed at the end of a rod connected to the beam of the engine. With the motion of the beam this revolved around, and turned, the 'sun' a second rotating cog fixed to and which turned the drive shaft. This system of achieving rotary motion, which enabled Boulton and Watt to evade the patent of the crank held by James Pickard, was patented in by James Watt in his own name in October 1781 (although Samuel Smiles, biographer of Boulton and Watt, attributes the invention to Murdoch; there also exists a drawing of the sun and planet system in Murdoch's hand dated August 1781). Other evidence attributing this invention to Murdoch takes the form of a letter from Boulton to a colleague concerning Watt's forthcoming October patents in which he writes:\nHe has another rotative scheme to add, which I could have told him of long ago when first invented by William Murdock but I do not think it a matter of much consequence.\nAnother innovation of Murdoch's was his 1799 invention of a much simplified and more efficient steam wheel than those in use at the time. A precursor of the steam turbine, the steam wheel allowed the wheel to be directly turned by the pressure of the steam moving through it. By this time Murdoch's contract had been amended and he was able to patent this device in his own name.\nMurdoch also carried out a number of experiments with compressed air and developed the first pneumatic message system which worked by using compressed air to propel a message in a cylinder through a tube to its intended destination. This system was developed by the London Pneumatic Despatch Company and became widely used; Harrods in particular used this system until at least the 1960s. Murdoch also used compressed air to ring a bell at his home to announce visitors.\nSome of Murdoch's other minor inventions and experiments were: a machine developed in 1784 or 1785 in Cornwall for drilling wooden pipes, (in 1810 this was further developed and patented for stone pipes), a steam cannon which he attempted to use in 1803 to knock down a wall at Soho, a steam gun in the same year which fired 3\u00a0cm lead bullets, and machinery to grind and compress peat moss under great pressure to produce a material with \"the appearance of the finest Jet\".\nSteam powered locomotion.\nAn important invention for which Murdoch receives less credit than one might expect is Britain's first working model of a steam carriage, or road locomotive, in 1784. French engineer Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot had already demonstrated the utility of such a device by building (from 1769) two full-sized working steam vehicles, one of which was designed to carry 4\u20135 tonnes. All that was needed was a more effective design.\nThe earliest mention of Murdoch's thoughts and plans for this method of transport was in March 1784 when his colleague in Cornwall, Thomas Wilson, wrote to Watt on Murdoch's \"new scheme\":\nIt is no less than drawing carriages upon the road with steam engines...he says that what he proposes, is different from anything you ever thought of, and that he is positively certain of its answering and that there is a great deal of money to be made by it.\nReplies from Watt made it clear that he thought there was no future in such an idea and, fearful of losing Murdoch's services in Cornwall, attempted to dissuade him from the scheme.\nA later letter from Boulton disclosed more details of Murdoch's ideas:\nHe proposes to catch most of the condensed Steam by making it strike against broad Copper plates &amp; the condensed part trickling down may be caught and returned into its Boiler or other reservoir. This may do some good in rain or frosty weather &amp; he proposes to have different sized revolvers to apply at every hill &amp; every vale according to their angle with ye Horizon... I verely believe he would sooner give up all his cornish business &amp; interest than be deprived of carrying the thing into execution.\nIn the same letter Boulton also secretly urged Watt to include a scheme for a steam-powered carriage in his patent application, which Watt did shortly thereafter.\nI have given such descriptions of engines for wheel carriages as I could do in the time and space I could allow myself; but it is very defective and can only serve to keep other people from similar patents.\nBy this time Murdoch had already built a working model of his steam carriage (now in Thinktank, Birmingham Science Museum); accounts exist from witnesses who \"saw the model steam carriage run around Murdoch's living room in Redruth in 1784\". This is the first recorded example in Great Britain of a man-made machine moving around completely under its own power.\nMurdoch's working model was a three-wheeled vehicle about a foot in height with the engine and boiler placed between the two larger back wheels with a spirit lamp underneath to heat the water and a tiller at the front turning the smaller front wheel. The mechanics of the model locomotive incorporated a number of innovations, such as a boiler safety valve, having the cylinder partly immersed in the boiler and using a new valve system on the lines of the D-slide valve.\nThis model was not the only one made by Murdoch as he continued experimenting with the design and by August 1786 had made at least one other model, of a different size, which we know of. Apart from this Murdoch does not appear to have worked much on his ideas from 1784 to 1786, because of the continuing high volume of work for Boulton and Watt, his marriage in 1785, and the birth of his and his wife's twins in the same year. Shortly after this birth, and with a second model already built, Murdoch took steps to patent his steam locomotive. However, at Exeter on the way to London he was met by Boulton who persuaded him to return to Cornwall without registering the patent. As Boulton wrote to Watt on 2 September 1795:\nHe said He was going to London to get Men but I soon found he was going there with his Steam Carg to shew it &amp; to take out a patent. He having been told by Mr W. Wilkn what Sadler had said &amp; he had likewise read in the news paper Simmingtons puff which had rekindled all Wms fire &amp; impations to make Steam Carriages. However, I prevailed upon him readily to return to Cornwall by the next days diligence &amp; he accordingly arivd here this day at noon, since which he hath unpacked his Carg &amp; made Travil a Mile or two in Rivers's great room in a Circle making it carry the fire Shovel, poker &amp; tongs.\nThis demonstration of his steam carriage in Rivers Great Room, at the King's Head hotel, Truro, was the first public demonstration in Britain given of steam locomotion in action.\nAlthough after 1786 there is no further mention of Murdoch's work on Steam Carriages in Watt's or Boulton's correspondence, a volume of evidence exists that he continued to work on it without his employers' support, and some argue that a full size version was built.\nOne story often told, both in respect of a full size carriage and one of his models, is that one night Murdoch decided to test his carriage outside on the open road and it soon outpaced him, leaving him to chase after it. Whilst chasing it he encountered a local clergyman in a state of considerable distress who had mistaken his carriage, with its billowing smoke and fire burning under the boiler, for the devil. This story may be accurate; however, is more likely to relate to a model than to a full-size steam carriage.\nAnother story often told, this one almost certainly apocryphal, is of Murdoch travelling from \"mine to mine in a steam chaise lit by gas\". Given the state of the roads at that time this can be discounted. However, it is argued by John Griffiths that Murdoch may have built a full-size steam carriage some time in the 1790s, which could be the source of this story.\nA fact important to the later development of the steam locomotive by others was that, in 1797 and 1798, Richard Trevithick came to live in Redruth next door to the house where William Murdoch lived (1782 to 1798). Trevithick would have seen and been influenced by Murdoch's experiments, and would certainly have been aware of his work in this area. There is also a story told by Murdoch's son John of a visit by Trevithick and Andrew Vivian to see a model engine in 1794: The model of the wheel carriage engine was made in the summer of 1792 and was then shown to many of the inhabitants of Redruth \u2013 about two years after Trevithick and A. Vivian called at my father's house in Redruth... My father mentions that... on that day they asked him to show his model of the wheel carriage engine which worked with strong steam and no vacuum. This was immediately shown to them in a working state.\nIn any event without the support of Boulton and Watt, who appear to have opposed Murdoch's work due to the need to use high pressure steam which Watt distrusted, Murdoch was unable to develop or gain publicity for his invention and it was left to Trevithick and others to develop it commercially later.\nChemistry discoveries.\nIn addition to his mechanical work Murdoch also experimented in the field of chemistry and made a number of discoveries. One such was the discovery, first recorded in 1784, of iron cement made from sal ammoniac, or ammonium chloride and iron filings, apparently discovered when Murdoch observed that these two components had accidentally mixed in his tool bag and formed a solid mass. This iron cement was used to fix and harden the joints of steam engines, thus creating a hard durable seal.\nAnother discovery, and the first for which Murdoch took out a patent, was that of\n The art or method of making from the same materials and by the same processes entirely new copperas, vitriol, and different sorts of dye or dying stuff, paints and colours, and also a composition for preserving the bottoms of all kinds of vessels and all wood required to be immersed in water, from worms, weeds, barnacles, and every other foulness which usually does or may adhere thereto.\nThis patent was filed in 1791 and although it was not developed at the time this can be seen as the first step in the development of aniline dyes and coatings.\nBritish isinglass.\nIn 1795 Murdoch developed a replacement for isinglass, a precipitate made from sturgeon used in the clarifying of beer to remove impurities, which had to be imported from Russia at great expense. Murdoch's replacement was made from dried Cod and was much cheaper than the 25 shillings a pound which isinglass cost. This cost saving was so attractive that the Committee of London Brewers paid \u00a32000 for the right to use his invention.\nMurdoch's isinglass replacement was so effective that in a court case brought by the British Customs and Excise Authorities, the noted chemist, Sir Humphry Davy in answer to a question on whether it was \"proper to be used for the purpose of fineing beer\" testified that:\nI believe it is if properly prepared \u2013 it is the same substance as Isinglass.\nUse of Murdoch's \"Isinglass made of British fish\" continued and played an important role in reducing British brewers' reliance on imported raw materials.\nGas lighting.\nThe key invention for which Murdoch is best known is the application of gas lighting as a replacement for oil and tallow produced light. It was in 1792 that he first began experimenting with the use of gas, derived from the heating of coal and other materials, for lighting. Many believe this experimenting took place in a cave. There is some uncertainty as to when he first demonstrated this process in practice; however, most sources identify this as between 1792 and 1794. About a decade before Murdoch, the Dutch-Belgian academic Jean-Pierre Minckelers was the first to use gas lighting on a practical scale.\nTo use gas for practical purposes it was first necessary to develop a working method for the production and capture of the gas. There is considerable doubt as to the date by which this process was perfected. However, numerous accounts exist that by 1794 Murdoch was producing coal gas from a small retort containing heated coals with a three or four-foot iron tube attached, through which he piped the gas before sending it through an old gun barrel and igniting it to produce light.\nMurdoch's house at Redruth was the first domestic residence to be lit by gas.\nOver the next few years Murdoch performed \"a series of experiments upon the quantity and quality of the gasses contained in different substances\" and upon the best way of transporting, storing, purifying and lighting these. It is known, by the account of William Fairbairn that Murdoch occasionally used his gas as a portable lantern:\n\"It was a dark winter's night and how to reach the house over such bad roads was a question not easily solved. Mr Murdoch, however, fruitful in resource, went to the gasworks where he filled a bladder which he had with him, and, placing it under his arm like a bagpipe, he discharged through the stem of an old tobacco pipe a stream of gas which enabled us to walk in safety to Medlock Bank.\"\nIn 1798 Murdoch returned to Birmingham to work in the Soho foundry and continued his experiments with gas, as part of which he lit the interior of the Soho main building, although it is likely that it was lit only in part and not (at this time) permanently. In 1802 as part of the public celebrations of the Peace of Amiens he made a public exhibition of his lighting by illuminating the exterior of the Soho Foundry. The first industrial factory to be illuminated by gas was the Philips and Lee cotton mill in Manchester which was fully lit by Murdoch in 1805, four years after the idea was first broached. Initially this mill contained 50 gas lights, although this soon grew to 904. The length of time taken to complete this project was partly due to experimentations and improvements in the process developed by Murdoch to make the lighting of a large factory by gas practicable and cost effective \u2013 such as purifying the gas with lime to remove the smell and determining the best temperature to heat coal to obtain the maximum quantity of gas \u2013 although Murdoch continued to be involved in other engine work for Boulton and Watt, which took up much of his time.\nDespite his pioneering work with gas Murdoch never made any money from this invention due to his failure to obtain a patent. This may have been partly a result of the advice of James Watt, Junior, that the discovery was not patentable, and partly a result of the commercial failure of his earlier patent of 1791 for an early form of aniline dye. This failure to apply for a patent, despite the commercial participation of Boulton and Watt in this field, left the fledgling industry of gas production and lighting open for exploitation by other commercial interests, such as his former assistant Samuel Clegg and Frederick Albert Winsor. In large part this was due to the failure of Boulton and Watt to make sufficient effort to expand from the factory and mill lighting market which they dominated by 1809 into the street and domestic lighting market. This reason for this lassitude is unknown but can be attributed to lack of interest, a failure to appreciate the size of the potential market, and a lack of desire to be involved in smaller, less prestigious projects. By May 1809 Boulton and Watt faced little competition in any gas market due to their success in lobbying Parliament to block the granting of a charter for the National Heat and Light Company, their only real competitor in this field. However, despite blocking the charter until 1812 this advantage was squandered as Boulton and Watt did not develop the gas market, or technology, and in 1814 abandoned the gas business. A few decades later most towns in Britain were lit by gas and most had their own gasworks.\nApart from the benefits of gas lighting and heating, the process for producing coal gas yielded a number of other substances which were subsequently successfully exploited. Among these were coke; ammonia; phenol (carbolic acid), a disinfectant and one of the components of bakelite, the first synthetic plastic invented in 1910; and coal tar, which contained a number of organic chemicals. Coal tar was subsequently used to produce the first synthetic dye, mauve, by William Henry Perkin in 1856 and in 1853 was found, by Charles Gerhardt to contain the chemical acetylsalicylic acid, now known as aspirin.\n\"The Caledonia\" paddle steamer.\nBoulton and Watt had been involved in a minor way with attempts to apply steam power to boats, providing in 1807 for Robert Fulton the engine for \"North River Steamboat\", the first steamboat to run on the Hudson River, (the boat later referred to as the \"Clermont\"). Murdoch was primarily responsible for designing and building this engine and for agreeing technical details and designs with Fulton, who also worked on the design of the engine. Boulton and Watt also provided engines for a number of other marine vessels. However, it was not until the purchase of \"The Caledonia\" by James Watt Jr. in 1817 that they became seriously involved in the marine engineering business. The task of refitting \"The Caledonia\", building and installing new engines and boilers and making her seaworthy and efficient in fuel consumption was a difficult process and Murdoch, although frequently suffering from fever and rheumatism, directed this. By August the vessel was able to be tested on its intended route, from Surrey Commercial Docks, London to Gravesend and at first made 8 miles per hour (mph). During its sea trials Murdoch carried out experiments on \"The Caledonia\" to measure the effect on fuel consumption and speed of changes in the depth of the paddles and whether one or both engines were used. This resulted in an increase of speed to .\nWhile carrying out trials \"The Caledonia\" was challenged to a race by their competitors for the London to Gravesend route, the \"Sons of Commerce\". Actually there were two races to Gravesend, both of which were won by the Boulton and Watt vessel, by a greater margin on the second attempt. The result was that the proprietors of the \"Sons of Commerce\" placed an order with Boulton and Watt for a new steamboat engine. There were also a number of other orders for steamboat engines, both for commercial customers and the Royal Navy, and Murdoch was in effect the head of this branch of the business, being referred to and deferred to on all aspects of their marine business. It is estimated that from 1813 until 1825, marine engines of over were made by Boulton and Watt, and used in some 40 to 60 vessels.\nShortly after the trials were completed \"The Caledonia\" carried out a crossing of the English Channel when Watt Jr. took it to Rotterdam and up the Rhine to Koblenz.\nLater years.\nMurdoch wrote a paper, \"Account of the Application of Gas from Coal to Economical Purposes\" which was presented to the Royal Society in 1808. In that year he was awarded their Rumford Gold Medal for \"both the first idea of applying, and the first actual application of gas to economical purposes\".\nIn 1817 Murdoch moved into a large new house he had built outside Birmingham. The house incorporated a number of curiosities and innovations he has designed including gas lighting, a doorbell worked by compressed air and an air conditioning system: described by Joshua Field as \"He has a good stove for heating the rooms with hot air which enters the rooms and staircases at convenient places.\" In 1815 he designed and installed the first gravity-fed, piped hot water system since classical times at the Royal Pump Rooms, Leamington Spa.\nIn September 1830, in declining health at age 76, Murdoch's partnership with Boulton &amp; Watt which began in 1810 came to an end, at which point he was receiving \u00a31,000 per year. The reasons for this appear to be both the increasing unprofitability of Boulton and Watt and Murdoch's increasing ill health. Murdoch died in 1839, aged 85. He was buried at St. Mary's Church, Handsworth.\nHonours and awards.\nAt the celebration of the centenary of gas lighting in 1892, a bust of Murdoch was unveiled by Lord Kelvin in the Wallace Monument, Stirling, and there is also a bust of him by Sir Francis Legatt Chantrey at St. Mary's Church.\nHis life and works are commemorated by the Moonstones; a statue of him, Boulton and Watt, by William Bloye; and \"Murdock Road\", all in Birmingham. There is also a \"Murdoch House\" in Rotherhithe, London.\nThe town of Redruth has an Annual Murdoch Day in June. The 2007 event included a parade of schoolchildren with banners on the theme \"Earth, Wind, Fire and Water\" and the first public journey of a full-size, working reproduction of Murdoch's Steam Carriage.\nIn 2019, he was inducted into the Scottish Engineering Hall of Fame.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58770", "revid": "7426491", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58770", "title": "Darien", "text": "Darien may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58771", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58771", "title": "Elgin", "text": "Elgin may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58772", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58772", "title": "Timeline of atomic and subatomic physics", "text": " \nA timeline of atomic and subatomic physics, including particle physics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58773", "revid": "48656293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58773", "title": "Fairmont", "text": "Fairmont can refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58774", "revid": "13560851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58774", "title": "Frankfort", "text": "Frankfort may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58775", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58775", "title": "Timeline of electromagnetism and classical optics", "text": "Timeline of electromagnetism and classical optics lists, within the history of electromagnetism, the associated theories, technology, and events.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58776", "revid": "206667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58776", "title": "Freeport", "text": "Freeport, a variant of free port, may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58777", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58777", "title": "Timeline of thermodynamics", "text": "A timeline of events in the history of thermodynamics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58778", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58778", "title": "Timeline of states of matter and phase transitions", "text": "This is a timeline of states of matter and phase transitions, specifically discoveries related to either of these topics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58783", "revid": "46524402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58783", "title": "Timeline of particle physics technology", "text": "Timeline of particle physics technology"}
{"id": "58785", "revid": "28862934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58785", "title": "Timeline of gravitational physics and relativity", "text": "The following is a timeline of gravitational physics and general relativity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58787", "revid": "50446187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58787", "title": "Timeline of black hole physics", "text": "The following timeline outlines notable discoveries in the study of black holes in physics, beginning in the 18th century and continuing to modern observations. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58789", "revid": "50483179", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58789", "title": "James Bowman Lindsay", "text": "Scottish Inventor\nJames Bowman Lindsay (8 September 1799 \u2013 29 June 1862) was a Scottish inventor and writer. He is credited with early developments in several fields, such as incandescent lighting and telegraphy.\nLife and work.\nJames Bowman Lindsay was born in Cotton of West Hills, Carmyllie near Arbroath in Angus, Scotland, son of John Lindsay, farm worker, and Elizabeth Bowman. During his childhood he was trained as a handloom weaver. However at the same time he educated himself and his parents recognised their son's potential. As a result, they saved enough money to be able to send him to St. Andrews University where he matriculated in 1821. As a student he soon made a name for himself in the fields of mathematics and physics and, after completing an additional course of studies in theology, he finally returned to Dundee in 1829 as Science and Mathematics Lecturer at the Watt Institution.\nAmong his technological innovations, which were not developed until long after his death, are the incandescent light bulb, submarine telegraphy and arc welding. Unfortunately, his claims are not well documented but, in July 1835, Lindsay did demonstrate a constant electric lamp at a public meeting in Dundee, Scotland. He could \"read a book at a distance of one and a half feet\". However, he did little to establish his claim or to develop the device.\nIn 1854 Lindsay took out a patent for his system of wireless telegraphy through water. This was the culmination of many years' painstaking experimentation in various parts of the country. The device, however, had an unfortunate flaw. In order to maximise its effectiveness, it was desirable to lay another line on dry land, which exceeded the width of water to be traversed. Although this would have been possible across the Straits of Dover, it would not have been practicable in the case of the Atlantic. A realistic alternative, the use of significantly larger batteries and terminals, was never fully explored.\nAware that the difficulties in laying transatlantic cable had not yet been solved, Lindsay took a great interest in the debate, with the revolutionary suggestion of using electric arc welding to join cables, and sacrificial anodes to prevent corrosion. These ideas, though not entirely new, were not to see widespread practical application for many years to come.\nLindsay was an accomplished astronomer and philologist. In 1858, he published a set of astronomical tables intended to assist in fixing historical dates, which he called his 'Chrono-Astrolabe'. The same year, on the recommendation of Prime Minister Lord Derby, Queen Victoria granted Lindsay a pension of \u00a3100 a year. He died on 29 June 1862.\nLike Preston Watson, the Dundee pioneer of flight, Lindsay possessed neither the will nor the sheer ruthlessness to promote his innovations as effectively as he might. A deeply religious and humane person, he refused the offer of a post at the British Museum so that he could care for his aged mother.\nLindsay's chief glory lay in his vision, which helped to propel scientific advance through the 19th and 20th centuries. His Lecture on Electricity effectively foretold the development of the information society, and he confidently predicted cities lit by electricity. His concern with electric light was mainly prompted by the need to provide a safe method of illuminating the jute mills, where severe fires had devastated the lives of the workers.\nJames Lindsay was buried in the Western Cemetery, Dundee. In 1901 a monument, in the form of an obelisk, was erected by public subscription, at his grave. The monument is topped by a bronze hand clasping a lightning conductor.\nObituary.\nAn obituary from \"The British Millennial Harbinger\", page 292, 1 August 1862, provides more information:\n \"Departed this life, Lord's day, June 29, 1862 at his residence in South Union Street, Dundee, Mr. J. B. Lindsay. Some of our readers will remember a recent review of a critical and learned \"Treatise on the Mode and Subjects of Baptism\" which Mr. Lindsay had then just published. On a recent visit to Dundee we had an interesting conversation with the author upon more advanced truths, and a brief inspection of his great and still incomplete work \u2013 a Dictionary of 53 Languages, upon which he has labored closely since 1828. He commenced with 150 languages, but in time concluded that three lives would be requisite to its completion and therefore reduced the number. When we saw it, he deemed himself able, if spared, to finish the work within one year. His treatise upon baptism is the work of a scholar, and places before the reader that exhaustive proof that immersion is the one and only action commanded by the Saviour which can only be reached as the result of complete classical research. Recently the author put on the Lord in baptism and cast his lot with brethren who continue steadfastly observing the order of the Lord's house. He was born at Carmullie, in 1799, and commenced life by an apprenticeship to the loom, although at times he would leave his sedentary occupation for the more agreeable one of the plough. By deep application, and by constantly snatching the leisure moments which might present themselves for reading, he acquired considerable knowledge, and began to aspire to a university education, which he obtained at St. Andrews. The study of languages, as well as more abstruse scientific subjects, occupied the chief part of his attention, and to which he applied himself with all his native love of learning. In 1841 he was appointed teacher at the Dundee prison, which appointment he held till he resigned it in 1858. During the whole of this time he scarcely ever moved from his house, except to the prison and back, and the result of a portion of his labors was discovered to his friends in conversations and experiments relating to electrical phenomena, which revealed to them the fact that, alone and unaided \u2013 from the sheer force of his genius \u2013 he had discovered as early, if not earlier, than Morse or Wheatstone, the principles of the present system of electric telegraphy. Immediately after the public adoption of the present system of land-telegraphy, Mr. Lindsay directed his attention to the sending of messages across water by means of insulated wires, and succeeded \u2013 after several trials on ponds and sheets of water in the neighborhood \u2013 in establishing on a sure basis the principles of electric communication by means of insulated submerged wires.\n Nor did he stop here \u2013 his searching experiments inspired him with the hope of transmitting messages across rivers and seas without the aid of wires, and he so far perfected his invention as to transmit currents across several small pieces of water \u2013 the last occasion on which he publicly experimented with this invention being in Portsmouth, about two years ago, when he was highly successful and the results afforded great satisfaction to the scientific gentlemen who assisted. He directed almost every penny he could spare, after procuring the bare necessaries of existence, to the acquisition of philological, as well as scientific and philosophical tomes \u2013 and with an income that never till the last few years, we believe, exceeding \u00a350, collected a library of rare and profound works, valued, by competent judges at from \u00a31300 to \u00a31500. At several times however, he was assisted by friends who took an interest in his efforts, and chief among these the present Lord Lindsay. The last gift from this nobleman was a splendid copy of the works of Confucius, in the original, which is said to be the only complete copy of the works of that philosopher in Great Britain.\n Mr. Lindsay's attention was originally riveted on philological studies, owing to doubts which he entertained as to the authenticity of Scripture history \u2013 more especially as regarded the origin of the human race from one primal pair: but the more he studied the different languages dead and extant, the more his doubts gave way, and the stronger did his convictions of the truth of the literal exactness of the Scripture statements on this subject become.\n Mr. Lindsay also published what may be called a prelude to the great work to which he has devoted his life \u2013 viz.: \"The Pentecontaglossal Paternoster,\" being the Lord's prayer in fifty languages.\n The little time we spent with Mr. Lindsay was enough to enable us to know that profound study had not turned either his head or heart from Christ. He was looking unto Jesus and there is every reason to hope that he will receive a crown of rejoicing at the coming of the Lord.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58790", "revid": "36986459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58790", "title": "Fraud", "text": "Intentional deception to gain unlawfully\nIn law, fraud is intentional deception to deprive a victim of a legal right or to gain from a victim unlawfully or unfairly. Fraud can violate civil law (e.g., a fraud victim may sue the fraud perpetrator to thwart the fraud or recover monetary compensation) or criminal law (e.g., a fraud perpetrator may be prosecuted and imprisoned by governmental authorities), or it may be an element of another civil or criminal wrong despite itself causing no loss of money, property, or legal right. The purpose of fraud may be monetary gain or other benefits, such as obtaining a passport, travel document, or driver's licence. In cases of mortgage fraud, the perpetrator attempts to qualify for a mortgage by way of false statements.\nTerminology.\nFraud can be defined as either a civil wrong or a criminal act. For civil fraud, a government agency or person or entity harmed by fraud may bring litigation to stop the fraud, seek monetary damages, or both. For criminal fraud, a person may be prosecuted for the fraud and potentially face fines, incarceration, or both.\nCivil law.\nIn common law jurisdictions, as a civil wrong, fraud is considered a tort. While the precise definitions and requirements of proof vary among jurisdictions, the requisite elements of fraud as a tort generally are the intentional misrepresentation or concealment of an important fact upon which the victim is meant to rely, and in fact does rely, to the detriment of the victim. Proving fraud in a court of law is often said to be difficult as the intention to defraud is the key element in question. As such, proving fraud comes with a \"greater evidentiary burden than other civil claims\". This difficulty is exacerbated by the fact that some jurisdictions require the victim to prove fraud by clear and convincing evidence.\nIn cases of a fraudulently induced contract, fraud may serve as a legal defence in a civil action for breach of contract or specific performance of a contract. Similarly, fraud may serve as a basis for a court to invoke its equitable jurisdiction. The remedies for fraud may include rescission (i.e., reversal) of a fraudulently obtained agreement or transaction, the recovery of a monetary award to compensate for the harm caused, punitive damages to punish or deter the misconduct, and possibly others.\nCriminal law.\nIn common law jurisdictions, as a criminal offence, fraud takes many different forms, some general (e.g., theft by false pretense) and some specific to particular categories of victims or misconduct (e.g., bank fraud, insurance fraud, forgery). The elements of fraud as a crime similarly vary. The requisite elements of perhaps the most general form of criminal fraud, theft by false pretense, are the intentional deception of a victim by false representation or pretense with the intent of persuading the victim to part with property and with the victim parting with property in reliance on the representation or pretense and with the perpetrator intending to keep the property from the victim.\nTypes of fraud.\nThe falsification of documents, known as forgery, and counterfeiting are types of fraud involved in physical duplication or fabrication. The \"theft\" of one's personal information or identity, like finding another's social security number and then using it as identification, is a type of fraud. Fraud can be committed through and across many media including mail, wire, phone, and the Internet (computer crime and Internet fraud).\nGiven the international nature of the web and the ease with which users can hide their location, obstacles to checking identity and legitimacy online, and the variety of hacker techniques available to gain access to PII have all contributed to the very rapid growth of Internet fraud. In some countries, tax fraud is also prosecuted under false billing or tax forgery. There have also been fraudulent \"discoveries\", e.g., science, where the appetite is for prestige rather than immediate monetary gain. A hoax is a distinct concept that involves deliberate deception without the intention of gain or of materially damaging or depriving a victim.\nInternal fraud.\nInternal fraud, also known as \"insider fraud\", is fraud committed or attempted by someone within an organization such as an employee.\nCommodities fraud.\nThe illegal act of obtaining (or the attempt to obtain) a certain amount of currency in accordance with a contract that promises the later exchange of equated assets, which ultimately never arrive, is a type of fraud, known as commodities fraud. Alternatively, the term can relate to the failure of registering in an exchange, the act of deliberately providing falsified information to clients, the action of executing transactions with the sole purpose of making a profit for the payee, and the theft of client funds.\nDetection.\nThe detection of fraudulent activities on a large scale is possible with the harvesting of massive amounts of financial data paired with predictive analytics or forensic analytics, the use of electronic data to reconstruct or detect financial fraud. Using computer-based analytic methods in particular allows for the surfacing of errors, anomalies, inefficiencies, irregularities, and biases which often refer to fraudsters gravitating to certain dollar amounts to get past internal control thresholds. These high-level tests include tests related to Benford's Law and possibly also those statistics known as descriptive statistics. High-level tests are always followed by more focused tests to look for small samples of highly irregular transactions. The familiar methods of correlation and time-series analysis can also be used to detect fraud and other irregularities.\nCost.\nParticipants of a 2010 survey by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners estimated that the typical organization loses five per cent of its annual revenue to fraud, with a median loss of $160,000. Fraud committed by owners and executives was more than nine times as costly as employee fraud. The industries most commonly affected are banking, manufacturing, and government.\nBy region.\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn China, according to the Criminal Law of the People's Republic of China, the Crime of Fraud () refers to the \"criminal act of deceiving and obtaining public or private property\". According to Article 266 of the Criminal Law:\nAccording to the \"Interpretation on Several Issues Concerning the Specific Application of the Law in Handling Criminal Cases of Fraud\" () issued by the Supreme People's Court and the Supreme People's Procuratorate in 2011, for cases of fraud involving public or private property with a value ranging from 3,000 yuan to 30,000 yuan, from 30,000 yuan to 500,000 yuan, and over 500,000 yuan, they should be respectively deemed as \"relatively large amount\", \"large amount\", and \"particularly large amount\" as stipulated in Article 266 of the Criminal Law.\nIndia.\nIn India, the criminal laws are enshrined in the Indian Penal Code, supplemented by the Criminal Procedure Code and Indian Evidence Act.\nEurope.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 2016, the estimated value lost through fraud in the UK was \u00a3193 billion a year. In January 2018, the \"Financial Times\" reported that the value of UK fraud hit a 15-year high of \u00a32.11bn in 2017, according to a study. The article said that the accountancy firm BDO examined reported fraud cases worth more than \u00a350,000 and found that the total number rose to 577 in 2017, compared with 212 in 2003. The study found that the average amount stolen in each incident rose to \u00a33.66m, up from \u00a31.5m in 2003.\nAs at November 2017, fraud is the most common criminal offence in the UK according to a study by Crowe Clark Whitehill, Experian and the Centre for Counter Fraud Studies. The 2017 Annual Fraud Indicator shows that fraud costs about \u00a310,000 per family in the UK, and the UK's fraud cost exceeds the gross domestic product of 148 countries such as Romania, Qatar and Hungary.\nAccording to another review by the UK anti-fraud charity Fraud Advisory Panel (FAP), business fraud accounted for \u00a3144bn, while fraud against individuals was estimated at \u00a39.7bn. The FAP has been particularly critical of the support available from the police to victims of fraud in the UK outside of London. Although victims of fraud are generally referred to the UK's national fraud and cybercrime reporting centre, Action Fraud, the FAP found that there was \"little chance\" that these crime reports would be followed up with any kind of substantive law enforcement action by UK authorities, according to the report.\nIn July 2016, it was reported that fraudulent activity levels in the UK increased in the 10 years leading up to 2016 from \u00a352 billion to \u00a3193 bn. This figure would be a conservative estimate, since as the former commissioner of the City of London Police, Adrian Leppard, has said, only 1 in 12 such crimes are actually reported. Donald Toon, director of the NCA's economic crime command, stated in July 2016: \"The annual losses to the UK from fraud are estimated to be more than \u00a3190bn\". Figures released in October 2015 from the Crime Survey of England and Wales found that there had been 5.1 million incidents of fraud in England and Wales in the previous year, affecting an estimated one in 12 adults and making it the most common form of crime.\nAlso in July 2016, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) stated: \"Almost six million fraud and cyber crimes were committed last year in England and Wales and estimated there were two million computer misuse offences and 3.8 million fraud offences in the 12 months to the end of March 2016.\" Fraud affects one in ten people in the UK. According to the ONS, most fraud relates to bank account fraud. These figures are separate from the headline estimate that another 6.3 million crimes (distinct from fraud) were perpetrated in the UK against adults in the year to March 2016.\nFraud was not included in a \"Crime Harm Index\" published by the Office for National Statistics in 2016. The Chief of the National Audit Office (NAO), Sir Anyas Morse has also said \"For too long, as a low-value but high-volume crime, online fraud has been overlooked by government, law enforcement and industry. It is now the most commonly experienced crime in England and Wales and demands an urgent response.\"\nHM Treasury issued guidance to central government departments in January 2011 concerned with \"Tackling Internal Fraud\", concerned that economic pressures and potential staff redundancies at the time might lead those staff who \"might be tempted\" to commit fraud to make more of any opportunity which might arise, noting a possible shift in the balance between \"the reward from fraud\" and the risk of detection. An aspect of the guidance was to equip staff to look out for \"fraud indicators\": clues or hints that an individual member of staff, team or area of activity might need \"a closer look\".\nIn 2022, the television program \"Scam Interceptors\" revealed that the majority of fraud in the United Kingdom was perpetrated by industrial-scale scamming call centres in Asia.\nEngland, Wales, and Northern Ireland.\nSince 2007, fraud in England and Wales and Northern Ireland has been covered by the Fraud Act 2006. The Act was given royal assent on 8 November 2006, and came into effect on 15 January 2007. The Act gives a statutory definition of the criminal offence of fraud, defining it in three classes\u2014fraud by false representation, fraud by failing to disclose information, and fraud by abuse of position. It provides that a person found guilty of fraud is liable to a fine or imprisonment for up to six months on summary conviction, or a fine or imprisonment for up to ten years on conviction on indictment. This Act largely replaces the laws relating to obtaining property by deception, obtaining a pecuniary advantage and other offences that were created under the Theft Act 1978.\nSerious Fraud Office.\nThe Serious Fraud Office is an arm of the Government of the United Kingdom, accountable to the Attorney General for England and Wales. The National Fraud Authority (NFA) was, until 2014, a government agency coordinating the counter-fraud response in the UK. Cifas is a British fraud prevention service, a not-for-profit membership organization for all sectors that enables organizations to share and access fraud data using their databases. Cifas is dedicated to the prevention of fraud, including internal fraud by staff, and the identification of financial and related crime.\nScotland.\nIn Scots law, fraud is covered under the common law and a number of statutory offences. The main fraud offences are common law fraud, uttering, embezzlement, and statutory fraud. The Fraud Act 2006 does not apply in Scotland.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nSection 380(1) of the Criminal Code provides the general definition of fraud in Canada:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;380. (1) Every one who, by deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means, whether or not it is a false pretence within the meaning of this Act, defrauds the public or any person, whether ascertained or not, of any property, money or valuable security or any service,\n(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding fourteen years, where the subject-matter of the offence is a testamentary instrument or the value of the subject-matter of the offence exceeds five thousand dollars; or\n(b) is guilty\n(i) of an indictable offence and is liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or\n(ii) of an offence punishable on summary conviction, where the value of the subject-matter of the offence does not exceed five thousand dollars.\nIn addition to the penalties outlined above, the court can also issue a prohibition order under s. 380.2 (preventing a person from \"seeking, obtaining or continuing any employment, or becoming or being a volunteer in any capacity, that involves having authority over the real property, money or valuable security of another person\"). It can also make a restitution order under s. 380.3. The Canadian courts have held that the offence consists of two distinct elements:\n* A prohibited act of deceit, falsehood or other fraudulent means. In the absence of deceit or falsehood, the courts will look objectively for a \"dishonest act\"; and\n* The deprivation must be caused by the prohibited act, and deprivation must relate to property, money, valuable security, or any service.\nThe Supreme Court of Canada has held that deprivation is satisfied on proof of detriment, prejudice or risk of prejudice; there does not have to be actual loss. Deprivation of confidential information, in the nature of a trade secret or copyrighted material that has commercial value, has also been held to fall within the scope of the offence.\nUnited States.\nCriminal fraud.\nThe proof requirements for criminal fraud charges in the United States are essentially the same as the requirements for other crimes: guilt must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Throughout the United States fraud charges can be misdemeanours or felonies depending on the amount of loss involved. High-value fraud can also trigger additional penalties. For example, in California, losses of $500,000 or more will result in an extra two, three, or five years in prison in addition to the regular penalty for the fraud. The U.S. government's 2006 fraud review concluded that fraud is a significantly under-reported crime, and while various agencies and organizations were attempting to tackle the issue, greater cooperation was needed to achieve a real impact in the public sector. The scale of the problem pointed to the need for a small but high-powered body to bring together the numerous counter-fraud initiatives that existed.\nCivil fraud.\nAlthough elements may vary by jurisdiction and the specific allegations made by a plaintiff who files a lawsuit that alleged fraud, typical elements of a fraud case are that:\nTo establish a civil claim of fraud, most jurisdictions in the United States require that each element of a fraud claim be pleaded with particularity and be proved by a preponderance of the evidence, meaning that it is more likely than not that the fraud occurred. Some jurisdictions impose a higher evidentiary standard, such as Washington State's requirement that the elements of fraud be proved with clear, cogent, and convincing evidence (very probable evidence), or Pennsylvania's requirement that common law fraud be proved by clear and convincing evidence.\nThe measure of damages in fraud cases is normally computed using one of two rules:\nSpecial damages may be allowed if shown to have been proximately caused by the defendant's fraud and the damage amounts are proved with specificity. Some jurisdictions may permit a plaintiff in a fraud case to seek punitive or exemplary damages.\nAnti-fraud provisioning.\nBeyond legislation directed at preventing or punishing fraud, some governmental and non-governmental organizations engage in anti-fraud efforts. Between 1911 and 1933, 47 states adopted the so-called Blue Sky Laws status. These laws were enacted and enforced at the state level and regulated the offering and sale of securities to protect the public from fraud. Though the specific provisions of these laws varied among states, they all required the registration of all securities offerings and sales, as well as of every U.S. stockbroker and brokerage firm; however, these Blue Sky laws were generally found to be ineffective. To increase public trust in the capital markets, Franklin D. Roosevelt established the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The main reason for the creation of the SEC was to regulate the stock market and prevent corporate abuses relating to the offering and sale of securities and corporate reporting. The SEC was given the power to license and regulate stock exchanges, the companies whose securities traded on them, and the brokers and dealers who conducted the trading.\nStatistics.\nRate of fraud per capita for individual countries as reported by United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is shown below for the last available year. Definitions of fraud and fraction of unreported fraud might differ for each country.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nApart from fraud, there are several related categories of intentional deceptions that may or may not include the elements of personal gain or damage to another individual:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58791", "revid": "995019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58791", "title": "Taiwanese Hokkien", "text": "Variety of Hokkien spoken in Taiwan\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nTaiwanese Hokkien ( , ), or Taiwanese (), also known as Taigi (), Taiwanese Taigi (), Taiwanese Southern Min (), Hoklo and Holo, is a variety of the Hokkien language spoken natively by more than 70 percent of the population of Taiwan. It is spoken by a significant portion of those Taiwanese people who are descended from Hoklo immigrants of southern Fujian. It is one of the national languages of Taiwan.\nTaiwanese is generally similar to Hokkien spoken in Xiamen (Amoy), Quanzhou, and Zhangzhou, as well as dialects used in Southeast Asia, such as Singaporean Hokkien, Penang Hokkien, Philippine Hokkien, Medan Hokkien, and Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien. It is mutually intelligible with the Amoy and Zhangzhou varieties at the mouth of the Jiulong River in China, and with Philippine Hokkien to the south in the Philippines, spoken altogether by about 3 million people. The mass popularity of Hokkien entertainment media from Taiwan has given prominence to the Taiwanese variety of Hokkien, especially since the 1980s.\nClassification.\nTaiwanese Hokkien is a variety of Hokkien, a Southern Min language. Like many varieties of Min Chinese, it has distinct literary and colloquial layers of vocabulary, often associated with formal and informal registers respectively. The literary layer can be traced to the late Tang dynasty, and as such is related to Middle Chinese. In contrast, the colloquial layers of Min varieties are believed to have branched from the mainstream of Chinese around the time of the Han dynasty.\nRegional variations within the Taiwanese variant may be traced back to Hokkien variants spoken in Southern Fujian, specifically those from Quanzhou and Zhangzhou, and later from Amoy. Taiwanese also contains loanwords from Japanese and native Formosan languages. Recent work by scholars such as Ekki Lu, Toru Sakai, and Li Khin-hoann, based on former research by scholars such as Ong Iok-tek, has gone so far as to associate part of the basic vocabulary of the colloquial Taiwanese with the Austronesian and Tai language families; however, such claims are controversial.\nThe literary form of Hokkien once flourished in Fujian and was brought to Taiwan by early emigrants. \"Tale of the Lychee Mirror\", a manuscript of a series of plays published during the Ming dynasty in 1566, is one of the earliest known works. This form of language is now largely extinct. However, literary readings of the numbers are used in certain contexts, such as reciting telephone numbers (see Literary and colloquial readings of Chinese characters).\nHistory and formation.\nSpread of Hokkien to Taiwan.\nDuring the Yuan dynasty, Quanzhou became a major international port for trade with the outside world. From that period onwards, many people from the Hokkien-speaking regions (southern Fujian) started to emigrate overseas due to political and economic reasons. One of the destinations for the emigrants was the island of Taiwan (formerly Formosa), starting around 1600. They brought their native Hokkien language with them.\nDuring the late Ming dynasty, the political chaos pushed more migrants from southern Fujian and eastern Guangdong to Taiwan. The earliest immigrants involved in Taiwan's development included pirate-merchants Pedro Yan Shiqi and Zheng Zhilong. In 1621, Chinese Peter and his forces, hailing from Zhangzhou, occupied \"Ponkan\" (modern-day Beigang, Yunlin) and started to develop \"Tirosen\" (modern-day Chiayi). After the death of Peter and another pirate, Li Dan of Quanzhou, Zheng sought to dominate the Strait of Taiwan. By 1628, he had grown so powerful that the Ming court bestowed him the official title, \"Patrolling Admiral\".\nIn 1624, the number of Chinese on the island was about 25,000. During the reign of Chongzhen Emperor (1627\u20131644), there were frequent droughts in the Fujian region. Zheng and a Chinese official suggested sending victims to Taiwan and provide \"for each person three taels of silver and for each three people one ox\". Although this plan was never carried out, the Zheng family maintained an interest in Taiwan that would have dire consequences for the Dutch Empire, who ruled Taiwan as Dutch Formosa at the time.\nDevelopment and divergence.\nIn 1624 and 1626, the Dutch and Spanish forces occupied the Tainan and Keelung areas, respectively. During the 40 years of Dutch colonial rule of Taiwan, the Dutch recruited many Chinese from the regions around Quanzhou and Zhangzhou in southern Fujian to help develop Taiwan.\nIn the 1661 Siege of Fort Zeelandia, Chinese general Koxinga, marshaling a military force composed of fellow hometown hoklo soldiers of Southern Fujian, expelled the Dutch and established the Kingdom of Tungning. Koxinga originated from the Quanzhou region. Chen Yonghua, who was in charge of establishing the education system of Tungning, also originated from Tong'an county of Quanzhou Prefecture. Because most of the soldiers he brought to Taiwan came from Quanzhou, the prestige variant of Hokkien on the island at the time was the Quanzhou dialect.\nIn 1683, Chinese admiral Shi Lang, marshaling a military force again composed of fellow hometown Hoklo soldiers of Southern Fujian, attacked Taiwan in the Battle of Penghu, ending the Tungning era and beginning Qing dynasty rule (until 1895).\nIn the first decades of the 18th century, the linguistic differences between the Qing imperial bureaucrats and the commoners were recorded by the Mandarin-speaking first Imperial High Commissioner to Taiwan (1722), Huang Shujing:\nThe tone of Huang's message foretold the uneasy relationships between different language communities and colonial establishments over the next few centuries.\nDuring the 200 years of Qing dynasty rule, thousands of immigrants from Fujian arrived yearly; the population was over one million in the middle of the 18th century. Civil unrest and armed conflicts were frequent. In addition to resistance against governments (both Chinese and later Japanese), battles between ethnic groups were also significant: the belligerents usually grouped around the language they used. History has recorded battles between Hakka speakers and Hokkien speakers, between these and the aborigines, and even between those who spoke different variants of Hokkien.\nIn the early 20th century, the Hoklo Taiwanese could be categorized as originating from modern-day Xiamen, Quanzhou, Zhangzhou, and Zhangpu. People from the former two areas (Quanzhou-speaking) were dominant in the north of the island and along the west coast, whereas people from the latter two areas (Zhangzhou-speaking) were dominant in the south and perhaps the central plains as well.\nAlthough there were conflicts between Quanzhou and Zhangzhou speakers in Taiwan historically, their gradual intermingling led to the mixture of the two accents. Apart from Lukang city and Yilan County, which have preserved their original Quanzhou and Zhangzhou accents, respectively, almost every region of Taiwan now speaks a mixture of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou Hokkien. A similar phenomenon occurred in Xiamen (Amoy) after 1842, when the mixture of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou Hokkien displaced the Quanzhou dialect to yield the modern Amoy dialect.\nDuring the Imperial Japanese rule of Taiwan, Taiwan began to hold Amoy Hokkien as its standard pronunciation; the Japanese called this mixture .\nDue to the influx of Japanese loanwords before 1945 and the political separation after 1949, Amoy Hokkien and Taiwanese Hokkien began to diverge slightly.\nModern times.\nLater, in the 20th century, the conceptualization of Taiwanese was more controversial than most variations of Chinese because, at one time, it marked a clear division between the mainlanders who arrived in 1949 and the pre-existing majority native Taiwanese. Although the political and linguistic divisions between the two groups have blurred considerably, the political issues surrounding the Taiwanese have been more controversial and sensitive than for other varieties of Chinese.\nAfter the First Sino-Japanese War, due to military defeat to the Japanese, the Qing dynasty ceded Taiwan to Japan, causing contact with the Hokkien-speaking regions of mainland China to stop. During Japanese rule, Japanese became an official language in Taiwan, and Taiwanese began to absorb a large number of Japanese loanwords into its language. Examples of such loanwords (some which had in turn been borrowed from English) include \"pi\u0101n-s\u00f3\u0358\" from , \"ph\u00eang\" from (see also Taiwanese units of measurement), \"ga-suh\" from , \"o\u0358-t\u00f3\u0358-b\u00e1i\" from . All of these caused the Taiwanese to deviate from Hokkien used elsewhere.\nDuring K\u014dminka of the late Japanese colonial period, the Japanese language appeared in every corner of Taiwan. The Second Sino-Japanese War beginning in 1937 brought stricter measures into force, and along with the outlawing of romanized Taiwanese, various publications were prohibited and Confucian-style private schools which taught Classical Chinese with literary Southern Min pronunciation \u2013 was closed down in 1939. Taiwanese thus was reduced to a common daily language. In 1937 the colonial government introduced a concept called \"National Language Family\" (\u56fd\u8a9e\u306e\u5bb6), which meant that families that proved that they adopted Japanese as their daily language enjoyed benefits such as greater access to education.\nAfter the handover of Taiwan to the Republic of China in 1945, there was a brief cultural exchange with mainland China followed by further oppression. The Chinese Civil War resulted in another political separation when the Kuomintang (Chinese Nationalist Party) government retreated to Taiwan following their defeat by the communists in 1949. The influx of two million soldiers and civilians caused the population of Taiwan to increase from 6 million to 8 million. The government subsequently promoted Mandarin while suppressing, but short of banning, the use of written Taiwanese Hokkien (e.g. Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b, a phonetic rendering of spoken Hokkien using the Latin alphabet) as part of its general policy of political repression. In 1964 the use of spoken Taiwanese Hokkien or Hakka in schools or in official settings was forbidden; violations of the prohibition in schools often resulted in physical punishments, fines, or humiliation.\nOnly after the lifting of martial law in 1987 and the mother tongue movement in the 1990s did Taiwan finally see a true revival in Taiwanese Hokkien. Today, there are a large number of Taiwanese Hokkien scholars dedicated to researching the language. Despite this, however, according to census data, the number of people speaking Taiwanese continued to drop. Taiwanese remains the de facto language of temple ceremonies as part of Taiwanese Folk Beliefs.\nThe history of the Taiwanese variety of Hokkien and its interaction with Mandarin is complex and, at times, controversial, even regarding its name. The language has no official name in Taiwan. Some dislike the name \"Taiwanese\" as they feel that it belittles other languages spoken on the island such as Mandarin, Hakka, and the indigenous languages. Others prefer the names Southern Min, Minnan or Hokkien as this views Taiwanese as a form of the Chinese variety spoken in Fujian province in mainland China. Others dislike those names for precisely the same reason. In the American Community Survey run by the United States Census Bureau, Taiwanese was referred to as \"Formosan\" from 2012 to 2015 and as \"Min Nan Chinese\" since 2016.\nPhonology.\nPhonologically, Hokkien is a tonal language with extensive tone sandhi rules. Syllables consist maximally of an initial consonant, a vowel, a final consonant, and a tone.\nConsonants.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnlike many other varieties of Chinese such as Mandarin, Cantonese, Hakka, etc., there are no native labiodental phonemes (i.e. , , , etc.).\nVowels.\nTaiwanese has the following vowels:\nThe vowel \u27e8o\u27e9 is akin to a schwa; in contrast, \u27e8o\u0358 \u27e9 (with dot) or \u27e8oo\u27e9 is a more open vowel. In addition, there are several diphthongs and triphthongs (for example, \u27e8iau\u27e9). The consonants \u27e8m\u27e9 and \u27e8ng\u27e9 can function as a syllabic nucleus and are therefore included here as vowels. The vowels may be either plain or nasal: \u27e8a\u27e9 is non-nasal, and \u27e8a\u207f\u27e9 or \u27e8ann\u27e9 is the same vowel with concurrent nasal articulation. This is similar to French, Portuguese, Polish, and many other languages.\nThere are two pronunciations of vowel \u27e8o\u27e9. In the south (e.g., Tainan and Kaohsiung) it is ; in the north (e.g., Taipei) it is . Due to the development of transportation and communication, both pronunciations are common and acceptable throughout the country.\n is a diphthong [i\u026a] before -k or -ng (), and is slightly shortened and retracted before -p or -t to something more like [\u00ed\u031e]. Similarly, is slightly shortened and retracted before -t or -n to something more like [\u028a].\nTones.\nIn the traditional analysis, there are eight \"tones\", numbered from 1 to 8. Strictly speaking, there are only five tonal contours. But as in other Sinitic languages, the two kinds of stopped syllables are also considered to be tones and assigned numbers 4 and 8. Words of tone 6 have merged into either tone 2 or tone 7 in most Taiwanese variants, and thus tone 6 is duplicated in the count. Here the eight tones are shown, following the traditional tone class categorization, named after the tones of Middle Chinese:\nSee (for one example) the modern phonological analysis in , which challenges these notions.\nFor tones 4 and 8, a final consonant \u27e8p\u27e9, \u27e8t\u27e9, or \u27e8k\u27e9 may appear. When this happens, it is impossible for the syllable to be nasal. Indeed, these are the counterpart to the nasal final consonants \u27e8m\u27e9, \u27e8n\u27e9, and \u27e8ng\u27e9, respectively, in other tones. However, it is possible to have a nasal 4th or 8th tone syllable such as \u27e8siah\u207f\u27e9 or \u27e8siahnn\u27e9, as long as there is no final consonant other than \u27e8h\u27e9.\nIn the dialect spoken near the northern coast of Taiwan, there is no distinction between tones number 8 and number 4 \u2013 both are pronounced as if they follow the tone sandhi rules of tone number 4.\nTone number 0, typically written with two consecutive hyphens (--a) or a point (\u00b7a) before the syllable with this tone, is used to mark enclitics denoting the extent of a verb action, the end of a noun phrase, etc. A frequent use of this tone is to denote a question, such as in or (lit.\u2009'Have you eaten yet?'). This is realized by speaking the syllable with either a low-falling tone (3) or a low stop (4). The syllable prior to the \u27e8--\u27e9 maintains its original tone.\nNinth tone.\nAlthough uncommon in written Taiwanese, there is a ninth tone which is used for three main purposes: contractions, triplicated adjectives, and loan words. The writing conventions for this tone vary, but the most common are with a breve accent (U+0306, \u27e8\u25cc\u0306\u27e9) in POJ and with a double acute accent (U+030B, \u27e8\u25cc\u030b\u27e9) in Tai-lo.\nSyllabic structure.\nA syllable requires a vowel (or diphthong or triphthong) to appear in the middle. All consonants can appear at the initial position. The consonants \u27e8p, t, k\u27e9 and \u27e8m, n, ng\u27e9 (and some consider \u27e8h\u27e9) may appear at the end of a syllable. Therefore, it is possible to have syllables such as \u27e8ngiau\u27e9 (\"(to) tickle\") and \u27e8thng\u27e9 (\"soup\").\nTone sandhi.\nTaiwanese has extremely extensive tone sandhi (tone-changing) rules: in an utterance, only the last syllable pronounced is not affected by the rules. What an 'utterance' (or 'intonational phrase') is, in the context of this language, is an ongoing topic for linguistic research, but some general rules apply:\nThe following syllables are unaffected by tone sandhi:\nNormal tone sandhi.\nThe following rules, listed in the traditional pedagogical mnemonic order, govern the pronunciation of tone on each of the syllables affected (that is, all but those described according to the rules listed above):\nAn example of the normal tone sandhi rule is:\n : 7 + 7 = 3 + 7\n : 4 + 4 = 2 + 4\nDouble tone sandhi.\nThere are a number of a single syllable words that undergo double tone sandhi, that is, they follow the tone change rule twice and are pronounced according to the second tone change. These syllables are almost always a 4th tone ending in -h, and include the words \u6b32 (beh), \u4f6e (kah), \u95a3 (koh), \u624d (chiah/tsiah), as well as the 3rd tone verb \u53bb kh\u00ec. As a result of following the tone change rule twice, these syllables are all pronounced as tone number 1.\nBefore the -\u00e1 suffix.\nApart from the normal tone sandhi rules described above, there are two special cases where a different set of tone sandhi apply. In a noun with the noun suffix '\u4ed4' (\u00e1), the penultimate syllable is governed by the following rules:\nIn triplicated adjectives.\nFinally, in the case of a single-syllable adjective triplication (for added emphasis), the first syllable is governed by the following rules (the second syllable follows the normal tone sandhi rules above):\nSee , and the work of Robert L. Cheng (\u912d\u826f\u5049; T\u0113\u207f Li\u00f4ng-\u00fai or T\u0113nn Li\u00f4ng-\u00fai) for modern linguistic approaches to tones and tone sandhi in Taiwanese.\nLexicon.\nModern linguistic studies (by Robert L. Cheng and Chin-An Li, for example) estimate that most (75% to 90%) Taiwanese words have cognates in other Sinitic languages. False friends do exist; for example, \"ch\u00e1u\"/\"ts\u00e1u\" () means \"to run\" in Taiwanese, whereas the Mandarin cognate, \"z\u01d2u\", means \"to walk\". Moreover, cognates may have different lexical categories; for example, the morpheme \"ph\u012b\u207f\"/\"ph\u012bnn\" () means not only \"nose\" (a noun, as in Mandarin \"b\u00ed\") but also \"to smell\" (a verb, unlike Mandarin).\nAmong the apparently cognate-less words are many basic words with properties that contrast with similar-meaning words of pan-Chinese derivation. Often the former group lacks a standard Han character, and the words are variously considered colloquial, intimate, vulgar, uncultured, or more concrete in meaning than the pan-Chinese synonym. Some examples: \"l\u00e2ng\" ( or , person, concrete) vs. \"j\u00een\" (\u4eba, person, abstract); \"cha-b\u00f3\u0358\"/\"tsa-b\u00f3o\" (\u67e5\u67d0, woman) vs. \"l\u00fa-j\u00een\" (\u5973\u4eba, woman, literary). Unlike the English Germanic/Latin contrast, however, the two groups of Taiwanese words cannot be as strongly attributed to the influences of two disparate linguistic sources.\nExtensive contact with the Japanese language has left a legacy of Japanese loanwords, with 172 recorded in the Ministry of Education's \"Dictionary of Frequently-Used Taiwan Minnan\". Although a very small percentage of the vocabulary, their usage tends to be high-frequency because of their relevance to modern society and popular culture. Examples are: \"o\u0358-t\u00f3\u0358-b\u00e1i\"/\"oo-t\u00f3o-b\u00e1i\" from and \"ph\u00e1ng\" from . Grammatical particles borrowed from Japanese, notably \"te\u030dk\"/\"ti\u030dk\" from and \"ka\" from , show up in the Taiwanese of older speakers.\nWhereas Mandarin attaches a syllabic suffix to the singular pronoun to make a collective form, Taiwanese pronouns are collectivized through nasalization. For example, \"i\" (he/she/it) and \"go\u00e1\"/\"gu\u00e1\" (I) become \"in\" (they) and \"go\u00e1n\"/\"gu\u00e1n\" (we), respectively. The \"-n\" thus represents a subsyllabic morpheme. Like all other varieties of Chinese, Taiwanese does not have true grammatical plurals.\nUnlike English, Taiwanese has two first-person plural pronouns. This distinction is called inclusive, which includes the addressee, and exclusive, which excludes the addressee. Thus, \"go\u00e1n\"/\"gu\u00e1n\" means \"we excluding you\", while \"l\u00e1n\" means \"we including you\" (similar to pluralis auctoris). The inclusive \"l\u00e1n\" may be used to express politeness or solidarity, as in the example of a speaker asking a stranger \"Where do we live?\" while implicitly asking \"Where do \"you\" live?\".\nSyntax.\nThe syntax of Taiwanese is similar to southern Sinitic languages such as Hakka and Yue. The subject\u2013verb\u2013object sequence is typical as in, for example, Mandarin, but subject\u2013object\u2013verb or the passive voice (with the sequence object\u2013subject\u2013verb) is possible with particles. Take a simple sentence for example: 'I hold you.' The words involved are: \"go\u00e1\"/\"gu\u00e1\" ('I' or 'me'), \"ph\u014d\" ('to hold'), \"l\u00ed\" ('you').\nThe word \"h\u014d\u0358\"/\"h\u014do\" also has other uses, such as to introduce an embedded clause: \"Go\u00e1 h\u014d\u0358 l\u00ed ch\u00fai lim\"/\"Gu\u00e1 h\u014do l\u00ed ts\u00fai lim\" ('I give water for you to drink': \"ch\u00fai\"/\"ts\u00fai\" means 'water'; \"lim\" is 'to drink').\nScripts and orthographies.\nUntil the late 19th century, Taiwanese speakers wrote mostly in Classical Chinese, although songbooks using Han characters are attested from the 1820s. Among many systems of writing Taiwanese using Latin characters, the most used is called Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b (POJ) and was developed in the 19th century, while the Taiwanese Romanization System (T\u00e2i-l\u00f4) has been officially promoted since 2006 by Taiwan's Ministry of Education. (For additional romanized systems, see references in \"Orthography in Latin characters\", below.) Nonetheless, Taiwanese speakers nowadays most commonly write in Mandarin, though many of the same characters are also used to write Taiwanese.\nHan characters.\nIn most cases, Taiwanese speakers write using the script called Han characters as in Mandarin, although there are a number of special characters which are unique to Taiwanese and which are sometimes used in informal writing. Where Han characters are used, they are not always etymological or genetic; the borrowing of similar-sounding or similar-meaning characters is a common practice. Bilingual speakers of both Mandarin and Taiwanese sometimes attempt to represent the sounds by adopting similar-sounding Mandarin Han characters. For example, the Han characters of the vulgar slang 'kho\u00e0\u207f s\u00e1\u207f-si\u00e2u' or 'khu\u00e1nn s\u00e1nn-si\u00e2u' (\u770b\u4e09\u5c0f, substituted for the etymologically correct \u770b\u5565\u6f72, meaning 'What the hell are you looking at?') has very little meaning in Mandarin and may not be readily understood by a Taiwanese monolingual, as knowledge of Mandarin character readings is required to fully decipher it.\nIn 2007, the Ministry of Education in Taiwan published the first list of Taiwanese Southern Min Recommended Characters, a list of 300 Han characters standardized for the use of writing Taiwanese and implemented the teaching of them in schools. In 2008, the ministry published a second list of 100 characters, and in 2009 added 300 more, giving a total of 700 standardized characters used to write uniquely Taiwanese words. With increasing literacy in Taiwanese, there are currently more Taiwanese online bloggers who write Taiwanese online using these standardized Chinese characters. Han characters are also used by Taiwan's Hokkien literary circle for Hokkien poets and writers to write literature or poetry in Taiwanese.\nOrthography in Latin characters.\nThere are several Latin-based orthographies, the oldest being Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b (POJ, meaning \"vernacular writing\"), developed in the 19th century. Taiwanese Romanization System (T\u00e2i-\u00f4an l\u00f4-m\u00e1-j\u012b, T\u00e2i-l\u00f4) and Taiwanese Language Phonetic Alphabet (TLPA) are two later adaptations of POJ. Other 20th-century innovations include Daighi tongiong pingim (DT), Ganvsig daiuuan bhanlam ghiw tongiong pingimv (GDT), Modern Literal Taiwanese (MLT), Simplified MLT (SMLT), Phofsit Daibuun (PSDB). The last four employ tonal spelling to indicate tone without use of diacritic symbols, but letters instead.\nIn POJ, the traditional list of letters is\na b ch chh e g h i j k kh l m n ng o o\u0358 p ph s t th (ts) u\nTwenty-four in all, including the obsolete \u27e8ts\u27e9, which was used to represent the modern \u27e8ch\u27e9 at some places. The additional necessities are the nasal symbol \u27e8\u207f\u27e9\u00a0 (superscript \u27e8n\u27e9; the uppercase form \u27e8N\u27e9 is sometimes used in all caps texts, such as book titles or section headings), and the tonal diacritics.\nPOJ was developed first by Presbyterian missionaries and later by the indigenous Presbyterian Church in Taiwan; they have been active in promoting the language since the late 19th century. Recently there has been an increase in texts using a mixed orthography of Han characters and romanization, although these texts remain uncommon.\nIn 2006, the National Languages Committee (Ministry of Education, Republic of China) proposed its Taiwanese Romanization System (T\u00e2i-\u00f4an L\u00f4-m\u00e1-j\u012b pheng-im, T\u00e2i-L\u00f4). This alphabet reconciles two orthographies, TLPA and POJ. The changes for the consonants involved using \u27e8ts\u27e9 for POJ's \u27e8ch\u27e9 (reverting to the orthography in the 19th century), and \u27e8tsh\u27e9 for \u27e8chh\u27e9. For the vowels, \u27e8o\u0358\u27e9 could optionally be represented as \u27e8oo\u27e9. The nasal mark \u27e8\u207f\u27e9 could also be represented optionally as \u27e8nn\u27e9. The rest of the alphabet, most notably the use of diacritics to mark the tones, appeared to keep to the POJ tradition. One of the aims of this compromise was to curb any increase of 'market share' for Daighi tongiong pingim/Tongyong Pinyin. It is unclear whether the community will adopt this new agreement.\nOrthographies in kana and in bopomofo.\nThere was an orthography of Taiwanese based on the Japanese kana during Japanese rule. The Kuomintang government also tried to introduce an orthography in bopomofo.\nComparison of orthographies.\nHere the different orthographies are compared:\nComputing.\nMany keyboard layouts and input methods for entering either Latin or Han characters in Taiwanese are available. Some of them are free of charge, and some are commercial.\nThe Min Nan dialect group is registered per as https://. Taiwanese Min Nan can be represented as 'zh-min-nan-TW'.\nWhen writing Taiwanese in Han characters, some writers create 'new' characters when they consider it is impossible to use directly or borrow existing ones; this corresponds to similar practices in character usage in Cantonese, Vietnamese ch\u1eef n\u00f4m, Korean hanja and Japanese kanji. These are usually not encoded in Unicode (or the corresponding ISO/IEC 10646: Universal Character Set), thus creating problems in computer processing.\nAll Latin characters required by Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b can be represented using Unicode (or the corresponding ISO/IEC 10646: Universal character set), using precomposed or combining (diacritics) characters.\nPrior to June 2004, the vowel akin to but more open than \u27e8o\u27e9, written with a 'dot above right', was not encoded. The usual workaround was to use the (stand-alone; spacing) character 'middle dot' (U+00B7, \u27e8\u00b7\u27e9) or, less commonly, the combining character 'dot above' (U+0307). As these are far from ideal, since 1997, proposals have been submitted to the ISO/IEC working group in charge of ISO/IEC 10646 \u2013 namely, https:// \u2013 to encode a new combining character 'dot above right'. This is now officially assigned to U+0358 (see documents http://, https://, https://,\nhttp:// , and http:// ). Font support has followed: for example, in Charis SIL.\nSociolinguistics.\nRegional variations.\nThe prestige variant of Taiwanese Hokkien is the southern speech found in Tainan and Kaohsiung. Other major variants are the northern speech, the central speech (near Taichung and the port town of Lukang), and the northern (northeastern) coastal speech (dominant in Yilan).\nThe distinguishing feature of the coastal speech is the use of the vowel \u27e8ui\u207f\u27e9 or \u27e8uinn\u27e9 in place of \u27e8ng\u27e9. The northern speech is distinguished by the absence of the 8th tone, and some vowel exchanges (for example, \u27e8i\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9, \u27e8e\u27e9 and \u27e8oe\u27e9 or \u27e8ue\u27e9). The central speech has an additional vowel or between \u27e8i\u27e9 and \u27e8u\u27e9, which may be represented as \u27e8\u00f6\u27e9. There are also a number of other pronunciation and lexical differences between the Taiwanese variants; the online Ministry of Education dictionary specifies these to a resolution of eight regions on Taiwan proper, in addition to Kinmen and Penghu.\nConcerning the fifth (rising) tone in normal sandhi patterns, the Quanzhou/Coastal/Northern dialects change to the seventh (mid-level) tone, whereas the Zhangzhou/\"Mixed\"/Southern dialects change to the third (low falling) tone.\nCertain new north\u2013south distinctions have appeared in recent decades. The fourth and eighth tones tend to be reversed in the north and south.\nQuanzhou\u2013Zhangzhou inclinations.\nHokkien immigrants to Taiwan originated from Quanzhou prefecture (44.8%) and Zhangzhou prefecture (35.2%). The original phonology from these regions was spread around Taiwan during the immigration process. With the advanced development of transportation and greater mobility of the Taiwanese population, Taiwanese speech has steered itself towards a mixture of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou speech, known as \"Chiang\u2013Ch\u00f4an-l\u0101m\"/\"Tsiang\u2013Ts\u00fban-l\u0101m\" (\u6f33\u6cc9\u6feb, in Mandarin \"Zh\u0101ng\u2013Qu\u00e1n l\u00e0n\"). Due to different proportions of the mixture, some regions are inclined more towards the Quanzhou accent, while others are inclined more towards the Zhangzhou accent.\nIn general, the Quanzhou accent is more common along the coastal region and is known as the \"h\u00e1i-kh\u00e1u\" accent; the Zhangzhou accent is more common within the mountainous region of Taiwan and is known as the \"l\u0101i-po\u0358\"/\"l\u0101i-poo\" accent. The regional variation within Taiwanese may be attributed to variations in the mixture of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou accents and/or lexicons. It ranges from Lukang accent (based on Quanzhou accent) on one end to the northern coastal Yilan accent (based on Zhangzhou accent) on another end. Tainan, Kaohsiung, and Taitung accents, on the other hand, are closest to the prestige accent.\nVariations in Taiwanese Hokkien accents\nRecent terminological distinctions.\nRecent research has found a need for new terminology of Taiwanese dialects, mainly because the Quanzhou and Zhangzhou dialects in Taiwan developed independently from those in Fujian. Thus, some scholars (i.e., Kl\u00f6ter, following ) have divided Taiwanese into five subdialects, based on geographic region:\nBoth \"phian-h\u00e1i\" and \"phian-l\u0101i\" are intermediate dialects between \"h\u00e1i-kh\u00e1u\" and \"l\u0101i-po\u0358\"/\"l\u0101i-poo\", these also known as \"thong-h\u00eang\"/\"thong-h\u00eeng\" () or \"\". In some ways this mixed dialect is similar to the Amoy dialect, which itself is a blend of Quanzhou and Zhangzhou speech. The common dialect refers to that which can be heard on radio, television, official announcements, etc.\nFluency.\nA great majority of people in Taiwan can speak both Mandarin and Hokkien, but the degree of fluency varies widely. There are, however, small but significant numbers of people in Taiwan, mainly but not exclusively Hakka and Mainlanders, who cannot speak Taiwanese fluently. A shrinking percentage of the population, mainly people born before the 1950s, cannot speak Mandarin at all or learned to speak Mandarin later in life, though some of these speak Japanese fluently. Urban, working-class Hakkas, as well as younger, southern-Taiwan Mainlanders, tend to have better, even native-like fluency. Approximately half of the Hakka in Taiwan do speak Taiwanese. There are many families of mixed Hakka, Hoklo, and Aboriginal bloodlines. There is, however, a large percentage of people in Taiwan, regardless of their background, whose ability to understand and read written Taiwanese is greater than their ability to speak it. This is the case with some singers who can sing Taiwanese songs with native-like proficiency but can neither speak nor understand the language.\nWhich variant is used depends strongly on the context, and in general, people will use Mandarin in more formal situations and Taiwanese in more informal situations. Taiwanese tends to get used more in rural areas, while Mandarin is used more in urban settings. Older people tend to use Taiwanese, while younger people tend to use Mandarin. In the broadcast media where Mandarin is used in many genres, soap opera, variety shows, and even some news programs can also be found in Taiwanese.\nSpecial literary and art forms.\n\"Chhit-j\u012b-\u00e1\"/\"Tshit-j\u012b-\u00e1\" (literally, \"that which has seven syllables\") is a poetic meter where each verse has 7 syllables.\nThere is a special form of musical/dramatic performance \"koa-\u00e1-h\u00ec\"/\"kua-\u00e1-h\u00ec\": the Taiwanese opera; the subject matter is usually a historical event. A similar form \"p\u00f2\u0358-t\u0113-h\u00ec\"/\"p\u00f2o-t\u0113-h\u00ec\" (glove puppetry) is also unique and has been elaborated in the past two decades into impressive televised spectacles.\nSee Taiwanese cuisine for names of several local dishes.\nBible translations.\nAs with many other languages, the translations of the Bible in Taiwan marked milestones in the standardization attempts of the language and its orthography.\nThe first translation of the Bible in Amoy or Taiwanese in the Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b orthography was by the first missionary to Taiwan, James Laidlaw Maxwell, with the New Testament \"L\u00e1n \u00ea Ki\u00f9-ch\u00fa I\u00e2-so\u0358 Ki-tok \u00ea Sin-iok\" published in 1873 and the Old Testament \"K\u016b-iok \u00ea S\u00e8ng Keng\" in 1884.\nThe next translation of the Bible in Taiwanese or Amoy was by the missionary to Taiwan, Thomas Barclay, carried out in Fujian and Taiwan. A New Testament translation was completed and published in 1916. The resulting work containing the Old and the New Testaments, in the Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b orthography, was completed in 1930 and published in 1933 as the Amoy Romanized Bible (). 2000 copies of the Amoy Romanized Bible were confiscated by the Taiwan Garrison from the Bible Society of Taiwan in 1975. This edition was later transliterated into Han characters and published as S\u00e8ng-keng T\u00e2i-g\u00ed H\u00e0n-j\u012b P\u00fan () in 1996.\nThe Ko\u2013T\u00e2n (Kerygma) Colloquial Taiwanese Version of the New Testament (\"Sin-iok\") in Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b, also known as the Red Cover Bible (), was published in 1973 as an ecumenical effort between the Protestant Presbyterian Church in Taiwan and the Roman Catholic mission Maryknoll. This translation used a more modern vocabulary (somewhat influenced by Mandarin), and reflected the central Taiwan dialect, as the Maryknoll mission was based near T\u00e2i-tiong. It was soon confiscated by the Kuomintang government (which objected to the use of Latin orthography) in 1975.\nA translation using the principle of functional equivalence, \"Today's Taiwanese Romanized Version\" (), containing only the New Testament, again in Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b, was published in 2008 as a collaboration between the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan and the Bible Society in Taiwan; a parallel-text version with both Han-character and Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b orthographies was published in 2013. A translation of the Old Testament following the same principle was completed and the whole Bible was published in 2021 as a parallel-text volume.\nAnother translation using the principle of functional equivalence, \"Common Taiwanese Bible\" (), with versions of Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b, Han characters and Ruby version (both Han characters and Pe\u030dh-\u014de-j\u012b) was published in 2015, available in printed and online.\nPolitics.\nUntil the 1980s, the use of Taiwanese Hokkien, along with all varieties other than Mandarin, was discouraged by the Kuomintang through measures such as banning its use in schools and limiting the amount of Taiwanese broadcast on radio and television. These restrictions were lifted by the 1990s, and the Taiwanese became an emblem of localization. Mandarin remains the predominant language of education, but Taiwanese schools have a \"mother tongue\" language requirement which can be satisfied with students' choice of the mother tongue: Taiwanese, Hakka, or indigenous languages.\nAlthough the use of Taiwanese Hokkien over Mandarin was historically part of the Taiwan independence movement, the linkage between politics and language is not as strong as it once was. Some fluency in Taiwanese Hokkien is desirable for political office in Taiwan for both independence and unificationist politicians. At the same time, even some supporters of Taiwan's independence have played down its connection with the Taiwanese in order to gain the support of the Mainlanders and Hakka people.\nJames Soong restricted the use of Taiwanese Hokkien and other local tongues in broadcasting while serving as Director of the Government Information Office earlier in his career, but later became one of the first politicians of Mainlander origin to use it in semi-formal occasions. Since then, politicians opposed to Taiwanese independence have used it frequently in rallies, even when they are not native speakers. Conversely, politicians who have traditionally been identified with Taiwan's independence have used Mandarin on formal occasions and semi-formal occasions such as press conferences. An example of the latter is former President Chen Shui-bian, who uses Mandarin in all official state speeches but uses mainly Taiwanese in political rallies and some informal state occasions such as New Year greetings. Former President Tsai Ing-wen was criticized by some of her supporters for not using Taiwanese in speeches. Her predecessor Ma Ying-jeou spoke in Taiwanese during his 2008 Double Ten Day speech when he was talking about the state of the economy in Taiwan.\nIn the early 21st century, there are few differences in language usage between the pro-unification leaning Pan-Blue Coalition and the independence leaning Pan-Green Coalition. Both tend to use Taiwanese at political rallies and sometimes in informal interviews, and both tend to use Mandarin at formal press conferences and official state functions. Both also tend to use more Mandarin in Northern Taiwan and more Taiwanese in Southern Taiwan. However, at official party gatherings (as opposed to both Mandarin-leaning state functions and Taiwanese-leaning party rallies), the DPP tends to use Taiwanese while KMT and PFP tend to use Mandarin. The Taiwan Solidarity Union, which advocates a strong line on Taiwan independence, tends to use Taiwanese even in formal press conferences. In speaking, politicians will frequently code switch. In writing, almost everyone uses vernacular Mandarin which is further from Taiwanese, and the use of semi-alphabetic writing or even colloquial Taiwanese characters is rare.\nIn 2002, the Taiwan Solidarity Union, a party with about 10% of the Legislative Yuan seats at the time, suggested making Taiwanese Hokkien a second official language. This proposal encountered strong opposition not only from Mainlander groups but also from Hakka and aboriginal groups who felt that it would slight their home languages, as well as others including Hoklo who objected to the proposal on logistical grounds and on the grounds that it would increase ethnic tensions. Because of these objections, support for this measure is lukewarm among moderate Taiwan independence supporters, and the proposal did not pass.\nIn 2003, there was a controversy when parts of the civil service examination for judges were written in characters used only in Taiwanese Hokkien. After strong objections, these questions were not used in scoring. As with the official-language controversy, objections to the use of Taiwanese came not only from Mainlander groups but also Hoklo, Hakka, and aborigines. The Control Yuan later created a rule that only allowed Standard Mandarin characters on civil service exams. According to public opinion surveys in 2008, more people supported making English a second official language than Taiwanese.\nMother tongue movement.\nTaiwanization developed in the 1990s into a 'mother tongue revival movement' aiming to save, preserve, and develop the local ethnic culture and language of Holo (Taiwanese), Hakka, and aborigines. The effort to save declining languages has since allowed them to revive and flourish. In 1993, Taiwan became the first country in the world to implement the teaching of Taiwanese Hokkien in schools. By 2001, Taiwanese languages such as Taiwanese Hokkien, Hakka, and indigenous languages were taught in all Taiwanese schools. Since the 2000s, elementary school students are required to take a class in either Taiwanese, Hakka or aboriginal languages. In junior high this is usually an available elective. Taiwan also has its own literary circle whereby Hokkien poets and writers compose poetry and literature in Taiwanese on a regular basis.\nAs a result of the mother tongue movement, Taiwan has emerged as a significant cultural hub for Hokkien in the world in the 21st century. It also plans to be the major export center for Hokkien culture worldwide in the 21st century.\nOn September 1st, 2025, Beiling Elementary School in Lujhu District, Kaohsiung, officially opened as a \"Taiwanese Language Experimental Elementary School.\" After a year of preparation and pilot programs, the school welcomed its first cohort of 16 new students. The principal and teachers greeted them in Taiwanese at the school gate, and the community and language community celebrated the event as a milestone in Taiwanese language education. This wasn't just a name change; it was a systematic experiment in local language, curriculum autonomy, and small school transformation.\nScholarship.\nKl\u00f6ter's \"Written Taiwanese\" (cited below) has been described as \"the most comprehensive English-language study of written Taiwanese\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWords in native languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58792", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58792", "title": "Judicial discretion", "text": "Judicial discretion is the power of the judiciary to make some legal decisions according to their discretion. Under the doctrine of the separation of powers, the ability of judges to exercise discretion is an aspect of judicial independence. Where appropriate, judicial discretion allows a judge to decide a legal case or matter within a range of possible decisions.\nHowever, where the exercise of discretion goes beyond constraints set down by legislation, by binding precedent, or by a constitution, the court may be abusing its discretion and undermining the rule of law. In that case, the decision of the court may be \"ultra vires\", and may sometimes be characterized as judicial activism.\nIn 1824, US Chief Justice John Marshall wrote the following on this subject:\nJudicial power, as contradistinguished from the power of the laws, has no existence. Courts are the mere instruments of the law, and can will nothing. When they are said to exercise a discretion, it is a mere legal discretion, a discretion to be exercised in discerning the course prescribed by law; and, when that is discerned, it is the duty of the court to follow it. Judicial power is never exercised for the purpose of giving effect to the will of the judge, always for the purpose of giving effect to the will of the legislature; or, in other words, to the will of the law.\nConcerns with regard to recidivism and other law and order issues have led to the introduction of mandatory sentencing. E.g. three-strikes laws and most sex offender registry laws in US are examples of laws carrying severe consequences, and which does not leave room for sentencing judges to consider the actual gravity of the offense, thus significantly limiting judicial discretion in sentencing. Introduction of mandatory minimum in criminal sentencing is often viewed as a shift of judicial power from judges to prosecutors, who are capable of affecting the length of potential sentence through their charging decision, e.g. filing charges on lesser included offense and dropping the charges carrying mandatory minimum sentences. Mandatory sentencing laws have been particularly popular among legislators in the United States. This has provoked formation of non-profit organizations such as Families Against Mandatory Minimums, Women Against Registry and RSOL to lobby for reinstatement of judicial discretion in criminal sentencing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58793", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58793", "title": "Disolution of Marriage", "text": ""}
{"id": "58794", "revid": "50783506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58794", "title": "Molasses", "text": "Viscous by-product of the refining of sugarcane, grapes, or sugar beets into sugar\nMolasses () is a viscous byproduct principally obtained from the refining of sugarcane or sugar beet juice into sugar. Molasses varies in the amount of sugar, the method of extraction, and the age of the plant. Sugarcane molasses is usually used to sweeten and flavour foods. Molasses is a major constituent of fine commercial brown sugar.\nMolasses is rich in vitamins and minerals, including vitamin B6, iron, calcium, magnesium, and potassium. There are different types of molasses depending on the amount of time refined, including first molasses (highest sugar content), second molasses (slightly bitter), and blackstrap molasses (the darkest and most robust in flavor). Molasses was historically popular in the Americas before the 20th century as a sweetener. It is still commonly used in traditional cuisine, such as in Madeira Island's traditional dishes.\nIn addition to culinary uses, molasses has industrial applications, such as in the distillation of rum, as an additive in mortar, and as a soil amendment to promote microbial activity. The unique flavor and nutritional profile of molasses make it a versatile ingredient.\nEtymology.\nThe word molasses comes from in Portuguese, a derivative of \"mel\" (honey) with Latinate roots. Cognates include Ancient Greek () (honey), Latin , Spanish ' (molasses), Romanian ' or ', and French ' (molasses). \"Blackstrap\" is derived from the Dutch word for syrup, \"stroop\".\nSugar cane molasses.\nSugar cane molasses is an ingredient used in baking and cooking. It was popular in the Americas before the 20th century, when it was plentiful and commonly used as a sweetener in foods and an ingredient in brewing beer in the colonies. George Washington had a notebook that contains a molasses beer recipe.\nTo produce molasses, sugar cane is harvested and stripped of leaves. Its juice is then extracted, usually by cutting, crushing, or mashing. The juice is boiled to produce a concentrate and encourage sugar crystallization. The result of this first boiling is called \"first syrup ('A' Molasses\") and has the highest sugar content. First syrup is usually referred to in the Southern United States as \"cane syrup\" rather than molasses. \"Second molasses ('B' Molasses\") is produced by a second boiling and sugar extraction and has a slightly bitter taste.\nBoiling the sugar syrup a third time yields dark, viscous \"blackstrap molasses\" (\"'C' Molasses\"), known for its robust flavour. During this process, the majority of sucrose from the original juice is crystallized and removed. The bitterness of blackstrap molasses is much greater than in the regular form of molasses. It is sometimes used in baking or to produce ethanol, as an ingredient in cattle feed, or in yeast production. Exaggerated health benefits claimed for blackstrap molasses were the theme of the 1951 novelty song \"Black Strap Molasses\", recorded by Groucho Marx, Jimmy Durante, Jane Wyman, and Danny Kaye.\nUnlike highly refined sugars, molasses contains significant amounts of vitamin B6 and minerals, including calcium, magnesium, iron, and manganese; one tablespoon provides up to 20% of the recommended daily value of each of those nutrients. Blackstrap is also a good source of potassium.\nMadeira Island.\nOn Madeira Island, cane molasses is an important constituent of the traditional cuisine, where it is known as \"mel-de-cana\" (Portuguese for \"(sugar)cane honey\"). Its origin in Madeira dates back to the golden age of sugar production in the archipelago.\nSugar beet molasses.\nBeet molasses is 50% sugar by dry weight, predominantly sucrose, but contains significant amounts of glucose and fructose. Beet molasses is limited in biotin (vitamin H or B7) for cell growth and therefore may be supplemented with a biotin source. The non-sugar content includes many salts, such as calcium, potassium, magnesium, oxalate, and chloride. It also contains sulfur, betaine, and the trisaccharide raffinose. These result from the concentration of the original plant material or other chemicals in processing and are unpalatable to humans. It is therefore mainly used as an animal feed additive (known as \"molassed\" \"sugar beet feed\") or a fermentation feedstock. In animal feed, it provides energy and minerals, increases palatability, and reduces dust.\nOther types.\nSweet sorghum syrup is colloquially called \"sorghum molasses\" in the southern United States.\nPomegranate molasses is a traditional ingredient in Middle Eastern cooking. It is made by simmering a mixture of pomegranate juice, sugar, and lemon juice, and reducing the mixture for about an hour until the consistency of syrup is achieved.\nUnsulfured molasses.\nMany types of molasses on the market are branded \"unsulfured\". In the past, many foods, including molasses, were treated with a sulfur dioxide preservative, helping to kill off moulds and bacteria. Sulfur dioxide is also used as a bleaching agent to help lighten the colour of molasses. Most brands have abandoned the use of sulfur dioxide in molasses, because untreated molasses already has a stable shelf life. Poor flavour and the trace toxicity of low doses of sulfur dioxide also led to its removal.\nCooking.\nDuring cooking, the presence of molasses increases the hygroscopicity of surrounding ingredients, and through the Maillard reaction, it often turns brown. These effects are the result of relatively high levels of amino acids, invert sugar and minerals.\nNutrition.\nMolasses is composed of 22% water, 75% carbohydrates, and very small amounts (0.1%) of fat; it contains no protein. In a reference amount of 100 grams, molasses is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin B6 and several dietary minerals, including manganese, magnesium, iron, potassium, and calcium.\nThe sugars in molasses are on average sucrose (39% of total carbohydrates), glucose (16%), and fructose (17%) (data from USDA nutrition table).\nOther uses.\nFood products and additives.\nThe uses of molasses in food production may include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58795", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58795", "title": "Dissolution of marriage", "text": ""}
{"id": "58796", "revid": "44238690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58796", "title": "The Day the Music Died", "text": "1959 American plane crash\nOn February 3, 1959, American rock and roll musicians Buddy Holly, Ritchie Valens, and \"The Big Bopper\" J. P. Richardson were all killed in a plane crash near Clear Lake, Iowa, together with pilot Roger Peterson. The event became known as \"The Day the Music Died\" after singer-songwriter Don McLean referred to it as such in his 1971 song \"American Pie\".\nAt the time, Holly and his band, consisting of Waylon Jennings, Tommy Allsup, and Carl Bunch, were playing on the \"Winter Dance Party\" tour across the American Midwest. Rising artists Valens, Richardson and vocal group Dion and the Belmonts had joined the tour as well. The long journeys between venues on board the cold, uncomfortable tour buses adversely affected the performers, with cases of flu and even frostbite.\nAfter stopping at Clear Lake to perform, and frustrated by the conditions on the tour buses, Holly chose to charter a plane to reach their next venue in Moorhead, Minnesota. Richardson, suffering from flu, swapped places with Jennings, taking his seat on the plane, while Allsup lost his seat to Valens on a coin toss. Soon after takeoff, late at night and in poor, wintry weather conditions, pilot Peterson lost control of the light aircraft, a Beechcraft Bonanza, which crashed into a cornfield, killing all four on board.\nThe event has since been mentioned or referenced in various media. Various monuments have been erected at the crash site and in Clear Lake, where an annual memorial concert is held at the Surf Ballroom, the venue that hosted the artists' last performances.\nBackground.\nIn November 1958, Buddy Holly terminated his association with The Crickets. According to Paul Anka, Holly realized he needed to go back on tour again for two reasons: he needed cash because the Crickets' manager Norman Petty had apparently stolen money from him, and he wanted to raise funds to move to New York City to live with his new wife, Mar\u00eda Elena Holly, who was pregnant (although he already lived in New York when he started the tour). Holly signed up with General Artists Corporation (GAC) because \"he knew they were planning a British tour and he wanted to be in on that.\"\nFor the start of the \"Winter Dance Party\" tour, Holly assembled a band consisting of Waylon Jennings (bass), Tommy Allsup (guitar) and Carl Bunch (drums), with the opening vocals of Frankie Sardo. The tour was set to cover twenty-four Midwestern cities in as many days\u2014there were no off days. New hit artist Ritchie Valens, \"The Big Bopper\" J. P. Richardson and the vocal group Dion and the Belmonts joined the tour to promote their recordings and make an extra profit.\nThe tour began in Milwaukee on January 23, 1959, with the performance in Clear Lake, Iowa on February 2 being the eleventh of the twenty-four scheduled events. The amount of travel required soon posed a serious problem. The distances between venues had not been properly considered when the performances were scheduled. Instead of systematically circling around the Midwest through a series of venues in close proximity to one another, the tour erratically zigzagged back and forth across the region, with distances between some tour stops exceeding . As there were no off days, the bands had to travel most of each day, frequently for ten to twelve hours in freezing mid-winter temperatures. Most of the Interstate Highway System had not yet been built, so the routes between tour stops required far more driving time on narrow two-lane rural highways than would now be the case on modern expressways.\nGAC, which booked the tour, received considerable criticism for their seemingly total disregard for the conditions they forced the touring musicians to endure:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They didn't care. It was like they threw darts at a map... The tour from hell\u2014that's what they named it\u2014and it's not a bad name.\nThe entire company of musicians traveled together in one bus, although the buses used for the tour were wholly inadequate, breaking down and being replaced frequently. Griggs estimates that five separate buses were used in the first eleven days of the tour\u2014\"reconditioned school buses, not good enough for school kids.\" The artists themselves were responsible for loading and unloading equipment at each stop, as no road crew assisted them. Adding to the disarray, the buses were not equipped for the harsh weather, which consisted of waist-deep snow in several areas and varying temperatures from to as low as . When the bus was delayed in departing Duluth, Minnesota late on January 31, Valens suggested chartering a plane, but a replacement bus arrived in time.\nIn the early morning hours of February 1, while traveling from Duluth to a matinee performance in Appleton, Wisconsin, the bus's heating system broke down and its engine froze, leaving the musicians stranded on a remote stretch of U.S. Highway 51 near Pine Lake, Wisconsin. Temperatures reached as low as as they waited for help to arrive, with the musicians burning newspapers inside the bus to keep warm. It was two hours before Iron County sheriffs rescued the group, by which time Carl Bunch had developed frostbite in both feet. Bunch was taken to the nearest hospital in Ironwood, Michigan, where he remained under observation for the next few days, while the planned performance in Appleton was canceled. Taking a Chicago &amp; North Western train from Hurley, the group made it to Green Bay, Wisconsin in time for that evening's performance at the Riverside Ballroom.\nWith Bunch removed from the tour group, Holly, Valens and Dion DiMucci (and Carlo Mastrangelo of the Belmonts who was a drummer) took turns playing drums for each other at the performances in Green Bay and Clear Lake, Iowa, with Holly playing drums for Dion, Dion playing drums for Ritchie, and Ritchie playing drums for Holly.\nOn Monday, February 2, the tour arrived in Clear Lake, west of Mason City, Iowa, having driven from the previous day's concert in Green Bay. Clear Lake had not been a scheduled stop; tour promoters hoped to fill the open date and called Carroll Anderson, the manager of the local Surf Ballroom, and offered him the show. Anderson accepted and they set the show for that night. By the time Holly arrived at the venue that evening, he was frustrated with the ongoing problems with the bus. After Valens closed his set at the Ballroom, he phoned his manager Bob Keane and after a conversation about the undesirable situation with the tour, they agreed that after the show in Moorhead, Ritchie would be going back to California. The next scheduled destination after Clear Lake was Moorhead, Minnesota, a drive north-northwest\u2014and, as a reflection of the poor quality of the tour planning, a journey that would have taken them directly back through the two towns they had already played within the last week. No respite was in sight after that, as the following day, after having traveled from Iowa to Minnesota, they were scheduled to travel back to Iowa, specifically almost directly south to Sioux City, a trip.\nHolly chartered a plane to fly himself and his band to Fargo, North Dakota, which is adjacent to Moorhead. The rest of the party would have picked him up in Moorhead, saving him the journey in the bus and leaving him time to get some rest. Their gig in Moorhead was to have been a radio performance at the station KFGO with disc jockey Charlie Boone.\nFlight arrangements.\nAnderson chartered a plane from Dwyer Flying Service in Mason City, to fly to Fargo's Hector Airport, the closest airport to Moorhead; the pilot was Roger Peterson, a 21-year-old married man who had \"built his life around flying\".\nDwyer Flying Service charged a fee of $36 () per passenger for the flight on the 1947 single-engined, V-tailed Beechcraft 35 Bonanza (registration N3794N), which seated three passengers and the pilot. A popular misconception, originating from Don McLean's song about the crash, was that the plane was called \"American Pie\"; no record exists of any name ever having been given to N3794N.\nThe most widely accepted version of events was that Richardson had contracted the flu during the tour and asked Jennings for his seat on the plane. When Holly learned that Jennings was not going to fly, he said in jest: \"Well, I hope your damned bus freezes up.\" Jennings responded: \"Well, I hope your ol' plane crashes\", a humorous but ill-fated response that would haunt Jennings for the rest of his life. Valens, who once had a fear of flying, asked Allsup for his seat on the plane. The two agreed to toss a coin to decide. Bob Hale, a disc jockey with Mason City's KRIB-AM, was emceeing the concert that night and flipped the coin in the ballroom's side-stage room shortly before the musicians departed for the airport. Valens won the coin toss for the seat on the flight. Valens is apocryphally said to have remarked, \"That's the first time I've ever won anything in my life.\"\nIn contradiction to the testimony of Allsup and Jennings, Dion has since said that Holly approached him along with Valens and Richardson to join the flight, not Holly's bandmates. In a 2009 interview, Dion said that Holly called him, Valens and Richardson into a vacant dressing room during Sardo's performance and said, \"I've chartered a plane, we're the guys making the money [we should be the ones flying ahead]...the only problem is there are only two available seats.\" According to Dion, it was Valens, not Richardson, who had fallen ill, so Valens and Dion flipped a coin for the seat. In his interview, no mention is made of Jennings or Allsup being invited on the plane. Dion said he won the toss, but ultimately decided that since the $36 fare equalled the monthly rent his parents paid for his childhood apartment, he could not justify the indulgence.\nTake-off and crash.\nAfter the show ended, Anderson drove Holly, Valens and Richardson to nearby Mason City Municipal Airport, where the elevation is AMSL. The weather at the time of departure was reported as light snow, a ceiling of AMSL with sky obscured, visibility and winds from . Although deteriorating weather was reported along the planned route, the weather briefings Peterson received failed to relay the information.\nThe plane took off normally from runway 17 (today's runway 18) at 00:55 (12:55 am) CST on Tuesday, February 3. Hubert Jerry Dwyer, owner of the flying service, watched the southbound take-off from a platform outside the control tower. He was able to clearly see the aircraft's tail light for most of the brief flight, which started with an initial 180 degree left turn to pass east of the airport, climbing to approximately AGL. After an additional left turn to a northwesterly heading, the tail light was observed gradually descending until it disappeared. Around 1am, when Peterson failed to make the expected radio contact, repeated attempts were made to establish radio contact, without success. Later that morning at daylight, after several attempts to contact the plane were unsuccessful, Dwyer retraced Peterson's planned route by air, and around 9:35 am he spotted the wreckage less than northwest of the airport.\nThe Bonanza had impacted terrain at high speed, estimated to have been around , banked 90\u00b0 to the right and in a nose-down attitude. The right-wing tip struck the ground first, gouging a furrow, crumpling then breaking off. The fuselage then hit the ground right-side down and bounced a few feet back into the air, traveling another through the air, simultaneously rolling inverted due to the remaining left wing still generating lift. The plane struck the ground a final time, in an inverted, nose-down position, the nose hitting and flipping the plane over into a right-side up, tail-first position. The momentum of the heavy engine caused the fuselage, left wing remaining attached and intact to the end, to roll upon itself into a virtual ball, rolling nose-over-tail across the frozen field for , before coming to rest tail-first against a wire fence. The bodies of the performers had been ejected from the fuselage and lay near the plane's wreckage, while Peterson's body, which was entangled in the wreckage, could only be retrieved after the cockpit was cut open using blowtorches. With the rest of the entourage en route to Minnesota, Anderson, who had driven the party to the airport and witnessed the plane's takeoff, had to identify the bodies of the musicians. The county coroner, Ralph Smiley, reported that all four victims died instantly, the cause of death being \"gross trauma to brain\" for the three musicians and \"brain damage\" for the pilot.\nAftermath.\nMar\u00eda Elena Holly learned of her husband's death via a television news report. A widow after only six months of marriage, she suffered a miscarriage shortly after, reportedly due to \"psychological trauma\". Holly's mother, on hearing the news on the radio at home in Lubbock, Texas, screamed and collapsed.\nDespite the tragedy, the \"Winter Dance Party\" tour continued. Fifteen-year-old Bobby Vee was given the task of filling in for Holly at the next scheduled performance in Moorhead, in part because he \"knew all the words to all the songs.\" Jennings and Allsup carried on for two more weeks, with Jennings taking Holly's place as lead singer. Other performers who were recruited for the remainder of the tour were Jimmy Clanton, Fabian and Frankie Avalon.\nMeanwhile, funerals for the victims were held individually. Holly and Richardson were buried in Texas, Valens in California and Peterson in Iowa. Holly's widow, Mar\u00eda Elena, did not attend his funeral. She said in an interview: \"In a way, I blame myself. I was not feeling well when he left. I was two weeks pregnant, and I wanted Buddy to stay with me, but he had scheduled that tour. It was the only time I wasn't with him. And I blame myself because I know that, if only I had gone along, Buddy never would have gotten into that airplane.\"\nOfficial investigation.\nThe official investigation was carried out by the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB, precursor to the NTSB). It emerged that Peterson had over four years of flying experience, of which one was with Dwyer Flying Service, and had accumulated 711 flying hours, of which 128 were on Bonanzas. He had also logged 52 hours of instrument flight training, although he had passed only his written examination, and was not yet qualified to operate in weather that required flying solely by reference to instruments. Peterson and Dwyer Flying Service itself were certified to operate only under visual flight rules, which essentially require that the pilot must be able to see where the aircraft is going. On the night of the accident visual flight would have been virtually impossible due to the low clouds, the lack of a visible horizon and the absence of ground lights over the sparsely populated area.\nFurthermore, Peterson, who had failed an instrument checkride nine months before the accident, had received his instrument training on airplanes equipped with a conventional artificial horizon as a source of aircraft attitude information, while the accident aircraft was equipped with an older-type Sperry F3 attitude gyroscope. Crucially, the two types of instruments display the same aircraft pitch attitude information in graphically opposite ways. As a result, when the aircraft took off, Peterson, observing the older model Sperry F3 gyroscope, thought he was climbing when in fact he was descending.\nAnother contributing factor was the \"seriously inadequate\" nighttime weather briefing provided to Peterson, which \"failed to even mention adverse flying conditions which should have been highlighted\". The CAB concluded that the probable cause of the accident was \"the pilot's unwise decision\" to attempt a flight at night that required skills he did not have.\nSubsequent investigations.\nOn March 6, 2007, in Beaumont, Texas, Richardson's body was exhumed for reburial. Forest Lawn Cemetery moved his body to a more suitable area after plans were made to erect a bronze statue near his gravesite to accompany a newly received historical marker. As the body was to be placed in a new casket while above ground, the musician's son, Jay Perry Richardson, took the opportunity to have his father's body re-examined to verify the original coroner's findings and asked forensic anthropologist William M. Bass to carry out the procedure.\nA longstanding rumor surrounding the accident, which this re-examination sought to confirm or dispel, asserted that an accidental firearm discharge took place on board the aircraft and caused the crash. It had also been speculated that Richardson initially survived the crash and crawled out of the wreckage in search of help before succumbing to his injuries, prompted by the fact that his body was found farther from the plane than the other victims. Bass and his team took several X-rays of Richardson's body and eventually concluded that the musician had indeed died instantly from extensive, unsurvivable fractures to virtually every bone in his body. No traces of lead were found from any bullet, nor any indication that he had been shot. Coroner Smiley's original 1959 report was, therefore, confirmed as accurate.\nIn March 2015, the NTSB received a request to reopen the investigation into the accident. The request was made by L. J. Coon, a retired pilot from New England who felt that the conclusion of the 1959 investigation was inaccurate. Coon suspected a possible failure of the right ruddervator, or a problem with the fuel system, as well as possible improper weight distribution. Coon argued that Peterson may have tried to land the plane and that his efforts should be recognized. The NTSB declined the request in April 2015, saying that the evidence presented by Coon was insufficient to merit the reconsideration of the original findings.\nLegacy.\nPolicy.\nA policy not to report on a person's death until their family had been notified was implemented by authorities in the months after Mar\u00eda Elena Holly suffered her miscarriage due to the psychological trauma of hearing about her husband's death on television for the first time.\nMemorials.\nA memorial service for Peterson was held at Redeemer Lutheran Church in Ventura, Iowa, on February 5. A funeral was held the next day at St. Paul Lutheran Church in his hometown of Alta; Peterson was buried in Buena Vista Memorial Cemetery in nearby Storm Lake.\nMemorial concerts.\nFans of Holly, Valens, and Richardson have been gathering for annual memorial concerts at the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake since 1979. The fiftieth anniversary concert took place on February 2, 2009, with Delbert McClinton, Joe Ely, Wanda Jackson, Los Lobos, Chris Montez, Bobby Vee, Graham Nash, Peter and Gordon, Tommy Allsup, and a house band featuring Chuck Leavell, James \"Hutch\" Hutchinson, Bobby Keys, and Kenny Aronoff. Jay Perry Richardson, the son of the Big Bopper, was among the participating artists, and Bob Hale was the master of ceremonies, as he was at the 1959 concert.\nA series of tribute concerts called the Winter Dance Party Tour was started by John Mueller, who starred as Buddy Holly in the musical . The recreation and live show is endorsed by the estates of Buddy Holly, Ritchie Valens, and J.P Richardson.\nMonuments.\nIn June 1988, a tall granite memorial bearing the names of Peterson and the three entertainers was dedicated outside the Surf Ballroom with Peterson's widow, parents, and sister in attendance; the event marked the first time that the families of Holly, Richardson, Valens, and Peterson had gathered together.\nIn 1989, Ken Paquette, a Wisconsin fan of the 1950s era, made a stainless-steel monument that depicts a guitar and a set of three records bearing the names of the three performers killed in the accident. The monument is on private farmland, about west of the intersection of 315th Street and Gull Avenue, north of Clear Lake. At that intersection, a large plasma-cut steel set of Wayfarer-style glasses, similar to those Holly wore, marks the access point to the crash site.\nPaquette created a similar stainless-steel monument to the three musicians located outside the Riverside Ballroom in Green Bay, Wisconsin, where Holly, Richardson, and Valens played their penultimate show on February 1. This second memorial was unveiled on July 17, 2003. In February 2009, a further memorial made by Paquette for Peterson was unveiled at the crash site.\nRoads.\nA road originating near the Surf Ballroom, extending north and passing to the west of the crash site, is now known as Buddy Holly Place.\nFiction.\nHoward Waldrop's short story \"Save a Place in the Lifeboat for Me\" (collected in \"Howard Who?\") describes a fictional attempt by a sextet of famous slapstick characters (Chico and Harpo Marx, Abbott and Costello, and Laurel and Hardy) to prevent the accident from occurring.\nTJ Klune's 2020 fantasy novel \"The House in the Cerulean Sea\" features an orphaned antichrist, Lucy, who collects records of Holly, the Big Bopper, and Valens, and discusses the crash with the protagonist, Linus.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58797", "revid": "43056943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58797", "title": "Saami", "text": "Saami or SAAMI may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58798", "revid": "35930533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58798", "title": "Lapps", "text": ""}
{"id": "58799", "revid": "50454634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58799", "title": "Lapp", "text": "Lapp or LAPP may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58800", "revid": "51018875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58800", "title": "Austronesian languages", "text": "Large language family mostly of Southeast Asia and the Pacific\nThe Austronesian languages ( ) are a language family widely spoken throughout Maritime Southeast Asia, parts of Mainland Southeast Asia, Madagascar, the islands of the Pacific Ocean and Taiwan (by Taiwanese indigenous peoples). They are spoken by about 328 million people (4.4% of the world population). This makes it the fifth-largest language family by number of speakers. Major Austronesian languages include Malay (one variant standardized as Indonesian), Javanese, Sundanese, Tagalog (standardized as Filipino), Malagasy and Cebuano. According to some estimates, the family contains 1,257 languages, which is the second most of any language family.\nIn 1706, the Dutch scholar Adriaan Reland first observed similarities between the languages spoken in the South East Asia Archipelago and by peoples on islands in the Pacific Ocean. In the 19th century, researchers (e.g. Wilhelm von Humboldt, Herman van der Tuuk) started to apply the comparative method to the Austronesian languages. The first extensive study on the history of the phonology was made by the German linguist Otto Dempwolff. It included a reconstruction of the Proto-Austronesian lexicon. The term \"Austronesian\" was coined (as German ') by Wilhelm Schmidt, deriving it from Latin ' \"south\" and Ancient Greek \"\" ( \"island\"), meaning the \"Southern Island languages\".\nMost Austronesian languages are spoken by the people of Insular Southeast Asia and Oceania. Only a few languages, such as Urak Lawoi\u02bc and the Chamic languages (except Acehnese), are indigenous to mainland Asia, or Malagasy which is the only Austronesian language indigenous to Insular East Africa. There are few Austronesian languages which have populations exceeding a few thousand, but a handful have speaking populations in the millions; Indonesian, the most widely spoken, has around 252 million speakers, making it the tenth most-spoken language in the world. Approximately twenty Austronesian languages are official in their respective countries.\nBy the number of languages they include, Austronesian and Niger\u2013Congo are the two largest language families in the world. They each contain roughly one-fifth of the world's languages. The geographical span of Austronesian was the largest of any language family in the first half of the second millennium CE, before the spread of Indo-European languages in the colonial period. It ranges from Madagascar to Easter Island in the eastern Pacific.\nAccording to Robert Blust (1999), Austronesian is divided into several primary branches, all but one of which are found exclusively in Taiwan. The Formosan languages of Taiwan are grouped into as many as nine first-order subgroups of Austronesian. All Austronesian languages spoken outside the Taiwan mainland (including its offshore Yami language) belong to the Malayo-Polynesian (sometimes called \"Extra-Formosan\") branch.\nMost Austronesian languages lack a long history of written attestation. The oldest inscription in the Cham language, the \u0110\u00f4ng Y\u00ean Ch\u00e2u inscription dated to c.\u2009350 AD, is the first attestation of any Austronesian language.\nTypological characteristics.\nPhonology.\nThe Austronesian languages overall possess phoneme inventories which are smaller than the world average. Around 90% of the Austronesian languages have inventories of 19\u201325 sounds (15\u201320 consonants and 4\u20135 vowels), thus lying at the lower end of the global typical range of 20\u201337 sounds. However, extreme inventories are also found, such as Nemi (New Caledonia) with 43 consonants.\nThe canonical root type in Proto-Austronesian is disyllabic with the shape CV(C)CVC (C = consonant; V = vowel), and is still found in many Austronesian languages. In most languages, consonant clusters are only allowed in medial position, and often, there are restrictions for the first element of the cluster. There is a common drift to reduce the number of consonants which can appear in final position, e.g. Buginese, which only allows the two consonants /\u014b/ and /\u0294/ as finals, out of a total number of 18 consonants. Complete absence of final consonants is observed e.g. in Nias, Malagasy and many Oceanic languages.\nTonal contrasts are rare in Austronesian languages, although Moken\u2013Moklen and a few languages of the Chamic, South Halmahera\u2013West New Guinea and New Caledonian subgroups do show lexical tone.\nMorphology.\nMost Austronesian languages are agglutinative languages with a relatively high number of affixes, and clear morpheme boundaries. Most affixes are prefixes (Malay \"ber-jalan\" 'walk' &lt; \"jalan\" 'road'), with a smaller number of suffixes (Tagalog \"titis-\u00e1n\" 'ashtray' &lt; \"t\u00edtis\" 'ash') and infixes (Roviana \"t&lt;in&gt;avete\" 'work (noun)' &lt; \"tavete\" 'work (verb)').\nReduplication is commonly employed in Austronesian languages. This includes full reduplication (Malay \"anak-anak\" 'children' &lt; \"anak\" 'child'; Karo Batak \"nipe-nipe\" 'caterpillar' &lt; \"nipe\" 'snake') or partial reduplication (Agta \"taktakki\" 'legs' &lt; \"takki\" 'leg', \"at-atu\" 'puppy' &lt; \"atu\" 'dog').\nSyntax.\nIt is difficult to make generalizations about the languages that make up a family as diverse as Austronesian. Very broadly, one can divide the Austronesian languages into three groups based upon their grammatical typologies: Philippine-type languages, Indonesian-type languages and post-Indonesian type languages:\nAdditional types of Austronesian languages include:\nLexicon.\nThe Austronesian language family has been established by the linguistic comparative method on the basis of cognate sets, sets of words from multiple languages, which are similar in sound and meaning which can be shown to be descended from the same ancestral word in Proto-Austronesian according to regular rules. Some cognate sets are very stable. The word for \"eye\" in many Austronesian languages is \"mata\" (from the most northerly Austronesian languages, Formosan languages such as Bunun and Amis all the way south to M\u0101ori).\nOther words are harder to reconstruct. The word for \"two\" is also stable, in that it appears over the entire range of the Austronesian family, but the forms (e.g. Bunun \"dusa\"; Amis \"tusa\"; M\u0101ori \"rua\") require some linguistic expertise to recognise. The Austronesian Basic Vocabulary Database gives word lists (coded for cognateness) for approximately 1000 Austronesian languages.\nClassification.\nThe internal structure of the Austronesian languages is complex. The family consists of many similar and closely related languages with large numbers of dialect continua, making it difficult to recognize boundaries between branches. The first major step towards high-order subgrouping was Dempwolff's recognition of the Oceanic subgroup (called \"Melanesisch\" by Dempwolff). The special position of the languages of Taiwan was first recognized by Andr\u00e9-Georges Haudricourt (1965), who divided the Austronesian languages into three subgroups: Northern Austronesian (= Formosan), Eastern Austronesian (= Oceanic), and Western Austronesian (all remaining languages).\nIn a study that represents the first lexicostatistical classification of the Austronesian languages, Isidore Dyen (1965) presented a radically different subgrouping scheme. He posited 40 first-order subgroups, with the highest degree of diversity found in the area of Melanesia. The Oceanic languages are not recognized, but are distributed over more than 30 of his proposed first-order subgroups. Dyen's classification was widely criticized and for the most part rejected, but several of his lower-order subgroups are still accepted (e.g. the Cordilleran languages, the Bilic languages or the Murutic languages).\nSubsequently, the position of the Formosan languages as the most archaic group of Austronesian languages was recognized by Otto Christian Dahl (1973), followed by proposals from other scholars that the Formosan languages actually make up more than one first-order subgroup of Austronesian. Robert Blust (1977) first presented the subgrouping model which is currently accepted by virtually all scholars in the field, with more than one first-order subgroup on Taiwan, and a single first-order branch encompassing all Austronesian languages spoken outside of Taiwan, viz. Malayo-Polynesian. The relationships of the Formosan languages to each other and the internal structure of Malayo-Polynesian continue to be debated.\nPrimary branches on Taiwan (Formosan languages).\nIn addition to Malayo-Polynesian, thirteen Formosan subgroups are broadly accepted. The seminal article in the classification of Formosan\u2014and, by extension, the top-level structure of Austronesian\u2014is . Prominent Formosanists (linguists who specialize in Formosan languages) take issue with some of its details, but it remains the point of reference for current linguistic analyses. Debate centers primarily around the relationships between these families. Of the classifications presented here, links two families into a Western Plains group, two more in a Northwestern Formosan group, and three into an Eastern Formosan group, while also links five families into a Northern Formosan group. Harvey (1982), Chang (2006) and Ross (2012) split Tsouic, and Blust (2013) agrees the group is probably not valid.\nOther studies have presented phonological evidence for a reduced Paiwanic family of Paiwanic, Puyuma, Bunun, Amis, and Malayo-Polynesian, but this is not reflected in vocabulary. The Eastern Formosan peoples Basay, Kavalan, and Amis share a homeland motif that has them coming originally from an island called \"Sinasay\" or \"Sanasay\". The Amis, in particular, maintain that they came from the east, and were treated by the Puyuma, amongst whom they settled, as a subservient group.\nBlust (1999).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLi (2008).\nThis classification retains Blust's East Formosan, and unites the other northern languages. proposes a Proto-Formosan (F0) ancestor and equates it with Proto-Austronesian (PAN), following the model in Starosta (1995). Rukai and Tsouic are seen as highly divergent, although the position of Rukai is highly controversial.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Sagart (2004, 2021).\nSagart (2004) proposes that the numerals of the Formosan languages reflect a nested series of innovations, from languages in the northwest (near the putative landfall of the Austronesian migration from the mainland), which share only the numerals 1\u20134 with proto-Malayo-Polynesian, counter-clockwise to the eastern languages (purple on map), which share all numerals 1\u201310. Sagart (2021) finds other shared innovations that follow the same pattern. He proposes that pMP *lima 'five' is a lexical replacement (from 'hand'), and that pMP *pitu 'seven', *walu 'eight' and *Siwa 'nine' are contractions of pAN *RaCep 'five', a ligature *a or *i 'and', and *duSa 'two', *telu 'three', *Sepat 'four', an analogical pattern historically attested from Pazeh. The fact that the Kradai languages share the numeral system (and other lexical innovations) of pMP suggests that they are a coordinate branch with Malayo-Polynesian, rather than a sister family to Austronesian.\nSagart's resulting classification is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMalayo-Polynesian.\nThe Malayo-Polynesian languages are\u2014among other things\u2014characterized by certain sound changes, such as the mergers of Proto-Austronesian (PAN) *t/*C to Proto-Malayo-Polynesian (PMP) *t, and PAN *n/*N to PMP *n, and the shift of PAN *S to PMP *h.\nThere appear to have been two great migrations of Austronesian languages that quickly covered large areas, resulting in multiple local groups with little large-scale structure. The first was Malayo-Polynesian, distributed across the Malay archipelago and Melanesia. The second migration was that of the Oceanic languages into Polynesia and Micronesia.\nHistory.\nFrom the standpoint of historical linguistics, the place of origin (in linguistic terminology, \"Urheimat\") of the Austronesian languages (Proto-Austronesian language) is most likely the main island of Taiwan, also known as Formosa; on this island the deepest divisions in Austronesian are found along small geographic distances, among the families of the native Formosan languages.\nAccording to Robert Blust, the Formosan languages form nine of the ten primary branches of the Austronesian language family. noted this when he wrote: ... the internal diversity among the... Formosan languages... is greater than that in all the rest of Austronesian put together, so there is a major genetic split within Austronesian between Formosan and the rest... Indeed, the genetic diversity within Formosan is so great that it may well consist of several primary branches of the overall Austronesian family.At least since , writing in 1949, linguists have generally accepted that the chronology of the dispersal of languages within a given language family can be traced from the area of greatest linguistic variety to that of the least. For example, English in North America has large numbers of speakers, but relatively low dialectal diversity, while English in Great Britain has much higher diversity; such low linguistic variety by Sapir's thesis suggests a more recent spread of English in North America. While some scholars suspect that the number of principal branches among the Formosan languages may be somewhat less than Blust's estimate of nine (e.g. ), there is little contention among linguists with this analysis and the resulting view of the origin and direction of the migration. For a recent dissenting analysis, see .\nThe protohistory of the Austronesian people can be traced farther back through time. To get an idea of the original homeland of the populations ancestral to the Austronesian peoples (as opposed to strictly linguistic arguments), evidence from archaeology and population genetics may be adduced. Studies from the science of genetics have produced conflicting outcomes. Some researchers find evidence for a proto-Austronesian homeland on the Asian mainland (e.g., ), while others mirror the linguistic research, rejecting an East Asian origin in favor of Taiwan (e.g., ). Archaeological evidence (e.g., ) is more consistent, suggesting that the ancestors of the Austronesians spread from the South Chinese mainland to Taiwan at some time around 8,000 years ago.\nEvidence from historical linguistics suggests that it is from this island that seafaring peoples migrated, perhaps in distinct waves separated by millennia, to the entire region encompassed by the Austronesian languages. It is believed that this migration began around 6,000 years ago. However, evidence from historical linguistics cannot bridge the gap between those two periods. The view that linguistic evidence connects Austronesian languages to the Sino-Tibetan ones, as proposed for example by , is a minority one. As states:Implied in... discussions of subgrouping [of Austronesian languages] is a broad consensus that the homeland of the Austronesians was in Taiwan. This homeland area may have also included the P'eng-hu (Pescadores) islands between Taiwan and China and possibly even sites on the coast of mainland China, especially if one were to view the early Austronesians as a population of related dialect communities living in scattered coastal settlements.Linguistic analysis of the Proto-Austronesian language stops at the western shores of Taiwan; any related mainland language(s) have not survived. The only exceptions, the Chamic languages, derive from more recent migration to the mainland. However, according to Ostapirat's interpretation of the seriously discussed Austro-Tai hypothesis, the Kra\u2013Dai languages (also known as Tai\u2013Kadai) are exactly those related mainland languages.\nHypothesized relations.\nGenealogical links have been proposed between Austronesian and various families of East and Southeast Asia.\nAustro-Tai.\nAn Austro-Tai proposal linking Austronesian and the Kra-Dai languages of the southeastern continental Asian mainland was first proposed by Paul K. Benedict, and is supported by Weera Ostapirat, Roger Blench, and Laurent Sagart, based on the traditional comparative method. proposes a series of regular correspondences linking the two families and assumes a primary split, with Kra-Dai speakers being the people who stayed behind in their Chinese homeland. suggests that, if the connection is valid, the relationship is unlikely to be one of two sister families. Rather, he suggests that proto-Kra-Dai speakers were Austronesians who migrated to Hainan Island and back to the mainland from the northern Philippines, and that their distinctiveness results from radical restructuring following contact with Hmong\u2013Mien and Sinitic. An extended version of Austro-Tai was hypothesized by Benedict who added the Japonic languages to the proposal as well.\nAustric.\nA link with the Austroasiatic languages in an 'Austric' phylum is based mostly on typological evidence. However, there is also morphological evidence of a connection between the conservative Nicobarese languages and Austronesian languages of the Philippines. Robert Blust supports the hypothesis which connects the lower Yangtze neolithic Austro-Tai entity with the rice-cultivating Austro-Asiatic cultures, assuming the center of East Asian rice domestication, and putative Austric homeland, to be located in the Yunnan/Burma border area. Under that view, there was an east-west genetic alignment, resulting from a rice-based population expansion, in the southern part of East Asia: Austroasiatic-Kra-Dai-Austronesian, with unrelated Sino-Tibetan occupying a more northerly tier.\nSino-Austronesian.\nFrench linguist and Sinologist Laurent Sagart considers the Austronesian languages to be related to the Sino-Tibetan languages, and also groups the Kra\u2013Dai languages as more closely related to the Malayo-Polynesian languages. Sagart argues for a north-south genetic relationship between Chinese and Austronesian, based on sound correspondences in the basic vocabulary and morphological parallels. Laurent Sagart (2017) concludes that the possession of the two kinds of millets in Taiwanese Austronesian languages (not just Setaria, as previously thought) places the pre-Austronesians in northeastern China, adjacent to the probable Sino-Tibetan homeland. Ko et al.'s genetic research (2014) appears to support Laurent Sagart's linguistic proposal, pointing out that the exclusively Austronesian mtDNA E-haplogroup and the largely Sino-Tibetan M9a haplogroup are twin sisters, indicative of an intimate connection between the early Austronesian and Sino-Tibetan maternal gene pools, at least. Additionally, results from Wei et al. (2017) are also in agreement with Sagart's proposal, in which their analyses show that the predominantly Austronesian Y-DNA haplogroup O3a2b*-P164(xM134) belongs to a newly defined haplogroup O3a2b2-N6 being widely distributed along the eastern coastal regions of Asia, from Korea to Vietnam. Sagart also groups the Austronesian languages in a recursive-like fashion, placing Kra-Dai as a sister branch of Malayo-Polynesian. His methodology has been found to be spurious by his peers.\nJapanese.\nSeveral linguists have proposed that Japanese is genetically related to the Austronesian family, cf. Benedict (1990), Matsumoto (1975), Miller (1967).\nSome other linguists think it is more plausible that Japanese is not genetically related to the Austronesian languages, but instead was influenced by an Austronesian substratum or adstratum.\nThose who propose this scenario suggest that the Austronesian family once covered the islands to the north as well as to the south. Martine Robbeets (2017) claims that Japanese genetically belongs to the \"Transeurasian\" (= Macro-Altaic) languages, but underwent lexical influence from \"para-Austronesian\", a presumed sister language of Proto-Austronesian.\nThe linguist Ann Kumar (2009) proposed that some Austronesians might have migrated to Japan, possibly an elite-group from Java, and created the Japanese-hierarchical society. She also identifies 82 possible cognates between Austronesian and Japanese, however her theory remains very controversial. The linguist Asha Pereltsvaig criticized Kumar's theory on several points. The archaeological problem with that theory is that, contrary to the claim that there was no rice farming in China and Korea in prehistoric times, excavations have indicated that rice farming has been practiced in this area since at least 5000 BC. There are also genetic problems. The pre-Yayoi Japanese lineage was not shared with Southeast Asians, but was shared with Northwest Chinese, Tibetans and Central Asians. Linguistic problems were also pointed out. Kumar did not claim that Japanese was an Austronesian language derived from proto-Javanese language, but only that it provided a superstratum language for old Japanese, based on 82 plausible Javanese-Japanese cognates, mostly related to rice farming.\nEast Asian.\nIn 2001, Stanley Starosta proposed a new language family named East Asian, that includes all primary language families in the broader East Asia region except Japonic and Koreanic. This proposed family consists of two branches, Austronesian and Sino-Tibetan-Yangzian, with the Kra-Dai family considered to be a branch of Austronesian, and \"Yangzian\" to be a new sister branch of Sino-Tibetan consisting of the Austroasiatic and Hmong\u2013Mien languages. This proposal was further researched by linguists like Michael D. Larish in 2006, who also included the Japonic and Koreanic languages in the macrofamily. The proposal has since been adopted by linguists such as George van Driem, albeit without the inclusion of Japonic and Koreanic.\nOngan.\n proposed that the Austronesian and the Ongan protolanguage are the descendants of an Austronesian\u2013Ongan protolanguage. This view is not supported by mainstream linguists and remains very controversial. Robert Blust rejects Blevins' proposal as far-fetched and based solely on chance resemblances and methodologically flawed comparisons.\nWriting systems.\nMost Austronesian languages have Latin-based writing systems today. Some non-Latin-based writing systems include:\nComparison charts.\nBelow are two charts comparing list of numbers of 1\u201310 and thirteen words in Austronesian languages; spoken in Taiwan, the Philippines, the Mariana Islands, Indonesia, Malaysia, Chams or Champa (in Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam), East Timor, Papua, New Zealand, Hawaii, Madagascar, Borneo, Kiribati, Caroline Islands, and Tuvalu.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58802", "revid": "30552921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58802", "title": "Suomi", "text": "Suomi means \"Finland\" in Finnish. \nSuomi may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "58805", "revid": "1318344478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58805", "title": "Malayo-Polynesian languages", "text": "Major subgroup of the Austronesian language family\nThe Malayo-Polynesian languages are a subgroup of the Austronesian languages, with approximately 385.5 million speakers. The Malayo-Polynesian languages are spoken by the Austronesian peoples outside of Taiwan, in the island nations of Southeast Asia (Indonesia and the Philippine Archipelago) and the Pacific Ocean, with a smaller number in continental Asia in the areas near the Malay Peninsula, with Cambodia, Vietnam and the Chinese island Hainan as the northwest geographic outlier. Malagasy, spoken on the island of Madagascar off the eastern coast of Africa in the Indian Ocean, is the furthest western outlier.\nMany languages of the Malayo-Polynesian family in insular Southeast Asia show the strong influence of Sanskrit, Tamil and Arabic, as the western part of the region has been a stronghold of Hinduism, Buddhism, and, later, Islam.\nTwo morphological characteristics of the Malayo-Polynesian languages are a system of affixation and reduplication (repetition of all or part of a word, such as \"wiki-wiki)\" to form new words. Like other Austronesian languages, they have small phonemic inventories; thus a text has few but frequent sounds. The majority also lack consonant clusters. Most also have only a small set of vowels, five being a common number.\nMajor languages.\nAll major and official Austronesian languages belong to the Malayo-Polynesian subgroup. Malayo-Polynesian languages with more than five million speakers are: Indonesian, Javanese, Sundanese, Tagalog, Bikol, Malagasy, Malay, Cebuano, Madurese, Ilocano, Hiligaynon, and Minangkabau.\nAmong the remaining more than 1,000 languages, several have national/official language status, e.g. Tongan, Samoan, M\u0101ori, Gilbertese, Fijian, Hawaiian, Palauan, and Chamorro.\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Malayo-Polynesian\" was originally coined in 1841 by Franz Bopp as the name for the Austronesian language family as a whole, and until the mid-20th century (after the introduction of the term \"Austronesian\" by Wilhelm Schmidt in 1906), \"Malayo-Polynesian\" and \"Austronesian\" were used as synonyms. The current use of \"Malayo-Polynesian\" denoting the subgroup comprising all Austronesian languages outside of Taiwan was introduced in the 1970s, and has eventually become standard terminology in Austronesian studies.\nClassification.\nRelation to Austronesian languages on Taiwan.\nIn spite of a few features shared with the Eastern Formosan languages (such as the merger of proto-Austronesian *t, *C to /t/), there is no conclusive evidence that would link the Malayo-Polynesian languages to any one of the primary branches of Austronesian on Taiwan.\nInternal classification.\nMalayo-Polynesian consists of a large number of small local language clusters, with the one exception being Oceanic, the only large group which is universally accepted; its parent language Proto-Oceanic has been reconstructed in all aspects of its structure (phonology, lexicon, morphology and syntax). All other large groups within Malayo-Polynesian are controversial.\nThe most influential proposal for the internal subgrouping of the Malayo-Polynesian languages was made by Robert Blust who presented several papers advocating a division into two major branches, viz. Western Malayo-Polynesian and Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian.\nCentral-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian is widely accepted as a subgroup, although some objections have been raised against its validity as a genetic subgroup. On the other hand, Western Malayo-Polynesian is now generally held (including by Blust himself) to be an umbrella term without genetic relevance. Taking into account the Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian hypothesis, the Malayo-Polynesian languages can be divided into the following subgroups (proposals for larger subgroups are given below):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNasal.\nThe position of the recently rediscovered Nasal language (spoken on Sumatra) is unclear; it shares features of lexicon and phonology with both Lampung and Rejang.\nEnggano.\nEdwards (2015) argues that Enggano is a primary branch of Malayo-Polynesian. However, this is disputed by Smith (2017), who considers Enggano to have undergone significant internal changes, but to have once been much more like other Sumatran languages in Sumatra.\nPhilippine languages.\nThe status of the Philippine languages as subgroup of Malayo-Polynesian is disputed. While many scholars (such as Robert Blust) support a genealogical subgroup that includes the languages of the Philippines and northern Sulawesi, Reid (2018) rejects the hypothesis of a single Philippine subgroup, but instead argues that the Philippine branches represent first-order subgroups directly descended from Proto-Malayo-Polynesian.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Nuclear Malayo-Polynesian (Zobel 2002).\nZobel (2002) proposes a \"Nuclear Malayo-Polynesian\" subgroup, based on putative shared innovations in the Austronesian alignment and syntax found throughout Indonesia apart from much of Borneo and the north of Sulawesi. This subgroup comprises the languages of the Greater Sunda Islands (Malayo-Chamic, Northwest Sumatra\u2013Barrier Islands, Lampung, Sundanese, Javanese, Madurese, Bali-Sasak-Sumbawa) and most of Sulawesi (Celebic, South Sulawesi), Palauan, Chamorro and the Central\u2013Eastern Malayo-Polynesian languages. This hypothesis is one of the few attempts to link certain Western Malayo-Polynesian languages with the Central-Eastern Malayo-Polynesian languages in a higher intermediate subgroup, but has received little further scholarly attention.\nMalayo-Sumbawan (Adelaar 2005).\nThe Malayo-Sumbawan languages are a proposal by K. Alexander Adelaar (2005) which unites the Malayo-Chamic languages, the Bali-Sasak-Sumbawa languages, Madurese and Sundanese into a single subgroup based on phonological as well as lexical evidence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGreater North Borneo (Blust 2010; Smith 2017, 2017a).\nThe Greater North Borneo hypothesis, which unites all languages spoken on Borneo except for the Barito languages together with the Malayo-Chamic languages, Rejang and Sundanese into a single subgroup, was first proposed by Blust (2010) and further elaborated by Smith (2017, 2017a).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBecause of the inclusion of Malayo-Chamic and Sundanese, the Greater North Borneo hypothesis is incompatible with Adelaar's Malayo-Sumbawan proposal. Consequently, Blust explicitly rejects Malayo-Sumbawan as a subgroup. The Greater North Borneo subgroup is based solely on lexical evidence.\nSmith (2017).\nBased on a proposal initially brought forward by Blust (2010) as an extension of the Greater North Borneo hypothesis, Smith (2017) unites several Malayo-Polynesian subgroups in a \"Western Indonesian\" group, thus greatly reducing the number of primary branches of Malayo-Polynesian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSmith (2025).\nFollowing Smith (2017), with contributions by Edwards &amp; Grimes (to appear):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Malayo-Polynesian languages except Chamorro, Palauan, and Moklenic can be classified under a \"Late Malayo-Polynesian\" dialect network around 3,000 BP. The position of Chamic, not listed in the table above, is uncertain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58806", "revid": "49784115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58806", "title": "New York divorce law", "text": "Divorce law in New York, United States\nNew York divorce law changed on August 15, 2010, when Governor David Paterson signed no-fault divorce into law in New York state. Until 2010, New York recognized divorces only upon fault-based criteria or upon separation. The State Senate approved the No-Fault Divorce bill on June 30, and the State Assembly passed the bill on July 1.\nOverview.\nDespite being generally considered a liberal state, New York has a history of being conservative on issues regarding marriage; it was the last state in the country to allow no-fault divorce and still maintains a (seldom enforced) law against adultery (Penal Law \u00a7 255.17). Until 1966, adultery was the only ground of divorce; cruelty, a ground that had long been available in most other states, was not available in New York.\nDivorce grounds.\nNew York is a mixed state that allows for both no-fault and at-fault divorce. In the US, about one-third of states, most of them in the West and Midwest, are only no-fault, having abolished at-fault divorce. A notable non-Western and non-Midwestern state that is only no fault is Florida.\nAt fault divorce.\nThe state of New York is one of the states which allow the possibility of an \"at fault divorce\". In this case, one party accuses the other of a wrongdoing (the \"fault\"). The other party may or may not contest. In the past, the parties might use the at fault grounds to obtain a mutually desired and agreed upon divorce: they can agree to an uncontested divorce as long as one of the parties is willing to allege one of the fault-based grounds and the other party accepts the \"fault\" without contesting it. The continued availability of fault grounds gives a spouse leverage in extracting a favorable settlement, as he or she can threaten to sue on a fault ground, which may have adverse social or business effects on the other spouse, unless he or she is given what he or she wants in the settlement.\nAn at fault divorce can be obtained due to the following:\n\"Cruel and inhuman treatment\" must be behavior by the defendant that rises to the level such that it makes it improper for the plaintiff to continue to reside with the defendant as husband and wife. Allegations under this ground include allegations of domestic violence and repeated, extreme mental cruelty.\n\"Abandonment\" may be actual or constructive. Actual abandonment is usually one spouse leaving the marital residence without the consent of the other spouse without intention to return. One spouse may also lock out the other spouse from the marital residence. Constructive abandonment is the refusal of \"basic obligation arising from the marital contract,\" including a cessation of sexual relations; establishing such a prior constructive abandonment may render the spouse who leaves, or locks out the other, as the innocent spouse.\n\"Adultery\" is difficult to prove as it requires corroborating evidence from a third party; thus a statement by the defendant that he or she had sexual relations with a third party is not legally admissible to permit the court to grant a divorce to the plaintiff. Furthermore, if the adultery was \"condoned\", i.e. the cheated-on party knew about the extra-marital sexual relationship but continued to stay in a marital, conjugal relationship with their spouse, the adultery cannot serve as a cause for divorce.\nIrretrievable breakdown (no fault).\nSince 2010, a new ground has been added, effectively permitting no-fault divorce in New York state:\nThe parties may also disagree over child support, custody, alimony, division of joint assets or who is going to pay legal fees. These are known as \"ancillary relief\" (see below) that are requested by one or both of the parties. No judgment of divorce may be granted under the no fault ground unless and until the economic issues of equitable distribution of marital property, the payment or waiver of spousal support, the payment of child support, the payment of counsel and experts\u2019 fees and expenses as well as the custody and visitation with the minor children of the marriage have been resolved by the parties, or determined by the court, and incorporated into the judgment of divorce.\nSeparation as ground of divorce.\nSeparation may also be a ground of divorce.\nProcedure.\nContested divorce.\nThe grounds for divorce may be decided by a jury or by a judge, all other ancillary relief is considered equitable in nature and must be decided by the judge alone.\nThe grounds in all cases must be specifically stated in the complaint, giving factual details, dates, and actual places of occurrence. Lack of proper content is not an affirmative defense; the plaintiff must prove the allegations even if uncontroverted; proof is made according to the general rules of evidence. Failure to state a cause of action will result in a judgment dismissing the complaint. Divorce may commence by means of filing and service of a Summons with Notice on the defendant. The defendant must then make an appearance and demand for the complaint by the plaintiff, or is at risk of having the plaintiff granted the divorce by default. Forms for filing or responding to a divorce are available on the state courts website.\nOnce the case is filed and served the parties must request a Preliminary Conference within ninety days if the case is to be treated as a contested divorce. Such Preliminary Conference will be scheduled if one of the parties files a \"Request for Judicial Intervention\" (RJI) with required fee. At the Preliminary Conference the court may deal with interim issues, (i.e. temporary custody, child support, attorney fees or spousal support) and will schedule discovery between the parties that includes the valuation of assets and pensions to be divided between the parties.\nUncontested divorce.\nIf all the issues are decided between the parties they may agree to submit the papers to the court for approval; this is known as an uncontested divorce. When the defendant is served but does not answer the legal pleadings, the plaintiff may seek a default judgment by application to the court. If the divorce is started with a \"Summons with Notice\" then the grounds will either have to be proven by plaintiff's affidavit, or by testimony at an inquest if the divorce is uncontested or to be granted by default. Uncontested divorces are also granted after the defendant appears and waives the right to answer the complaint. In these cases the defendant neither admits nor denies the plaintiff's allegations, it is up to the plaintiff to prove the allegations by testimony or affidavit in such a case.\nResidency requirements.\nFor New York State Supreme Court to have jurisdiction over the parties (see DRL \u00a7 230) one of the following residency conditions must be satisfied:\nResiding \"continuously\" in the state does not mean that the party can not have left the state during the period of residency nor does it mean that the party does not have another residence elsewhere outside New York.\nAncillary issues.\nChildren.\nThere are three keys issues when children are involved in a divorce or separation:\nProperty.\nEquitable distribution is the law in New York that determines the division of property at the end of a marriage. The court examines thirteen factors in determining the fair division of the property that was accumulated during the marriage and the debts of the parties. The courts have routinely held that equal distribution is the norm except in cases of egregious misconduct, or when dealing with businesses, professional licenses, and college &amp; advanced degrees.\nSpousal support.\nToday alimony is known as \"maintenance\" or \"spousal support.\" Unlike child support, there is a set formula to calculate spousal support \"pendente lite\" (\"pending the litigation\"), but there is no post judgment formula. A grant of spousal support depends on the facts of the case, such as the disparity between the income of the parties, the duration of the marriage, the health of the parties, and the presence of very young children. In New York, spousal support is rarely granted on a permanent basis, except in cases of physical or mental disability or when the parties are elderly (about 60 years old or older). Generally, it is granted for a set period of time so the other party can get back on their feet after the termination of the marriage. The length of time depends on the facts of the case as the judge sees fit to award.\nLegal fees.\nWhen one party to a divorce is unable to afford an attorney that party is allowed to request the court to order the spouse with the greater income or assets to pay all or part of the other spouse's legal fees. These awards can be on a temporary basis at the beginning of the suit or at the end, as the judge sees fit in each case.\nName change.\nAccording to NY Civil Rights Law Section 65, people have the right to choose, and to change, their name without government approval or involvement; thus, people who chose to change their names in connection with marriage do so according to custom, not law. Legally, one can change one's name at any time simply by using this newly chosen name consistently and without an intent to commit fraud. However, to give people easy \"legal proof\" of a name change made in connection with divorce, every divorce decree mentions the name change option and itself represents legal proof or documentation of any concomitant name change. (A parallel provision in the Domestic Relations Law (Section 15) also renders every marriage certificate legal \"proof\" of a name change upon marriage (if there is one).)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58808", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58808", "title": "The day the music died", "text": ""}
{"id": "58809", "revid": "2697759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58809", "title": "Adultery", "text": "Type of extramarital sex\nAdultery is generally defined as extramarital sex that is or was considered objectionable on social, religious and moral grounds, and which often resulted in legal consequences. Although the sexual activities that can be described as adultery vary, as well as their consequences, the concept is found in many cultures and shares similarities in Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Adultery was and continues to be viewed by many societies as offensive to public morals, and as undermining the \"marital\" relationship.\nHistorically, many cultures considered adultery a sin and a very serious crime, sometimes subject to severe penalties, usually for the woman and sometimes for the man, with penalties including capital punishment, mutilation, or torture. In most Western countries during the 19th century, most direct criminal penalties have fallen into disfavor. Since the 20th century, criminal laws against adultery have become controversial, with most Western countries repealing adultery laws. In countries where adultery is still a criminal offense, punishments range from a fine to caning and even capital punishment.\nEven in jurisdictions that have repealed adultery laws, adultery may still have legal consequences. For example, in jurisdictions with fault-based divorce laws adultery almost always constitutes a ground for divorce and in some jurisdictions it may be considered in relation to custody of children. Even in jurisdictions with no-fault divorce, adultery may still be a factor in property settlement and the award or denial of alimony.\nInternational organizations have called for the repeal of adultery laws, especially in the light of several high-profile stoning cases that took place in some countries. The head of the United Nations expert body charged with identifying ways to eliminate laws that discriminate against women or are discriminatory to them in terms of implementation or impact, Kamala Chandrakirana, has stated that: \"Adultery must not be classified as a criminal offence at all\". A joint statement by the United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice states that: \"Adultery as a criminal offence violates women's human rights\".\nIn Muslim countries that follow Sharia law for criminal justice, the punishment for adultery may be stoning. There are fifteen countries in which stoning is authorized as lawful punishment, though in recent times it has been legally carried out only in Iran and Somalia. Most countries where adultery is a crime are those where the dominant religion is Islam, and several Sub-Saharan African Christian-majority countries, but also in the Philippines and several U.S. states. In some jurisdictions, having sexual relations with the king's wife or the wife of his eldest son constitutes treason.\nOverview.\nThe term \"adultery\" refers to sexual acts between a married person and someone who is not that person's spouse. It may arise in a number of contexts. In criminal law, adultery was a criminal offence in many countries in the past, and is still a crime in some countries today. In family law, adultery may be a ground for divorce, with the legal definition of adultery being \"physical contact with an alien and unlawful organ\", while in some countries today, adultery is not in itself grounds for divorce. Extramarital sexual acts not fitting this definition are not \"adultery\" though they may constitute \"unreasonable behavior\", also a ground of divorce.\nAnother issue is the issue of paternity of a child. The application of the term to the act appears to arise from the idea that \"criminal intercourse with a married woman ... tended to adulterate the issue [children] of an innocent husband ... and to expose him to support and provide for another man's [children]\". Thus, the \"purity\" of the children of a marriage is corrupted, and the inheritance is altered.\nIn archaic law, there was a common law tort of criminal conversation arising from adultery, \"conversation\" being an archaic euphemism for sexual intercourse. It was a tort action brought by a husband against a third party (\"the other man\") who interfered with the marriage relationship.\nSome adultery laws differentiate based on the sex of the participants, and as a result such laws are often seen as discriminatory, and in some jurisdictions they have been struck down by courts, usually on the basis that they discriminated against women.\nThe term \"adultery\", rather than \"extramarital sex\", implies a moral condemnation of the act; as such it is usually not a neutral term because it carries an implied judgment that the act is wrong.\nAdultery refers to sexual relations which are not officially legitimized; for example it does not refer to having sexual intercourse with multiple partners in the case of polygamy (when a man is married to more than one wife at a time, called polygyny; or when a woman is married to more than one husband at a time, called polyandry).\nDefinitions and legal constructs.\nIn the traditional English common law, adultery was a felony. Although the legal definition of \"adultery\" differs in nearly every legal system, the common theme is sexual relations outside of marriage, in one form or another.\nTraditionally, many cultures, particularly Latin American ones, had strong double standards regarding male and female adultery, with the latter being seen as a much more serious violation.\nAdultery involving a married woman and a man other than her husband was considered a very serious crime. In 1707, English Lord Chief Justice John Holt stated that a man having sexual relations with another man's wife was \"the highest invasion of property\" and claimed, in regard to the aggrieved husband, that \"a man cannot receive a higher provocation\" (in a case of murder or manslaughter).\nThe \"Encyclopedia of Diderot &amp; d'Alembert\", Vol. 1 (1751), also equated adultery to theft writing that, \"adultery is, after homicide, the most punishable of all crimes, because it is the most cruel of all thefts, and an outrage capable of inciting murders and the most deplorable excesses.\"\nLegal definitions of adultery vary. For example, New York defines an adulterer as a person who \"engages in sexual intercourse with another person at a time when he has a living spouse, or the other person has a living spouse.\" North Carolina defines adultery as occurring when any man and woman \"lewdly and lasciviously associate, bed, and cohabit together.\"\nMinnesota law (repealed in 2023) provided: \"when a married woman has sexual intercourse with a man other than her husband, whether married or not, both are guilty of adultery.\" In the 2003 New Hampshire Supreme Court case \"Blanchflower v. Blanchflower\", it was held that female same-sex sexual relations did not constitute sexual intercourse, based on a 1961 definition from \"Webster's Third New International Dictionary\"; and thereby an accused wife in a divorce case was found not guilty of adultery. In 2001, Virginia prosecuted an attorney, John R. Bushey, for adultery, a case that ended in a guilty plea and a $125 fine. Adultery is against the governing law of the U.S. military.\nIn common-law countries, adultery was also known as \"criminal conversation.\" This became the name of the civil tort arising from adultery, being based upon compensation for the other spouse's injury. Criminal conversation was usually referred to by lawyers as \"crim. con.\", and was abolished in England in 1857, and the Republic of Ireland in 1976. Another tort, alienation of affection, arises when one spouse deserts the other for a third person. This act was also known as desertion, which was often a crime as well. A small number of jurisdictions still allow suits for criminal conversation and/or alienation of affection. In the United States, six states still maintain this tort.\nA marriage in which both spouses agree ahead of time to accept sexual relations by either partner with others is sometimes referred to as an open marriage or the swinging lifestyle. Polyamory, meaning the practice, desire, or acceptance of intimate relationships that are not exclusive with respect to other sexual or intimate relationships, with knowledge and consent of everyone involved, sometimes involves such marriages. Swinging and open marriages are both a form of non-monogamy, and the spouses would not view the sexual relations as objectionable. However, irrespective of the stated views of the partners, extramarital relations could still be considered a crime in some legal jurisdictions which criminalize adultery.\nIn Canada, though the written definition in the \"Divorce Act\" refers to extramarital relations with someone of the opposite sex, a British Columbia judge used the \"Civil Marriage Act\" in a 2005 case to grant a woman a divorce from her husband who had cheated on her with another man, which the judge felt was equal reasoning to dissolve the union.\nIn England and Wales, case law restricts the definition of adultery to penetrative sexual intercourse between a man and a woman, no matter the gender of the spouses in the marriage. Infidelity with a person of the same gender can be grounds for a divorce as unreasonable behavior; this situation was discussed at length during debates on the Marriage (Same-Sex Couples) Bill. However, the practical effect of this ceased with the introduction of no-fault divorce in April 2022, which meant that unreasonable behavior ceased to be grounds for divorce.\nIn India, adultery was the sexual intercourse of a man with a married woman without the consent of her husband when such sexual intercourse did not amount to rape, and it was a non-cognizable, non-bailable criminal offence; the adultery law was overturned by the Supreme Court of India on 27 September 2018.\nPrevalence.\nDurex's Global Sex Survey found that worldwide 22% of people surveyed admitted to have had extramarital sex. According to a 2015 study by Durex and Match.com, Thailand and Denmark were the most adulterous countries based on the percentage of adults who admitted having an affair.\nIn the United States Alfred Kinsey found in his studies that 50% of males and 26% of females had extramarital sex at least once during their lifetime. Depending on studies, it was estimated that 22.7% of men and 11.6% of women, had extramarital sex. Other authors say that between 20% and 25% of Americans had sex with someone other than their spouse.\nThree 1990s studies in the United States, using nationally representative samples, have found that about 10\u201315% of women and 20\u201325% of men admitted to having engaged in extramarital sex.\nThe Standard Cross-Cultural Sample described the occurrence of extramarital sex by gender in over 50 pre-industrial cultures. The occurrence of extramarital sex by men is described as \"universal\" in 6 cultures, \"moderate\" in 29 cultures, \"occasional\" in 6 cultures, and \"uncommon\" in 10 cultures. The occurrence of extramarital sex by women is described as \"universal\" in 6 cultures, \"moderate\" in 23 cultures, \"occasional\" in 9 cultures, and \"uncommon\" in 15 cultures.\nCultural and religious traditions.\nGreco-Roman world.\nIn the Greco-Roman world, there were stringent laws against adultery, but these applied to sexual intercourse with a married woman. In the early Roman Law, the \"jus tori\" belonged to the husband. It was therefore not illegal for a husband to have sex with a slave or an unmarried woman.\nThe Roman husband often took advantage of his legal immunity. Thus historian Spartianus said that Verus, the imperial colleague of Marcus Aurelius, did not hesitate to declare to his reproaching wife: \"Uxor enim dignitatis nomen est, non voluptatis.\" (\"'Wife' connotes rank, not sexual pleasure\", or more literally \"Wife is the name of dignity, not bliss\") (Verus, V).\nLater in Roman history, as William E.H. Lecky has shown, the idea that the husband owed a fidelity similar to that demanded of the wife must have gained ground, at least in theory. Lecky gathers from the legal maxim of Ulpian: \"It seems most unfair for a man to require from a wife the chastity he does not himself practice\".\nAccording to Plutarch, the lending of wives practiced among some people was also encouraged by Lycurgus, though from a motive other than that which actuated the practice (Plutarch, Lycurgus, XXIX). The recognized license of the Greek husband may be seen in the following passage of the pseudo-Demosthenic \"Oration Against Neaera\":\n\"We keep mistresses for our pleasures, concubines for constant attendance, and wives to bear us legitimate children and to be our faithful housekeepers. Yet, because of the wrong done to the husband only, the Athenian lawgiver Solon allowed any man to kill an adulterer whom he had taken in the act.\" (Plutarch, Solon)\nThe Roman Lex Julia, \"Lex Iulia de Adulteriis Coercendis\" (17 BC), punished adultery with banishment. The two guilty parties were sent to different islands (\"dummodo in \"diversas\" insulas relegentur\"), and part of their property was confiscated. Fathers were permitted to kill daughters and their partners in adultery. Husbands could kill the partners under certain circumstances and were required to divorce adulterous wives.\nAbrahamic religions.\nBiblical sources.\nBoth Judaism and Christianity base their injunction against adultery on passages in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament in Christianity), which firstly prohibits adultery in the Seventh Commandment: \"Thou shalt not commit adultery.\"\n(). However, Judaism and Christianity differ on what actually constitutes adultery.\n defines what constitutes adultery in the Hebrew Bible, and it also prescribes the punishment as capital punishment. In this verse, and in the Jewish tradition, adultery consists of sexual intercourse between a man and a \"married\" woman who is not his lawful wife:\nAnd the man that committeth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.\nThus, according to the Hebrew Bible, adultery is not committed if the female participant is unmarried (unless she is betrothed to be married), while the marital status of the male participant is irrelevant (he himself could be married or unmarried to another woman).\nIf a married woman was raped by a man who is not her husband, only the rapist is punished for adultery. The victim is not punished: as the Bible declares, \"this matter is similar to when a man rises up against his fellow and murders him\"; just as a murder victim is not guilty of murder, a rape victim is not guilty of adultery.\nMichael Coogan writes that according to the text wives are the property of their husband, marriage meaning transfer of property (from father to husband), and adultery is violating the property right of the husband. However, in contrast to other ancient Near Eastern law collections which treat adultery as an offense against the husband alone, and allow the husband to waive or mitigate the punishment, Biblical law allows no such mitigation, on the grounds that God as well as the husband is offended by adultery, and an offense against God cannot be forgiven by man. In addition, Coogan's book was criticized by Phyllis Trible, who argues that that patriarchy was not decreed, but only described by God. She claims that Paul the Apostle made the same mistake as Coogan.\nDavid's sexual intercourse with Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, is described by the Bible as a \"sin\" whose punishment included the ravishment of David's own wives. According to Jennifer Wright Knust, David's act was adultery only according to the spirit and not the letter of the law, because Uriah was non-Jewish, and (according to Knust) the Biblical codes only technically applied to Israelites. However, according to Jacob Milgrom, Jews and resident foreigners received equal protection under Biblical law. In any case, according to the Babylonian Talmud, Uriah was indeed Jewish and wrote a provisional bill of divorce prior to going out to war, specifying that if he fell in battle, the divorce would take effect from the time the writ was issued.\nChristianity.\nAdultery is considered immoral by Christians and a sin, based primarily on passages like and . Although does say that \"and that is what some of you were. But you were washed\", it still acknowledges adultery to be immoral and a sin.\nCatholicism ties fornication with breaking the sixth commandment in its Catechism.\nUntil a few decades ago, adultery was a criminal offense in many countries where the dominant religion is Christianity, especially in Roman Catholic countries (for example, in Austria it was a criminal offense until 1997). Adultery was decriminalized in Chile in 1994, Argentina in 1995, Brazil in 2005 and Mexico in 2011, but in some predominantly Catholic countries, such as the Philippines, it remains illegal.\nThe Book of Mormon also prohibits adultery. For instance, Abinadi cites the Ten Commandments when he accuses King Noah's priests of sexual immorality. When Jesus Christ visits the Americas he reinforces the law and teaches them the higher law (also found in the New Testament):\n\"Behold, it is written by them of old time, that thou shalt not commit adultery; but I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman, to lust after her, hath committed adultery already in his heart.\"\nSome churches such as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have interpreted \"adultery\" to include all sexual relationships outside of marriage, regardless of the marital status of the participants. Book of Mormon prophets and civil leaders often list adultery as an illegal activity along with murder, robbing, and stealing.\nJudaism.\nThough Leviticus 20:10 prescribes the death penalty for adultery, the legal procedural requirements were very exacting and required the testimony of two eyewitnesses of good character for conviction. The defendant also must have been warned immediately before performing the act. A death sentence could be issued only during the period when the Holy Temple stood, and only so long as the Sanhedrin court convened in its chamber within the Temple complex. Technically, therefore, no death penalty can now be applied.\nThe death penalty for adultery was generally strangulation, except in the case of a woman who was the daughter of a Kohen, which was specifically mentioned in Scripture as the penalty of burning (pouring molten lead down the throat), or a woman who was betrothed but not married, in which case the punishment for both man and woman was stoning.\nAt the civil level, Jewish law (halakha) forbids a man to continue living with an adulterous wife, and he is obliged to divorce her. Also, an adulteress is not permitted to marry the adulterer, but (to avoid any doubt as to her status as being free to marry another or that of her children) many authorities say he must give her a divorce as if they were married.\nAccording to Judaism, the Seven laws of Noah apply to all of humankind; these laws prohibit adultery to non-Jews as well as Jews.\nThe extramarital intercourse of a married man is not in itself considered a crime in biblical or later Jewish law; it was considered akin to polygyny, which was permitted. Similarly, sexual intercourse between an unmarried man and a woman who was neither married nor betrothed was not considered adultery. This concept of adultery stems from the economic aspect of Israelite marriage whereby the husband has an exclusive right to his wife, whereas the wife, as the husband's possession, did not have an exclusive right to her husband.\nIn Jesus's time, the real punishment for adultery was divorce, not the death penalty.\nIslam.\n\"Zina\"' is an Arabic term for illegal intercourse, premarital or extramarital. Various conditions and punishments have been attributed to adultery. Under Islamic law, adultery in general is sexual intercourse by a person (whether man or woman) with someone to whom they are not married. Adultery is a violation of the marital contract and one of the major sins condemned by God in the Qur'an:\nQur'anic verses prohibiting adultery include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Do not go near adultery. It is truly a shameful deed and an evil way.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Say, \"My Lord has only forbidden open and secret indecencies, sinfulness, unjust aggression, associating \u02f9others\u02fa with Allah \u02f9in worship\u02fa\u2014a practice He has never authorized\u2014and attributing to Allah what you do not know.\"\u2014\u200a\nPunishments are reserved to the legal authorities and false accusations are to be punished severely. It has been said that these legal procedural requirements were instituted to protect women from slander and false accusations: i.e. four witnesses of good character are required for conviction, who were present at that time and saw the deed taking place; and if they saw it they were not of good moral character, as they were looking at naked adults; thus no one can be convicted of adultery unless both of the accused also agree and give their confession under oath four times.\nAccording to \"a hadith\" attributed to Muhammad, an unmarried person who commits adultery or fornication is punished by flogging 100 times; a married person will then be stoned to death. A survey conducted by the Pew Research Center found support for stoning as a punishment for adultery mostly in Arab countries; it was supported in Egypt (82% of respondents in favor of the punishment) and Jordan (70% in favor), as well as Pakistan (82% favor), whereas in Nigeria (56% in favor) and in Indonesia (42% in favor) opinion is more divided, perhaps due to diverging traditions and differing interpretations of Sharia.\nEastern religions.\nHinduism.\nThe Hindu Sanskrit texts present a range of views on adultery, offering widely differing positions. The hymn 4.5.5 of the \"Rigveda\" calls adultery \"p\u0101pa\" (evil, sin). Other Vedic texts call adultery a sin, just like murder, incest, anger, evil thoughts and trickery. The Vedic texts, including the \"Rigveda\", the \"Atharvaveda\" and the Upanishads, also acknowledge the existence of male lovers and female lovers as a basic fact of human life, followed by the recommendation that one should avoid such extramarital sex during certain ritual occasions (yajna). The Rigveda describes a woman's eagerness to meet her lover, and one hymn asks the gods to protect the embryo of a pregnant wife as she sleeps with her husband and other lovers.\nAdultery and similar offenses are discussed under one of the eighteen \"viv\u0101dapadas\" (titles of laws) in the \"dharma\" literature of Hinduism. These texts generally condemn adultery, with some exceptions involving consensual sex and \"niyoga\" (levirate conception) in order to produce an heir. According to \"Apastamba Dharmasutra\", the earliest dated Hindu law text, cross-varna adultery is a punishable crime, where the man receives a far more severe punishment than the woman. In \"Gautama Dharmasutra\", the adulterous woman is liable to harsh punishment for the cross-class adultery. While \"Gautama Dharmasutra\" reserves the punishment in cases of cross-class adultery, it seems to have been generalized by \"Vishnu Dharmasastra\" and \"Manusmiriti\". The recommended punishments in the text also vary between these texts.\nThe \"Manusmriti\", also known as the \"Laws of Manu\", deals with this in greater detail. Verse 4.134 declares adultery to be a heinous offense. The \"Manusmriti\" does not include adultery as a \"grievous sin\", but includes it as a \"secondary sin\" that leads to a loss of caste. Intent and consent are a elements that determine the appropriate punishment. Rape is not considered adultery for the woman, while the rapist is punished severely. Lesser punishment is recommended for consensual adulterous sex. Manu recommends the death penalty for a man who rapes a virgin. Other penalties range from fines and head-shaving to the loss of a limb, depending on the relative social status of those involved. In verses 8.362-363, the author states that sexual relations with the wife of traveling performer is not a sin, and reduces the penalty to a small fine.\nVerse 5.152 of says that a woman must constantly worship her husband as a god and be completely faithful even if he commits adultery. Although the \"Manusmrti\" recommends sexual fidelity in marriage, it also accepts that adulterous relationships happen and that children are born from such unions. According to Manu, a child conceived through adultery should belong to its mother's husband and not to its biological father.\nOther \"dharmasastra\" texts describe adultery as a punishable crime but offer differing details. According to \"Naradasmriti\", the term adultery in is not confined to the relationship of a married man with another man's wife. It includes sex with any woman who is protected by another man, including wives, daughters, other relatives, and servants. Adultery is not a punishable offence for a man if \"the woman's husband has abandoned her because she is wicked, or he is eunuch, or of a man who does not care, provided the wife initiates it of her own volition\". Adultery is not a punishable offence if a married man engages in intercourse with woman who doesn't belong to other man and is not a Brahmin, provided the woman is not of higher caste than the man. Brihaspati-smriti mention, among other things, adulterous local customs in ancient India and then states, \"for such practices these (people) incur neither penance nor secular punishment\". Kautilya's \"Arthashastra\" includes an exemption that in case the husband forgives his adulterous wife, the woman and her lover should be set free. If the offended husband does not forgive, the \"Arthashastra\" recommends the adulterous woman's nose and ears be cut off, while her lover be executed.\nIn \"Kamasutra\", which is not a religious text like Vedas or Puranas but an ancient text on love and sex, Vatsyayana discusses adultery and devotes \"not less than fifteen sutras (1.5.6\u201320) to enumerating the reasons (\"karana\") for which a man is allowed to seduce a married woman\". According to Wendy Doniger, the \"Kamasutra\" teaches adulterous sexual liaison as a means for a man to predispose the involved woman in assisting him, working against his enemies and facilitating his successes. It also explains the many signs and reasons a woman wants to enter into an adulterous relationship and when she does not want to commit adultery. The \"Kamasutra\" teaches strategies to engage in adulterous relationships, but concludes its chapter on sexual liaison stating that one should not commit adultery because adultery pleases only one of two sides in a marriage, hurts the other, it goes against both \"dharma\" and \"artha\".\nAccording to Werner Menski, the Sanskrit texts take \"widely different positions on adultery\", with some considering it a minor offense that can be addressed with penance, but others treat it as a severe offense that depending on the caste deserves the death penalty for the man or the woman. According to Ramanathan and Weerakoon, in Hinduism, the sexual matters are left to the judgment of those involved and not a matter to be imposed through law.\nAccording to Carl Olsen, the classical Hindu society considered adultery as a sexual transgression but treated it with a degree of tolerance. It is described as a minor transgression in \"Naradasmriti\" and other texts, one that a sincere penance could atone. Penance is also recommended to a married person who does not actually commit adultery, but carries adulterous thoughts for someone else or is thinking of committing adultery.\nOther Hindu texts present a more complex model of behavior and mythology where gods commit adultery for various reasons. For example, Krishna commits adultery and the \"Bhagavata Purana\" justifies it as something to be expected when Vishnu took a human form, just like sages become uncontrolled. According to Tracy Coleman, Radha and other gopis are indeed lovers of Krishna, but this is \"prema\" or \"selfless, true love\" and not carnal craving. In Hindu texts, this relationship between gopis and Krishna involves secret nightly rendezvous. Some texts state it to be divine adultery, others as a symbolism of spiritual dedication and religious value. The example of Krishna's adulterous behavior has been used by Sahajiyas Hindus of Bengal to justify their own behavior that is contrary to the mainstream Hindu norm, according to Doniger. Other Hindu texts state that Krishna's adultery is not a license for other men to do the same, in the same way that men should not drink poison just because Rudra-Shiva drank poison during the Samudra Manthan. A similar teaching is found in Mahayana Buddhism, states Doniger.\nThe \"Linga Purana\" indicates that sexual hospitality existed in ancient India. The sage Sudarshana, asks his wife Oghavati to please their guests in this way. One day, he comes home while she is having sex with a mendicant who visits their house. Sudarshana tells them to continue. The mendicant turns out to be Dharma, the lord of righteous conduct, who blesses the couple for their upholding of social law.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhist texts such as Digha Nik\u0101ya describe adultery as a form of sexual wrongdoing that is one link in a chain of immorality and misery. According to Wendy Doniger, this view of adultery as evil is postulated in early Buddhist texts as having originated from greed in a previous life. This idea combines Hindu and Buddhist thoughts then prevalent. Sentient beings without body, state the canonical texts, are reborn on earth due to their greed and craving, some people become beautiful and some ugly, some become men and some women. The ugly envy the beautiful and this triggers the ugly to commit adultery with the wives of the beautiful. Like in Hindu mythology, states Doniger, Buddhist texts explain adultery as a result from sexual craving; it initiates a degenerative process.\nBuddhism considers celibacy as the monastic ideal. For he who feels that he cannot live in celibacy, it recommends that he never commit adultery with another's wife. Engaging in sex outside of marriage, with the wife of another man, with a girl who is engaged to be married, or a girl protected by her relatives (father or brother), or extramarital sex with prostitutes, ultimately causes suffering to other human beings and oneself. It should be avoided, state the Buddhist canonical texts.\nBuddhist Pali texts narrate legends where the Buddha explains the karmic consequences of adultery. For example, states Robert Goldman, one such story is of Thera Soreyya. Buddha states in the Soreyya story that \"men who commit adultery suffer hell for hundreds of thousands of years after rebirth, then are reborn a hundred successive times as women on earth, must earn merit by \"utter devotion to their husbands\" in these lives, before they can be reborn again as men to pursue a monastic life and liberation from \"samsara\".\nThere are some differences between the Buddhist texts and the Hindu texts on the identification and consequences of adultery. According to Jos\u00e9 Ignacio Cabez\u00f3n, for example, the Hindu text \"Naradasmriti\" considers consensual extra-marital sex between a man and a woman in certain circumstances (such as if the husband has abandoned the woman) as not a punishable crime, but the Buddhist texts \"nowhere exculpate\" any adulterous relationship. The term adultery in \"Naradasmriti\" is broader in scope than the one in Buddhist sources. In the text, various acts such as secret meetings, exchange of messages and gifts, \"inappropriate touching\" and a false accusation of adultery, are deemed adulterous, while Buddhist texts do not recognize these acts under adultery. Later texts such as the \"Dhammapada\", \"Pancasiksanusamsa Sutra\" and a few Mahayana sutras state that \"heedless man who runs after other men's wife\" acquire demerit, blame, discomfort and are reborn in hell. Other Buddhist texts make no mention of legal punishments for adultery.\nOther historical practices.\nIn some Native American cultures, severe penalties could be imposed on an adulterous wife by her husband. In many instances she was made to endure a bodily mutilation which would, in the mind of the aggrieved husband, prevent her from ever being a temptation to other men again. Among the Aztecs, wives caught in adultery were occasionally impaled, although the more usual punishment was to be stoned to death.\nThe Code of Hammurabi, a well-preserved Babylonian law code of ancient Mesopotamia, dating back to about 1772 BC, provided drowning as punishment for adultery.\nAmputation of the nose\u00a0\u2013 rhinotomy\u00a0\u2013 was a punishment for adultery among many civilizations, including ancient India, ancient Egypt, among Greeks and Romans, and in Byzantium and among the Arabs.\nIn the tenth century, the Arab explorer Ibn Fadlan noted that adultery was unknown among the pagan Oghuz Turks. Ibn Fadlan writes that \"adultery is unknown among them; but whomsoever they find by his conduct that he is an adulterer, they tear him in two. This comes about so: they bring together the branches of two trees, tie him to the branches and then let both trees go, so that he is torn in two.\"\nIn medieval Europe, early Jewish law mandated stoning for an adulterous wife and her partner.\nIn England and its successor states, it has been high treason to engage in adultery with the King's wife, his eldest son's wife and his eldest unmarried daughter. The jurist Sir William Blackstone writes that \"the plain intention of this law is to guard the Blood Royal from any suspicion of bastardy, whereby the succession to the Crown might be rendered dubious.\" Adultery was a serious issue when it came to succession to the crown. Philip IV of France had all three of his daughters-in-law imprisoned, two (Margaret of Burgundy and Blanche of Burgundy) on the grounds of adultery and the third (Joan of Burgundy) for being aware of their adulterous behaviour. The two brothers accused of being lovers of the king's daughters-in-law were executed immediately after being arrested. The wife of Philip IV's eldest son bore a daughter, the future Joan II of Navarre, whose paternity and succession rights were disputed all her life.\nThe christianization of Europe came to mean that, in theory, and unlike with the Romans, there was supposed to be a single sexual standard, where adultery was a sin and against the teachings of the church, regardless of the sex of those involved. In practice, however, the church seemed to have accepted the traditional double standard which punished the adultery of the wife more harshly than that of the husband. Among Germanic tribes, each tribe had its own laws for adultery, and many of them allowed the husband to \"take the law in his hands\" and commit acts of violence against a wife caught committing adultery. In the Middle Ages, adultery in Vienna was punishable by death through impalement. Austria was one of the last Western countries to decriminalize adultery, in 1997.\nThe \"Encyclopedia of Diderot &amp; d'Alembert\", Vol. 1 (1751) noted the legal double standard from that period, it wrote:\n\"Furthermore, although the husband who violates conjugal trust is guilty as well as the woman, it is not permitted for her to accuse him, nor to pursue him because of this crime\".\nAdultery and the law.\nHistorically, many cultures considered adultery a very serious crime, some subject to severe punishment, especially for the married woman and sometimes for her sex partner, with penalties including capital punishment, mutilation, or torture. Such punishments have gradually fallen into disfavor, especially in Western countries from the 19th century. In countries where adultery is still a criminal offense, punishments range from fines to caning and even capital punishment. Since the 20th century, such laws have become controversial, with most Western countries repealing them.\nHowever, even in jurisdictions that have decriminalised adultery, adultery may still have legal consequences, particularly in jurisdictions with fault-based divorce laws, where adultery almost always constitutes a ground for divorce and may be a factor in property settlement, the custody of children, the denial of alimony, etc. Adultery is not a ground for divorce in jurisdictions which have adopted a no-fault divorce model, but may still be a factor in child custody and property disputes.\nInternational organizations have called for the decriminalising of adultery, especially in the light of several high-profile stoning cases that have occurred in some countries. The head of the United Nations expert body charged with identifying ways to eliminate laws that discriminate against women or are discriminatory to them in terms of implementation or impact, Kamala Chandrakirana, has stated that: \"Adultery must not be classified as a criminal offence at all\". A joint statement by the United Nations Working Group on discrimination against women in law and in practice states that: \"Adultery as a criminal offence violates women's human rights\".\nIn Muslim countries that follow Sharia law for criminal justice, the punishment for adultery may be stoning. There are 15 countries in which stoning is authorized as lawful punishment, though in recent times it has been legally carried out only in Iran and Somalia. Most countries that criminalize adultery are those where the dominant religion is Islam, and several Sub-Saharan African Christian-majority countries, but there are some notable exceptions to this rule, namely, the Philippines and several U.S. states.\nPunishment.\nIn jurisdictions where adultery is illegal, punishments vary from fines (for example in the US state of Rhode Island) to caning in parts of Asia. In 15 countries the punishment includes stoning, although in recent times it has been legally enforced only in Iran and Somalia. Most stoning cases are the result of mob violence, and while technically illegal, no action is usually taken against perpetrators. Sometimes such stonings are ordered by informal village leaders who have \"de facto\" power in the community. Adultery may have consequences under civil law even in countries where it is not outlawed by the criminal law. For instance it may constitute \"fault\" in countries where the divorce law is fault based or it may be a ground for tort.\nIn some jurisdictions, the \"intruder\" (the third party) is punished, rather than the adulterous spouse. For instance art 266 of the Penal Code of South Sudan reads: \"Whoever, has consensual sexual intercourse with a man or woman who is and whom he or she has reason to believe to be the spouse of another person, commits the offence of adultery [...]\". Similarly, under the adultery law in India (Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code, until overturned by the Supreme Court in 2018) it was a criminal offense for a man to have consensual sexual intercourse with a married woman, without the consent of her husband (no party was criminally punished in case of intercourse between a married man and an unmarried woman).\nLegal issues regarding paternity.\nHistorically, paternity of children born out of adultery has been seen as a major issue. Modern advances such as reliable contraception and paternity testing have changed the situation (in Western countries). Most countries nevertheless have a legal presumption that a woman's husband is the father of her children who were born during that marriage. Although this is often merely a rebuttable presumption, many jurisdictions have laws which restrict the possibility of legal rebuttal (for instance by creating a legal time limit during which paternity may be challenged\u00a0\u2013 such as a certain number of years from the birth of the child). Establishing correct paternity may have major legal implications, for instance in regard to inheritance.\nChildren born out of adultery suffered, until recently, adverse legal and social consequences. In France, for instance, a law that stated that the inheritance rights of a child born under such circumstances were, on the part of the married parent, half of what they would have been under ordinary circumstances, remained in force until 2001, when France was forced to change it by a ruling of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) (and in 2013, the ECtHR also ruled that the new 2001 regulations must be also applied to children born \"before\" 2001).\nThere has been, in recent years, a trend of legally favoring the right to a relation between the child and its biological father, rather than preserving the appearances of the 'social' family. In 2010, the ECtHR ruled in favor of a German man who had fathered twins with a married woman, granting him right of contact with the twins, despite the fact that the mother and her husband had forbidden him from seeing the children.\nCriticism of adultery laws.\nLaws against adultery have been named as invasive and incompatible with principles of limited government. Much of the criticism comes from libertarianism, the consensus among whose adherents is that government must not intrude into daily personal lives and that such disputes are to be settled privately rather than prosecuted and penalized by public entities. It is also argued that adultery laws are rooted in religious doctrines; which should not be the case for laws in a secular state.\nHistorically, in most cultures, laws against adultery were enacted only to prevent women\u2014and not men\u2014from having sexual relations with anyone other than their spouses, with adultery being often defined as sexual intercourse between a married woman and a man other than her husband. Among many cultures the penalty was\u2014and to this day still is, as noted below\u2014capital punishment. At the same time, men were free to maintain sexual relations with any women (polygyny) provided that the women did not already have husbands or \"owners\". Indeed, \u05d1\u05e2\u05dc (ba`al), Hebrew for \"husband\", used throughout the Bible, is synonymous with \"owner\". These laws were enacted in fear of cuckoldry and thus sexual jealousy. Many indigenous customs, such as female genital mutilation and even menstrual taboos, have been theorized to have originated as preventive measures against cuckolding. This arrangement has been deplored by many modern intellectuals.\nOpponents of adultery laws argue that these laws maintain social norms which justify violence, discrimination and oppression of women; in the form of state sanctioned forms of violence such as stoning, flogging or hanging for adultery; or in the form of individual acts of violence committed against women by husbands or relatives, such as honor killings, crimes of passion, and beatings. UN Women has called for the decriminalization of adultery.\nAn argument against the criminal status of adultery is that the resources of the law enforcement are limited, and that they should be used carefully; by investing them in the investigation and prosecution of adultery (which is very difficult) the curbing of serious violent crimes may suffer.\nHuman rights organizations have stated that legislation on sexual crimes must be based on consent, and must recognize consent as central, and not trivialize its importance; doing otherwise can lead to legal, social or ethical abuses. Amnesty International, when condemning stoning legislation that targets adultery, among other acts, has referred to \"acts which should never be criminalized in the first place, including consensual sexual relations between adults\". Salil Shetty, Amnesty International's Secretary General, said: \"It is unbelievable that in the twenty-first century some countries are condoning child marriage and marital rape while others are outlawing abortion, sex outside marriage and same-sex sexual activity\u00a0\u2013 even punishable by death.\" The \"My Body My Rights\" campaign has condemned state control over individual sexual and reproductive decisions; stating \"All over the world, people are coerced, criminalized and discriminated against, simply for making choices about their bodies and their lives\".\nConsequences.\nGeneral.\nFor various reasons, most couples who marry do so with the expectation of fidelity. Adultery is often seen as a breach of trust and of the commitment that had been made during the act of marriage. Adultery can be emotionally traumatic for both spouses and often results in divorce.\nAdultery may lead to ostracization from certain religious or social groups.\nAdultery can also lead to feelings of guilt and jealousy in the person with whom the affair is being committed. In some cases, this \"third person\" may encourage divorce (either openly or subtly). If the cheating spouse has hinted at divorce to continue the affair, the third person may feel deceived if that does not happen. They may simply withdraw with ongoing feelings of guilt, carry on an obsession with their lover, may choose to reveal the affair, or in rare cases, commit violence or other crimes.\nThere is correlation between divorces and children having struggles in later life.\nSexually transmitted infections.\nLike any sexual contact, extramarital sex opens the possibility of the introduction of sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) into a marriage. Since most married couples do not routinely use barrier contraceptives, STDs can be introduced to a marriage partner by a spouse engaging in unprotected extramarital sex. This can be a public health issue in regions of the world where STDs are common, but addressing this issue is very difficult due to legal and social barriers\u00a0\u2013 to openly talk about this situation would mean to acknowledge that adultery (often) takes place, something that is taboo in certain cultures, especially those strongly influenced by religion. In addition, dealing with the issue of barrier contraception in marriage in cultures where women have very few rights is difficult: the power of women to negotiate safer sex (or sex in general) with their husbands is often limited. The World Health Organization (WHO) found that women in violent relations were at increased risk of HIV/AIDS, because they found it very difficult to negotiate safe sex with their partners, or to seek medical advice if they thought they have been infected.\nViolence.\nHistorically, female adultery often resulted in extreme violence, including murder (of the woman, her lover, or both, committed by her husband). Today, domestic violence is outlawed in most countries.\nMarital infidelity has been used, especially in the past, as a legal defence of provocation to a criminal charge, such as murder or assault. In some jurisdictions, the defence of provocation has been replaced by a partial defence or provocation or the behaviour of the victim can be invoked as a mitigating factor in sentencing.\nIn recent decades, feminists and women's rights organizations have worked to change laws and social norms which tolerate crimes of passion against women. UN Women has urged states to review legal defenses of passion and provocation, and other similar laws, to ensure that such laws do not lead to impunity in regard to violence against women, stating that \"laws should clearly state that these defenses do not include or apply to crimes of \"honour\", adultery, or domestic assault or murder.\"\nThe Council of Europe Recommendation Rec(2002)5 of the Committee of Ministers to member states on the protection of women against violence states that member states should \"preclude adultery as an excuse for violence within the family\".\nHonor killings.\nHonor killings are often connected to accusations of adultery. Honor killings continue to be practiced in some parts of the world, particularly (but not only) in parts of South Asia and the Middle East. Honor killings are treated leniently in some legal systems. Honor killings have also taken place in immigrant communities in Europe, Canada, and the U.S. In some parts of the world, honor killings enjoy considerable public support: in one survey, 33.4% of teenagers in Jordan's capital city, Amman, approved of honor killings. A survey in Diyarbakir, Turkey, found that, when asked the appropriate punishment for a woman who has committed adultery, 37% of respondents said she should be killed, while 21% said her nose or ears should be cut off.\nUntil 2009, in Syria, it was legal for a husband to kill or injure his wife or his female relatives caught in flagrante delicto committing adultery or other illegitimate sexual acts. The law has changed to allow the perpetrator to only \"benefit from the attenuating circumstances, provided that he serves a prison term of no less than two years in the case of killing.\" Other articles also provide for reduced sentences. Article 192 states that a judge may opt for reduced punishments (such as short-term imprisonment) if the killing was done with an honorable intent. Article 242 says that a judge may reduce a sentence for murders that were done in rage and caused by an illegal act committed by the victim. In recent years, Jordan has amended its Criminal Code to modify its laws which used to offer a complete defense for honor killings.\nAccording to the UN in 2002:\n\"The report of the Special Rapporteur ... concerning cultural practices in the family that are violent towards women (E/CN.4/2002/83), indicated that honour killings had been reported in Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Pakistan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Yemen, and other Mediterranean and Persian Gulf countries, and that they had also taken place in western countries such as France, Germany and the United Kingdom, within migrant communities.\"\nCrimes of passion.\nCrimes of passion are often triggered by jealousy, and, according to Human Rights Watch, \"have a similar dynamic [to honor killings] in that the women are killed by male family members and the crimes are perceived as excusable or understandable.\"\nStoning.\nStoning, or lapidation, refers to a form of capital punishment whereby an organized group throws stones at an individual until the person dies, or the condemned person is pushed from a platform set high enough above a stone floor that the fall would probably result in instantaneous death.\nStoning continues to be practiced today, in parts of the world. Recently, several people have been sentenced to death by stoning after being accused of adultery in Iran, Somalia, Afghanistan, Sudan, Mali, and Pakistan by tribal courts.\nFlogging.\nIn some jurisdictions flogging is a punishment for adultery. There are also incidents of extrajudicial floggings, ordered by informal religious courts. In 2011, a 14-year-old girl in Bangladesh died after being publicly lashed, when she was accused of having an affair with a married man. Her punishment was ordered by villagers under Sharia law.\nViolence between the partners of an adulterous couple.\nMarried people who form relations with extramarital partners or people who engage in relations with partners married to somebody else may be subjected to violence in these relations. Because of the nature of adultery\u00a0\u2013 illicit or illegal in many societies\u00a0\u2013 this type of intimate partner violence may go underreported or may not be prosecuted when it is reported; and in some jurisdictions this type of violence is not covered by the specific domestic violence laws meant to protect persons in legitimate couples.\nIn fiction.\nThe theme of adultery has been used in many literary works, and has served as a theme for notable books such as \"Anna Karenina\", \"Madame Bovary\", \"Lady Chatterley's Lover\", \"The Scarlet Letter\" and \"Adultery\". It has also been the theme of many movies.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58810", "revid": "90542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58810", "title": "Gnaeus Marcius Coriolanus", "text": "5th-century BCE Roman general\nGnaeus Marcius Coriolanus was a Roman general who is said to have lived in the 5th century BC. He received his toponymic cognomen \"Coriolanus\" following his courageous actions during a Roman siege of the Volscian city of Corioli. He was subsequently exiled from Rome, and led troops of Rome's enemy the Volsci to besiege the city.\nIn later ancient times, it was generally accepted by historians that Coriolanus was a real historical individual, and a consensus narrative story of his life appeared, retold by leading historians such as Livy, Plutarch, and Dionysius of Halicarnassus. More recent scholarship has cast doubt on the historicity of Coriolanus, with some portraying him as either a wholly legendary figure or at least disputing the accuracy of the conventional story of his life or the timing of the events.\nThe story is the basis for the tragedy of \"Coriolanus\", written by William Shakespeare, and a number of other works, including Beethoven's \"Coriolan Overture\" (based not on Shakespeare but on the play \"Coriolan\" by Heinrich Joseph von Collin).\nConsensus biography.\nFirst name.\nCoriolanus's first name is traditionally given as Gnaeus; this was the form used by the historian Livy and by later Latin authors. The Greek author Dionysius of Halicarnassus, on the other hand, calls him Gaius, which was followed by Plutarch. Ogilvie suggests Dionysius may have followed a separate tradition originated from the annalist Licinius Macer.\nIn English, Thomas North's sixteenth-century English translation of Plutarch's \"Parallel Lives\", \"The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans\", was a primary source for Shakespeare's \"Coriolanus\"; in both texts, the name is given as Caius\".\"\nSiege of Corioli.\nCoriolanus came to fame as a young man serving in the army of the consul Postumus Cominius in 493 BC during the siege of the Volscian town of Corioli. While the Romans were focused on the siege, another Volscian force arrived from Antium and attacked the Romans, and at the same time the soldiers of Corioli launched a sally. Marcius held watch at the time of the Volscian attack. He quickly gathered a small force of Roman soldiers to fight against the Volscians who had sallied forth from Corioli. Not only did he repel the enemy, but he also charged through the town gates and then began setting fire to some of the houses bordering the town wall. The citizens of Corioli cried out, and the whole Volscian force was dispirited and defeated by the Romans. The town was captured, and Marcius gained the cognomen Coriolanus.\nConflict and exile.\nIn 491 BC, two years after Coriolanus's victory over the Volscians, Rome was recovering from a grain shortage. A significant quantity of grain was imported from Sicily, and the senate debated the manner in which it should be distributed to the commoners. Coriolanus advocated that grain should be provided only upon the reversal of the pro-plebeian political reforms arising from the first \"secessio plebis\" in 494 BC.\nThe senate thought Coriolanus's proposal was too harsh. The populace were incensed at Coriolanus's proposal, and the tribunes put him on trial. The senators argued for the acquittal of Coriolanus, or at the least a merciful sentence. Coriolanus refused to attend on the day of his trial, and was convicted.\nDefection to the Volsci.\nCoriolanus fled to the Volsci in exile. He was received and treated kindly, and resided with the Volscian leader Attius Tullus Aufidius.\nPlutarch's account of his defection tells that Coriolanus donned a disguise and entered the home of Aufidius as a supplicant.\nCoriolanus and Aufidius then persuaded the Volscians to break their truce with Rome and raise an army to invade. Livy recounts that Aufidius tricked the Roman senate into expelling the Volsci from Rome during the celebration of the Great Games, thereby stirring up ill-will among the Volsci.\nCoriolanus and Aufidius led the Volscian army against Roman towns, colonies and allies. Roman colonists were expelled from Circeii. They then retook the formerly Volscian towns of Satricum, Longula, Pollusca and Corioli. Then the Volscian army took Lavinium, then Corbio, Vitellia, Trebia, Lavici, and Pedum.\nFrom there the Volsci marched on Rome and besieged it. The Volscians initially camped at the Cluilian trench, five miles outside Rome, and ravaged the countryside. Coriolanus directed the Volsci to target plebeian properties and to spare those of the patricians.\nThe consuls, now Spurius Nautius and Sextus Furius, readied the defences of the city. But the plebeians implored them to sue for peace. The senate was convened, and it was agreed to send supplicants to the enemy. Initially ambassadors were sent, but Coriolanus sent back a negative response. The ambassadors were sent to the Volsci a second time, but were refused entry to the enemy camp. Next priests, in their regalia, were sent by the Romans, but achieved nothing more than had the ambassadors.\nThen Coriolanus's mother Veturia (known as Volumnia in Shakespeare's play) and his wife Volumnia (known as Virgilia in Shakespeare's play) and his two sons, together with the matrons of Rome, went out to the Volscian camp and implored Coriolanus to cease his attack on Rome. Coriolanus was overcome by their pleas, and moved the Volscian camp back from the city, ending the siege. Rome honoured the service of these women by the erection of a temple dedicated to Fortuna (a female deity).\nCoriolanus's fate after this point is unclear, but it seems he took no further part in the war.\nOne version says that Coriolanus retired to Aufidius's home town of Antium. Coriolanus had committed acts of disloyalty to both Rome and the Volsci, and Aufidius raised support to have Coriolanus first put on trial by the Volscians, and then assassinated before the trial had ended.\nPlutarch's tale of Coriolanus's appeal to Aufidius is quite similar to a tale from the life of Themistocles, a leader of the Athenian democracy who was a contemporary of Coriolanus. During Themistocles's exile from Athens, he travelled to the home of Admetus, King of the Molossians, a man who was his personal enemy. Themistocles came to Admetus in disguise and appealed to him as a fugitive, just as Coriolanus appealed to Aufidius. Themistocles, however, never attempted military retaliation against Athens.\nModern scepticism.\nSome modern scholars question parts of the story of Coriolanus. It is notable that accounts of Coriolanus's life are first found in works from the third century BC, some two hundred years after Coriolanus's life, and there are few authoritative historical records prior to the Gallic sack of Rome in 390 BC. Whether or not Coriolanus himself is a historical figure, the saga preserves a genuine popular memory of the dark, unhappy decades of the early 5th century BC when the Volscians overran Latium and threatened the very existence of Rome.\nCultural references.\nShakespeare's \"Coriolanus\" is the last of his \"Roman plays\". Its portrayal of the hero has led to a long tradition of political interpretation of Coriolanus as an anti-populist, or even proto-fascist leader. Bertolt Brecht's version of \"Coriolanus\" (1951) stresses this aspect. Shakespeare's play also forms the basis of the 2011 motion picture \"Coriolanus\", starring and directed by Ralph Fiennes, in which Coriolanus is the protagonist.\nJohn Dennis's play \"The Invader of His Country\" was staged at the Drury Lane Theatre in 1719. Inspired by Shakespeare's work, it made reference to the recent Jacobite uprisings against the Hanoverian Succession.\nHeinrich Joseph von Collin's 1804 play \"Coriolan\" portrayed him in the context of German romantic ideas of the tragic hero. Beethoven's 1807 \"Coriolan Overture\" was written for a production of the von Collin play.\nT. S. Eliot wrote a sequence of poems in 1931 entitled \"Coriolan\".\n\"Thunder of Battle\" is a 1964 Italian film based on the legend of Coriolanus.\nSteven Saylor's 2007 novel \"Roma: A Novel of Ancient Rome\" presents Coriolanus as a plebeian, the child of a patrician mother and plebeian father. His attitudes toward the changes occurring in Rome during his lifetime are reflective of what has been described. He achieves Senatorial status thanks to his military valour and connections. When he calls for the abolition of the office of tribune, he becomes a target of the plebeians and their representatives. He flees before the trial which would ruin him and his family socially and financially, and seeks the alliance with the Volsci described above. His military campaign against Rome is successful and his forces are approaching the walls of the city until the appeal of the Roman women, including his patrician mother and his wife. When he orders his troops to withdraw, he is killed by them.\n\"The 48 Laws of Power\" uses Coriolanus as an example of violating Law no. 4: \"Always Say Less Than Necessary\", citing his constant insulting of the plebeians as the reason for his exile.\nIn Suzanne Collins's novel series \"The Hunger Games\" the lead antagonist is named Coriolanus Snow. The prequel, \"The Ballad of Songbirds and Snakes\", focuses solely on Coriolanus Snow, and Collins then references the similarities between the historical Coriolanus and the fictional Coriolanus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58811", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58811", "title": "Teff", "text": "Edible annual grass native to Ethiopia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTeff (), Eragrostis tef, also known as Williams lovegrass and annual bunch grass, is an annual species of lovegrass native to Ethiopia, where it originated in the Ethiopian Highlands. It has been cultivated for its edible seeds, also called teff, since at least 1000 BCE and possibly as long ago as 4000 BCE. It is one of Ethiopia's most important staple crops. As a modern crop, it is low-yielding and susceptible to lodging; the tef shoot fly is a major pest.\nDescription.\n\"Eragrostis tef\" is a self pollinated tetraploid annual cereal grass. Teff is a C4 plant, which allows it to more efficiently fix carbon in drought and high temperatures, and is an intermediate between a tropical and temperate grass. The name teff is thought to originate from the Amharic word \"teffa\", which means \"lost\". This probably refers to its tiny seeds, which have a diameter smaller than . Teff is a fine-stemmed, tufted grass with large crowns and many tillers. Its roots are shallow, but develop a massive fibrous rooting system. The plant height varies depending on the cultivation variety and the environmental conditions.\nDistribution and habitat.\nTeff originated in the Ethiopian Highlands. It is mainly cultivated in Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is one of the most important staple crops in these two countries, where it is used to make injera. In 2016, Ethiopia grew more than 90 percent of the world's teff. It is marginally cultivated in India, Australia, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, and the US, particularly in Idaho, California, Texas, and Nevada. Because of its very small seeds, a handful is enough to sow a large area. This makes teff particularly suited to a seminomadic lifestyle.\nEcology.\nTeff is adaptable and can grow in various environments, at altitudes ranging from sea level to . However, it does not tolerate frost. Highest yields are obtained when teff is grown between , with an annual rainfall of , and daily temperatures range from . Yields decrease when annual rainfall falls below 250\u00a0mm and when the average temperature during pollination exceeds 22\u00a0\u00b0C. Despite its superficial root system, teff is quite drought-resistant thanks to its ability to regenerate rapidly after a moderate water stress and to produce fruits in a short time span. It is daylight-sensitive and flowers best with 12 hours of daylight. Teff is usually cultivated on pH-neutral soils, but can tolerate acid soil pH below 5. Teff has a C4 photosynthesis mechanism.\nCultivation.\nAs with many ancient crops, teff is quite adaptable; in particular, it can be cultivated both in dry environments and in wet conditions on marginal soils.\nTeff is one of the most important cereals in Ethiopia and Eritrea. It is grown for its edible seeds and also for its straw to feed cattle. The seeds are very small, about a millimeter in length, and a thousand grains weigh approximately . They can have a color from a white to a deep reddish brown. Teff is similar to millet and quinoa in cooking, but the seed is much smaller and cooks faster, using less fuel.\nHistory.\nTeff is believed to have originated in Ethiopia between 4000\u00a0BCE and 1000\u00a0BCE. Genetic evidence points to \"E.\u00a0pilosa\" as the most likely wild ancestor. A 19th-century identification of teff seeds from an ancient Egyptian site is now considered doubtful; the seeds in question (no longer available for study) are more likely of \"E.\u00a0aegyptiaca\", a common wild grass in Egypt.\nTeff is the most important commodity produced and consumed in Ethiopia where the flat pancake-like injera provides a livelihood for around 6.5 million small farmers in the country. In 2006, the Ethiopian government outlawed the export of raw teff, fearing export-driven domestic shortages like those suffered by South American countries after the explosion of quinoa consumption in Europe and the US. Processed teff, namely injera, could still be exported and was mainly bought by the Ethiopian and Eritrean diaspora living in northern Europe, the Middle East and North America. After a few years, fears of a domestic shortage of teff in the scenario of an international market opening decreased. Teff yields had been increasing by 40 to 50% over the five previous years while prices had remained stable in Ethiopia. This led the government to partially lift the export ban in 2015. To ensure that the domestic production would not be minimized, the export licenses have only been granted to 48 commercial farmers which had not cultivated the plant before. Lack of mechanization is a barrier to potential increases in teff exports. Yet the increasing demand, rising by 7\u201310% per year, and the subsequent increase in exports is encouraging the country to speed up the modernization of agriculture and is also boosting research. Because of its potential as an economic success, a few other countries, including the US and some European countries, are already cultivating teff and selling it on domestic markets.\nModern cultivation.\nThe cultivation of teff is labor-intensive and the small size of its seeds makes it difficult to handle and transport without loss. In Ethiopia, teff is mostly produced during the main rain season, between July and November. It is known as an \"emergency crop\" because it is planted late in the season, when the temperatures are warmer, and most other crops have already been planted. Teff germination generally occurs 3\u201312 days after sowing. Optimal germination temperatures range from 15 to 35\u00a0\u00b0C; below 10\u00a0\u00b0C, germination almost does not occur. Teff is traditionally sown or broadcast by hand, on firm, humid soil. Usual sowing density ranges from 15 to 20\u00a0kg/ha, though farmers can sow up to 50\u00a0kg/ha, because the seeds are hard to spread equally and a higher sowing density helps to reduce weed competition at the early stage. Seeds are either left at the soil surface or slightly covered by a thin layer of soil, but must not be planted at a depth greater than 1\u00a0cm. The field can be subsequently rolled. \nRecommended fertilization doses are 25\u201360\u00a0kg/ha for N, and 10\u201318\u00a0kg/ha for P. Teff responds more to nitrogen than to phosphorus; thus, high nitrogen inputs increase the biomass production and size of the plants, thereby increasing lodging. To avoid this, farmers can decrease nitrogen input, cultivate teff after a legume crop or adjust sowing time so that the rains have stopped when the crop reaches heading stage. In Ethiopia, teff is commonly used in crop rotations with other cereals and legumes.\nTeff is harvested 2\u20136 months after sowing, when the vegetative parts start to turn yellow. If teff is harvested past its maturation, seeds will fall off, especially in windy or rainy weather conditions. In Ethiopia, harvest lasts from November to January; harvest is usually done manually, with sickles. Farmers cut the plants at the soil surface, pile them up in the field and transport them to the threshing area. Teff is traditionally threshed by using animals walking on the harvest. Alternatively, some farmers rent threshing machines used for other cereals. The seeds are easy to store, as they are resistant to most pests during storage. Teff seeds can stay viable several years if direct contact with humidity and sun is avoided. Average yields in Ethiopia reach around two tonnes per ha. One single inflorescence can produce up to 1000 seeds, and one plant up to 10,000. Moreover, teff offers some promising opportunities for breeding programs: the first draft of the \"Eragrostis tef\" genome was published in 2014 and research institutes have started selecting for more resistant varieties. In 1996, the US National Research Council characterized teff as having the \"potential to improve nutrition, boost food security, foster rural development and support sustainable landcare.\"\nChallenges and prospects.\nThe major challenges in teff production are its low yield and high susceptibility to lodging. Efforts to conventionally breed teff towards higher yields started in the 1950s and led to an average annual increase in yield of 0.8%. \nHigh-yielding varieties, such as \"Quencho\", were widely adopted by farmers in Ethiopia. Sequencing of the teff genome improved breeding, and an ethyl methanesulphonate (EMS)-mutagenized population was then used to breed the first semi-dwarf lodging-tolerant teff line, called \"kegne\". In 2015, researchers tested 28 new teff varieties and identified three promising lines that generated yields of up to 4.7 tonnes per ha.\nThe \"Teff Improvement Project\" marked a milestone by releasing the first teff variety \"Tesfa\" to the Ethiopian markets in March 2017. Areas of further development include: \"(i) improving productivity of teff; (ii) overcoming the lodging malady; (iii) developing climate-smart and appropriate crop and soil management options; (iv) developing tolerance to abiotic stresses such as drought and soil acidity; (v) developing suitable pre- and post-harvest mechanization technologies suitable for smallholder farmers as well as commercial farms; (vi) food processing and nutrition aspects with special attention to the development of different food recipes and value-added products; (vii) developing crop protection measures against diseases, insect pests and weeds; and (viii) improving or strengthening socio-economics and agricultural extension services.\"\nPests.\nThe tef shoot fly (\"Atherigona hyalinipennis\") is a major pest of the crop.\nOther insect pests include:\nUses.\nTeff is a multipurpose crop which has a high importance for the Ethiopian diet and culture. In Ethiopia, teff provides two-thirds of the daily protein intake. It is not only important for human nutrition, but also as fodder for livestock, or as building material. Teff is the main ingredient to prepare injera, a sourdough-risen flatbread. During meals, it is often eaten with meat or ground pulses. Sometimes it is also eaten as porridge. Moreover, teff can be used to prepare alcoholic drinks, called \"arak'e\" or \"katikalla\" or beer, called \"t'ella\" or \"fersso\". Finally, due to its high mineral content, teff is also mixed with soybeans, chickpeas or other grains to manufacture baby foods.\nFarmers in Ethiopia believe that consumers prefer white teff over darker varieties. As a nutritious fodder, teff is used to feed ruminants in Ethiopia and horses in the US. It is a source of animal feed, especially during the dry season, and it is often preferred over straw from other cereals. Teff grass can be used as a construction material when mixed with mud to plaster the walls of local grain storage facilities.\nNutrition.\nUncooked teff is 9% water, 73% carbohydrates, 13% protein, and 2% fat. Cooked teff is 75% water, 20% carbohydrates, 4% protein, and less than 1% fat. A reference serving of cooked teff provides of food energy, is a rich source of protein, dietary fiber, and manganese, and contains moderate amounts of thiamin, phosphorus, iron, magnesium, and zinc. The fiber content in teff is also higher than in most other cereals.\nTeff is gluten free, and a method has been developed to process teff into a flour with a wider range of baking applications, such as for bread and pasta. \nPatent and bio-piracy.\nIn 2003, a Dutch company, Health and Performance Food International (HPFI), paired with the Ethiopian Institute of Biodiversity Conservation to introduce teff to European markets. The agreement was for Ethiopia to provide HPFI with a dozen strains of teff to market globally, and the two entities would split the proceeds. HPFI's CEO, Jans Roosjen, took out two patents on teff in 2003 and 2007, claiming that his way of milling and storing the flour was unique. HPFI went bankrupt in 2009, allowing Roosjen to utilize those patents and the marketing rights for the grain while being freed from the original agreement with Ethiopia. Ethiopia only received 4,000 euros over five years of collaboration. Roosjen sued a Dutch bakery company, Bakels, for patent infringement through selling teff baked goods. The Dutch patent office declared the patent void, stating that the methods used to bake and mix flours were \"general professional knowledge\". Teff is inherent to Ethiopia's national culture and identity. The government of Ethiopia has expressed intent to hold Roosjen accountable under patent law, and to regain ownership over international markets of its most important food.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58814", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58814", "title": "Zula", "text": "Zula is a small town in central Eritrea. It is situated near the head of Annesley Bay (also known as the Gulf of Zula), on the Red Sea coast. Four kilometers away is the archeological site of Adulis, which was an emporium and the port of Axum.\nHistory.\nThe Eritrean Research Project Team composed of Eritrean, Canadian, American, Dutch and French scientists discovered a Paleolithic site with stone and obsidian tools dated to over 125,000 years old south of Massawa, along the Red Sea littoral. The tools are believed to have been used by early humans to harvest marine resources like clams and oysters.\nThe local Saho call this place \"Ado Lay\", meaning \"clear water\", however this is probably in reference to the nearby site of Adulis, just situated 4 kilometers away from the town.\nIn 1857, an agreement was entered into by the Dejazmach of Tigray, in revolt against Emperor Tewodros II of Ethiopia, to cede Zula to the French. Agew Niguse was defeated by Emperor Tewodros, and the commander of a French cruiser sent to Annesley Bay in 1859 found the country in a state of anarchy. No further steps were taken by France to assert its sovereignty, and Zula with the neighbouring coast passed, nominally, to Egypt in 1866. Zula was the place where Robert Napier's British expedition of 1867 \u2013 1868 against Tewodros disembarked, Annesley Bay affording safe and ample anchorage for the largest ocean-going vessels. A road was built by the British from Zula to Senafe in the Eritrean Highlands.\nThe authority of Egypt having lapsed over Zula, an Italian protectorate was proclaimed in 1888, and in 1890 the town was incorporated into the colony of Eritrea. Along with Afta and Irafalo, it remains an important trade center for the Saho people.\nGeography.\nZula is a village on the Red Sea in central Eritrea. It stands on the right bank of the Aligede River, on a narrow coastal plain on the west side of the Gulf of Zula, some to the east of Asmara. The coast here is lined with mangroves, and there is an aircraft landing strip to the north.\nThe original port of Adulis is now inland, debris washed down from the mountains having accumulated along the coastline, extending it further out to sea. Napier built limited port facilities at Zula to enable his expedition; the remains of the railway tracks, laid by Napier's Expedition to haul his heavy equipment ashore, can still be seen. However, modern port services are handled at Massawa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58816", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58816", "title": "Lake Zug", "text": "Lake in Switzerland\nLake Zug (, ) is a lake in Central Switzerland, situated between Lake Lucerne and Lake Zurich. It stretches for between Arth and the Cham-Zug bay. The Lorze as the main feeder river empties its waters into the lake at its northern extremity, but further west issues from the lake to pursue its course towards the Reuss. Due to this poor feeding, Environmental protection is very important as the lake would suffer long term damage if polluted as the second of the rivers, \"Rigiaa\", feeds only a marginal amount into the lake at its southern end. Already a great part of the fauna in the deep parts of the lake has been lost.\nBackground.\nThe lake is mostly within the borders of the Canton of Zug, with about at its southern end in the canton Schwyz, while the Canton of Lucerne claims about to the north of Immensee. Toward the south-west extremity of the lake the Rigi descends rather steeply to the water's edge, while part of its east shore forms a narrow level band at the foot of the Rossberg, and the Zugerberg. The culminating point of the lake's drainage basin is the summit of the Rigi at .\nAt its northern end, the shores are nearly level, while on the west shore the wooded promontory of Buonas (with its castles, old and new) projects picturesquely into the waters. The principal place on the lake is the town of Zug. Three railways follow the shore of the lake, one from Z\u00fcrich via Zug and Arth-Goldau to Saint-Gotthard, one from Lucerne via Arth-Goldau to Saint-Gotthard, and the third from Z\u00fcrich via Zug to Lucerne.\nMany fish (including pike and carp of considerable weights) are taken in the lake, which is especially famous for an endemic kind of trout (\"Salmo salvelinus\", locally called \"Rolheli\").\nHistory.\nThe first steamer was placed on the lake in 1852.\nIn the early 20th century, a railway (formerly part of the St. Gotthard main route) ran along its eastern shore past Walchwil to Arth at its south end, which was connected initially by a steam tramway with the Arth-Goldau station of the St. Gotthard line. This line runs from Arth along the western shore to Immensee, where it bears south-west to Lucerne, while from Immensee another railway leads (at first some way from the shore) to Cham, west of Zug.\nPublic Transportation.\nPublic transportation on Lake Zug is done by the Zugersee Schifffahrt / Schifffahrtsgesellschaft f\u00fcr den Zugersee AG (SGZ) .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58818", "revid": "48557348", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58818", "title": "Zug", "text": "City in Switzerland\nZug ( , ; ; ; ; ) is the largest town and capital of the Swiss canton of Zug. Zug is renowned as a hub for some of the wealthiest individuals in the world and is known for its high concentration of wealth.\nThe municipality had a total population of on 31 December 2020. The official language of Zug is the Swiss variety of Standard German, but the main spoken language is the local variant of the Alemannic Swiss German dialect.\nEtymology.\nIts name, translating from German as \"pull\" or \"tug\", originates from the fishing vocabulary; in the Middle Ages it referred to the right to \"pull up\" fishing nets and hence to the right to fish. \nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe oldest evidence of humans in the area trace back to 14,000\u00a0BC. There have been Paleolithic finds on the north bank of Lake Zug, which come from nomadic hunters and gatherers. Archaeologists have also found over forty lake-shore settlements, known as pile dwellings, on the shores of Lake Zug from the epoch of the first settled farmers in the Neolithic period (5,500\u20132,200\u00a0BC). The peak in these lake-shore village settlements was between 3800 and 2450\u00a0BC. For the same epoch, the first pre-alpine land use has been found in Menzingen and in the \u00c4geri valley. The well-known, historically researched lake-shore village \"'Sumpf'\" (the swamp), dated from the late Bronze Age (up until 850\u00a0BC). Evidence from these finds resulted in a quite different picture of life in former times, which is on display at the Zug Museum for Prehistory. In addition, finds from the Iron Age (850\u201350 BC) and the Roman and Celtic-Roman time (from 50\u00a0BC) have been unearthed.\nKyburg foundation.\nIn around AD 600, Alemannic families and tribes migrated to the area of present-day canton Zug. The name Blickensdorf, and place names with '-ikon' endings, prove this as the first Alemannic living space. The churches of Baar and Risch also date back to the early Middle Ages. The first written document on the area originates from the year 858, and refers to King Ludwig the German giving the farm \"Chama\" (Cham) to the Z\u00fcrich Fraum\u00fcnster convent. At this time, the area of present-day Zug belonged to completely different monastic and secular landlords, the most important of whom were the Habsburgs, and who, in 1264, inherited the Kyburg rights and remained a central political power until about 1400.\nIn the course of the high medieval town construction, the settlement of Zug also received a town wall at some point after 1200. The town founders were probably the counts of Kyburg. The town, first mentioned in AD 1240, was called an \"oppidum\" in 1242 and a \"castrum\" in 1255. In 1273, it was bought by Rudolph of Habsburg from Anna, the heiress of Kyburg and wife of Eberhard, head of the cadet line of Habsburg. Through this purchase it passed into the control of the Habsburgs and was placed under a Habsburg bailiff. The \"Aeusser Amt\" or Outer District consisted of the villages and towns surrounding Zug, which each had their own \"Landsgemeinden\" but were ruled by a single Habsburg bailiff. Zug was important as an administrative center of the Kyburg and the Habsburg district, then as a local market place, and, thereafter, as a stage town for the transport of goods (particularly salt and iron) over the Hirzel hill towards Lucerne.\nJoining the Swiss Confederation.\nOn 27 June 1352, both the town of Zug and the \"Aeusser Amt\" entered the Swiss Confederation, the latter being received on exactly the same terms as the town, and not, as was usual in the case of outer districts, as a subject land. However, in September 1352, Zug had to acknowledge its own lords again, and in 1355 was obliged to break off its connection with the league. About 1364, the town and the Aeusser Amt were recovered for the league by the men of Schwyz, and from this time Zug took part as a full member in all the acts of the league. In 1379, the Holy Roman Emperor Wenceslaus exempted Zug from all external jurisdictions, and in 1389 the Habsburgs renounced their claims, reserving only an annual payment of 20 silver marks, which came to an end in 1415. In 1400 Wenceslaus gave all criminal jurisdiction to the town only. The Aeusser Amt, in 1404, then claimed that the banner and seal of Zug should be kept in one of the country districts and were supported in this claim by Schwyz. The matter was finally settled in 1412 by arbitration, and the banner was to be kept in the town. Finally in 1415, the right of electing their \"landammann\" was given to Zug by the Confederation, and a share in the criminal jurisdiction was granted to the Aeusser Amt by German king Sigismund.\nThe alliance of the four forest cantons of Uri, Schwyz, Unterwalden and Lucerne with the city of Z\u00fcrich in 1351 set much in motion. The town of Zug was seen as having Habsburg ties with the cities of Z\u00fcrich and Lucerne, and therefore had to be conquered. It is likely that this was more for political than economic reasons: the Lucerne market was very important for central Switzerland, but also strongly dependent on the city of Z\u00fcrich. Z\u00fcrich initiated a siege on Zug with the federal army in June 1352. Zug surrendered. On 27 June 1352 Z\u00fcrich, Luzern, Zug, Uri, Schwyz and Unterwalden formed an alliance. Z\u00fcrich's saw this 'Zugerbund' (Zug alliance) as an alliance of convenience. For the town of Zug, little changed, and Zug remained Habsburg. That same year, the Zug alliance was declared invalid by all parties. A period of Schwyz domination then followed. Only gradually did Zug become sovereign and federal.\nSimultaneously, Zug expanded its territory, acquiring a number of rural areas in the form of bailiwicks (Walchwil, Cham, Gangolfswil [Risch] H\u00fcnenberg and Steinhausen, and Oberr\u00fcti, now part of the canton of Aargau). Zug became a confederation in itself \u2013 with the town and its subject territories, and the three outer ('free') municipalities, \u00c4geri, Menzingen (with Neuheim) and Baar. This problematic dualism dominated until 1798, i.e. until the end of the old confederation, the political structure of the Canton Zug. The unifying element of this miniature confederation was, among others, the rural municipalities and the forty-member city council.\nGrowth of the town.\nIn 1385, Zug joined the league of the Swabian cities against Leopold III of Austria and shared in the victory of Sempach, as well as in the various Argovian (1415) and Thurgovian (1460) conquests of the Confederates, and later in those of Italy (1512), having already taken part in the occupation of the Val d'Ossola. Between 1379 (Walchwil) and 1477 (Cham), Zug had acquired various districts in its own neighborhood, principally to the north and the west, which were ruled till 1798 by the town alone as subject lands.\nIn 1478, the building of a larger town wall began, which increased the town area six-fold \u2013 the same year as the building of the late gothic St. Oswald Church began. The building master of the new town wall was Hans Felder from Bavarian Swabia. The ground plan of the town wall is indicative of an ideal symmetric plan of the Renaissance period \u2013 something very rare at that time. The overall urban planning implemented in the small town of Zug was modern for its time.\nThe Reformation and early modern era.\nDuring the turmoil of the Reformation, Zug remained on the Catholic side of central Switzerland and retained the old faith. Warring religious confederates fought at Kappel am Albis (1531) and at Gubel in Menzingen. Its location on the edge of central Switzerland made Zug a confessional border town. During the Reformation, Zug clung to the old faith and was a member of the \"Christliche Vereinigung\" of 1529. In 1586, it became a member of the Golden League.\nThe period up until 1798 was marked by internal political rivalries and turbulence. The invasion of the French troops marked the end of the old order, and with the Helvetic order came a radical political change. Zug became part of the canton Waldst\u00e4tten, and the cantonal capital for a short time. After a 50-year struggle between federalism and centralism, between confederation and central state, between conservative and liberal-radical vision, in 1848, today's federal government of Switzerland emerged. Zug was given its current cantonal structure, consisting of eleven local municipalities.\nIndustrialisation and internationalisation.\nUntil well into the 19th century, Zug consisted of agricultural land. Actual industrialization began with the entrepreneur Wolfgang Henggeler, who in 1834 built a cotton mill in Unter\u00e4geri. This was followed by the two companies in Neu\u00e4geri and Baar. In 1866, the American George Ham Page founded the first European condensed milk factory in Cham, which later merged with Nestl\u00e9. Industry in Zug was dominated by the company Landis+Gyr, founded in 1896, and now owned by Toshiba. The connection to the Swiss railway network in 1864 was important, as was the connection of mountain and valley with an electric tram at the beginning of the 20th century.\nIn the second half of the century, dynamic expansion took place and Zug became a national and international financial and trading centre, aided by its proximity to Z\u00fcrich, and by an attractive tax policy. In parallel, large industrial and commercial zones evolved; employment increased rapidly; the population rose sharply, and the building boom skyrocketed. Canton Zug catapulted itself into being at the top of the financially strong cantons. And the town today has become, as the British Guardian once wrote, 'a compass of the global economy'.\nToday.\nZug is a low tax region and is headquarters for a number of multinational enterprises. The Expat City Ranking in 2019, based on a study of more than 20,000 respondents, rated the quality of life in Zug highest among all cities in the survey. The town's best-known agricultural product is Kirsch. \nOn 27 September 2001, a mentally-ill 57-year-old resident shot 32 people, killing 14 before killing himself in the cantonal parliament building (Parlamentsgeb\u00e4ude Zug).\nGeography.\nTopography.\nZug has an area (as of the 2004 survey) of . Of this area, about 33.1% is used for agricultural purposes, while 37.9% is forested. Of the rest of the land, 26.6% is settled (buildings or roads) and 2.5% is unproductive land. In the 2004 survey a total of or about 16.3% of the total area was covered with buildings, an increase of over the 1982 amount. Over the same time period, the amount of recreational space in the municipality increased by and is now about 2.53% of the total area. Of the agricultural land, is used for orchards and vineyards, is fields and grasslands and consists of alpine grazing areas. Since 1982 the amount of agricultural land has decreased by . Over the same time period the amount of forested land has increased by . Rivers and lakes cover in the municipality.\nClimate.\nSee also climate of Lucerne and Z\u00fcrich.\nWeather.\nZug has an average of 136.1 days of rain per year and on average receives of precipitation. It has an average of 5.5 days per year with visibility reduced to less than 1\u00a0km, the international definition of fog. The wettest month is August during which time Zug receives an average of of precipitation. During this month there is precipitation for an average of 12.7 days. The month with the most days of precipitation is June, with an average of 13.7, but with only of precipitation. The driest month of the year is January with an average of of precipitation over 12.7 days.\nPolitics.\nGovernment.\nThe City Council (Stadtrat) constitutes the executive government of the Town of Zug and operates as a collegiate authority. It is composed of five councillors (), each presiding over a department (\"Departement\") comprising several bureaus. The president of the executive department acts as mayor (\"Stadtpr\u00e4sident\"). In the mandate period 2015\u20132018 (\"Legislatur\") the City Council is presided by \"Stadtpr\u00e4sident\" Karl Kobelt. Departmental tasks, coordination measures and implementation of laws decreed by the Grand Municipal Council are carried by the City Council. The regular election of the City Council by any inhabitant valid to vote is held every four years. The current mandate period (\"Legislatur\") is from 2019 to 2022. Any resident of Zug allowed to vote can be elected as a member of the City Council. The delegates are selected by means of a system of Majorz (since 2014). The mayor is elected as such as well by public election while the heads of the other departments are assigned by the collegiate. The executive body holds its meetings in the \"Stadthaus\" (Town Hall) on Kolinplatz. As of October 2018[ [update]], Zug's City Council is made up of two of FDP (FDP.The Liberals, of whom one is also the mayor), and one each of CVP (Christian Democratic Party), CSP (Christian Social Party), and SVP (Swiss People's Party). The last regular election was held on 7 October 2018.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMartin W\u00fcrmli is Town Chronicler (\"Stadtschreiber\") since 2014 and presides the Town Office (\"Stadtkanzlei\"). He has been elected by the collegiate.\nFederal elections.\nNational Council.\nIn the 2015 federal election the most popular party was the SVP with 25.4% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the CVP (22.5%), the FDP (19.5%) and the SP (17.2%). In the federal election, a total of 9,438 votes were cast, and the voter turnout was 55.4%. The 2015 election saw a large change in the voting when compared to 2011. The percentage of the vote received by the SP increased sharply from 6.4% in 2011 to 17.2% in 2015, while the percentage that the GPS received dropped from 21.3% to 9.5%.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nAfter World War II, Zug helped the town of F\u00fcrstenfeld, Styria in Austria. In 1986 they decided to become sister cities.\nDemographics.\nZug has a population (as of 31 December 2020) of . As of 2014[ [update]], 31.7% of which are foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years [when?] the population has grown at a rate of 11.4%. Most of the population (as of 2000[ [update]]) speaks German (81.8%), with Italian being second most common (3.8%) and Serbo-Croatian being third (3.2%).\nIn Zug about 76% of the population (between the ages 25 and 64) have completed either non-mandatory upper secondary education or additional higher education (either university or a \"Fachhochschule\").\nZug has an unemployment rate of 2.28%. As of 2005[ [update]], there were 172 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 51 businesses involved in this sector. 5,821 people are employed in the secondary sector and there are 269 businesses in this sector. 21,445 people are employed in the tertiary sector, with 3,205 businesses in this sector.\nSport.\nZug is known as a hockey town in Switzerland. The town's main team is EV Zug, which plays in the National League (NL). They play their home games in the 7,800-seat OYM Hall. The team has recently won two NL titles in 2021 and 2022. EV Zug II plays in the Second Regio League, the fifth highest league in Switzerland. HC Zugerland plays in the Third Regio League, the sixth highest league in Switzerland. Zug also has numerous junior teams that compete in the different junior leagues of Switzerland.\nThere are also an amateur association football team, Zug 94, which was formed in 1994 and one amateur Rugby Team, Zug Rugby Club, in the national 3rd Division. They also have the largest junior (minis) club in Switzerland. They have had many junior players representing Switzerland at U18 &amp; U19 Internationally. Additionally, there is an amateur floorball team, Zug United. Zug has a rowing club See-Club Zug, which is repeatedly the highest ranked rowing club in Switzerland.\nThe Motorsports team and Global Championship League team and Global Champions Tour team Iron Dames is based out of Zug.\nEconomy.\nAs of \u00a02012[ [update]], there were a total of 40,166 people employed in the municipality. Of these, a total of 142 people worked in 42 businesses in the primary economic sector. The secondary sector employed 5,939 workers in 351 separate businesses. Finally, the tertiary sector provided 34,085 jobs in 6,592 businesses. In 2013 a total of 15.3% of the population received social assistance.\nSince 2016, Zug has accepted digital currency, first for small payments of municipal fees up to CH200. To reduce risk, Zug immediately converts any cryptocurrency received into Swiss francs. This is part of a strategy to associate Zug with new technologies. Zug is a popular location for incorporation of companies, such as Siemens Building Technologies, and Nord Stream AG. Zug has also been referred to as Crypto Valley because of the large number of companies engaged in cryptocurrency in the city. These include Ethereum, Cardano, Polkadot and Bitcoin Suisse. By 2018, a Crypto Valley Association had been formed, with Oliver Bussmann as its president.\nCulture.\nSituation.\nThe lake shore has been embanked and forms a promenade, from which views of the Rigi and Pilatus, as well as of the snowy peaks of the Bernese Oberland, are gained. Towards its northerly end, a monument marks the spot where a part of the shore slipped into the lake in 1887.\nThe older part of the town is rather crowded together, though only four of the wall towers and a small part of the town walls still survive.\nThe most striking old building in the town is the parish church of St Oswald (late 15th century), dedicated to St Oswald, king of Northumbria (d. 642), one of whose arms was brought to Zug in 1485. The town hall, also a 15th-century building, now houses the Historical and Antiquarian Museum. There are some quaint old painted houses close by. A little way higher up the hillside is a Capuchin convent in a striking position, close to the town wall and leaning against it. Still higher, and outside the old town, is the fine new parish church of St Michael, consecrated in 1902.\nThe business quarter is on the rising ground north of the old town, near the railway station. Several fine modern buildings rise on or close to the shore in the town and to its south, whilst to the southwest is a convent of Capuchin nuns, who manage a large girls' school and several other educational establishments.\nThe \"Museum of Prehistory Zug\" houses an important collection of archaeological remains, especially from the late Bronze Age (urnfield culture) settlement of Zug-Sumpf. Many of Catharine II of Russia's relatives descended from Zug and became known as the Volga Germans.\nMuseums.\nThere are three museums in the town: the Museum of Prehistory, which displays archaeological finds from Canton Zug; the castle houses the Museum of Cultural History of the town and Canton Zug, and the Zug Art Gallery attracts visitors with its exhibitions. Several municipalities also have their own local museum. The Casino Theatre in Zug and the Zug \"Burgbachkeller\", along with the \"Chollerhalle\" cultural center, are the most famous establishments. The event centers in Baar, Cham and Rotkreuz and the Zug youth scene (Galvanik, Podium Industrie 45) enrich the range of cultural events.\nZug is surrounded with mountains, rivers and lakes including the mountains Zugerberg and the Walchwilerberg Oberallmig, the H\u00f6hronen and the river Sihl. The Choller nature reserve is also near Lake Zug.\nSights within the town include the late Gothic church of St. Wolfgang, near H\u00fcnenberg, or St. Oswald in Zug, the old town of Zug with the Town Hall and the Zytturm (clock tower), the Huwiler Tower, the Zurlaubenhof, feudal estate of the family Zurlauben, on the outskirts of the town.\nZug's culture also includes the famous Zuger cherry liqueur cake. Local specialties, in addition to the cherry and the cherry liqueur cake, include the Zug 'R\u00f6tel', a fine lake charfish, found on many menus.\nThe IG Culture Zug society, an umbrella organization of museums, theaters, orchestras and other cultural organizations, was founded in Zug in 1995. The society publishes calendars and a magazine of cultural events in the canton. In 2019 it had 167 members.\nHeritage sites.\nThere are a number of Swiss heritage sites of national significance in Zug. These include two libraries, the Library of the former Capuchin monastery and the library of the parish church of St. Michael. One archeological site, the \"Sumpf\" a late Bronze Age lake shore settlement, is included, as are three museums; the \"Burg\" (Castle museum), \"Kunsthaus\" (Art museum) and \"Museum f\u00fcr Urgeschichte\" (Museum for ancient history). There are three archives that are included in the list; \"B\u00fcrgerarchiv Zug\" (Citizen's archive of Zug), \"Staatsarchiv Zug\" (State/Canton of Zug archive) and the \"Unternehmensarchiv der Landis &amp; Gyr AG\" (Landis &amp; Gyr AG company archives). The rest of the sites are the Catholic Church of St. Oswald with Charnel house, the Seminary of St. Michael, the town walls and several buildings in the old town of Zug.\nThe prehistoric settlements at Oterswil/Insel Eielen, Riedmatt and Sumpf are part of the Prehistoric Pile dwellings around the Alps a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nEducation.\nThe Zug education system is based on equal abilities and includes compulsory primary and secondary school, with optional secondary education and vocational training. Two thirds of young people go into vocational education, connected to an apprenticeship, joining the professional world after the 9th grade of secondary school. The international business community of Zug offers many and varied apprenticeships along with the Zug technical and industrial college, GIBZ, and the business college, KBZ, provide the academic knowledge and skills.\nZug has a long tradition of education. Private schools, like the Montana Institute Zug, on Zugerberg, International School of Zug or Lucerne (ISZL), or the Dr. Pfister Institute AG, Ober\u00e4geri supplement the range available. In addition, there are the three former non-state teacher training colleges in Menzingen, Holy Cross in Cham and St. Michael in Zug.\nTertiary education.\nCanton Zug has two high schools: the Canton High School in the town of Zug, and the Cantonal School in Menzingen. Also at higher secondary level, is the Vocational School Zug and the Business Studies School, incorporated within the Canton School. Zug is one of the university cantons, with, on the one hand, the University of Teacher Training, PHZ Zug, on the other, a polytechnic for financial services.\nThere are also six technical colleges (for business, computer science, engineering design, naturopathy and homeopathy, child education, and rescue services).\nIn 2022 the European Institute of Management and Technology (EIMT) has been duly established in the Canton of Zug, Switzerland as a Business, Management and Technology Tertiary education school offering bachelor's, master's and doctorate degrees, through online, onsite or hybrid mediums and through other schools worldwide under the aegis of the laws, regulations and authorities of Switzerland. The European Institute of Management and Technology has been granted Accreditation for two years by the Diplomatic Research and Policy Foundation (DRPF). Diplomatic Research and Policy Foundation is a prestigious Intergovernmental Organization a Government recognized Accreditation Agency founded by Ministry of Education and Science, Republic of Macedonia and Ministry of Diaspora, Republic of Albania. The same is now graced by the presence of Ministry of Labour and Social Service, Government of Kosovo.\nInternational Schools.\nThe range of educational institutions is a key factor for location in the globalized world of competition, especially for foreign employees, the so-called 'Expats'. The four international schools have been developed accordingly, and report a high student intake.\nTransportation.\nZug acts as an important transportation node.\nAn extensive bus network within the town and canton is provided by ZVB Zugerland Verkehrsbetriebe.\nThe Swiss Federal Railways link at Zug railway station for Cham \u2013 Horgen \u2013 Z\u00fcrich, Steinhausen \u2013 Affoltern am Albis, Arth-Goldau \u2013 St. Gotthard \u2013 Ticino and Italy, and Rotkreuz \u2013 Luzern. Zug is the hub of the Zug Stadtbahn (an S-Bahn-style commuter rail network). The network consisted of the following lines:\nZug is also at the end of Z\u00fcrich S-Bahn suburban railway network, on lines S5 and S24.\nThe Zugerbergbahn is a funicular linking the Zug suburb of Sch\u00f6negg (558\u00a0m) with the Vordergeissboden (literally: anterior goat terrain, 925\u00a0m), the plateau of the Zugerberg overlooking the town and Lake Zug.\nThe A4 motorway and other main roads connect Zug with the rest of the nation.\nWater transportation on Lake Zug is centred on the town, with public transport on the lake provided by (Motor Ship) \"MS Zug\", \"MS Schwyz\", \"MS Rigi\" and \"MS Schwan\". These vessels belong to the Zugersee Schifffahrt, a partner of the local public transport executive, ZVB Zugerland Verkehrsbetriebe.\nThe nearest airport is Zurich Airport, located north east of Zug.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58819", "revid": "38517020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58819", "title": "Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer", "text": "American film and television and distribution company\nMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. (also known as Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures, commonly referred to as Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, commonly shortened to MGM) is an American film and television production and distribution company headquartered in Culver City, California. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was founded on April 17, 1924, and has been owned by the Amazon MGM Studios subsidiary of Amazon since 2022.\nMGM was formed by Marcus Loew by combining Metro Pictures, Goldwyn Pictures, and Louis B. Mayer Pictures into one company. It hired a number of well-known actors as contract players\u2014its slogan was \"more stars than there are in heaven\"\u2014and soon became Hollywood's most prestigious filmmaking company, producing popular musical films and winning many Academy Awards. MGM also owned film studios, movie lots, movie theaters, and technical production facilities. Its most prosperous era, from 1926 to 1959, was bracketed by two productions of \"\". It divested itself of the Loews movie theater chain and, in 1956, expanded into television production.\nIn 1969, businessman and investor Kirk Kerkorian bought 40% of MGM and dramatically changed the operation and direction of the studio.&lt;ref name=\"mango-madness/MGM\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He hired new management, reduced the studio's output to about five films per year, and diversified its products, creating MGM Resorts International as a Las Vegas\u2013based hotel and casino company. In 1980, Kerkorian split MGM into two separate companies to focus on its hotels and resorts. The studio was rebranded as Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Film Co., and in 1981, acquired United Artists (UA). In 1986, Kerkorian sold MGM/UA to Ted Turner, who retained the rights to the MGM film library, sold the studio lot in Culver City to Lorimar, and sold the remnants of MGM back to Kerkorian a few months later. After Kerkorian sold and reacquired the company again in the 1990s, he expanded MGM by purchasing Orion Pictures and the Samuel Goldwyn Company, including both of their film libraries. Finally in 2005, Kerkorian sold MGM to a consortium that included Sony Pictures.\nMGM was listed on the New York Stock Exchange until 1986 when it was sold to Turner. The company had its third IPO on the same exchange in 1997.\nIn 2010, MGM filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection and reorganization. After reorganization, it emerged from bankruptcy later that year under its creditors' ownership. Two former executives at Spyglass Entertainment, Gary Barber and Roger Birnbaum, became co-chairmen and co-CEOs of MGM's new holding company. After Barber's departure in 2018, the studio sought to be acquired by another company to pay its creditors. In May 2021, Amazon acquired MGM for US$; the deal closed in March 2022. In October 2023, Amazon Studios absorbed MGM Holdings and rebranded itself as Amazon MGM Studios. As of 2023, its most commercially successful film franchises include \"James Bond\" and \"Rocky\", while its most recent television productions include \"Fargo\" and \"The Handmaid's Tale\".\nAs a subsidiary of Amazon MGM Studios, MGM is a member of the Motion Picture Association (MPA); it was a founding member before leaving in the 2005 acquisition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOverview.\nMGM was the last studio to convert to sound pictures\u2014nonetheless, from the end of the silent film era through the late 1950s, it was the dominant motion picture studio in Hollywood. It was slow to respond to the changing legal, economic, and demographic nature of the motion picture industry during the 1950s and 1960s; and although its films often did well at the box office, it lost significant amounts of money throughout the 1960s. In 1966, MGM was sold to Canadian investor Edgar Bronfman Sr., whose son Edgar Jr. would later buy Universal Studios. Three years later, an increasingly unprofitable MGM was bought by Kirk Kerkorian, who slashed staff and production costs, forced the studio to produce low-quality, low-budget fare, and then ceased theatrical distribution in 1973. The studio continued to produce five to six films a year that were distributed through other studios, usually United Artists (UA). Kerkorian did, however, commit to increased production and an expanded film library when he bought UA in 1981.\nMGM ramped up internal production, and kept production going at UA, which was continuing to thrive, particularly with the lucrative James Bond film franchise. It also incurred significant amounts of debt to increase production. The studio took on additional debt as a series of owners took charge in the 1980s and early 1990s. In 1986, Ted Turner bought MGM, but a few months later, sold the company back to Kerkorian to recoup massive debt, while keeping the library assets for himself. The series of deals left MGM even more heavily in debt. MGM was bought by Path\u00e9 Communications (led by Italian publishing magnate Giancarlo Parretti) in 1990, but Parretti lost control of Path\u00e9 and defaulted on the loans used to purchase the studio. The French banking conglomerate Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais, the studio's major creditor, then took control of MGM. Even more deeply in debt, MGM was purchased by a joint venture between Kerkorian, producer Frank Mancuso, and Australia's Seven Network in 1996.\nThe debt load from these and subsequent business deals negatively affected MGM's ability to survive as an independent motion picture studio. After a bidding war which included Time Warner (the current parent of Turner Broadcasting) and General Electric (the owners of the NBC television network at the time), MGM was acquired on September 23, 2004, by a partnership consisting of Sony Corporation of America, Comcast, Texas Pacific Group (now TPG Capital, L.P.), Providence Equity Partners, and other investors.\nAfter its bankruptcy in 2010, MGM reorganized, with its creditors' $4 billion debt transferred to ownership. MGM's creditors controlled MGM through MGM Holdings, a private company. New management of its film and television production divisions was installed.\nHistory.\nFounding and early years.\nIn 1924, movie theater magnate Marcus Loew had a problem. He had bought Metro Pictures Corporation in 1919 for $3 million, to provide a steady supply of films for his large Loew's Theatres chain. However, he found that his new property only provided a lackluster assortment of films. Seeking to solve this problem, Loew purchased Goldwyn Pictures in 1924 for $5 million to improve the quality of the theaters' products. Loew acquired the Goldwyn studio - including its Culver City studio lot, its Leo the Lion \"Ars Gratia Artis\" slogan, and its contracted stars and projects - after negotiations with its president, Frank Joseph Godsol, as Samuel Goldwyn had lost control of the company he'd renamed himself after in 1922. Goldwyn reluctantly sold his remaining interest in Goldwyn Pictures to Loew for $1 million.\nHowever, these purchases created a need for someone to oversee his new Hollywood operations, since longtime assistant Nicholas Schenck was needed in New York headquarters to oversee the 150 theaters. A solution came in the person of Louis B. Mayer, head of Louis B. Mayer Pictures. Loew bought the Mayer studio for $75,000. Loews Incorporated completed the merger of the Loews theater chain and the three studios on April 17, 1924, celebrated with a fete on April 26, 1924. Mayer became head of the renamed Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, with 24-year-old Irving Thalberg as head of production. Final approval over budgets and contracts rested with New York City-based Loews Inc., while production decisions rested with the production headquarters in Culver City.\nMGM produced more than 100 feature films in its first two years. In 1925, MGM released the extravagant and successful \"Ben-Hur\", taking a $4.7 million profit that year, its first full year. Also in 1925, MGM, Paramount Pictures and UFA formed a joint German distributor, Parufamet.\nMarcus Loew died in 1927, and control of Loew's passed to Nicholas Schenck. In 1929, William Fox of Fox Film Corporation bought the Loew family's holdings with Schenck's assent. Mayer and Thalberg disagreed with the decision. Mayer was active in the California Republican Party and used his political connections to persuade the Justice Department to delay final approval of the deal on antitrust grounds. During this time, in the summer of 1929, Fox was badly hurt in an automobile accident. By the time he recovered, the stock market crash in the fall of 1929 had nearly wiped Fox out and ended any chance of the Loew's merger going through. Schenck and Mayer had never gotten along (Mayer reportedly referred to his boss as \"Mr. Skunk\"), and the abortive Fox merger increased the animosity between the two men.\n1920s and 1930s.\nFrom the outset, MGM tapped into the audience's need for glamor and sophistication. Having inherited few big names from their predecessor companies, Mayer and Thalberg began at once to create and publicize a host of new stars, among them Joan Crawford, Greta Garbo, John Gilbert, William Haines, and Norma Shearer (who followed Thalberg from Universal and eventually married him). Established names such as Wallace Beery, Lon Chaney, Buster Keaton, and William Powell were hired from other studios. They also hired top directors such as Clarence Brown, Tod Browning, Victor Seastrom, King Vidor and Erich von Stroheim. The arrival of talking pictures in 1928\u201329 gave opportunities to other new stars, many of whom would carry MGM through the 1930s: Clark Gable, Nelson Eddy, Jean Harlow, Myrna Loy, Jeanette MacDonald (often paired with Eddy), Robert Montgomery, Robert Taylor, and Spencer Tracy among them.\nMGM was one of the first studios to experiment with filming in Technicolor. Using the two-color Technicolor process then available, MGM filmed portions of \"The Uninvited Guest\" (1924), \"The Big Parade\" (1925), and \"\" (1925), among others, in the process. MGM released \"The Viking\" (1928), the first complete Technicolor feature with a synchronized score and sound effects, but no spoken dialogue.\nWith the arrival of \"talkies\", MGM moved slowly and reluctantly into the sound era, releasing features such as \"White Shadows in the South Seas\" (1928) with music and sound effects, and \"Alias Jimmy Valentine\" (1928) with limited dialogue sequences. Their first full-fledged talkie, the musical \"The Broadway Melody\" (1929), however, was both a box-office success and won the Academy Award as Best Picture of the Year.\nMGM was the last major studio to convert to sound. The studio's first all-color, \"all-talking\" sound feature with dialogue was the musical \"The Rogue Song\" in 1930. MGM included a sequence made in Technicolor's superior new three-color process, a musical number in the otherwise black-and-white \"The Cat and the Fiddle\" (1934), starring Jeanette MacDonald and Ramon Novarro. The studio then produced a number of three-color short subjects including the musical \"La Fiesta de Santa Barbara\" (1935); the first complete Technicolor feature was \"Sweethearts\" (1938) with MacDonald and Nelson Eddy, the earlier of the popular singing team's two films in color. From then on, MGM regularly produced several films a year in Technicolor with \"Northwest Passage\" (1939) being one of the most notable of this era.\nIn addition to a large short-subjects program of its own, MGM also distributed the shorts and features produced by Hal Roach Studios, including comedy shorts starring Laurel and Hardy, Our Gang and Charley Chase. The studio's distribution deal with Roach lasted from 1927 to 1938, and MGM benefited in particular from the success of the popular Laurel and Hardy films. In 1938, MGM purchased the rights to the Our Gang series from Roach and production of the successful series moved to the MGM studios, where it continued until 1944. From 1929 to 1931, MGM produced a series of comedy shorts called \"All Barkie Dogville Comedies\", in which trained dogs were dressed up to parody contemporary films and were voiced by actors. One of the shorts, \"The Dogway Melody\" (1930), spoofed MGM's hit 1929 musical \"The Broadway Melody\".\nMGM entered the music industry by purchasing the \"Big Three\" starting with Miller Music Publishing Co. in 1934, then Robbins Music Corporation. In 1935, MGM acquired a controlling interest in the capital stock of Leo Feist, Inc., the last of the Big Three. In the 1934 California gubernatorial election Democratic nominee Upton Sinclair ran against Republican incumbent Frank Merriam, the latter of whom MGM supported. MGM and other film studios deducted a day's pay from each of their employees to raise an anti-Sinclair fund that amounted to $500,000. Irving Thalberg was to lead MGM's anti-Sinclair campaign and the studio recruited Carey Wilson to create a series of anti-Sinclair propaganda films. These films, directed by Felix E. Feist, included fake newsreels of Sinclair supporters who were portrayed as bums and criminals. They were shown in California movie theaters, with one episode featuring hired actors as Sinclair supporters speaking with foreign accents.\nDuring the 1930s, MGM produced approximately 50 pictures a year, though it never met its goal of releasing a new motion picture each and every week (it was only able to release one feature film every nine days). Loew's 153 theaters were mostly located in New York, the Northeast, and Deep South; \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939) had its world premiere at Loew's Grand Theatre in Atlanta, Georgia. A fine reputation was gained for lavish productions that were sophisticated and polished to cater to an urban audience. Still, as the Great Depression deepened, MGM began to economize by \"recycling\" existing sets, costumes, and furnishings from previous projects. This recycling practice never let up once started. In addition, MGM saved money because it was the only one of the big five studios that did not own an off-site movie ranch. Until the mid-1950s, MGM could make a claim its rivals could not: the studio never lost money, although it did produce an occasional disaster such as \"Parnell\" (1937), Clark Gable's biggest flop. MGM was the only Hollywood studio that continued to pay dividends during the 1930s.\nMGM stars dominated the box office during the 1930s, and the studio was credited for inventing the Hollywood stable-of-stars system as well. MGM contracted with the American Musical Academy of Arts Association to handle all of their press and artist development. The AMAAA's main function was to develop the budding stars and to make them appealing to the public. Stars such as Joan Crawford, Greta Garbo, Myrna Loy, Jeanette MacDonald and Norma Shearer, reigned as the top-paid figures at the studio. Another MGM actress of the era, Jean Harlow, who had previously appeared in the Howard Hughes film \"Hell's Angels\" (1930), now had a big break and became a Hollywood sex symbol and one of MGM's most admired stars. Despite Harlow's gain, Garbo arguably remained the biggest star at MGM. Shearer was still a money maker despite her screen appearances becoming scarce, and Crawford continued her box-office popularity until 1937. MGM also received a boost through the man who would become known as \"King of Hollywood\", Clark Gable. Gable's career took off to new heights after he won an Oscar for the Columbia film \"It Happened One Night\" (1934).\nMayer and Irving Thalberg's association began warmly, but eventually relations between the two became strained; Thalberg preferred literary works and expensive costume pictures over the lower-budget, family-oriented crowd pleasers Mayer wanted. Thalberg, always physically frail, was removed as head of production in 1932. Mayer encouraged other staff producers, among them his son-in-law David O. Selznick, but no one seemed to have the sure touch of Thalberg. As Thalberg's health deteriorated in 1936, Mayer could now serve as his temporary replacement. Rumors had begun circulating for some time that Thalberg was leaving MGM to set up his own independent company; his premature death at age 37 in September 1936 cost MGM dearly.\nAfter Thalberg's untimely death, Mayer became head of production, as well as studio chief, becoming the first million-dollar executive in American history. The company remained profitable, and an increase in MGM's \"series\" pictures (\"Andy Hardy\" starring Mickey Rooney, \"Maisie\" starring Ann Sothern, \"The Thin Man\" starring William Powell and Myrna Loy, and \"Dr. Kildare/Dr. Gillespie\" with Lew Ayres and Lionel Barrymore) is cited as evidence of Mayer's restored influence. Also playing a huge role was Ida Koverman, Mayer's secretary and right hand.\nIn 1937, Mayer hired Mervyn LeRoy, a former Warner Bros. producer/director as MGM's top producer and Thalberg's replacement. LeRoy convinced Mayer to acquire the film rights to the popular children's book \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\"; MGM purchased the rights from Samuel Goldwyn for $75,000 in 1938.\nMGM's hits in 1939 included \"The Wizard of Oz\"; \"Ninotchka\", starring Greta Garbo; \"The Women\", starring Joan Crawford and Norma Shearer; and \"Gone with the Wind\", starring Vivien Leigh as Scarlett O'Hara and Clark Gable as Rhett Butler. Although \"Gone With the Wind\" was produced by Selznick International Pictures, the film was distributed by MGM as part of a deal for producer David O. Selznick, Mayer's son-in-law, to obtain the services of Gable as well as financial assistance necessary for Selznick to complete the film. After Selznick International foundered in 1944, MGM acquired the full rights to \"Gone With the Wind\". While \"The Wizard of Oz\" was a critical hit, the production costs for the film were so expensive it took 20 years before it turned a profit.\n1940s.\nWithin one year, beginning in 1942, Mayer released his five highest-paid actresses from their MGM contracts: Joan Crawford, Greta Garbo, Myrna Loy, Jeanette MacDonald and Norma Shearer. After being labeled \"box office poison\", Crawford's MGM contract was terminated and she moved to Warner Brothers, where her career took a dramatic upturn. Garbo and Shearer never made another film after leaving the lot. Of the five stars, Loy and MacDonald were the only two whom Mayer later rehired, in 1947 and 1948 respectively; Crawford returned to MGM after Mayer's departure for the musical drama \"Torch Song\" in 1953.\nIncreasingly, before and during World War II, Mayer came to rely on his \"College of Cardinals\"\u2014senior producers who controlled the studio's output. This management-by-committee resulted in MGM losing its momentum, developing few new stars, and relying on the safety of sequels and bland material. (Dorothy Parker memorably referred to the studio as \"Metro-Goldwyn-Merde\".) Production values remained high, and even \"B\" pictures carried a polish and gloss that made them expensive to mount. After 1940, production was cut from 50 pictures a year to a more manageable 25 features per year. During this period, MGM released several very successful musicals with stars such as Fred Astaire, Judy Garland, Gene Kelly, and Frank Sinatra.\n1950s.\nAudiences began drifting to television in the late 1940s, and MGM and the other studios were finding it increasingly difficult to attract them to theaters. With its high overhead expenses, MGM's profit margins continued to decrease. Word came from Nicholas Schenck in New York to find \"a new Thalberg\" who could improve quality while paring costs. Mayer thought he had found this savior in Dore Schary, a writer and producer who had found success at running RKO Pictures. Lavish musicals were Schary's focus, and hits like \"Easter Parade\" (1948), \"Annie Get Your Gun\" (1950) and the popular musical films of tenor Mario Lanza, including \"That Midnight Kiss\" (1949) and \"The Great Caruso\" (1951), helped to keep MGM profitable during this period.\nIn August 1951, Louis B. Mayer was fired by MGM's East Coast executives and he was replaced by Schary. Gradually cutting loose expensive contract players (including $6,000-a-week Judy Garland in 1950 and \"King of Hollywood\" Clark Gable in 1954), saving money by recycling existing movie sets instead of building costly new scenery, and reworking expensive old costumes, Schary managed to keep the studio running much as it had through the early 1940s, though his sensibilities for hard-edged, message movies would never bear much fruit. One bright spot continued to be MGM's musical pictures, under the aegis of producer Arthur Freed, who was operating what amounted to an independent unit within the studio. During the 1950's, MGM produced some well-regarded and profitable musicals that would later be acknowledged as classics, among them \"An American in Paris\" (1951), \"Singin' in the Rain\" (1952), and \"Seven Brides for Seven Brothers\" (1954). However, \"Brigadoon\" (1954), \"Deep in My Heart\" (1954), \"It's Always Fair Weather\" (1955), \"Invitation to the Dance\" (1956), and \"Les Girls\" (1957) were extravagant song and dance flops, and even \"The Band Wagon\" (1953) and \"Silk Stockings\" (1957), two musicals that are now considered classics and among the studio's best, lost money upon their initial releases.\nIn 1952, as a settlement of the government's restraint-of-trade action, \"United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.\" 334 US 131 (1948), Loews, Inc. gave up control of MGM. It would take another five years before the interlocking arrangements were completely undone, by which time both Loews and MGM were losing money. In 1956, Schary was ousted from MGM in another power struggle against the New York-based executives. Cost overruns and the failure of the big-budget epic \"Raintree County\" (1957) prompted the studio to terminate Schary's contract.\nSchary's reign at MGM had been marked with few legitimate hits, but his departure (along with the retirement of Schenck in 1955) left a power vacuum that would prove difficult to fill. Initially Joseph Vogel became president and Sol Siegel head of production. In 1957 (by coincidence, the year Mayer died), the studio lost money for the first time in its 34-year history. After Spencer Tracy left MGM in 1955, the only major star remaining under contract from MGM's heyday was Robert Taylor; by 1960, MGM had released Taylor and the last of its contract players, with many either retiring or moving on to television.\nIn 1958, MGM released what is generally considered its last great musical, Arthur Freed's Cinemascope color production of \"Gigi\", starring Leslie Caron, Maurice Chevalier, and Louis Jourdan. It was adapted from the novel by Colette, and written by the team of Lerner and Loewe, who also wrote \"My Fair Lady\" and \"Camelot\". \"Gigi\" was a box-office and critical success which won nine Academy Awards, including Best Picture. From it came several hit songs, including \"Thank Heaven For Little Girls\", \"I Remember It Well\", the \"Waltz at Maxim's\", and the Oscar-winning title song. The film was the last MGM musical to win a Best Picture Oscar, an honor that had previously gone to \"The Broadway Melody\" (1929), \"The Great Ziegfeld\" (1936), and \"An American in Paris\" (1951). The last musical film produced by the \"Freed Unit\" was an adaptation of the Broadway musical \"Bells Are Ringing\" (1960) with Judy Holliday and Dean Martin. However, MGM did release later musical films, including an adaptation of Meredith Willson's \"The Unsinkable Molly Brown\" (1964) with Debbie Reynolds and Harve Presnell.\nMGM enters television.\nMGM's first television program, \"The MGM Parade\", was produced by MGM's trailer department as one of the compilation and promotional shows that imitated Disney's series \"Disneyland\" which was also on ABC. \"Parade\" was canceled by ABC in the second quarter of 1956. MGM took bids for its movie library in 1956 from Lou Chesler and others, but decided on entering the television market itself. Chesler had offered $50 million for the film library. MGM Television was started with the hiring of Bud Barry to head up the operation in June 1956. MGM Television was to distribute its films to television (starting with the networks), television production and purchasing television stations. Television production was expected to start with the 1957\u201358 season and was to include half-hour remakes of, or series based on, its pictures. Initial feature film sales focused on selling to the networks.\nThe year 1957 also marked the end of MGM's animation department, as the studio determined it could generate the same amount of revenue by reissuing older cartoons as it could by producing and releasing new ones. William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, by then the heads of the MGM cartoon studio, took most of their unit and made their own company, Hanna-Barbera Productions, a successful producer of television animation.\nIn 1956, MGM sold the television rights for \"The Wizard of Oz\" to CBS, which scheduled it to be shown in November of that year. In a landmark event, the film became the first American theatrical fiction film to be shown complete in one evening on prime time television over a major American commercial network. (Laurence Olivier's version of \"Hamlet\" was shown on prime time network television a month later, but split in half over two weeks, and the 1950 film, \"\" was telecast by ABC in 1952, but that was a documentary.) Beginning in 1959, and lasting until 1991, telecasts of \"The Wizard of Oz\" became an annual tradition, drawing huge audiences in homes all over the United States and earning additional profits for MGM. The studio was all too happy to see \"Oz\" become, through television, one of the two or three most famous films MGM has ever made, and one of the few films that nearly everybody in the United States has seen at least once. Today \"The Wizard of Oz\" is regularly shown on the Turner-owned channels, no longer just once a year.\nMGM cartoons.\nIn animation, MGM purchased the rights in 1930 to distribute a series of cartoons that starred a character named Flip the Frog, produced by Ub Iwerks. The first cartoon in this series (titled \"Fiddlesticks\") was the first sound cartoon to be produced in two-color Technicolor. In 1933, Ub Iwerks canceled the unsuccessful Flip the Frog series and MGM began to distribute its second series of cartoons, starring a character named Willie Whopper, that was also produced by Iwerks.\nIn 1934, after Iwerks' distribution contract expired, MGM contracted with animation producers/directors Hugh Harman and Rudolph Ising to produce a new series of color cartoons. Harman and Ising came to MGM after breaking ties with Leon Schlesinger and Warner Bros. and brought with them their popular \"Looney Tunes\" character, Bosko. These were known as \"Happy Harmonies\", and in many ways resembled the \"Looney Tunes\"' sister series, \"Merrie Melodies\". The \"Happy Harmonies\" regularly ran over budget, and MGM dismissed Harman and Ising in 1937 to start its own animation studio.\nAfter initial struggles with a poorly received series of \"The Captain and the Kids\" cartoons, the studio rehired Harman and Ising in 1939, and Ising created the studio's first successful animated character, Barney Bear. However, MGM's biggest cartoon stars would come in the form of the cat-and-mouse duo Tom and Jerry, created by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera in 1940. The \"Tom and Jerry\" cartoons won seven Academy Awards between 1943 and 1953. In 1941, Tex Avery, another Schlesinger alumnus, joined the animation department. Avery gave the unit its image, with successes such as \"Red Hot Riding Hood\", \"Swing Shift Cinderella\", and the \"Droopy\" series.\nAvery left the studio in 1953, leaving Hanna and Barbera to focus on the popular \"Tom and Jerry\" and \"Droopy\" series. After 1955, all cartoons were filmed in CinemaScope until MGM closed its cartoon division in 1957.\nIn 1961, MGM resumed the release of new \"Tom and Jerry\" shorts, and production moved to Rembrandt Films in Prague, Czechoslovakia (now the Czech Republic) under the supervision of Gene Deitch, who had been hired away from Terrytoons. Although Deitch's \"Tom and Jerry\" cartoons were considered to be vastly inferior to the earlier Hanna and Barbera shorts, they did receive positive reviews in some quarters. In 1963, the production of \"Tom and Jerry\" returned to Hollywood under Chuck Jones and his Sib Tower 12 Productions studio (later absorbed by MGM and renamed MGM Animation/Visual Arts). Jones' group also produced its own works, winning an Oscar for \"The Dot and the Line\" (1965), as well as producing the classic television version of Dr. Seuss's \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (1966) featuring the voice of Boris Karloff. \"Tom and Jerry\" folded in 1967, and the animation department continued with television specials and one feature film, \"The Phantom Tollbooth\". A revived Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Animation was in existence from 1993 to 1999.\nMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer Inc..\nMGM in the 1960s.\nIn 1959, MGM enjoyed what is quite probably its greatest financial success of later years, with the release of its nearly four-hour Technicolor epic \"Ben\u2013Hur\", a remake of its 1925 silent film hit and adapted from the novel by General Lew Wallace. Starring Charlton Heston in the title role, the film was critically acclaimed, and won 11 Academy Awards, including Best Picture, a record that held until \"Titanic\" matched it in 1997 and \"\" also did in 2003.\nDuring this period, MGM fell into a questionable practice that eventually nearly doomed the studio: an entire year's production schedule relied on the success of one big-budget epic film each year. This policy began in 1959, when \"Ben\u2013Hur\" proved profitable enough to carry the studio through 1960. However, four succeeding big-budget epics\u2014like \"Ben\u2013Hur\", each a remake\u2014failed: \"Cimarron\" (1960), \"King of Kings\" (1961), \"Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse\" (1961), and, most notoriously, \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" (1962). The Cinerama film \"The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm\" (also 1962), the first film in Cinerama to actually tell a story, was also a financial failure. One other big-budget epic that was a success, however, was the MGM-Cinerama co-production \"How the West Was Won\" (1962), with a huge all-star cast. \"King of Kings\", while a commercial and critical bomb at the time, has since come to be regarded as a film classic. The losses caused by these films led to the resignations of Sol Siegel and Joseph Vogel who were replaced by Robert M. Weitman (head of production) and Robert O'Brien (president).\nThe combination of O'Brien and Weitman seemed to temporarily revive the studio. MGM released David Lean's immensely popular \"Doctor Zhivago\" (1965), later followed by such hits as \"The Dirty Dozen\" (1967), \"\" (1968) and \"Where Eagles Dare\" (1968). However the company's time was taken up fighting off proxy attacks by corporate raiders, and then MGM backed another series of box office failures, including the musical remake of \"Goodbye, Mr. Chips\" (1969) and \"Ryan's Daughter\" (1970). Weitman moved over to Columbia in 1967 and O'Brien was forced to resign a few years later.\nIn the mid-1960s, MGM began to diversify by investing in real estate. Edgar Bronfman Sr. purchased a controlling interest in MGM in 1966 (and was briefly chairman of the board in 1969), and in 1967 Time Inc. became the company's second-largest shareholder.\nKirk Kerkorian investment.\nIn 1969, Kirk Kerkorian purchased 40% of MGM stock. What appealed to Kerkorian was MGM's asset value, which included subsidiary businesses, real estate, and the value of 45 years' worth of glamour associated with the name, which he attached to a Las Vegas hotel and casino. As for film-making, that part of the company was bleeding money and was quickly and severely downsized under the supervision of James T. Aubrey Jr. With changes in its business model including fewer pictures per year, more location shooting and more distribution of independent productions, MGM's operations were reduced. Aubrey sold off MGM's accumulation of props, furnishings and historical memorabilia, including a pair of Dorothy's ruby slippers from \"The Wizard of Oz\". Lot 3, of back-lot property, was sold off for real-estate development. In 1971, it was announced that MGM was in talks with 20th Century-Fox about a possible merger, a plan which never came into fruition. Under Aubrey, MGM also sold off MGM Records and its overseas theater holdings.\nThrough the 1970s, studio output slowed considerably as Aubrey preferred four or five medium-budget pictures each year along with a smattering of low-budget fare. In October 1973 and in decline in output, MGM closed its distribution offices then outsourced distribution for its films for a ten-year period to United Artists (UA). UA also purchased MGM's music publishing arm, Robbins, Feist &amp; Miller plus half of Canadian record label Quality Records.\nKerkorian had largely distanced himself from the operations of the studio, focusing on the MGM Grand Hotel, investing $120 million into that project. Another portion of the backlot was sold in 1974. The last shooting done on the backlot was the introductory material for \"That's Entertainment!\" (1974), a retrospective documentary that became a surprise hit for the studio.\n\"That's Entertainment!\" was authorized by Dan Melnick, who was appointed head of production in 1972. Under Melnick's regime, MGM produced a number of successful films in the 1970s, including \"Westworld\" (1973), \"Soylent Green\" (1973), \"The Sunshine Boys\" (1975), \"The Wind and the Lion\" (1975), \"Network\" (1976) and \"Coma\" (1978). Despite these successes, MGM never reclaimed its former status.\nThe MGM Recording Studios were sold in 1975. In 1979, Kerkorian issued a press statement that MGM was now primarily a hotel company. In 1980, MGM hit a symbolic low point when David Begelman, earlier fired by Columbia following the discovery of his acts of forgery and embezzlement, was installed as MGM's president and CEO.\nIn 1980, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. split its production and casino units into separate companies: Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Film Co. and MGM Grand Hotels, Inc. The rise of ancillary markets was enough to allow MGM to increase production to 10\u201315 films a year compared to three to six in the previous decade, but first it needed to revive its distribution unit.\nMGM/UA Entertainment.\nMGM proceeded to return to theatrical distribution in 1981 with its purchase of United Artists (UA), as UA's parent company Transamerica Corporation decided to jettison the studio following the huge financial debacle of \"Heaven's Gate\" (1980); after this acquisition, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Film Co. was renamed \"MGM/UA Entertainment Company\". MGM/UA formed a trio of subsidiaries, the MGM/UA Home Entertainment Group, MGM/UA Classics, and the MGM/UA Television Group in 1982. Kerkorian offered to purchase the remaining outstanding MGM shares he did not own to take the company private but was met with resistance. MGM/UA sold its music publishing division to CBS Songs in 1983 with a five-year co-publishing agreement.\nAfter the purchase of UA, David Begelman's duties were transferred to that unit. Under Begelman, MGM/UA produced a number of unsuccessful films, and he was fired in July 1982. Out of the 11 films he put into production, only one film, \"Poltergeist\" (1982), proved to be a clear hit during his tenure with the studio. \"WarGames\" (1983) and \"Octopussy\" (1983) were both hits for MGM/UA, but did not push MGM into the profit range that Kerkorian wanted.\nNot even MGM's greatest asset \u2013 its library \u2013 was enough to keep the studio afloat. After 1982, the studio relied more on distribution, picking up independent productions, rather than financing its own projects. The first of these deals was with Fred Silverman's InterMedia. In 1982, the company entered into a relationship with mini-major studio and film distributor The Cannon Group, Inc. for theatrical and home video distribution; this would not be the last time Cannon and MGM would be involved with each other. Other producers and companies, such as Dino De Laurentiis and PSM Entertainment, also made deals with MGM/UA.\nMGM Entertainment.\nOn August 7, 1985, Turner Broadcasting System offered to buy MGM/UA. As film licensing to television became more complicated, Ted Turner saw the value of acquiring MGM's film library for his Superstation WTBS. Ahead of the merger, MGM/UA Distribution Co. become the newly minted joint venture UA/MGM Distribution Co., which would handle sales and operations of MGM and UA feature films. On March 25 of the following year, the deal was finalized in a cash-stock deal for $1.5\u00a0billion, and the company was renamed \"MGM Entertainment Co.\". Turner immediately sold MGM's UA subsidiary back to Kerkorian for roughly $480 million. However, Turner was unable to find financing for the rest of the deal because of concerns in the financial community over the debt-load of his companies; thus, on August 26, 1986, Turner was forced to sell MGM's production and distribution assets to UA for $300\u00a0million. The MGM studio lot and lab facilities were sold to Lorimar-Telepictures. Lorimar-Telepictures would later sell the Metrocolor facilities, Metrocolor Film Laboratory (aka MGM Laboratory) to Technicolor for $60 million. Turner retained the pre-May 1986 library of MGM films, along with the RKO Radio Pictures and pre-1950 Warner Bros. films which UA had previously purchased.\nHow much of MGM's back catalog Turner actually obtained was a point of conflict for a time; eventually, it was determined that Turner owned all of the pre-May 1986 MGM library, as well as the pre-1950 Warner Bros. catalog, the \"Popeye\" cartoons released by Paramount (both the pre-1950 Warner Bros. library and \"Popeye\" cartoons were sold to Associated Artists Productions, which was later bought by UA), and the US/Canadian rights to the RKO library, in addition to MGM's television series. Turner used the acquired films to launch the new cable channel Turner Network Television (TNT).\nMGM/UA Communications.\nAfter Kerkorian reclaimed MGM in August 1986, the MGM/UA name continued to be used, but the company changed its name, this time to MGM/UA Communications Co., which was renamed from United Artists Corporation, now using MGM and UA as separate brands. The change became official on September 10, 1986, and at that time, the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) ticker symbol was changed from UA, yet again, to MGM. In 1987, MGM/UA Communications Co., Paramount Pictures and Universal Pictures teamed up in order to market feature film and television product to China.\nKerkorian, however, continued to try to sell portions of MGM/UA. In July 1988, Kerkorian announced plans to split MGM and UA into separate studios. Under this deal, Kerkorian, who owned 82% of MGM/UA Communications, would have sold 25% of MGM to Barris Industries (controlled by producers Burt Sugarman, Jon Peters, and Peter Guber). The proposition to spin off MGM was called off a few weeks later. In 1989, two Australian-based media entities attempted to gain control of MGM/UA. The first was Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, which had purchased 20th Century Fox in 1985, making a $1.35 billion bid; rival Australian media company Qintex attempted to buy MGM from Kerkorian\u2014topping Murdoch's bid with a $1.5 billion offer\u2014but the deal collapsed as Qintex was plagued by financial issues. Ted Turner also attempted to buy MGM/UA again, but these efforts also failed.\nMGM-Path\u00e9 Communications.\nIn 1990, Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti announced he was about to buy MGM/UA. Although the French government had scuttled Parretti's bid to buy Path\u00e9 due to concerns about his character, background, and past dealings, Parretti gained backing from Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais and bought MGM/UA from Kirk Kerkorian. To finance the purchase, Parretti licensed the MGM/UA library to Time Warner for home video and Turner for domestic television rights until 2003. He then merged it with his Path\u00e9 Communications Corporation (formerly The Cannon Group, a distributor that Parretti had renamed before his aborted bid for Path\u00e9; ironically, MGM had previously distributed Cannon product several years prior) to form MGM\u2013Pathe Communications Co.\nThe well-respected executive, Alan Ladd Jr., a former president of MGM/UA, was brought on board as CEO of MGM in 1991. However, a year later, Parretti's ownership of MGM\u2013Path\u00e9 dissolved in a flurry of lawsuits and a default by Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais, and Parretti faced securities-fraud charges in the United States and Europe. It was later revealed that Parretti's deal to buy MGM/UA was largely based on fraudulent and/or highly leveraged loans; upon taking over MGM, he had fired almost all of the financial staff, resulting in chaos at MGM amid complaints from actors, directors and others who were not being paid. Danjaq, LLC also began litigation against MGM during this time after Parretti attempted to sell the international television rights to the \"James Bond\" franchise without their knowledge or approval, as a method of financing his buyout of MGM; this in turn caused the planned production of the seventeenth \"Bond\" film, \"Property of a Lady\", to grind to a halt (the length of the lawsuit ultimately led to Timothy Dalton's departure from the role and Pierce Brosnan taking over for the seventeenth installment, 1995's \"GoldenEye\").\nOn the verge of bankruptcy, Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais took full control of MGM\u2013Path\u00e9 via loan default in mid-1992 and reverted its name back to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. The bank fired Ladd and replaced him with former Paramount executive Frank Mancuso Sr. Mancuso then hired Michael Marcus as chairman, MGM Pictures and former Warner Bros. executive John Calley as United Artists head. A television production division was started up. As part of his exit package, Ladd took some of the top properties, including \"Braveheart\".\nOn December 21, 1992, MGM's 15% investment ($30 million in cash) in Carolco Pictures plus a $30 million convertible note was approved by Carolco's board. MGM also started distributing Carolco's films in January 1994 after its deal with TriStar Pictures ended. While MGM had to convince parent Credit Lyonnais to allow the deal, Lyonnais was Carolco's main lender thus allowing the bank to collect outstanding debts and extend a new line of credit.\nMGM Holdings, Inc. was formed to take on about $1 billion in MGM's liabilities off MGM's balance sheet in the third quarter of 1993. Credit Lyonnais extended a $400 million line of credit allowing a Chemical Bank lead bank group to extend a $350 million line of credit in 1994. In 1994, MGM had a hit in \"Stargate\". Deals made during this era included one with Sega of America to create television shows and films based on Sega's video games (including an ultimately-unmade film based on \"Sonic the Hedgehog\", titled \"Sonic: Wonders of the World\") and another deal with Rysher Entertainment.\nMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures.\nCr\u00e9dit Lyonnais soon put MGM up for sale. Bidders included News Corporation, The Walt Disney Company and General Electric (GE); independent production firms New Regency and Morgan Creek Productions; and several foreign firms, including France's Chargeurs, Germany's Bertelsmann and the British/Dutch media company PolyGram. Ultimately the highest bidder was none other than Kirk Kerkorian, who re-purchased the studio in October 1996 for $1.3 billion, becoming MGM's owner for the third time; others involved in the deal included MGM studio head Mancuso and Australian television station Seven Network (which Kerkorian would later purchase himself in 1998). John Calley left as head of United Artists to become head of Sony Pictures Entertainment around this time, allegedly because of Mancuso not keeping him informed of the planned buyout and his low salary.\n1997 proved to be an eventful year for MGM. On April 11, 1997, MGM bought Metromedia's film subsidiaries (Orion Pictures, The Samuel Goldwyn Company, and the Motion Picture Corporation of America) for US$573\u00a0million, substantially enlarging its library of films and television series and acquiring additional production capacity. The deal closed in July of that year. This catalog, along with the James Bond franchise, was considered to be MGM's primary asset. MGM's long-running cable television series, \"Stargate SG-1\", premiered on Showtime on July 27. MGM and Danjaq, LLC filed a lawsuit against Sony Pictures in November, as Sony was intending to launch a rival Bond franchise backed by Kevin McClory; the lawsuit alleged that Calley had used confidential information from his tenure at MGM/UA to assist Sony with their attempt at making a \"James Bond\" film. MGM acquired the rights to the unofficial Bond production \"Never Say Never Again\" from Jack Schwartzman's estate that December.\nIn December 1997, MGM attempted to purchase 1,000 films (referred to as the Epic film library) held by Consortium de R\u00e9alisation, but was outbid by PolyGram. However, they ultimately succeeded when they acquired &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 of the pre-1996 PolyGram Filmed Entertainment library from Seagram in 1999 for $250\u00a0million, increasing their library holdings to 4,000. Prior to that, MGM had held a home video license for 100 of the films since spring 1997. The PolyGram libraries were purchased by its Orion Pictures subsidiary so as to avoid its 1990 video distribution agreement with Warner Home Video. The studio also obtained the broadcast rights to more than 800 of its films previously licensed to Turner Broadcasting System.\nBy 1998, MGM had started a specialty film unit using The Samuel Goldwyn Company under the Goldwyn Films name. Samuel Goldwyn Jr. sued Metromedia over salary and damages when he worked at Goldwyn Company under Metromedia and sued MGM over the use of the Goldwyn name claiming trademark infringement and unfair competition. MGM and Metromedia settled on January 10, 1999, with MGM's Goldwyn Films changing its name to G2 Films. In the middle of that year, MGM and Sony settled in an out-of-court lawsuit that saw MGM trading its \"Spider-Man\" film rights (itself obtained by MGM through a messy legal process involving Cannon and Carolco) to Sony in exchange for gaining the rights to \"Casino Royale\".\nIn March 1999, MGM announced that it had paid $225 million to end its home video distribution contract with Warner Home Video and re-acquired the home video rights to their post-1986 catalog while Warner Home Video took over home video distribution of the pre-1986 catalogue. MGM also ended its international theatrical distribution agreement with United International Pictures (UIP) after UIP was accused by the European Union (EU) of being an illegal cartel. On June 22, 1999, MGM announced they had formed a three-year international distribution agreement and strategic alliance with 20th Century Fox for theatrical and home video releases outside North America, alongside a deal to jointly explore cable and satellite distribution ventures worldwide. The Fox deal would begin in February 2000 for home video releases and November 2000 for theatrical releases, and last until the end of January 2003. In the same month, MGM announced it would restructure United Artists as an arthouse film producer/distributor, while G2 Films was renamed United Artists International and became a sales distributor for films produced by the restructured business. However, United Artists International was shut down the following year due to lucrative international television output deals which had affected the box office results for United Artists' films.\nIn 2000, Kirk Kerkorian announced that MGM would release two major films in 2002\u2014\"Rollerball\" and \"Hart's War\". These were likely the last films in the original post-May 1986 library of MGM titles dating back to \"\", before significant corporate changes, such as Compaq's merger with Hewlett-Packard in May 2002, reshaped the broader media and technology landscape. MGM purchased 20% of Rainbow Media Group from Cablevision Systems for $825\u00a0million in 2001. MGM attempted to take over Universal Studios in 2003, but failed, and was forced to sell several of its cable channel investments (taking a $75-million loss on the deal).\nIn January 2002, MGM formed the MGM Entertainment Business Group with lawyer Darcie Denkert as president. This placed her in charge of MGM on Stage, the company's theatrical arm. Her friend Dean Stolber joined her as co-president of the theatrical unit.\nOn May 27, 2003, MGM re-acquired full home video distribution rights to its films internationally, while Fox would continue to distribute on behalf of MGM in select developing regions.\nMGM Holdings.\nBidding war and corporate reorganization.\nIn 2002, Kerkorian again put MGM up for sale, with a suggested sale price of $7 billion. In 2004, many of MGM's competitors started to make bids to purchase MGM, beginning with Time Warner. Time Warner's bid was expected, since the company's largest shareholder was Ted Turner, whose Turner Broadcasting System had merged with Time Warner in 1996. After a short period of negotiations with MGM, Time Warner was unsuccessful. The leading bidder proved to be Sony Corporation of America, backed by Comcast and private equity firms Texas Pacific Group (now TPG Capital, L.P.), DLJ and Providence Equity Partners. Sony's primary goal was to ensure Blu-ray Disc support at MGM; cost synergies with Sony Pictures Entertainment were secondary. Time Warner made a counter-bid (which Ted Turner reportedly tried to block), but on September 13, 2004, Sony increased its bid of US$11.25 per share (roughly $4.7\u00a0billion) to $12 per share ($5\u00a0billion), and Time Warner subsequently withdrew its bid of $11 per share ($4.5\u00a0billion). MGM and Sony agreed on a purchase price of nearly $5\u00a0billion, of which about $2\u00a0billion was to pay off MGM's debt. From 2005 to 2006, the Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group domestically distributed films by MGM and UA.\nHowever, problems quickly arose between MGM and Sony. The largest issue was Sony failing to meet sales projections for MGM's catalog on DVD; when this occurred, Providence Equity brought in Harry Sloan as chairman of MGM. Sloan began to champion MGM's future as being independent of Sony as opposed to a label under Sony control; other issues both between MGM and Sony as well as inside both companies began to manifest, resulting in MGM reestablishing itself as an independent studio.\nIn February 2006, MGM announced it would return as a theatrical distribution company. MGM struck deals with The Weinstein Company (TWC), Lakeshore Entertainment, Bauer Martinez, and many other independent studios, and then announced its plans to release 14 feature films for 2006 and early 2007. MGM also hoped to increase the amount to over 20 by 2007. \"Lucky Number Slevin\", released April 7, was the first film released under the new MGM era. The TWC distribution agreement covered three years, but ended three months early.\nOn May 31, 2006, MGM announced it would transfer the majority of its home video output from Sony Pictures Home Entertainment to 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment. MGM also announced plans to restructure its worldwide television distribution operation. In addition, MGM signed a deal with New Line Television in which MGM would handle New Line's U.S. film and series television syndication packages. MGM served as New Line's barter sales representative in the television arena until 2008.\nA tentative agreement was signed in Seoul on March 15, 2006, between MGM, South Korea-based entertainment agency Glovit and Busan city officials for a theme park scheduled to open in 2011. MGM Studio City was projected to cost $1.02 billion, built on 245 acres owned by the city in a planned tourist district and contain 27 attractions, a film academy with movie sets, hotels, restaurants and shopping facilities. Glovit was expected to find funding and oversee management of the park, while MGM received a licensing agreement making them handle content and overall planning and the option to buy a 5%\u201310% share.\nOn November 2, 2006, producer/actor Tom Cruise and his production partner, Paula Wagner, signed an agreement with MGM to run United Artists. Wagner served as United Artists' chief executive.\nMGM in the digital age.\nOver the next several years, MGM launched a number of initiatives in distribution and the use of new technology and media, as well as joint ventures to promote and sell its products. In April 2007, it was announced that MGM movies would be able to be downloaded through Apple's iTunes service, with MGM bringing an estimated 100 of its existing movies to iTunes service, the California-based computer company revealed. The list of movies included the likes of modern features such as \"Rocky\", \"Ronin\", \"Mad Max\", and \"Dances with Wolves\", along with more golden-era classics such as \"Lilies of the Field\" and \"The Great Train Robbery\". In October, the company launched MGM HD on DirecTV, offering a library of movies formatted in Hi Def. MGM teamed up with Weigel Broadcasting to launch a new channel titled This TV on November 1, 2008. On August 12, 2008, MGM teamed up with Comcast to launch a new video-on-demand network titled Impact. On November 10, 2008, MGM announced that it would release full-length films on YouTube.\nOn April 14, 2008, a South Korea government agency announced that MGM and Incheon International Airport Corporation agreed to build MGM Studio Theme Park. The selected site was a 1.5 million square meter Yeongjongdo island property near the Incheon International Airport. Ultimately, the park was designed but never built.\nMGM files for bankruptcy.\nAs of mid-2009, MGM had US$3.7\u00a0billion in debt, and interest payments alone totaled $250\u00a0million a year. MGM was earning approximately $500\u00a0million a year on income from its extensive film and television library, but the economic recession is reported to have reduced this income substantially.\nWhether MGM could avoid voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy had been a topic of much discussion in the film industry. MGM had to repay a $250-million line of credit in April 2010, a $1-billion loan in June 2011, and its remaining US$2.7\u00a0billion in loans in 2012. In May 2009, MGM's auditor gave the company a clean bill of health, concluding it was still on track to meet its debt obligations. At that time, the company was negotiating with its creditors to either extend the debt repayment deadlines or engage in a debt-for-equity swap. Industry observers, however, questioned whether MGM could avoid a Chapter-11 bankruptcy filing under any circumstances, and concluded that any failure to conclude the negotiations must trigger a filing. MGM and its United Artists subsidiary were now producing very few films each year, and it was widely believed that MGM's solvency would depend on the box-office performance of these films (especially \"Skyfall\"). There was some indication that Relativity Media and its financial backer, Elliott Associates (a hedge fund based in New York), had been acquiring MGM debt in an attempt to force the company into involuntary bankruptcy.\nOn August 17, 2009, chief executive officer Harry E. Sloan stepped down and MGM hired Stephen F. Cooper as its new CEO, a corporate executive who guided Enron through its post-2001 bankruptcy and oversaw the restructuring and growth of Krispy Kreme in 2005. Expectations were that Cooper was hired to act quickly on MGM's debt problems. On October 1, 2009, the studio's new leadership negotiated a forbearance agreement with its creditors under which interest payments due from September to November 2009 did not have to be paid until December 15, 2009.\nMGM stated in February 2010 that the studio would likely be sold in the next four months, and that its latest film, \"Hot Tub Time Machine\", might be one of the last four films to bear the MGM name. However, some stated that the company might continue as a label for new James Bond productions, as well as other movie properties culled from the MGM library.\nMGM Holdings, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and 160 affiliates filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on November 3, 2010, with a prepackaged plan for exiting bankruptcy which led to MGM's creditors taking over the company. On December 20, 2010, MGM executives announced that the studio had emerged from bankruptcy. Spyglass Entertainment executives Gary Barber and Roger Birnbaum became co-Chairs and co-CEOs of the studio.\nPost-bankruptcy era.\nOn January 4, 2011, MGM and Weigel Broadcasting announced plans to distribute MeTV nationwide. On February 2, 2011, MGM named Jonathan Glickman to be the film president of MGM. Six days later, MGM was finalizing a distribution deal with Sony Pictures Entertainment to handle distribution of its films worldwide, including the two upcoming Bond films \"Skyfall\" and \"Spectre\", and MGM having the right to be co-financier on selected Sony films, such as \"The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo\". The deal was finalized on April 13, 2011. 20th Century Fox's deal with MGM handling its library distribution worldwide was set to expire in September 2011. However, the deal was renewed and extended on April 14, 2011 and, after five years, was renewed and extended again on June 27, 2016. It was expired in June 2020 due to Disney's acquisition of 21st Century Fox's properties (including 20th Century Fox) in 2019.\nMGM moved forward with several upcoming projects, including remakes of \"RoboCop\" and \"Poltergeist\" (the \"RoboCop\" and \"Poltergeist\" remakes were released in 2014 and 2015, respectively), and released their first post-bankruptcy film, \"Zookeeper\", which was co-distributed by Columbia Pictures on July 8, 2011. The new MGM, under Barber and Birnbaum's control, focuses on co-investing on films made by another party, which handle all distribution and marketing for the projects. MGM handles international television distribution rights for the new films as well as its library of existing titles and also retains its in-house production service. In separate 2011 deals, the rights to MGM's completed films \"Red Dawn\" and \"The Cabin in the Woods\" were dealt to FilmDistrict as well as Lionsgate Films, respectively.\nOn October 3, 2012, Birnbaum announced his intention to exit his role as an MGM executive and return to \"hands-on\" producing. He remained with the studio to produce films on \"an exclusive basis\". In December 2012, Denkert retired as co-president of MGM on Stage after producing five Broadway and West End plays. In May 2014, MGM introduced The Works, a channel available in 31 percent of the country, including stations owned by Titan Broadcast Management.\nIn 2013, the Orion brand was revived as a television production label for a syndicated court show. The Orion Pictures name was extended in fourth quarter 2014 for smaller domestic and international video on demand and limited theatrical releases.\nIn March 2017, MGM announced a multi-year distribution deal with Annapurna Pictures for some international markets and including home entertainment, theatrical and television rights. Later on October 31, 2017, the two companies formed a US distribution joint venture called Mirror Releasing. However, this partnership was not exclusive to all MGM films, as several of them continue to be released through existing studio partners, such as Warner Bros. and Paramount. It also does not include newly relaunched Orion Pictures. On February 5, 2019, Annapurna and MGM rebranded and expanded their US distribution joint venture as United Artists Releasing, marking another revival of the United Artists brand, with the Orion Pictures distribution team and films joining the venture. The decision was made to coincide with the United Artists brand's 100th anniversary.\nFollowing the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse allegations in October 2017, MGM was listed as one of 22 potential buyers interested in acquiring The Weinstein Company. In October 2017, MGM's board renewed Gary Barber's contract as chairman and CEO until December 2022. In February 2018, Chris Brearton, the former media M&amp;A attorney of Latham and Watkins, was appointed as chief operating officer. On March 19, 2018, MGM Holdings announced that Barber had been fired by the studio's board of directors. MGM gave no reason for his firing. For the interim, the company would be led by the newly formed \"Office of the CEO\".\nIn April 2019, MGM signed a two-year, first-look deal for films with Smokehouse Pictures, owned by George Clooney and Grant Heslov. The deal's first film is a yet-to-be-named John DeLorean film based on journalist Alex Pappademas' \"Epic\" magazine article \"Saint John\", written by Keith Bunin and Clooney as director with a possibility of starring.\nIn April 2019, MGM made a multi-film non-exclusive creative partnership with AGBO Films to co-develop, co-produce and co-finance a slate from the MGM library. The deal includes a new film projects joint development fund with the first film under the deal to be a remake of \"The Thomas Crown Affair\".\nMGM agreed to a $100 million co-financing slate deal with Bron Creative in June 2019. The slate consisted of at least nine films including three Orion Pictures films.\nMGM was one of the first studios to delay the films, including \"No Time to Die\", due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This was followed by an April 2020 layoff of 7% of employees.\nA shuffle of top executives occurred in the first four months. Glickman left in January 2020 and was replaced by Michael De Luca as chairman of the motion picture group. A motion picture group president, veteran executive and producer Pamela Abdy, was named in early April. Co-presidents of production Cassidy Lange, Adam Rosenberg left by May 1, 2020.\nIn May 2020, MGM made an investment, facilitated by its television group, in Audio Up podcast production studio, platform and network. Audio Up would also produce 5 podcasts per year for MGM and agreed to an exclusive first look for its works. Later that month, MGM agreed to a two-year film and television first-look development deal with Killer Films.\nIn 2013 and 2015, Starz Entertainment signed exclusive film licensing agreements with MGM for 585 movies and 176 television series. In August 2019, Starz found an MGM-owned film, \"Bill &amp; Ted's Excellent Adventure\", covered by the agreement to be streaming on Amazon Prime Video, and had it pulled. Starz pressed them and MGM admitted in November that 244 films and television series were being shown on other platforms including Epix. MGM indicated that month that the license tracking system was fixed; Starz instead found an additional 100 MGM films on other platforms. With this seeming to diminish their channel's value to cable operators, Starz sued on May 4, 2020, to uncover all contract violations.\nAmazon subsidiary.\nIn December 2020, MGM began to explore a potential sale of the studio, with the COVID-19 pandemic and the domination of streaming platforms due to the closure of movie theaters as contributing factors. The company hired Morgan Stanley and LionTree Advisors to handle the process on behalf of the studio. On May 17, 2021, online retail and technology company Amazon entered negotiations to acquire the studio. The negotiations were made directly with MGM board chairman Kevin Ulrich whose Anchorage Capital Group is a major shareholder. On May 26, 2021, it was officially announced that MGM would be acquired by Amazon for $8.45 billion, subject to regulatory approvals and other routine closing conditions; with the studio continuing to operate as a label under Amazon's existing content arm, complementing Amazon Studios and Amazon Prime Video. On March 15, 2022, Amazon secured an unconditional European Union (EU) antitrust approval for its proposed acquisition of MGM.\nOn February 8, 2022, Paul Thomas Anderson's \"Licorice Pizza\" became the studio's first fully produced, marketed and distributed film to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture in 33 years, after 1988's \"Rain Man\". On March 17, Amazon finalized the merger. Later that day, Amazon Studios and Prime Video SVP Mike Hopkins revealed that Amazon would continue to partner with United Artists Releasing, which would remain in operation to release all future MGM titles theatrically on a \"case-by-case basis,\" while \"all MGM employees will join my organization.\" It was also revealed that Amazon had no plans to make changes to the studio's production slate and release schedules nor make all MGM content exclusive to Prime Video, providing some hope that the studio would operate autonomously from Amazon Studios. These plans are expected to not impact the future of the James Bond franchise and its creative team. Two town halls further detailing MGM's future post-merger took place on March 18, which included one for MGM employees and one for Amazon Studios/Prime Video employees. Both revealed the new interim reporting structure as part of Amazon's \"phased integration plan\", which would involve De Luca, Mark Burnett (Chairman of MGM Worldwide Television) and COO Chris Brearton reporting to Hopkins on behalf of the studio. On March 22, the studio made its first post-merger acquisition with Luca Guadagnino's \"Bones and All\", for which the studio purchased the global distribution rights. On April 27, 2022, it was announced that De Luca and Abdy would leave the studio for Warner Bros. A few months later, in August, it was announced MGM and Warner Bros. had signed a multi-year pact to distribute MGM's titles internationally outside North America, both theatrically in international territories and on home video worldwide, beginning with \"Bones and All\" and \"Creed III\". The deal however excludes the films \"Till\", \"Women Talking\", and MGM's 26th James Bond film, which would be distributed by Universal Pictures, with whom MGM had an international distribution deal earlier. On November 30, 2022, it was announced that Jennifer Salke, head of Amazon Studios, would be given full control of MGM's film and television divisions, with Brearton stepping down as COO to become the Vice President of PVS Corporate Strategy for MGM+ and MGM Alternative Television. On March 4, 2023, it was revealed that Amazon had shut down United Artists Releasing's operations and folded it into MGM, amid the decision to release Amazon Studios' \"Air\" into theaters instead of Prime Video amidst 2024 Oscar buzz. This made \"Creed III\" the first film released and distributed by MGM itself under the new parent company instead of UAR. On March 22, 2023, longtime MGM distribution head Erik Lomis died.\nIn May 2023, Amazon Studios created Amazon MGM Studios Distribution, an international film and television distribution unit for \nboth MGM and Amazon projects. The first MGM films from the new distributor were \"Saltburn\", which premiered at the Telluride Film Festival on August 30, 2023, and \"Sitting in Bars with Cake\", which was released on Prime Video on September 8, 2023. On October 4, 2023, Pablo Iacoviello, Amazon's director of monetization for local originals, announced at the TV forum Iberseries &amp; Platino Industria in Madrid that Amazon Studios would be renamed to Amazon MGM Studios itself to reflect this. On September 17, 2023, Orion Pictures' \"American Fiction\" earned the studio its first win for the People's Choice Award at that year's Toronto International Film Festival. In January 2024, Amazon announced hundreds of layoffs across Amazon MGM Studios, Prime Video and Twitch in order to \"prioritize our investments for the long-term success of our business, while relentlessly focusing on what we know matters most to our customers,\" according to Mike Hopkins.\nIn March 2024, beginning with the Prime Video release of the remake of \"Road House\", the studio kicked off the centennial anniversary celebration of its founding, with a \"100 Years\" logo variant appearing on titles produced by MGM throughout the year. In April 2024, the studio, in collaboration with Fandango at Home, Rotten Tomatoes and iTunes, offered customers a \"100 Essential Movies\" bundle of 100 films from its library as part of their centennial for a limited time. In September 2024, Amazon MGM Studios and Prime Video became the seventh member of the MPA, marking MGM's return to membership for the first time since 2005.\nHeadquarters.\nThe headquarters of Amazon MGM Studios are located in Culver City, California. Previously, MGM's headquarters were located in Beverly Hills, California, where it rented space in a six-story office building. The facility was originally built for the William Morris talent agency, but had remained all but unoccupied because of the agency's merger with Endeavor Talent Agency in April 2009. MGM planned to house a private theater and a private outdoor patio in the building.\n The company's former headquarters on Beverly Drive in Beverly Hills with the MGM sign above the entrance. The MGM headquarters was currently moved to the Culver Studios.\nPrior to 2003, MGM's headquarters were in the Colorado Center in Santa Monica, California, occupying at least . In 2000, it announced it was moving its headquarters to a new building in Century City that was to be the first high-rise in Los Angeles to be completed in the 21st century. When the company agreed to be its lead tenant halfway through the building's design process, it became identified as MGM Tower, planned for a 2003 opening. When MGM moved into the lavishly appointed spaces devised by Alex Yemenidjian, former MGM chairperson and chief executive, Roger Vincent and Claudia Eller observed in the \"Los Angeles Times\" that \"Yemenidjian spared no expense in building out the studio's space with such Las Vegas-style flourishes as towering marble pillars and a grand spiral staircase lined with a wall of awards.\"\nArchitect Scott Johnson designed the bottom third of the tower with extra-large floors so MGM executives could have outdoor decks. No expense seemed to be spared\u2014from imported Italian marble for MGM's offices, to the company's exclusive use of a private garage, security checkpoint, and elevator bank, all to enable visiting celebrities discreet entry and exit. One of the tower's three screening rooms was a 100-seat theater on the ground floor (later taken over by International Creative Management in December 2010). The 14th-floor lobby housed the executive suites and a wall of Oscar statuettes for Academy Award-winning films. The street leading to the building's garage was renamed MGM Drive and a large MGM logo, illuminated at night, crowned the building. As of December 2010, MGM was renting in MGM Tower at a cost of almost $5 per square foot per month.\nEmerging from bankruptcy protection in 2010, MGM announced that it planned to move its headquarters to Beverly Hills as part of an effort to resolve almost $5 billion in debt, since the lease in Century City was not scheduled to expire until 2018. Vincent and Eller said that MGM's per-square-foot monthly rent would be far lower in the Beverly Hills building than in MGM Tower. Larry Kozmont, a real estate consultant not involved in the process, said, \"It's a prudent move for them. Downsizing and relocating to a space that is still prominent but not overly ostentatious and burdened by expenses is fundamental for their survival.\" MGM vacated its namesake tower on August 19, 2011.\nLeo logo and mottos.\nThe studio's official motto, \"Ars Gratia Artis\", is a Latin phrase meaning \"Art for art's sake\". It was chosen by Howard Dietz, the studio's chief publicist. The studio's logo is a roaring lion surrounded by a ring of film inscribed with the studio's motto. The logo, which features Leo the Lion, was created by Dietz in 1916 for Goldwyn Pictures and updated in 1924 for MGM's use. Dietz based the logo on his alma mater's mascot, the Columbia University lion. Originally silent, the sound of Leo the Lion's roar was added to films for the first time in August 1928.\nIn the 1930s and 1940s, the studio billed itself as having \"more stars than there are in heaven\", a reference to the large number of A-list movie stars under its contract. This second motto was also coined by Dietz and was first used in 1932.\nOn March 8, 2021, the studio unveiled a rebrand, centered on the \"Ars Gratia Artis\" motto, across its social media and marketing platforms, including a photorealistic CGI version of its Leo the Lion emblem and logo, also introducing a new print logo for television, digital, and film posters, phasing out the static MGM logo in favor of simply the company's initials, done in the company's longtime typeface. This was to make the studio's name more recognizable when viewed at a small size.\nAs of September 2023, this version of the logo is also being used to represent Amazon MGM Studios at the start of films produced and/or distributed by the parent company without MGM's involvement after retiring their own 2016\u20132023 on-screen logo as a result of their rebrand.\nFilm library.\nTurner Entertainment Co..\nFollowing his brief ownership of the company in 1986, Ted Turner formed Turner Entertainment Co. as a holding company for the pre-May 1986 MGM film and television library and pre-1950 Warner Bros. film library which he retained. For several years after the sale, MGM continued to distribute home video releases of those films under license from Turner, though in 1990 it sold all of its home video distribution rights to Warner Bros. After Turner's holdings were purchased by Time Warner Entertainment in 1996, the rights for the Turner-owned films were reassigned to Warner Home Video in 1999 when MGM ended their distribution deal with Warner Home Video, though Turner Entertainment, as a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Discovery (WBD), remains the credited copyright holder.\nHighest-grossing films.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDistribution.\nDomestically, MGM currently distributes its own films and others it acquires from third parties through Amazon MGM Studios Distribution, as well as films produced by the relaunches of Orion Pictures and American International Pictures, and the 2024 iteration of United Artists. They were previously distributed by United Artists Releasing, the former Mirror Releasing, from 2019 to 2023. Internationally, MGM's films are currently distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing International, following a four-year deal with Warner Bros. Pictures, and prior to that, Universal Pictures. With Universal, they were distributed mostly through United International Pictures (UIP), of which MGM is a former member (see below).\nFrom 1924 to 1973 (worldwide) and 1981 to 2010 (domestically), MGM has theatrically distributed most of its movies entirely in-house, as well as those of United Artists after July 1981 and Orion Pictures after April 1997. In October 2017, seven years after shutting down their major distribution operations, MGM re-entered US theatrical distribution by launching an American joint venture with Annapurna Pictures that would share distribution financing between the two companies and release certain MGM and Annapurna films, beginning with the 2018 remake of \"Death Wish\".\nThere were also periods when MGM outsourced distribution to other companies. From 1973 to 1981, a period when MGM was producing fewer films, United Artists was MGM's distributor in North America while Cinema International Corporation released MGM films overseas. In 1981, United Artists' international arm was combined by CIC to form United International Pictures. MGM's arrangement with that company lasted until 2000, when it made an arrangement with 20th Century Fox for international distribution. From 2005 to 2016, the Columbia TriStar Motion Picture Group (later Sony Pictures Entertainment Motion Picture Group) has distributed certain films. From 2006 to 2010, Alliance Films handled Canadian distribution of some of its products. From 2019 to 2022, Universal Pictures International distributed MGM films overseas.\nMGM also distributed films from Carolco Pictures (1994\u20131995, in North America), Rysher Entertainment (1996\u20131997), and The Weinstein Company/Dimension Films (2006\u20132008, in the United States), as well as currently handling select international distribution of Annapurna Pictures' releases.\nBeginning in 2002, most films were distributed by MGM, at the time new post-merger Compaq Presario models were released by HP instead of Compaq due to the merger that happened in May of that year. From 2006 to September 2008, MGM distributed films produced or acquired by The Weinstein Company (TWC). Weinstein preferred the deal brought carriage on Showtime. Prints and marketing were paid for by TWC, while MGM was paid for booking theaters. With TWC agreeing to a direct deal with Showtime and MGM not intending to renew the distribution deal, TWC and MGM agreed to end the distribution deal three months early in September 2008.\nOther international arrangements.\nIn 2012, MGM signed a deal with Forum Film to release its films in Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Israel; Forum Film has also been known to release some of MGM's films in Czech Republic/Slovakia. That same year, in Denmark, Sweden and Norway, MGM arranged to get its films distributed through AB Svensk Filmindustri, which was renamed to SF Studios in 2016. Also in 2012, it arranged to have its films distributed by FS Film (now SF Film Finland) to release its films in Finland and with ZON Lusomundo (now NOS Audiovisuais) to release its films in Portugal.\nIn 2018, for select films, MGM arranged international distribution with Entertainment One (for the Canadian market), Vertigo Releasing (for the UK market), Rialto Distribution (for the Australian market), Ascot Elite Entertainment Group (for the Swiss market), BF Distribution (for the Argentine market), Dutch FilmWorks (for the Dutch market), Kinepolis Film Distribution (for the Belgian film market), Odeon (for the Greek market), OctoArts Films (for the Filipino market), Universum Film (for the German market), Filmax International (for the Spanish market), Hollywood International Film Exchange/Big Screen Entertainment Group (for the Chinese market), Shaw Organisation (for the Singaporean market), and Showgate (for the Japanese market). Paramount Pictures distributed the 2018 remake of \"Death Wish\" for the French market.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58821", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58821", "title": "Taddeo Zuccari", "text": "Italian painter (1529\u20131566)\nTaddeo Zuccaro (or Zuccari) (1 September 1529\u00a0\u2013 2 September 1566) was an Italian painter, one of the most popular members of the Roman mannerist school.\nBiography.\nZuccaro was born in Sant'Angelo in Vado, near Urbino, the son of Ottaviano Zuccaro, an almost unknown painter. His brother Federico, born around 1540, was also a painter and architect. As a young man Taddeo was to be encouraged by Pompeo da Fano.\nZuccaro moved to Rome by age 14, and mainly trained himself by copying earlier masters. He succeeded at an early age in gaining a knowledge of painting and in finding patrons to employ him.The principal formative influences on him were the fa\u00e7ade decorations of Polidoro da Caravaggio. When he was seventeen a pupil of Correggio, named Daniele da Parma, engaged him to assist in painting a series of frescoes in a chapel at Vitto near Sora, on the borders of the Abruzzi (not corroborated by Freedberg). Zuccaro returned to Rome in 1548, and began his career as a fresco painter, by executing a series of scenes in monochrome from the life of Marcus Furius Camillus on the front of the palace of a wealthy Roman named Jacopo Mattei. From that time his success was assured, and he was largely employed by the popes Julius III and Paul IV, by the della Rovere duke of Urbino, and by other rich patrons. He is documented to have worked alongside Prospero Fontana in decorating the Villa Giulia. In 1556, he painted frescoed \"Scenes of the Passion\" in the \"Cappella Mattei\" of Santa Maria della Consolazione.\nHis best frescoes were a historical series in \"quadro riportato\" painted on the walls and ceiling of Villa Farnese at Caprarola, built for Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, for which Zuccaro also designed a great quantity of rich decorations in stucco relief after the style of Giulio Romano and other pupils of Raphael. He also painted \"Histories of Alexander\" in the Castello Orsini at Bracciano. Nearly all his paintings were large, rapidly executed frescos, often in chiaroscuro or monochrome. \nZuccaro borrowed elements from both the High Renaissance style and Mannerism, combining figures of natural proportion and idealized form with intense emotion. Stylistically, he also displays a Mannerist taste for sculpted physicality characteristic of Michelangelo. Vasari praised his compositional skill and the refined fluidity and vigour of his style, singling out his treatment of heads, hands and nudes.\nZuccaro's easel pictures are less common than his decorative frescoes. A small painting on copper of the \"Adoration of the Shepherds\", formerly in the collection of James II, is now at Hampton Court Palace. The Caprarola frescoes were engraved and published by Prenner, \"Illustri Fatti Farnesiani Coloriti nel Real Palazzo di Caprarola\" (Rome, 1748\u201350).\nAround 1558, he painted a ceiling fresco, \"The Martyrdom of Saint Paul\", in the Frangipani Chapel in San Marcello al Corso in Rome.\nHe died in Rome in 1566, and was buried in the Pantheon, not far from Raphael. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58822", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58822", "title": "Federico Zuccari", "text": "Italian painter\nFederico Zuccaro, also known as Federico Zuccari and Federigo Zucchero (c.\u20091540/1541\u00a0\u2013 July/August 1609), was an Italian painter, draughtsman, architect and writer. He worked in various cities in Italy, as well as in other countries such as Spain, France, the Spanish Netherlands and England. He was an important representative of late Mannerism in Italian art.\nLife and work.\nZuccaro was born in Sant'Angelo in Vado, near Urbino (Marche), then in the Duchy of Urbino. His parents were the painter Ottaviano de Zucharellis, who changed his surname to Zuccaro in 1569, and Antonia Neri. He was the third child of eight. His siblings were called Taddeo, Bartolomea, Federico, Iacopo, Lucio, Maurizio, Aloysio and Marco Antonio.\nIn 1550, when he was barely 11 years old, his parents brought him to Rome to study law but Federico preferred a career in art. He trained and worked in the workshop of his elder brother Taddeo who had become a successful painter in Rome. He became quickly integrated into the team of his brother and assisted with the workshop's commissions. Around 1560 he was able to join a group of artists who worked for pope Pius IV at the Vatican where he made decorations for the Casino in the garden and the cycle with the \"History of Moses\" at the Belvedere which were commenced in 1560. He helped his brother on the fresco decorations at the Villa Farnese at Caprarola. \nHe left his work on this commission to travel to Venice to work for a private Venetian patron, Giovanni Grimani, the patriarch of Aquileia. He made decorations for the Palazzo Grimani di Santa Maria Formosa in Venice and painted frescoes and the altarpiece of the patriarch's chapel in San Francesco della Vigna. During this period in Venice, he met the prominent architect Palladio and the Florentine writer Anton Francesco Doni. They were active in various literary and artistic academies to which they introduced him. He collaborated with Palladio on the design of sets for the theater company Compagnia della Calza degli Accesi and in March 1565 they visited together Cividale del Friuli. He tried unsuccessfully to obtain the commissions for the decoration of the Scuola di San Rocco and the wall with the Paradise fresco in the Doge's Palace. He used his period in Venice to copy works of other masters of the 15th and 16th centuries, including some pages of the precious Grimani Breviary, a manuscript illumination produced by Flemish artists between 1515 and 1520.\nIn 1565, Zuccaro left Venice and traveled to Florence where he had been introduced to some important people by his Florentine friends in Venice. He arrived not long before the elaborate wedding of the Grand Duke of Tuscany Francesco I de' Medici with Joanna of Austria in December 1565. Giorgio Vasari, who was in charge of the organisation of the artistic and decorative preparations for the festive occasion, entrusted him with the painting of some stories in grisaille. These served as decorations of the fake arch and the great drop scene that closed off one of the sides of the Sala dei Cinquecento in the Palazzo Vecchio, where the wedding was to take place. A preparatory sketch in colour depicting hunting scenes near Florence is the only item that survives in relation to his contribution.\nAfter returning to Rome in 1566, he found artistic success with his \"Annunciation\" (lost) in the church of the Jesuits in Piazza del Collegio Romano and frescoes in the Villa d'Este at Tivoli. His brother Taddeo died suddenly, aged 37, on 2 September 1566. He took over all the ongoing commissions of his brother. This kept him busy for many years. He worked extensively on the fresco decorations at the Villa Farnese at Caprarola. In summer 1569, a conflict over payments arose between Zuccaro and Cardinal Farnese. As a result, Federico was sent away from Caprarola where he was replaced by Jacopo Bertoia of Parma. Upset by this event, Federico painted and then made copies of a satirical composition which was inspired by the lost painting of the ancient Greek painter Apelles called the \"Calumny of Apelles\" as described by the ancient author Lucian. In the painting Apelles had expressed his unhappiness with his ignorant patron King Midas. In his painting, Zuccaro depicts King Midas with donkey ears while the painter hero is led away under the protection of the Roman god Mercury. In this painting Zuccaro for the first time expressed his feeling of being misunderstood by an ignorant patron that would accompany him in the remainder of his career. In 1569, with Taddeo's team of assistants dispersed, Federico began to work mostly for the free market.\nOn 22 June 1573, he set out for Paris after accepting to work in the service of Charles, Cardinal of Lorraine, a member of the powerful House of Guise. He arrived in Paris on 24 August 1573. He may have seen Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa when he visited the Palace of Fontainebleau near Paris. From Paris he traveled on 14 August 1574 to Antwerp where he arrived six days later. He visited Brussels, where he prepared a series of cartoons for the tapestry-weavers. On 16 March 1575 he left Antwerp for England, where he stayed until 8 August 1575. In England he received a commission from Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester to portray himself and Queen Elizabeth. Only the preparatory drawings for the two portraits are preserved. The drawings are inscribed with the date \u201c1575\u201d and \u201cin london magio 1575.\u201d He also painted Mary, Queen of Scots, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Francis Walsingham, Lord High Admiral Howard. Upon learning that the Grand Duke Francesco I de' Medici wished to commission him with the completion of the \"Last Judgement\" in the dome of Santa Maria del Fiore in Florence, left unfinished by Giorgio Vasari upon his death in 1574, he immediately decided to return to Italy. On his return trip, he stopped over in Antwerp from 18 to 30 August.\nIn the execution of the \"Last Judgement\" in Florence he only relied in Vasari's general proportional scheme while creating his own original design by changing the manner of representation, technique and style. He painted a portrait of a \"Man with Two Dogs\" in the Pitti Palace (Florence), and the \"Dead Christ and Angels\" in the Galleria Borghese (Rome). In 1585, he accepted an offer by Philip II of Spain to decorate the new Escorial at a yearly salary of 2,000 crowns. He worked at the palace from January 1586 to end of 1588, when he returned to Rome. His paintings (like those of El Greco before him) were not in line with the austere artistic preferences of the king and many were painted over or heavily retouched after he left. However the parting was amicable: \"We must not blame him, but those who sent him to us\", said Philip. He was succeeded by Pellegrino Tibaldi. In Rome, he obtained a charter confirmed by Pope Sixtus V approving the establishment in 1595 of the Accademia di San Luca, of which he was the first president. Bartolomeo Carducci is said to have studied with him.\nIn 1603, he spent time in his birthplace Sant'Angelo in Vado, where he completed the Zuccari altarpiece at the monastery of Santa Caterina. He was in Venice, where he perfected the work in the Great Council room at the Doge Palace (signed, dated \u201c1582 / PERFECIT AN. 1603\u201d and bearing his emblem, a lily sugar loaf). He was given a gold necklace and the title of cavaliere knight as his reward for completing this work. From Venice he travelled to Pavia where, together with Cesare Nebbia, he frescoed the hall of the Collegio Borromeo, a work commissioned by Cardinal Federico Borromeo.\nZuccari travelled from one court to another. The last stages of his journey took him to Emilia and Romagna. Following a brief illness, he died in July or August 1609, in Ancona, in the home of a gentleman with whom he was staying and who arranged for his burial.\nDraughtsman.\nHe was a prolific draughtsman and left a large number of preliminary studies for his paintings. He is the author of one of the most complete illustrations of the Divina Commedia of Dante which he created between 1586 and 1588 during his stay in Spain. The set of 88 sheets was kept by the artist throughout his life and were part of his estate at the time of his death. The sheets are now in the collection of the Uffizi in Florence.\nHe created around in 1595 a series of 20 drawings, which illustrate the early life of his older brother Taddeo, starting with the hardships and disappointments during the period of his training in Rome until his first artistic successes at the age of 18. In addition to 16 scenes depicting Taddeo's life, the series includes four drawings of allegorical Virtues flanking the Zuccaro emblem. The set is kept at the Getty Center.\nArt writer.\nZuccaro also published books on art theory and art history. In his book \"L'idea de' Pittori, Scultori, ed Architetti\" (1607) he sets out a complex theoretical exposition on the idea of design.\nSelected fresco projects.\nThe fresco projects he worked on include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58823", "revid": "46376176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58823", "title": "Francesco Zuccarelli", "text": "Italian painter (1702\u20131788)\nGiacomo Francesco Zuccarelli (commonly known as Francesco Zuccarelli, ; 15 August 1702 \u2013 30 December 1788) was an Italian artist of the late Baroque or Rococo period. He is considered to be the most important landscape painter to have emerged from his adopted city of Venice during the mid-eighteenth century, and his Arcadian views became popular throughout Europe and especially in England where he resided for two extended periods. His patronage extended to the nobility, and he often collaborated with other artists such as Antonio Visentini and Bernardo Bellotto. In 1768, Zuccarelli became a founding member of the Royal Academy of Arts, and upon his final return to Italy, he was elected president of the Venetian Academy. In addition to his rural landscapes which frequently incorporated religious and classical themes, Zuccarelli created devotional pieces and on occasion did portraiture. Besides paintings, his varied output included etchings, drawings, and designs for tapestries as well as a set of Old Testament playing cards.\nDespite the fame he experienced in his lifetime, Zuccarelli's reputation declined in the early 19th century with naturalism becoming increasingly favoured in landscapes. Turner criticized him in mild terms while confessing that his figures could be beautiful, paving the way for more severe Victorian assessments. In 1959, the art historian Michael Levey offered suggestions for why Zuccarelli held such wide contemporary appeal among the English, concluding that his best work is highly decorative. More recently, since the 1990s there has been a renewed focus on Zuccarelli among Italian scholars, who have given him prominence in several books and articles, and his paintings and drawings are regularly shown in exhibitions.\nRome and Tuscany (1702\u201332).\nThe third-youngest of four sons, Giacomo Francesco Zuccarelli was born at Pitigliano, in southern Tuscany, on 15 August 1702. His prosperous father Bartolomeo owned several local vineyards, and also in the northwest not far from Pisa, a shop offering kitchen tools and spices. Around the age of eleven or twelve, Zuccarelli began his apprenticeship in Rome with the portrait painters Giovanni Maria Morandi (1622\u20131717) and his pupil Pietro Nelli (1672\u20131740), under whose tutelage he learned the elements of design while absorbing the lessons of Roman classicism. Zuccarelli completed his first commission in his hometown of Pitigliano in the years 1725\u201327, a pair of chapel altarpieces. With the sponsorship of the Florentine art connoisseur, Niccol\u00f2 Gabburri (1676\u20131742), from 1728 to 1731 he devoted his energies mostly to etching, eventually producing at least 43 prints, the majority consisting of two series which recorded the deteriorating frescoes of Giovanni da San Giovanni (1592\u20131636) and Andrea del Sarto (1486\u20131531). During his five years spent in Florence, though preoccupied with figurative subjects, he began to experiment with drawings in the landscape, as shown by works now preserved in the department of prints and drawings at the Uffizi, including a view of the Tuscan capital. According to Luigi Lanzi, writing in the 1790s, the Roman landscape painter and etcher Paolo Anesi (1697\u20131773) was the key mentor of Zuccarelli in the genre which eventually led to his renown.\nTwenty years in Venice (1732\u201352).\nIn 1732, after a stay of several months in Bologna, Zuccarelli relocated to Venice. Prior to his arrival in the Republic, the death of Marco Ricci in 1730 had created an opening in the field of landscape painting amid a marketplace crowded with history painters. While continuing to paint religious and mythological works, he increasingly devoted his attention to landscapes, drawing inspiration from the classicism of Claude and the Roman school. His early paintings from the 1730s show briefly the influence of Alessandro Magnasco, and for a longer period, of Ricci. Zuccarelli brought a more mellow and airy palette to the typically Venetian colours, and using tonal values of higher luminous content than Ricci, the figures in his idyllic landscapes came to life. An almost immediate success in Venice, he enjoyed early patronage, from amongst others, Johann Matthias von der Schulenburg; Joseph (Consul) Smith, who became his longtime patron; and Francesco Algarotti; who recommended him to Augustus III of Poland. In 1735, Zuccarelli married Giustina Agata Simonetti in the church of Santa Maria Zobenigo in Venice, and they had four daughters, the first two dying as infants, followed by two sons. He attended the baptism of the daughter of the painter Gaspare Diziani in 1743, and he often worked with other artists, including Bernardo Bellotto and Antonio Visentini. Under the auspices of Consul Smith, during the mid\u20131740s he produced with Visentini a series featuring neo-Palladian architecture, as can be seen in \"Burlington House\" (1746). The most interesting of the Zuccarelli and Visentini collaborations was a set of 52 playing cards with Old Testament subjects published in Venice in 1748. The hand-coloured scenes are treated in a light manner; the suits are circles, diamonds, hearts, and jars, each containing a mixture of inscribed emblems; and the cards begin with the creation of Adam and end with a battle scene that has an elephant carrying a castle. The outstanding achievement of his first Venetian period was a series of seven canvases, now located at Windsor Castle, which according to a note in an 18th-century manuscript catalogue, represent the biblical characters of Rebecca with Jacob and Esau. The tall paintings are delicately painted and dream-like, and most likely were originally situated at Consul Smith's villa at Mogliano Veneto. He also occasionally created pastiches of various 17th-century Dutch masters.\nIn the years 1748 to 1751, Zuccarelli made frequent trips to Bergamo, invited by his friend Francesco Maria Tassi. Through Tassi, he met Cesare Femi, a student of the portrait painter Fra Galgario, and under his influence he realized three portraits now held at the Accademia Carrara.\nAround this time, Zuccarelli's paint handling became more responsive to mood, utilizing bright colours that demonstrate a vibrant quality even though thinly laid on. The artist Richard Wilson painted a portrait of Zuccarelli in 1751 at Venice, and Zuccarelli was influential in redirecting Wilson away from portraits and towards landscape painting. During the following year, Zuccarelli discussed the techniques of Italian Renaissance painters with Joshua Reynolds, with Zuccarelli expressing the opinion that Paolo Veronese and Tintoretto painted on gesso grounds, while Titian did not.\nFirst English period (1752\u20131762).\nAccording to Henry Angelo, it was Richard Dalton, the royal librarian, who persuaded Zuccarelli to travel to England. Consul Smith was also likely involved in some way. A splendid canvas of the artist's early English period, signed and dated 1753, depicts a cheerful country festival. The Arcadian style remains his best known, where nature is transfigured into pleasant scenery, representing a platonic golden age, pervaded with beauty and love.\nHis decorative talent resulted in diverse work, including the design of tapestries with the weaver Paul Saunders at Holkham Hall. Based on the tapestry cartoons, Zuccarelli was commissioned in 1758 by Thomas Coke, 1st Earl of Leicester to produce the corresponding paintings of Oriental themes, such as \"Pair with Dromedary\".\nBy November 1757, Zuccarelli had become a member of the Society of Dilettanti. In 1760, he painted the elegiac \"Et in Arcadio Ego\", a work described as an \"admirable picture\" by the poet George Keate. In the same year, Zuccarelli borrowed from Shakespeare, depicting a scene from \"Macbeth\" where Macbeth and Banquo encounter the three witches, noteworthy as being one of the first paintings to portray theatrical characters in a landscape. The impetus of the work may have come from the portrayals of Macbeth by the actor David Garrick, a later acquaintance. Its initial genesis was a pen and ink sketch, followed by paintings on panels and then canvas.\nIn this period, he also produced vedute, a genre new to him, seen for example in \"A View of the River Thames from Richmond Hill looking towards Twickenham\", and the \"View of Vicenza with Ancient Monuments\". Zuccarelli held a sale of his canvases in 1762 at Prestage and Hobbs in London, before his departure for Italy. The pictures listed for sale comprise a heterogeneous lot, including religious scenes, a portrait, the Four Seasons, and an Arabian horse Also in 1762, King George III acquired thirty of his works through the purchase of much of Consul Smith's extensive art collection and library in Venice.\nVenetian interlude (1762\u20131764).\nZuccarelli arrived in Venice in September 1762, and he became a member of the Venetian Academy in 1763. There is only one known painting from this interval, the rather academic \"St. John the Baptist\", a composition required by the academy after gaining admittance. Zuccarelli was induced to journey back to London in 1764 by his friend Algarotti's bequest of a cameo and group of drawings made to Lord Chatham.\nSecond English period (1765\u20131771).\nOn this second visit to England, Zuccarelli was lauded by the English nobility and critics alike, and invited to exhibit at leading art societies. He continued to draw from diverse sources, as indicated by a work in a private collection. The peasant woman breast-feeding her child in a landscape shows the influence of Flemish-Dutch artists, Nordic clothing, and hints of Thomas Gainsborough, a favourite referent of Zuccarelli during the 1760s.\nThe artist contributed works to shows held by the Free Society of Artists in 1765, 1766, and 1782. In 1767, his painting \"Macbeth and the Witches\", probably a third version, was exhibited at The Society of Artists. Shown alongside was the \"Journey of Jacob\". The two paintings had differing compositional styles. While \"Macbeth\" had quick and almost unformed brushstrokes, \"Jacob\" revealed careful attention to detail. \"Macbeth\" later achieved widespread dissemination through a 1770 engraving by William Woollett.\nZuccarelli was a founding member, in 1768, of the Royal Academy of Arts. King George III commissioned the out-sized painting \"River Landscape with the Finding of Moses\" (1768), a privilege granted to no other Italian artist. The painting, impeccable from a formal point of view, clearly shows the influences of Gaspard Dughet as well as Claude Lorrain. In 1769, Zucccarelli exhibited at the inaugural exhibition of the Royal Academy, showing two landscapes and figures; in 1770, three landscapes, a \"St. John Preaching in the Wilderness\", and a \"Holy Family\"; and finally, in 1771, another \"Holy Family\". As a postscript, the \"Finding of Moses\" was shown in 1773, two years after his departure to Italy.\nFinal years in Italy (1771\u201388).\nUpon his return to Venice in 1771, Zuccarelli was received with affection and pride, and in September of that year, the artistic community appointed him director of the Academy of Fine Arts of Venice, followed by president in the following month. Now entering his eighth decade, he departed from his accustomed Arcadian landscapes and adopted an approach more congenial to the current Venetian taste, neoclassical in outlook, harkening back to his youthful emulation of Ricci. A masterpiece of his late maturity, the unusual \"Landscape with Bridge, Figures, and a Statue\", adheres to the model of Francesco Guardi who reinvented capricci by casting them with pre-romantic moods, while at the same time, the composition gently mocks Guardi, by the placement of the statue in the centre of the composition. The painting has many elements common to Zuccarelli, such as a fisherman, waterfall, bridge with animals, traveller, and a peasant, but is done with quick brushstrokes, a technique characteristic of this period, and the atmosphere is one of pathos, recalling his earlier \"Macbeth and the Witches\". Another beautiful canvas, \"Banquet of a Villa\", at which outdoor diners sit at a festive table, is realistic in a manner reminiscent of Pietro Longhi, and the parallel and sloping bands of the landscape are typical of those favoured by English topographical artists. This continued desire to look at fresh approaches, even as he grew old, perhaps helps explain why Zuccarelli showed little interest in his role as president of the ossified Venetian Academy, where he was often absent from sessions. In 1774, without giving notice, and to the consternation of the membership, he departed permanently to Florence.\nIt is apparent that Zuccarelli kept in contact with Great Britain, for in 1775, he was commissioned for a set of four paintings destined for the Scottish residence of Wedderburn Castle, based on engravings of the ruins of Palmyra, first published by Robert Wood in 1753. The small Turkish-style figures standing amidst the classical ruins are in keeping with other oriental scenes of his late maturity, some of which are similar to paintings done by Giovanni Antonio Guardi for Zuccarelli's early patron Marshal Schulenburg in 1746\u20131747. Having been a member of the Florentine Academy of Design since his youth, Zuccarelli was created \"Master of Nudes\" at the academy in 1777, a more prestigious designation than that of a painter of landscapes, then considered a minor art form, in comparison to the traditional elite status given to figure drawing. Zuccarelli continued teaching at the academy until its reorganization in 1784.\nIn his will of 1787, Zuccarelli made his \"beloved wife\" Giustina his sole heir, and one and a half years later, he died in Florence on 30 December 1788. His lengthy obituary, which appeared in the \"Gazzetta Toscana\", described his personality as \"straightforward, humble, grateful, compassionate, generous, uniting these solid virtues in the most courteous tactful manner, with much grace in speaking\", and it also took note that since his youth, he possessed a \"natural genius\" for landscapes.\nReputation and legacy.\nZuccarelli was one of the few Venetian painters of his era to win universal acclaim, even from critics who rejected the concept of Arcadia. He was especially popular among the followers of Rousseau. Francesco Maria Tassi (1716\u20131782), in his \"Lives of the Painters, Sculptors, and Architects of Bergamo\" remarks that Zuccarelli paints \"landscapes with the most charming figures and thus excels not only artists of modern times but rivals the great geniuses of the past; for no one previously knew how to combine the delights of an harmonious ground with figures gracefully posed and represented in the most natural colours\". With the move to more representational modes of depicting landscape in the 19th century, negative criticism began to develop, as described by the art historian Michael Levey in a landmark 1959 article, \"Francesco Zuccarelli in England.\" Turner's view was restrained, saying Zuccarelli's work was \"meretricious\", lacking the charm and grace of Watteau, and yet his figures were \"sometimes beautiful\". Victorian writers, among them partisans of Richard Wilson, sensitive to the neglect of their favourite while the Italian flourished, used adjectives such as theatrical and insincere. Levey contributed to a reevaluation of the artist by explaining the appeal of Zuccarelli to his contemporaries, drawing a parallel with the affection of the 18th century English for pastoral poetry, since everyone could recognize a pleasing convention when they saw one; in this case, a fairyland where \"the skies are forever blue, the trees forever green.\" The exaltation of the rural life as a retreat from the bustle of urbanity had the sanction of a long and distinguished history; for \"Virgil had recommended it, Petrarch had practiced it; Zuccarelli was left to illustrate it\"; and in Levey's continuation, \"at its best\u2014in comparison to an age he never saw\u2014Zuccarelli's work is highly decorative and still capable of giving pleasure\". While sparsely treated in Italy for much of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the painter never fell into disfavour there as in England. The last few decades have seen a resurgence of interest in Zuccarelli by Italian scholars, notably by Federico Dal Forno, who published an artistic biography with sixty paintings in 1994, and Federica Spadotto, who issued a catalogue raisonn\u00e9 in 2007. In a larger cultural context, modern historians have considered him to be a figure of interest because of his love of escapism, seen as not untypical of the late Baroque.\nDuring the mid to late 18th century Zuccarelli was widely imitated, and artists influenced by him included Richard Wilson, Giuseppe Zais, Giovanni Battista Cimaroli, and Vittorio Amedeo Cignaroli. Among those who created engravings after his work were Joseph Wagner, Fabio Berardi, Giovanni Volpato, Francesco Bartolozzi, and William Woollett.\nThe \"Francesco Zuccarelli Municipal Library and Historical Archives\" is located in the Fortezza Orsini Cultural Centre, in Pitigliano, Italy, the town of the artist's childhood. Also in the vicinity, the Museum of the Orsini Palace has on permanent exhibit Zuccarelli's earliest commissioned altarpieces.\nIdentification.\nHis paintings are rarely signed, yet they often contain a gourd water bottle that was held at the waist by rural Italian women, a punning allusion to his surname, \"zucco\" being the Italian word for gourd. A defining touch found consistently across the long span of Zuccarelli's career is a serene and vaguely sweet expression on the faces of his rounded figures.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58824", "revid": "1290181326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58824", "title": "Corporate raid", "text": "Business concept\nIn business, a corporate raid is the process of buying a large stake in a corporation and then using shareholder voting rights to require the company to undertake novel measures designed to increase the share value, generally in opposition to the desires and practices of the corporation's current management. The measures might include replacing top executives, downsizing operations, or liquidating the company.\nCorporate raids were particularly common between the 1970s and the 1990s in the United States. By the end of the 1980s, management of many large publicly traded corporations had adopted legal countermeasures designed to thwart potential hostile takeovers and corporate raids, including poison pills, golden parachutes, and increases in debt levels on the company's balance sheet. In later years, some corporate raiding practices have been used by \"activist shareholders\", who purchase equity stakes in a corporation to influence its board of directors and put public pressure on its management.\nHistory.\nCorporate raids became a hallmark of investors in the 1970s and 1980s, particularly highlighted by the public suicide of Eli Black. Among the most notable corporate raiders of the 1970s and 1980s were Louis Wolfson, Carl Icahn, Victor Posner, Meshulam Riklis, Nelson Peltz, Robert M. Bass, T. Boone Pickens, Paul Bilzerian, Harold Clark Simmons, Kirk Kerkorian, James Goldsmith, Saul Steinberg and Asher Edelman. These investors used a number of the same tactics and targeted the same type of companies as more traditional leveraged buyouts and in many ways could be considered a forerunner of the later private equity firms. In fact it is Posner, one of the first \"corporate raiders,\" who is often credited with coining the term \"leveraged buyout\" or \"LBO\".\nVictor Posner, who had made a fortune in real estate investments in the 1930s and 1940s, acquired a major stake in DWG Corporation in 1966. Having gained control of the company, he used it as an investment vehicle that could execute takeovers of other companies. Posner and DWG are perhaps best known for the hostile takeover of Sharon Steel Corporation in 1969, one of the earliest such takeovers in the United States. Posner's investments were typically motivated by attractive valuations, balance sheets and cash flow characteristics. Because of its high debt load, Posner's DWG generated attractive but highly volatile returns and ultimately landed in financial difficulty. In 1987, Sharon Steel entered Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.\nCarl Icahn developed a reputation as a ruthless \"corporate raider\" after his hostile takeover of TWA in 1985. The result of that takeover was Icahn systematically selling TWA's assets to repay the debt he used to purchase the company, which was described as \"asset stripping\".\nIcahn also attempted the grand prize of U.S. Steel, launching a hostile takeover for 89% of the industrial giant for $7 billion ($ billion today) in late 1986, which was rebuffed finally by CEO David Roderick on January 8, 1987.\nT. Boone Pickens' hostile takeover bid of Gulf Oil in 1984 led to shock that such a large company could be raided. Gulf eventually sold out to Chevron for a then-record $13.3 billion ($ billion today) \"white knight\" buyout.\nPaul Bilzerian launched a number of takeover bids including Cluett Peabody &amp; Company, Hammermill Paper Company, Pay n Pack Stores, Allied Stores and the Singer Corporation. All of his takeover bids were for all cash and for all shares and he refused any greenmail. Bilzerian was indicted for Schedule13(d) disclosure violations and despite his claims of innocence he was convicted in 1989. After spending thirty years fighting the government in his attempt to overturn his conviction, he renounced his US citizenship in 2019.\nBritish raider Beazer also launched several successful hostile takeovers in the 1980s, the largest being that of Koppers in early 1988 for $1.81 billion ($ billion today).\nMany of the corporate raiders of the 1980s were onetime clients of Michael Milken, whose investment banking firm, Drexel Burnham Lambert helped raise blind pools of capital which corporate raiders could use to make legitimate attempts to take over companies and provide high-yield debt financing of the buyouts.\nRonald Perelman and Revlon.\nDrexel Burnham raised a $100 million blind pool in 1984 for Nelson Peltz and his holding company Triangle Industries (later Triarc) to give credibility for takeovers, representing the first major blind pool raised for this purpose. Two years later, in 1986, Wickes Companies, a holding company run by Sanford Sigoloff, would raise a $1.2 billion blind pool. In later years, Milken and Drexel would shy away from certain of the more \"notorious\" corporate raiders as the firm and the private equity industry attempted to move upscale.\nIn 1985, Milken raised $750 million for a similar blind pool for Ronald Perelman, which would ultimately prove instrumental in acquiring his biggest target: The Revlon Corporation. In 1980, Ronald Perelman, the son of a wealthy Philadelphia businessman, and future \"corporate raider\", having made several small but successful buyouts, acquired MacAndrews &amp; Forbes, a distributor of licorice extract and chocolate, which Perelman's father had tried and failed to acquire 10 years earlier. Perelman would ultimately divest the company's core business and use MacAndrews &amp; Forbes as a holding company investment vehicle for subsequent leveraged buyouts including Technicolor, Inc., Pantry Pride and Revlon. Using the Pantry Pride subsidiary of his holding company, MacAndrews &amp; Forbes Holdings, Perelman's overtures were rebuffed. Repeatedly rejected by the company's board and management, Perelman continued to press forward with a hostile takeover, raising his offer from an initial bid of $47.50 per share until it reached $53.00 per share. After Revlon received a higher offer from a white knight, private equity firm Forstmann Little &amp; Company, Perelman's Pantry Pride finally was able to make a successful bid for Revlon, valuing the company at $2.7 billion. The buyout would prove troubling, burdened by a heavy debt load. Under Perelman's control, Revlon sold 4 divisions: two were sold for $1 billion, its vision care division was sold for $574 million, and its National Health Laboratories division was spun out to the public market in 1988. Revlon also made acquisitions including Max Factor in 1987 and Betrix in 1989, later selling them to Procter &amp; Gamble in 1991. Perelman exited the bulk of his holdings in Revlon through an IPO in 1996 and subsequent sales of stock. As of December 31, 2007, Perelman still retains a minority ownership interest in Revlon. The Revlon takeover, because of its well-known brand, was profiled widely by the media and brought new attention to the emerging boom in leveraged buyout activity. Litigation associated with the takeover has also become standard reading for introductory business organization classes in most law schools, introducing what have come to be known as \"Revlon duties\" for boards of companies that are up for auction.\nDecline of the corporate raiders.\nIn the late 1980s several famous corporate raiders suffered from bad investments financed by large amounts of leverage, ultimately losing money for their investors. Additionally, with the fall of Michael Milken and the subsequent collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert, the credit lines for these investors dried up. By the end of the decade, management of many large publicly traded corporations reacted negatively to the threat of potential hostile takeover or corporate raid and pursued drastic defensive measures including poison pills, golden parachutes and increasing debt levels on the company's balance sheet. Finally, in the 1990s the overall price of the American stock market increased, which reduced the number of situations in which a company's share price was low with respect to the assets that it controlled. By the end of the 1990s, the corporate raider moniker was used less frequently as private equity firms pursued different tactics than their predecessors. In later years, many of the corporate raiders would be re-characterized as \"activist shareholders\", such as Carl Icahn during his 2008 profile on CBS's \"60 Minutes\".\nMedia reflections of corporate raiders.\nAlthough private equity rarely received a thorough treatment in popular culture, several films have prominently featured corporate raiders. Among the most notable examples are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58825", "revid": "32860082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58825", "title": "Zschopau", "text": "Zschopau (), is a town in the Erzgebirgskreis district of Saxony, Germany.\nThe town grew around the castle, which was built in the mid-12th century to protect the Salt Road, which crossed the Zschopau River here. Mining was also practiced from the 14th century onward, and in 1493, Zschopau was granted the privileges of a \"Freie Bergstadt\" However, its importance always lagged behind the major mining towns in the Ore Mountains.\nThe development of crafts and trades was favored by the trade route; in 1451, Zschopau was granted market rights and in 1466, brewing rights. The first guilds of weavers and calico printers were founded as early as 1529. Later, textile factories and spinning mills developed, which favored Zschopau's early transformation into an industrial city at the beginning of the 19th century.\nMotorcycles have been built in Zschopau since 1922. The world's first motorcycle assembly line was located here in 1926, and the \"Zschopauer Motorenwerke\", with its DKW brand, was the world's largest motorcycle factory for the first time, with a production of around 60,000 units in 1928. Even during the GDR era, the motorcycle factory was one of the world's largest motorcycle producers in terms of production volume.\nGeography.\nThe town is located on the northwestern slopes of the Ore Mountains, on both banks of the Zschopau River, about south-east from Chemnitz. The highest point is Mt. Pilzh\u00fcbel with an elevation of . The municipal area comprises the village of Krumhermersdorf, incorporated in 1999. Since German reunification, Zschopau has lost about one fourth of its population.\nZschopau has a handsome parish church dedicated to St Martin, a town hall and a castle (Schloss Wildeck), whose construction started in the twelfth century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "58826", "revid": "28032115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58826", "title": "Merger", "text": ""}
{"id": "58827", "revid": "14548726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58827", "title": "Heinrich Zschokke", "text": "German-Swiss author and reformer (1771\u20131848)\nJohann Heinrich Daniel Zschokke (22 March 1771\u00a0\u2013 27 June 1848) was a German, later Swiss, author and reformer. Most of his life was spent, and most of his reputation earned, in Switzerland. He had an extensive civil service career, and wrote histories, fiction and other works which were widely known.\nBiography.\nYouth and early career in Prussia.\nBorn in Magdeburg, Prussia, he was educated at the monasterial () school and at the Altst\u00e4dter Gymnasium there. He ran away from school at 17, and spent some time as playwright with a company of traveling actors. Later, he studied philosophy, theology and history at the University of Frankfurt (Oder), where in 1792 he established himself as a privatdozent (associate professor or lecturer).\nWhile a privatdozent, Zschokke created a sensation by publishing the extravagant novel, (Abaellino, the great bandit, 1793; subsequently also dramatized), modelled on Schiller's , and the melodramatic tragedy (1796).\nMove to Switzerland.\nThe Prussian government declined to make him a full professor, and in 1796 Zschokke settled in Switzerland, where he ran an educational institution in the castle of Reichenau. The authorities of Graub\u00fcnden granted him citizenship, and in 1798 he published his . The political disturbances of this year compelled him to close his institution.\nCivil service.\nHe was, however, sent as a deputy to Aarau, where he was appointed president of the educational department. Soon afterward, the Helvetic executive directory sent him as government commissioner to Unterwalden for the purpose of restoring tranquility. His authority was ultimately extended over the cantons of Uri, Schwyz and Zug. Zschokke distinguished himself by the vigour of his administration and by the enthusiasm with which he devoted himself to the interests of the poorer classes of the community. In 1800, he reorganized the institutions of the Italian cantons and was appointed lieutenant-governor of the canton of Basel.\nZschokke retired from public life when the central government at Bern proposed to re-establish the federal system, but after the changes effected by Napoleon he entered the service of the canton of Aargau, with which he remained connected.\nWritings.\nWhile Zschokke appeared as one of the most distinguished and energetic public men in Switzerland, he still found time to cultivate his favorite literary pursuits, and it is chiefly by his numerous writings, historical and fictitious, that he became known to the world at large. In 1801, he attracted attention by his . Through his popular (Swiss Messenger), the publication of which began in 1804, he exercised a wholesome influence on public affairs; and the like may be said of his , issued from 1807 to 1813. In 1811 he also started a monthly periodical, the . In addition to his 1801 work, he wrote various other historical works, among which are (Contributions to the history of our time, 1811\u201327) and (History of Switzerland for the Swiss people, 1822, 8th ed. 1849).\nZschokke's tales, on which his literary reputation rests, are collected in several series, (Pictures from Switzerland, 5 vols., 1824\u201325), (16 vols., 1838\u201339). The best known are:\n (1794), (1794), (1802), , , (1830), (The goldmakers' village, 1817), and (1845).\nIn (Hours of devotion, 1809\u20131816; 27 editions in Zschokke's lifetime), which was widely read, he expounded in a rationalistic spirit the fundamental principles of religion and morality. (1842) is a kind of autobiography.\nAccording to the 1911 \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", \"Zschokke was not a great original writer, but he secured an eminent place in the literature of his time by his enthusiasm for modern ideas in politics and religion, by the sound, practical judgment displayed in his works, and by the energy and lucidity of his style.\"\nAn edition of Zschokke's selected works, in forty volumes, was issued in 1824\u201328. In 1851\u201354 an edition in thirty-five volumes was published. A new edition of the was published by A. V\u00f6gtlin in twelve volumes (1904).\nLater life.\nIn his later years, Zschokke traveled regularly to \u00dcberlingen am Bodensee to enjoy the waters at the city's spa; he died at his country house of Blumenhalde on the Aar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nIn addition to Wernly's work, there are biographies of Zschokke by E. M\u00fcnch (1831), Emil Zschokke (3rd ed. 1876), and R. Sauerl\u00e4nder (Aarau, 1884)."}
{"id": "58828", "revid": "2175", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58828", "title": "Market cap", "text": ""}
{"id": "58829", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58829", "title": "Market capitalization", "text": "Total value of a public company's outstanding shares\nMarket capitalization, sometimes referred to as market cap, is the total value of a publicly traded company's outstanding common shares owned by stockholders. \nMarket capitalization is equal to the market price per common share multiplied by the number of common shares outstanding.\nDescription.\nMarket capitalization is sometimes used to rank the size of companies. It measures only the equity component of a company's capital structure, and does not reflect management's decision as to how much debt (or leverage) is used to finance the firm. A more comprehensive measure of a firm's size is enterprise value (EV), which gives effect to outstanding debt, preferred stock, and other factors. For insurance firms, a value called the embedded value (EV) has been used.\nIt is also used in ranking the relative size of stock exchanges, being a measure of the sum of the market capitalizations of all companies listed on each stock exchange. The total capitalization of stock markets or economic regions may be compared with other economic indicators (e.g. the Buffett indicator). The approximate total market capitalization of all publicly traded companies was:\nHistorical estimates of world market cap.\nTotal market capitalization of all publicly traded companies in the world from 1975 to 2020.\nCalculation.\nMarket cap is given by the formula formula_1, where \"MC\" is the market capitalization, \"N\" is the number of common shares outstanding, and \"P\" is the market price per common share.\nFor example, if a company has 4 million common shares outstanding and the closing price per share is $20, its market capitalization is then $80 million. If the closing price per share rises to $21, the market cap becomes $84 million. If it drops to $19 per share, the market cap falls to $76 million. This is in contrast to mercantile pricing where purchase price, average price and sale price may differ due to transaction costs.\nNot all of the outstanding shares trade on the open market. The number of shares trading on the open market is called the float. It is equal to or less than \"N\" because \"N\" includes shares that are restricted from trading. The free-float market cap uses just the floating number of shares in the calculation, generally resulting in a smaller number.\nMarket cap terms.\nTraditionally, companies were divided into large-cap, mid-cap, and small-cap. The terms mega-cap and micro-cap have since come into common use, and nano-cap is sometimes heard. Large caps have a slow growth rate as compared to small caps. Different numbers are used by different indexes; there is no official definition of, or full consensus agreement about, the exact cutoff values. The cutoffs may be defined as percentiles rather than in nominal dollars. The definitions expressed in nominal dollars need to be adjusted over decades due to inflation, population change, and overall market valuation (for example, $1 billion was a large market cap in 1950, but it is not very large now), and market caps are likely to be different country to country.\nIn the United States.\nFINRA's investor education materials state that the following is a typical (not official) categorization of stocks by market capitalization:\nThe U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission notes that \"nano-cap\" stocks, in cases when they're separated from micro-caps, are typically defined as stocks with a market capitalization less than $50\u00a0million (as of 2013); which is equivalent to less than $ million in 2024.\nS&amp;P Dow Jones Indices defines 3 major US indices segmented by market capitalization. The components of these indices are selected by committee, but in order to be eligible, among other requirements, a stock's market capitalization at the time of addition must be within the respective range in the following table:\nThese market cap eligibility criteria are only for addition to these indices, not for continued membership in an index. As a result, an S&amp;P index constituent that appears to violate criteria for addition to that index is not removed unless ongoing conditions warrant an index change.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58830", "revid": "2313206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58830", "title": "G-8", "text": ""}
{"id": "58834", "revid": "39619725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58834", "title": "Leveraged buyout", "text": "Acquisition of a company using a significant proportion of borrowed money\nA leveraged buyout (LBO) is the acquisition of a company using a significant proportion of borrowed money (leverage) to fund the acquisition with the remainder of the purchase price funded with private equity. The assets of the acquired company are often used as collateral for the financing, along with any equity contributed by the acquiror.\nWhile corporate acquisitions often employ leverage to finance the purchase of the target, the term \"leveraged buyout\" is typically only employed when the acquiror is a financial sponsor (a private equity investment firm).\nThe use of debt, which normally has a lower cost of capital than equity, serves to reduce the overall cost of financing for the acquisition and enhance returns for the private equity investor. The equity investor can increase their projected returns by employing more leverage, creating incentives to maximize the proportion of debt relative to equity (i.e., debt-to-equity ratio). While the lenders have an incentive to limit the amount of leverage they will provide, in certain cases the acquired company may be \"overleveraged\", meaning that the amount of leverage assumed by the target company was too high for the cash flows generated by the company to service the debt. As a result, the increased use of leverage increases the risk of default should the company perform poorly after the buyout. Since the early 2000s, the debt-to-equity ratio in leveraged buyouts has declined significantly, resulting in increased focus on operational improvements and follow-on M&amp;A activity to generate attractive returns.\nCharacteristics.\nA leveraged buyout is characterized by the extensive use of debt financing to acquire a company. This financing structure enables private equity firms and financial sponsors to control businesses while investing a relatively small portion of their own equity. The acquired company\u2019s assets and future cash flows serve as collateral for the debt, making lenders more willing to provide financing.\nWhile different firms pursue different strategies, there are some characteristics that hold true across many types of leveraged buyouts:\nDebt volumes of up to 100% of a purchase price have been provided to companies with very stable and secured cash flows, such as real estate portfolios with rental income secured by long-term rental agreements. Typically, debt of 40\u201360% of the purchase price may be offered. Debt ratios vary significantly among regions and target industries.\nDebt for an acquisition comes in two types: senior and junior. Senior debt is secured with the target company's assets and has lower interest rates. Junior debt has no security interests and higher interest rates. In big purchases, debt and equity can come from more than one party. Banks can also syndicate debt, meaning they sell pieces of the debt to other banks. Seller notes (or vendor loans) can also happen when the seller uses part of the sale to give the purchaser a loan. In LBOs, the only collateral is the company's assets and cash flows. The financial sponsor can treat their investment as common equity, preferred equity, or other securities. Preferred equity pays dividends and has priority over common equity.\nIn addition to the amount of debt that can be used to fund leveraged buyouts, it is also important to understand the types of companies that private equity firms look for when considering leveraged buyouts.\nAnother key benefit to the equity investor in a leveraged buyout is the tax deductibility of interest payments on the acquisition financing which can offset the company's earnings and reduce the corporate income tax. Of course, the interest income on the interest payments are taxed at ordinary income rates rather than capital gains rates so while the allocation of taxes is shifted from the borrower to the lender, the total income tax generated from the company's earnings is often higher than it would be if less leverage were used.\nManagement buyouts.\nA \"management buyout\" (MBO) is a form of buyout in which the incumbent management team acquires a sizeable portion of the shares of the company. Similar to an MBO is an MBI (Management Buy In) in which an external management team acquires the shares.\nManagement buyouts are usually an indication of a high degree of conviction by management in the future prospects of the business relative to the existing ownership. Often, management is able to secure the company outside of an auction process allowing the management team to acquire the company on favorable terms. In many cases the management may still require additional equity from a financial sponsor, which may also be actively involved in securing the financing for the acquisition. Financial sponsors often find MBOs to be attractive situations as they have the opportunity to align itself with an insider who may have unique perspectives on the company and potential areas of operational improvement.\nSecondary buyouts.\nA secondary buyout is the leveraged buyout of a company already owned by a private equity sponsor. A secondary buyout will often provide a realization event for the selling private equity owner(s) and its limited partner investors. Historically, given that private equity firms were extolling their unique ability to source attractive investments and drive value through a leveraged buyout, secondary buyouts were perceived as less attractive than the \"primary buyout\" of a private company or a \"take-private\" of a public company and were disdained by investors. Over time, it has been difficult to distinguish a differential investment returns based on the prior owner of the company and secondary buyouts have become a common part of the private equity ecosystem typically representing 25% to 35% of all leverage buyouts.\nFor sellers, secondary buyouts have led to faster realizations than an initial public offering which often takes months to prepare and requires years after the IPO to realize the remaining public shares. Similarly the sale to another private equity sponsor may be less complex than the sale to a strategic corporate acquiror which could face regulatory scrutiny or challenges financing the purchase.\nSecondary buyouts differ from secondaries which typically involve the acquisition of portfolios of private equity assets including limited partnership stakes and direct investments in corporate securities. More recently GP-led Secondaries, in which a private equity sponsor creates a \"continuation fund\" to acquire a company from one of its own funds has brought together elements of secondary buyouts and management buyouts.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe first leveraged buyout may have been the purchase by McLean Industries, Inc. of Pan-Atlantic Steamship Company in January 1955 and Waterman Steamship Corporation in May 1955. Under the terms of that transaction, McLean borrowed $42 million and raised an additional $7 million through an issue of preferred stock. When the deal closed, $20 million of Waterman cash and assets were used to retire $20 million of the loan debt.\nLewis Cullman's acquisition of Orkin Exterminating Company in 1964 is among the first significant leveraged buyout transactions. Similar to the approach employed in the McLean transaction, the use of publicly traded holding companies as investment vehicles to acquire portfolios of investments in corporate assets was a relatively new trend in the 1960s, popularized by the likes of Warren Buffett (Berkshire Hathaway) and Victor Posner (DWG Corporation), and later adopted by Nelson Peltz (Triarc), Saul Steinberg (Reliance Insurance) and Gerry Schwartz (Onex Corporation). These investment vehicles would utilize a number of the same tactics and target the same type of companies as more traditional leveraged buyouts and in many ways could be considered a forerunner of the later private-equity firms. In fact, it is Posner who is often credited with coining the term \"leveraged buyout\" or \"LBO.\"\nThe leveraged buyout boom of the 1980s was conceived in the 1960s by a number of corporate financiers, most notably Jerome Kohlberg, Jr. and later his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Henry Kravis. Working for Bear Stearns at the time, Kohlberg and Kravis, along with Kravis' cousin George Roberts, began a series of what they described as \"bootstrap\" investments. Many of the target companies lacked a viable or attractive exit for their founders, as they were too small to be taken public and the founders were reluctant to sell out to competitors: thus, a sale to an outside buyer might prove attractive. In the following years, the three Bear Stearns bankers would complete a series of buyouts including Stern Metals (1965), Incom (a division of Rockwood International, 1971), Cobblers Industries (1971), and Boren Clay (1973) as well as Thompson Wire, Eagle Motors and Barrows through their investment in Stern Metals. By 1976, tensions had built up between Bear Stearns and Kohlberg, Kravis and Roberts leading to their departure and the formation of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in that year.\n1980s.\nIn January 1982, former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon and a group of investors acquired Gibson Greetings, a producer of greeting cards, for $80 million, of which only $1 million was rumored to have been contributed by the investors. By mid-1983, just sixteen months after the original deal, Gibson completed a $290 million IPO and Simon made approximately $66 million. The success of the Gibson Greetings investment attracted the attention of the wider media to the nascent boom in leveraged buyouts. Between 1980 and 1990, there were 180 leveraged buyouts involving firms with an aggregate book value of $39.2 billion.\nIn the summer of 1984 the LBO was a target for virulent criticism by Paul Volcker, then chairman of the Federal Reserve, by John S.R. Shad, chairman of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and other senior financiers. The gist of all the denunciations was that top-heavy reversed pyramids of debt were being created and that they would soon crash, destroying assets and jobs.\nDuring the 1980s, constituencies within acquired companies and the media ascribed the \"corporate raid\" label to many private equity investments, particularly those that featured a hostile takeover of the company, perceived asset stripping, major layoffs or other significant corporate restructuring activities. Among the most notable investors to be labeled corporate raiders in the 1980s included Carl Icahn, Victor Posner, Nelson Peltz, Robert M. Bass, T. Boone Pickens, Harold Clark Simmons, Kirk Kerkorian, Sir James Goldsmith, Saul Steinberg and Asher Edelman. Carl Icahn developed a reputation as a ruthless corporate raider after his hostile takeover of TWA in 1985. Many of the corporate raiders were onetime clients of Michael Milken, whose investment banking firm, Drexel Burnham Lambert helped raise blind pools of capital with which corporate raiders could make a legitimate attempt to take over a company and provided high-yield debt financing of the buyouts.\nOne of the final major buyouts of the 1980s proved to be its most ambitious and marked both a high-water mark and a sign of the beginning of the end of the boom that had begun nearly a decade earlier. In 1989, KKR closed in on a $31.1 billion takeover of RJR Nabisco. It was, at that time and for over 17 years following, the largest leveraged buyout in history. The event was chronicled in the book (and later the movie) \"\". KKR would eventually prevail in acquiring RJR Nabisco at $109 per share, marking a dramatic increase from the original announcement that Shearson Lehman Hutton would take RJR Nabisco private at $75 per share. A fierce series of negotiations and horse-trading ensued which pitted KKR against Shearson Lehman Hutton and later Forstmann Little &amp; Co. Many of the major banking players of the day, including Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Salomon Brothers, and Merrill Lynch were actively involved in advising and financing the parties. After Shearson Lehman's original bid, KKR quickly introduced a tender offer to obtain RJR Nabisco for $90 per share \u2013 a price that enabled it to proceed without the approval of RJR Nabisco's management. RJR's management team, working with Shearson Lehman and Salomon Brothers, submitted a bid of $112, a figure they felt certain would enable them to outflank any response by Kravis's team. KKR's final bid of $109, while a lower dollar figure, was ultimately accepted by the board of directors of RJR Nabisco. At $31.1 billion of transaction value, RJR Nabisco was the largest leveraged buyout in history until the 2007 buyout of TXU Energy by KKR and Texas Pacific Group. In 2006 and 2007, a number of leveraged buyout transactions were completed that for the first time surpassed the RJR Nabisco leveraged buyout in terms of nominal purchase price. However, adjusted for inflation, none of the leveraged buyouts of the 2006\u20132007 period surpassed RJR Nabisco.\nBy the end of the 1980s the excesses of the buyout market were beginning to show, with the bankruptcy of several large buyouts including Robert Campeau's 1988 buyout of Federated Department Stores, the 1986 buyout of the Revco drug stores, Walter Industries, FEB Trucking and Eaton Leonard. Additionally, the RJR Nabisco deal was showing signs of strain, leading to a recapitalization in 1990 that involved the contribution of $1.7 billion of new equity from KKR.\nDrexel Burnham Lambert was the investment bank most responsible for the boom in private equity during the 1980s due to its leadership in the issuance of high-yield debt. Drexel reached an agreement with the government in which it pleaded \"nolo contendere\" (no contest) to six felonies \u2013 three counts of stock parking and three counts of stock manipulation. It also agreed to pay a fine of $650 million \u2013 at the time, the largest fine ever levied under securities laws. Milken left the firm after his own indictment in March 1989. On February 13, 1990, after being advised by United States Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the New York Stock Exchange, and the Federal Reserve, Drexel Burnham Lambert officially filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.\nAge of the mega-buyout.\nThe combination of decreasing interest rates, loosening lending standards, and regulatory changes for publicly traded companies (specifically the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act) would set the stage for the largest boom the private equity industry had seen. Marked by the buyout of Dex Media in 2002, large multibillion-dollar U.S. buyouts could once again obtain significant high yield debt financing from various banks and larger transactions could be completed. By 2004 and 2005, major buyouts were once again becoming common, including the acquisitions of Toys \"R\" Us, The Hertz Corporation, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and SunGard in 2005.\nAs 2005 ended and 2006 began, new \"largest buyout\" records were set and surpassed several times with nine of the top ten buyouts at the end of 2007 having been announced in an 18-month window from the beginning of 2006 through the middle of 2007. In 2006, private-equity firms bought 654 U.S. companies for $375 billion, representing 18 times the level of transactions closed in 2003. Additionally, U.S.-based private-equity firms raised $215.4 billion in investor commitments to 322 funds, surpassing the previous record set in 2000 by 22% and 33% higher than the 2005 fundraising total. The following year, despite the onset of turmoil in the credit markets in the summer, saw yet another record year of fundraising with $302 billion of investor commitments to 415 funds. Among the mega-buyouts completed during the 2006 to 2007 boom were: EQ Office, HCA, Alliance Boots and TXU.\nIn July 2007, turmoil that had been affecting the mortgage markets spilled over into the leveraged finance and high-yield debt markets. The markets had been highly robust during the first six months of 2007, with highly issuer friendly developments including PIK and PIK Toggle (interest is \"\"P\"ayable \"I\"n \"K\"ind\") and covenant light debt widely available to finance large leveraged buyouts. July and August saw a notable slowdown in issuance levels in the high yield and leveraged loan markets with only few issuers accessing the market. Uncertain market conditions led to a significant widening of yield spreads, which coupled with the typical summer slowdown led many companies and investment banks to put their plans to issue debt on hold until the autumn. However, the expected rebound in the market after Labor Day 2007 did not materialize and the lack of market confidence prevented deals from pricing. By the end of September, the full extent of the credit situation became obvious as major lenders including Citigroup and UBS AG announced major writedowns due to credit losses. The leveraged finance markets came to a near standstill. As 2007 ended and 2008 began, it was clear that lending standards had tightened and the era of \"mega-buyouts\" had come to an end. Nevertheless, private equity continues to be a large and active asset class and the private-equity firms, with hundreds of billions of dollars of committed capital from investors are looking to deploy capital in new and different transactions.\nIn September 2025, Electronic Arts announced it was being taken private for $55bn, the biggest leveraged buyout in history. The consortium of buyers include Saudi Arabia's Public Investment Fund (PIF), Silver Lake, and Jared Kushner's Affinity Partners.\nFailures.\nAs with all companies, a proportion of companies acquired in leveraged buyouts will experience financial challenges and given the higher debt-to-equity ratio of LBO targets, these financial challenges can result in default.\nEspecially in the leveraged buyouts of the 1980s in which debt-to-equity ratios often exceeded 9 to 1, defaults occurred at notable levels. Robert Campeau's 1988 buyout of Federated Department Stores and the 1986 buyout of the Revco drug stores were well documented failures that resulted in bankruptcy. The failure of the Federated buyout was a result of excessive debt financing, comprising about 97% of the total consideration, which led to large interest payments that exceeded the company's operating cash flow. Many LBOs of the boom period 2005\u20132007 were also financed with too high a debt burden, however default rates were significantly below the expectations of market observers given the proximate onset of the 2008 financial crisis.\nThe inability to repay debt in an LBO can be caused by initial overpricing of the target firm and/or its assets. Over-optimistic forecasts of the revenues of the target company may also lead to financial distress after acquisition. Some courts have found that in certain situations, LBO debt constitutes a fraudulent transfer under U.S. insolvency law if it is determined to be the cause of the acquired firm's failure. The outcome of litigation attacking a leveraged buyout as a fraudulent transfer will generally turn on the financial condition of the target at the time of the transaction \u2013 that is, whether the risk of failure was substantial and known at the time of the LBO, or whether subsequent unforeseeable events led to the failure. The analysis historically depended on \"dueling\" expert witnesses and was notoriously subjective and it was rare that such findings were sustained. In addition, the Bankruptcy Code includes a so-called \"safe harbor\" provision, preventing bankruptcy trustees from recovering settlement payments to the bought-out shareholders. In 2009, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit held that such settlement payments could not be avoided, irrespective of whether they occurred in an LBO of a public or private company. To the extent that public shareholders are protected, insiders and secured lenders become the primary targets of fraudulent transfer actions.\nIn certain cases, instead of declaring insolvency, the company negotiates a debt restructuring with its lenders. The financial restructuring might entail that the equity owners inject some more money in the company and the lenders waive parts of their claims. In other situations, the lenders inject new money and assume the equity of the company, with the present equity owners losing their shares and investment. The operations of the company are not affected by the financial restructuring. Nonetheless, the financial restructuring requires significant management attention and may lead to customers losing faith in the company.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58837", "revid": "33412931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58837", "title": "Zoutpansberg", "text": "Region of the South African Republic\nZoutpansberg was the north-eastern division of the Transvaal, South Africa, encompassing an area of 25,654 square miles. The chief towns at the time were Pietersburg and Leydsdorp. It was divided into two districts (west and east) prior to the first general election of the Union of South Africa in 1910. Since 2005 the area is divided into the Capricorn, Vhembe and Mopani district municipalities of Limpopo province.\nVoortrekkers.\nThis was the district to which Louis Tregardt and Hans van Rensburg, the forerunners of the Great Trek, journeyed in 1835. In 1845 Hendrik Potgieter, a prominent leader of the Voortrekkers, moved there. The Zoutpansberg Boers formed a semi-independent community, and in 1857 Stephanus Schoeman, their commandant-general, sided against Marthinus Pretorius and Paul Kruger when they invaded the Orange Free State.\nSouth African Republic.\nIt was not until 1864 that Zoutpansberg was definitively incorporated in the South African Republic as a result of the Transvaal Civil War. The white settlers in Zoutpansberg had for many years a reputation for lawlessness, and were later regarded as typical \"back velt Boers\".\nNative population.\nZoutpansberg contained a larger native population than any other region of the Transvaal. It was estimated at 201,539 in 1903.\nMinerals.\nTregardt and his companions had been shown gold workings by the natives, and it was in this district in 1867\u201370, and in the neighbouring region of Lydenburg, that gold mines were first worked by Europeans south of the Limpopo. It is a highly mineralized area; next to gold, copper, found near the Limpopo River (where the Messina mine is located) is also extracted here.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58838", "revid": "50939614", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58838", "title": "Default (finance)", "text": "Financial failure to meet legal conditions of a loan\nIn finance, default is failure to meet the legal obligations (or conditions) of a loan, for example when a home buyer fails to make a mortgage payment, or when a corporation or government fails to pay a bond which has reached maturity. A national or sovereign default is the failure or refusal of a government to repay its national debt.\nThe biggest private default in history is Lehman Brothers, with over $600 billion when it filed for bankruptcy in 2008 (equivalent to over $\u00a0billion in 2024). The biggest sovereign default is Greece, with $138 billion in March 2012 (equivalent to $\u00a0billion in 2024).\nDistinction from insolvency, illiquidity and bankruptcy.\nThe term \"default\" should be distinguished from the terms \"insolvency\", illiquidity and \"bankruptcy\":\nTypes.\nDefault can be of two types: debt services default and technical default. Debt service default occurs when the borrower has not made a scheduled payment of interest or principal. Technical default occurs when an affirmative or a negative covenant is violated.\nAffirmative covenants are clauses in debt contracts that require firms to maintain certain levels of capital or financial ratios. The most commonly violated restrictions in affirmative covenants are tangible net worth, working capital/short term liquidity, and debt service coverage.\nNegative covenants are clauses in debt contracts that limit or prohibit corporate actions (e.g. sale of assets, payment of dividends) that could impair the position of creditors. Negative covenants may be continuous or incurrence-based. Violations of negative covenants are rare compared to violations of affirmative covenants.\nWith most debt (including corporate debt, mortgages and bank loans) a covenant is included in the debt contract which states that the total amount owed becomes immediately payable on the first instance of a default of payment. Generally, if the debtor defaults on any debt to the lender, a cross default covenant in the debt contract states that that particular debt is also in default.\nIn corporate finance, upon an uncured default, the holders of the debt will usually initiate proceedings (file a petition of involuntary bankruptcy) to foreclose on any collateral securing the debt. Even if the debt is not secured by collateral, debt holders may still sue for bankruptcy, to ensure that the corporation's assets are used to repay the debt.\nThere are several financial models for analyzing default risk, such as the Jarrow-Turnbull model, Edward Altman's Z-score model, or the structural model of default by Robert C. Merton (Merton Model).\nSovereign defaults.\nSovereign borrowers such as nation-states generally are not subject to bankruptcy courts in their own jurisdiction, and thus may be able to default without legal consequences. One example is Greece, which defaulted on an IMF loan in 2015. In such cases, the defaulting country and the creditor are more likely to renegotiate the interest rate, length of the loan, or the principal payments.\nIn the 1998 Russian financial crisis, Russia defaulted on its internal debt (GKOs), but did not default on its external Eurobonds. As part of the Argentine economic crisis in 2002, Argentina defaulted on $1 billion of debt owed to the World Bank.\nOrderly default.\nIn times of acute insolvency crises, it can be advisable for regulators and lenders to preemptively engineer the methodic restructuring of a nation's public debt\u2014also called \"orderly default\" or \"controlled default\". Experts who favor this approach to solve a national debt crisis typically argue that a delay in organising an orderly default would wind up hurting lenders and neighboring countries even more.\nStrategic default.\nWhen a debtor \"chooses\" to default on a loan, despite being able to service it (make payments), this is said to be a strategic default. This is most commonly done for nonrecourse loans, where the creditor cannot make other claims on the debtor; a common example is a situation of negative equity on a mortgage loan in common law jurisdictions such as the United States, which is in general non-recourse. In this latter case, default is colloquially called \"jingle mail\"\u2014the debtor stops making payments and mails the keys to the creditor, generally a bank.\nSovereign strategic default.\nSovereign borrowers such as nation-states can also choose to default on a loan, even if they are capable of making the payments. In 2008, Ecuador's president Rafael Correa strategically defaulted on a national debt interest payment, stating that he considered the debt \"immoral and illegitimate\".\nConsumer default.\nConsumer default frequently occurs in rent or mortgage payments, consumer credit, or utility payments. A European Union wide analysis identified certain risk groups, such as single households, being unemployed (even after correcting for the significant impact of having a low income), being young (especially being younger than around 50 years old, with somewhat different results for the New Member States, where the elderly were more often at risk as well), being unable to rely on social networks, etc. Even internet illiteracy has been associated with increased default, potentially caused by these households being less likely to find their way to the social benefits they are often entitled to. While effective non-legal debt counseling is usually the preferred -more economic and less disruptive- option, consumer default can end-up in legal debt settlement or consumer bankruptcy procedures, the last ranging from one-year procedures in the UK to six-year procedures in Germany.\nResearch in the United States has found that pre-purchase counseling can significantly reduce the rate of defaults.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58840", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58840", "title": "Zouche", "text": "Zouche or la Zouche is a surname that may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "58841", "revid": "12317794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58841", "title": "John McCarthy", "text": "John McCarthy may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "58842", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58842", "title": "Richard Zouch", "text": "English judge and Member of Parliament\nRichard Zouch (c.\u20091590\u00a0\u2013 1 March 1661) was an English judge and a Member of Parliament from 1621 to 1624. He was elected Member of Parliament for Hythe in 1621 and later became principal of St. Alban Hall, Oxford. During the English Civil War, he was a Royalist and was appointed by Oliver Cromwell to a special commission of oyer and terminer. Zouch wrote extensive legal texts and was among the earliest systematic writers of international law.\nEarly life.\nZouch was born at Ansty, Wiltshire, the third surviving son of Francis Zouche (d.1600) and Philippa, sixth daughter of George Ludlow of Hill Deverel, Wiltshire. He was educated at Winchester and afterwards at New College, Oxford, where he was a scholar in 1607, and Fellow in 1609. He graduated as B.C.L. in 1614, and D.C.L. in 1619, was admitted at Doctor's Commons, London, in January 1618, and was appointed Regius Professor of Civil Law at Oxford in 1620. In addition to his university duties, he had a large legal practice in London.\nIt was apparently in 1622 that he married Sarah, daughter of John Harte of Brill in Oxfordshire, a proctor in Doctors' Commons; having thus vacated his fellowship, he entered himself in 1623 as a fellow commoner at Wadham College.\nCareer.\nIn 1621 and 1624, through the influence of his cousin Edward la Zouche, 11th Baron Zouche, he was elected member of parliament for Hythe. In 1625 he became principal of St Alban Hall, Oxford.\nHe took a leading part in William Laud's codification of the statutes of the university (1629\u20131633). He acted for many years as assessor of the vice-chancellor's court, and in 1632 became chancellor of the diocese of Oxford. In 1641 he was made Judge of the High Court of Admiralty.\nDuring the Civil War, he was a Royalist, though not a pronounced one. Under the Commonwealth, having submitted to the parliamentary visitors, he retained his university appointments, and was appointed by Oliver Cromwell to a special commission of oyer and terminer (consisting of three judges, three civilians, and three laymen, for the trial of Don Pantaleone Sa, the brother of the Portuguese ambassador, for murder committed in a brawl). Zouche was, however, not allowed to retain the judgeship of the admiralty, which was in 1649 conferred on John Exton. He was regarded with some suspicion by both factions.\nAfter the Restoration, he was appointed to the commission which reinstated the professors and Fellows of Oxford who had been removed under the Protectorate of Cromwell. On 4 February 1661, he was restored to his judgeship, though he died soon afterwards at his apartments in Doctors' Commons, London, on 1 March 1661.\nPublications.\nLegal works.\nIn virtue of the last two he has the distinction of being one of the earliest systematic writers on international law. According to Thomas Erskine Holland writing in the \"Dictionary of National Biography\", Jeremy Bentham's coinage \"international law\" derives from the phrase \"jus inter gentes\" implied by Zouch's 1650 choice of title. Holland also identifies both Zouch and Arthur Duck as pupils of distinction of the civilian John Budden, in the Oxford tradition founded by Alberico Gentili.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58843", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58843", "title": "Zouave", "text": "Class of light infantry regiments of the French Army\nThe Zouaves () were a class of light infantry regiments of the French Army and other units modelled on it, which served between 1830 and 1962, mainly in French North Africa. The zouaves were among the most decorated units of the French Army.\nIt was initially intended that the zouaves would be a regiment of Berber volunteers from the Zwawa group of tribes in Algeria (\"Zwawa\" being the origin of the French term \"zouave\") who had gained a martial reputation fighting for local rulers under the Regency of Algiers. The regiment was to consist of 1,600 Zwawa Berbers, French non-commissioned officers and French officers. 500 Zwawa were recruited in August and September 1830. However, twelve years later, this idea was dropped. More zouave regiments were raised and the men recruited to serve in them were almost exclusively French or people of French descent born in French Algeria (\"pieds-noirs\"), a policy which continued until the final dissolution of these regiments after the Algerian War.\nIn the 1860s, zouave units arose in many other countries. The Papal Zouaves were organized by Louis Juchault de Lamorici\u00e8re, a former commander of North African zouaves, while a former zouave sergeant, Fran\u00e7ois Rochebrune, organized the Polish Zouaves of Death who fought against Russia in the January Uprising of 1863\u20131864. In the 1870s, former Papal Zouaves formed the cadre for a short-lived Spanish zouave unit. The \"zouave\" title was also used by Brazilian units of black volunteers in the Paraguayan War, possibly due to a perceived link with Africa.\nIn the United States, zouaves were brought to public attention by Elmer E. Ellsworth, who created and ran a drill company called the \"Zouave Cadets\". The drill company toured nationally. Zouave units were then raised on both sides of the American Civil War of 1861\u20131865; including a regiment under Ellsworth's command, the 11th New York Infantry\u2014the New York \"Fire Zouaves\". These units were composed of local American soldiers rather than North Africans, but drew their inspiration and dress from the French zouaves. \nThe distinctive uniforms of French and other zouave units was of North African origin. It generally included short open-fronted jackets, baggy trousers (\"serouel\"), sashes, and a fez-like \"ch\u00e9chia\" head-dress.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"zouave\" () is a French language derivative of \"Zouaouas\"; the original name of the Kabyle Berbers recruited for French service.\nZouave units in French service.\nRecruitment.\nThe zouaves of the French Army were first raised in Algeria in 1831 with one and later two battalions, initially recruited primarily from the Zouaoua (or Zw\u0101wa), a tribe of Berbers located in the mountains of the Jurjura Range (see Kabyles). The Zouaoua had formerly provided soldiers for the deys of Algiers and in August 1830 the commander of the French expeditionary force which had occupied the city recommended their continued employment in this role. The existence of the new corps was formally recognised by a Royal decree dated 21 March 1831.\nFrom their beginning the zouave units included a French European element, initially drawn from the demobilized \"Garde royal\" of Charles X and other Parisian volunteers. From March 1833 each zouave battalion was organised into ten companies, of which eight were Muslim Berbers and Arabs and two French. In 1838 a third battalion was raised, and the regiment thus formed was commanded by Major de Lamoriciere. Shortly afterwards the formation of the \"Tirailleurs alg\u00e9riens\", the \"Turcos\", as the infantry corps for Muslim troops, changed the basis for enlistment of the zouave battalions. For most of their remaining history the zouaves became an essentially French body, until in 1956 a new policy of partial racial mixing was introduced amongst units of the Army of Africa.\nZouave regiments.\nInitially constituted as battalion sized units, the zouaves were reorganized as separate regiments in 1852:\nAt the end of the Algerian War six zouave regiments were in existence, of which the \"1er\" was disbanded in 1960 and the remainder in 1962.\nOther provisional regiments of zouaves were raised in 1914 and 1939 for the First and Second World Wars respectively. During World War I nine \"regiments de marche\" of zouaves were created; comprising active, reserve, and new battalions seconded from other regiments. In World War II the number reached fourteen.\nThe zouave regiments raised in 1914 for the First World War were the 8th and 9th. The 13th Zouaves were raised in 1919 and dissolved in 1940. The zouave regiments raised in 1939 for the Second World War were the 11th, 12th, 14th, and 21st, all of which were dissolved after the fall of France in 1940. Other regiments raised later in the Second World War were the 9th ('reactivated'), 22nd, 23rd, and 29th.\nIn addition, four mixed zouave and \"tirailleur\" regiments (\"r\u00e9giments mixtes de zouaves et tirailleurs\") were raised for the First World War, all of which were redesignated Algerian \"tirailleur\" regiments in 1918 or 1920.\nThe 9th Zouaves were the last French zouave unit. The first 9th Zouave regiment existed from 1914 until the fall of France in 1940, a second 9th Zouaves was raised in the Second World War and disbanded after the Algerian War (1954\u20131962). A third 9th Zouaves existed as a nominal unit from 1982 to 2006 (representing a commando training school). With this symbolic exception there was no zouave regiment in existence after 1962 and none now survives in the French Army.\nEarly history.\nThe zouaves saw extensive service during the French conquest of Algeria, initially at the Mouzaia Pass action (March 1836), then at Mitidja (September 1836) and the siege of Constantine (1837). From 1843-44 either one or two battalions played prominent roles in each of the Kabylia campaigns.\nRecruited through direct voluntary enlistment or by transfer from other regiments of men with at least two years service, the zouaves quickly achieved the status of an elite amongst the French Army of Africa.\nThe Second Empire.\nBy 1853, the French Army included three regiments of zouaves. Each of the three line regiments of zouaves was allocated to a different province of Algeria, where their depots and peace-time garrisons were located. The Crimean War was the first service which the regiments saw outside Algeria. Armed with the powerful \"fusil ray\u00e9\" (rifled gun) they subsequently served as effective light infantry in the Franco-Austrian War of 1859, the Mexican Intervention (1864\u20131866) and the Franco-Prussian War (1870). In 1860 1,500 zouaves were landed in Beirut to assist in the restoration of order in the Levant, following extensive inter-communal disturbances.\nThe distinctive dress and dash of the zouaves made them well known outside France and they were frequently portrayed in the illustrated publications of the period. The 2nd Zouaves (popularly known as \"the Jackals of Oran\") had their mutilated eagle decorated with the \"Legion d' Honneur\" following the Battle of Magenta in 1859.\nOn 23 December 1854 a fourth regiment was created, the Zouaves of the Imperial Guard. The actual formation of this unit was delayed until 15 March 1855 when detachments from the zouave regiments already serving in the Crimea were brought together before Sebastopol for this purpose. Having earned the unusual distinction of being created on the field of battle, the Zouaves of the Imperial Guard served through the remainder of the Crimean War and subsequently in all the campaigns of the Second Empire. Their peace-time garrisons were initially at Saint-Cloud and then Versailles from 1857. This regiment wore the classic zouave uniform but with yellow braiding and piping substituted for the red of the line regiments.\nIn the opening stages of the Franco-Prussian War the bulk of the serving zouave units were amongst the Imperial field army defeated at Sedan in September 1870. Drawing on remnants of the Imperial forces, depot troops from Algeria and volunteers it was possible to reconstitute all four regiments as part of the Army of the Loire and the Republican defenders of Paris.\nThe Third Republic.\nAfter 1871 the zouaves lost their status as an elite corps solely made up of long-service volunteers; they became a force mainly composed of conscripts from the French settlers in Algeria and Tunisia, undertaking their compulsory military service. Shortfalls in numbers were made up by detachments from the Paris, Lyon and some northern \"r\u00e9gions militaires\" of mainland France (the \"m\u00e9tropole\"). The zouave regiments did however retain significant numbers of long-service volunteers (\"engag\u00e9s volontaires et r\u00e9engag\u00e9s\") who contributed to the high morale and steadiness of these units.\nTwo zouave battalions (under \"chefs de bataillon\" Simon and Mignot) served in Tonkin during the closing weeks of the Sino-French War (August 1884 to April 1885). One of these battalions was roughly handled on 23 March 1885 in the Battle of Phu Lam Tao. A third zouave battalion (\"chef de bataillon\" Metzinger) joined the Tonkin Expeditionary Corps shortly after the end of the war, and took part in operations against Vietnamese insurgents.\nIn 1899 a law created for each regiment of zouaves a 5th Battalion, \"to be stationed in France\" in \"groupes des 5e bataillons de Zouaves\". The 5th battalions of the 1st and 4th Zouaves were stationed as part of the \"Gouvernement militaire de Paris\". The 5th battalions of the 2nd and 3rd Zouaves were stationed in the \"r\u00e9gion militaire de Lyon\". Upon mobilization for war in France, these battalions would form the nucleus of \"R\u00e9giments de Marche de Zouaves\", each of 3 battalions. This permanent presence in the two key garrisons of metropolitan France facilitated subsequent arrival and participation by other elements of the 19th Military Region (French colonial Algeria) as reinforcements, in the event of an attack on mainland France.\nZouave battalions subsequently saw active service in China during the Boxer Rising (1900\u20131901) and in Morocco (1908\u20131914). From the very beginning of World War I zouave regiments and detached battalions saw extensive service on the Western Front. Others served in the Dardanelles, Macedonia (within the 156th Division), Tonkin, Algeria, Tunisia, and Morocco. Twelve zouave battalions were recruited for exclusively North African service from French-speaking prisoners-of-war and deserters from German Alsace-Lorraine, who had volunteered to join the French Army.\nThe four zouave regiments of the French Army wore their traditional colorful dress during the early months of the First World War. The development of the machine gun, rapid-fire artillery, and improved small-arms obliged them to adopt a plain khaki uniform from 1915 onwards, in common with other units of the \"Arm\u00e9e d'Afrique\". From 1927 to 1939 the \"oriental dress\" of red fez (\"ch\u00e9chia\"), blue sash, braided blue jackets with waistcoats and voluminous red trousers was reintroduced as off-duty dress for re-enlisted NCOs and other long-service regulars in the zouave regiments.\nIt was also worn by colour guards and other detachments on ceremonial occasions. White trousers of the same wide style had, until 1915, been worn as an item of hot-weather or active service dress. The four regiments were distinguished by the colours (red, blue, white and yellow) of the \"tombeaus\" (circular false pockets) on each side of their open-fronted jackets.\nThe zouaves played a major role in the 1914\u20131918 War with their numbers being expanded to nine \"r\u00e9giments de marche\". These units retained much of their traditional panache, especially in attack. They became however less conspicuous in World War II, seeing service mainly during the opening stages of the war in the Battle of France (1940) and in the course of the liberation of France (1944).\nPost-1945.\nAs predominantly conscript units the zouaves did not serve in Indochina between 1945 and 1954. They were, however, employed extensively as sector troops during the Algerian War. Their history as a corps of high-profile elite infantry, closely identified with French Algeria, made for higher morale and effectiveness than that of most conscript units from metropolitan France assigned to Algeria. The 9th Zouaves based in the Casbah, played a major role in the 1957 Battle of Algiers.\nAt the end of the Algerian War, the remaining zouave and tirailleur units were incorporated in a short-lived \"Force locale de l'ordre Alg\u00e9rienne\": created under the \u00c9vian Accords of March 1962 and intended to provide a transitional peace-keeping force acceptable to both Muslim and European communities. The remaining zouave regiments (2nd, 3rd, 4th, 8th and 9th) were finally disbanded in 1962 immediately following Algerian independence. This was inevitable since their recruitment base was the European population of Algeria, which dispersed with the ending of French rule.\nThe traditions of the zouave regiments were maintained until 2006 by the French Army's Commando Training School of Givet (\"Centre d'entrainment commando\"), which occasionally paraded colour parties and other detachments in zouave dress. With the closure of the CEC school that year and the putting into store of the flag of the 9th Zouaves in 2010, any direct link between the former zouaves and active units of the modern French Army ceased. While other branches of the old French Army of Africa have either survived or been reestablished as representative units in recent years (notably the Foreign Legion, Chasseurs d'Afrique, Tirailleurs, and Spahis), France has not recreated one of its most distinctive and best known military corps.\nZouave units in Papal service.\nThe Papal Zouaves were a corps of volunteers formed as part of the Army of the Papal States. The Zouaves evolved out of a unit formed by Lamorici\u00e8re in 1860: the Franco-Belgian Tirailleurs. On January 1, 1861, the unit was renamed the Papal Zouaves.\nThe \"Zuavi Pontifici\" were mainly young men, unmarried and Roman Catholic, who volunteered to assist Pope Pius IX in his struggle against the Italian Risorgimento. They wore a similar style of uniform to that of the French Zouaves but in grey with red trim. A grey and red kepi was substituted for the North African fez.\nAll orders were given in French, and the unit was commanded by a Swiss Colonel, M. Allet. The regiment was truly international, and by May 1868 numbered 4,592 men including 1,910 Dutch, 1,301 French, 686 Belgians, and 240 Italians. A total of three hundred volunteers came from Canada, the United States and Ireland; while the remaining 155 Zouaves were mostly South American.\nThe Papal Zouaves assisted in the notable Franco/Papal victory at the Battle of Mentana on November 3, 1867. They suffered the brunt of the fighting, sustaining 81 casualties in the battle, including 24 killed (the Papal forces suffered only 30 dead in total). The official report of the battle prepared by the French commander, General de Failly cited the bravery of the Zouaves. They were also mentioned in Victor Hugo's poem \"Mentana\".\nThe Papal Zouaves also played a role in the final engagements against the forces of the newly united Kingdom of Italy in September 1870, in which the Papal forces were outnumbered almost seven to one. The Zouaves fought bravely before surrender, inflicting losses on the Bersaglieri of the regular Italian Army as the latter stormed the Porta Pia.\nSeveral Papal Zouaves were reportedly executed or murdered by the Italian forces following the surrender.\nThe French component of the Papal Zouaves regrouped as the \"Volontaires de l'Ouest\" (Volunteers of the West) to fight on the French side in the Franco-Prussian War, where they kept their grey and red Papal uniforms. The Zouaves saw action outside Orl\u00e9ans, Patay and the Battle of Loigny. The \"Volontaires de l'Ouest\" were disbanded after the entrance of Prussian troops into Paris.\nIn 1871 an English veteran, Joseph Powell, published his account of his service with the Papal Zouaves, \"Two Years in the Pontifical Zouaves.\"\nZouave units in Polish service.\nIn 1863, during the Polish January Uprising against the Russian Empire, a French ex-officer who had served previously in one of the French zouave regiments, Fran\u00e7ois Rochebrune, organised the \"Zouaves of Death\". Members of this Polish unit swore \"to conquer or to die\" and not to surrender. They wore a black uniform with white cross and red fez.\nThe unit's baptism by fire occurred at the Battle of Miech\u00f3w, where under the command of adjutant Wojciech Komorowski, they successfully charged Russian forces defending the local cemetery. However, the overall engagement was a defeat for the Poles on February 17, 1863. Lt. Tytus O'Brien de Lacy escaped with 400 zouaves to Galicia in March 1863. In the Battle of Chroberz the Zouaves covered the retreat of the main body of Polish forces under Marian Langiewicz. They also fought at the follow-up Battle of Grochowiska where they captured Russian artillery positions but suffered very high casualties.\nCommanding officers of the regiment were:\nZouave units in British service.\nIn 1856, the West India Regiments of the British Army switched their attire to a uniform modeled on that of the French zouaves. This consisted of a red fez with a white tassel, a white turban, a scarlet sleeveless jacket with yellow trimming, a white long sleeved waistcoat, and dark blue sirwals with yellow piping. White canvas gaiters and leather jamberees completed the uniform. This uniform was reserved for full dress and is still used by the Barbados Defense Force military band and the Jamaica Military Band. Other British colonial units who adopted zouave elements as part of their dress uniforms included the Gold Coast Regiment and the Royal West African Frontier Force.\nZouave units in American service.\nAmerican Civil War.\nUnion Zouaves.\nNumerous zouave regiments were organized from soldiers of the United States of America who adopted the name and the North African\u2013inspired uniforms during the American Civil War. The Union army had more than 70 volunteer zouave regiments throughout the conflict, while the Confederates fielded about 25 Zouave companies.\nIn the United States, zouaves were brought to public attention by Elmer E. Ellsworth. Inspired by his French friend Charles De Villers, who had been a surgeon in the North African zouaves, he obtained a zouave drill manual. In 1859, Ellsworth took over a drill company and renamed them the \"Zouave Cadets\". The drill company toured nationally, performing the light infantry drill of the north African zouaves with many theatrical additions. \"Zouave\" units were then raised on both sides of the American Civil War of 1861\u20131865, including a regiment under Ellsworth's command, the New York \"Fire Zouaves\".\nA feature of some American zouave units, at least in the opening stages of the American Civil War, was the light infantry tactics and drill they employed. Zouaves \"utilised light infantry tactics that emphasised open-order formations, with several feet between soldiers, rather than the customary close order, with its characteristic 'touch of elbows'. They moved at double-time, rather than marching to a stately cadence, and they lay on their backs to load their rifles rather than standing to do so. To fire, they rolled prone and sometimes rose on one knee.\"\nArguably the most famous Union zouave regiments were from New York and Pennsylvania: the 5th New York Volunteer Infantry, known as \"Duryee's Zouaves\" after its first colonel, Abram Duryee; the 114th Pennsylvania Infantry, called \"Collis's Zouaves\" after their colonel, Charles H. T. Collis; and the 11th New York Volunteer Infantry, the \"Fire Zouaves\". The 11th New York was initially led by Col. Elmer E. Ellsworth, until his death in 1861. The 11th New York was badly mauled during the First Battle of Bull Run in July 1861 as it acted as the rear guard for the retreating Army of the Potomac. The 5th New York was considered one of the elite units of the Army of the Potomac; it was one of only two volunteer regiments serving with the regular division commanded by George Sykes. At the Second Battle of Bull Run, the 5th New York, along with another Zouave regiment, the 10th New York \"National Zouaves\", held off the flanking attack of James Longstreet's Corps for ten crucial minutes before it was overrun. The 5th New York thus suffered the highest percentage of casualties in the shortest amount of time of any unit in the Civil War \u2013 of 525 men, approximately 120 were killed and 330 were wounded in less than 10 minutes.\nIn 1863 and 1864, three Union regiments (146th New York, 140th New York, and 155th Pennsylvania) were issued with Zouave uniforms to reward their proficiency in drill and battlefield performance. Difficulties in supply and replacement meant that Zouave and other exotic militia uniforms tended to be replaced by standard issue uniforms throughout the conflict. However, the tradition remained strong, and the last Union casualty of the fighting in Virginia was reported to be a Zouave of the 155th Pennsylvania, killed at Farmville, Virginia, on the morning of April 9, 1865.\nConfederate Zouaves.\nA number of Confederate Zouave units were also raised. In contrast to the many Federal units, most Confederate Zouaves were not full \"regiments\"; many were companies within larger units. The cognomen \"Louisiana Tiger\" dates from the Mexican\u2013American War. Four different volunteer units from Louisiana adopted the Tiger nickname during the Mexican American War, including the 141st Field Artillery Regiment. But none of the Mexican War Louisiana \"Tigers\" were Zouaves. The earliest, and most famous, Louisiana Zouave unit was White's Company B (the \"Tiger Rifles\") of Major Chatham Roberdeau Wheat's 1st Special Battalion, Louisiana Volunteers, also known as \"Louisiana Tigers\".\nAnother notable Zouave unit on the Confederate side was the \"1st (Coppens') Louisiana Zouave Battalion\", which was raised by Georges Augustus Gaston De Coppens in 1861. They saw action from the Peninsula Campaign to the Siege of Petersburg, all the while being short of supplies. They were disbanded in 1865.\nThe Confederate Zouave units did not last long throughout the war. All of them had traded out their Zouave garb for standard Confederate clothing by 1862. The last Confederate Zouave unit was Coppens' Zouave Battalion, which later became dubbed the Confederate State Zouave Battalion.\nPost-Civil War.\nZouaves gradually vanished from the U.S. military in the 1870s and 1880s, as the militia system slowly transformed into the National Guard. As an example, the Wisconsin militia still included one zouave unit in 1879, but the next year, in 1880, the traditional distinctions of title and dress ceased when a standard Wisconsin Guard uniform was adopted. After the Civil War, veteran groups sometimes dressed as zouaves during honor guard ceremonies such as funeral processions, since zouave dress was considered colorful and distinctive. Modern American Civil War reenactments often feature zouave units.\nAmerican zouave uniforms.\nThe zouave uniform was sometimes quite elaborate, to the extent of being unwieldy. Some Zouave regiments wore a fez with a colored tassel (usually yellow, blue, green, or red) and turban, a tight fitting short jacket (some without buttons), a wide sash, baggy pantaloons or \"chasseur\" trousers, white leggings, and a short leather cuff for the calf, called jambieres. The sash was especially difficult to put on, often requiring the help of another zouave. The zouave uniform was better suited for warm climates and rough terrain. The loose pantaloons allowed for greater freedom of movement than trousers, while the short jacket was much cooler than the long woolen blouse worn by most armies of the time.\nZouave units in Spanish service.\nIn the Third Carlist War (1872\u20131876) the Infante Alfonso Carlos, Duke of San Jaime, (the brother of the Carlist Pretender to the Spanish throne, Carlos, Duke of Madrid) raised a unit of Spanish zouaves, the Carlist Zouaves (\"Batallon Zuavos\"), as an honor guard for himself and his wife Maria de las Nieves Braganza. The Carlist Zouaves originated as the sixth company of the second battalion of the Pontifical Zouaves. (Don Alfonso Carlos had formerly served as a lieutenant in the Pontifical Zouaves.) The Carlist Zouaves had the status of an elite unit within the army of Catalonia and the Maestrazgo.\nThe uniforms of the Carlist Zouaves included the baggy trousers, short jacket, vest and sash of both the French and Pontifical Zouaves. However, the Carlist Zouaves also wore a distinctive feature that differentiated them from existing zouave regiments elsewhere, in the form of a beret of Basque influence with a characteristic tassel. In order to distinguish the troops from the officers, the color of the officer's jacket was a blue-gray shade, with a darker blue for the other ranks. The beret worn by the troops was white with a yellow tassel, while the officers wore a red beret with yellow tassel. The baggy trousers were grayish for all ranks.\nNorth African dress influence.\nFrom 1830 to 1848 the zouave costume was closely derived from contemporary North African clothing. However, with the establishment of the zouave regiments as a permanent and integral part of the French Army, the \"oriental dress\" became a formalized uniform, subject to regulations while retaining the distinctive features of its indigenous origins.\nFeatures of the zouave dress were widely copied by colonial units of various European armies during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. These included African regiments raised by Portugal, Britain, Spain, and Italy, as well as the West India Regiment in British service.\nVariations of zouave-style dress of the short open jacket (\"shama\"), voluminous trousers (\"serouel\") and fez were worn by indigenous regiments of the French Army of Africa such as the Spahis and the \"Tirailleurs Algeriens\", although in different colours.\nModern ceremonial units of the Algerian, Moroccan, and Tunisian armies retain items of traditional North African dress, sharing some common features with the \"tenue orientale\" of the French zouaves.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58845", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58845", "title": "Zosterops", "text": "Genus of birds\nZosterops (meaning \"eye-girdle\") is a genus of passerine birds containing the typical white-eyes in the white-eye family Zosteropidae. The genus has the largest number of species in the white-eye family. They occur in the Afrotropical, Indomalayan, and Australasian realms. Typical white-eyes have a length of between . Their most characteristic feature is a conspicuous white feather ring around the eye, though some species lack it. The species in this group vary in the structural adaptations of the tongue. The \"Zosterops\" [\"griseotinctus\"] group is an example of a \"great speciator\" inhabiting a vast area and showing a remarkable morphological differentiation on islands, some of which may be as close as apart.\nSystematics.\nThe genus \"Zosterops\" was introduced by the naturalists Nicholas Vigors and Thomas Horsfield in 1827. The name combines the Ancient Greek words \"z\u014dst\u0113ros\" \"belt\" or \"girdle\" and \"\u014dpos\" \"eye\". The type species was designated as the Malagasy white-eye by Ren\u00e9 Lesson in 1828.\nThe results of a series of molecular phylogenetic studies of the Zosteropidae published between 2014 and 2018 prompted a major revision of species limits, in which 10 new genera were introduced. In the reorganisation, the English names of three of the existing genera were replaced.\nAdditionally, a study on Sri Lanka white-eyes (\"Zosterops ceylonensis\") and Indian white-eyes (\"Zosterops palpebrosus\") suggests that the Sri Lanka white-eye is the root species and the origin of all \"Zosterops species\". This raises questions upon the former theory of Southeast Asian origin.\nSpecies.\nThere are over 100 species in the genus. This includes three species (denoted by a dagger \u2020 in the list below) that have become extinct since the 16th century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58846", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58846", "title": "Regions of France", "text": "Administrative divisions of France\nFrance is divided into eighteen administrative regions (, singular ), of which thirteen are located in metropolitan France (in Europe), while the other five are overseas regions (not to be confused with the overseas collectivities, which have a semi-autonomous status).\nAll of the thirteen metropolitan administrative regions (including Corsica as of 2019[ [update]]) are further subdivided into two to thirteen administrative departments, with the prefect of each region's administrative centre's department also acting as the regional prefect. The overseas regions administratively consist of only one department each and hence also have the status of overseas departments.\nMost administrative regions also have the status of regional territorial collectivities, which comes with a local government, with departmental and communal collectivities below the regional level. The exceptions are Corsica, French Guiana, Mayotte and Martinique, where region and department functions are managed by single local governments having consolidated jurisdiction and which are known as single territorial collectivities.\nHistory.\n1982\u20132015.\nThe term was officially created by the Law of Decentralisation (2 March 1982), which also gave regions their legal status. The first direct elections for regional representatives took place on 16 March 1986.\nBetween 1982 and 2015, there were 22 regions in Metropolitan France. Before 2011, there were four overseas regions (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, and R\u00e9union); in 2011 Mayotte became the fifth.\nReform and mergers of regions.\nIn 2014, the French parliament passed a law reducing the number of metropolitan regions from 22 to 13 effective 1 January 2016.\nThe law gave interim names for most of the new regions by combining the names of the former regions, e.g. the region composed of Aquitaine, Poitou-Charentes and Limousin was temporarily called \"Aquitaine-Limousin-Poitou-Charentes\". However, the combined region of Upper and Lower Normandy was simply called \"Normandy\" (\"Normandie\"). Permanent names were proposed by the new regional councils by 1 July 2016 and new names confirmed by the by 30 September 2016. The legislation defining the new regions also allowed the Centre region to officially change its name to \"Centre-Val de Loire\" with effect from January 2015. Two regions, Auvergne-Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes and Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9, opted to retain their interim names.\nGiven below is a table of former regions and which new region they became part of.\nRole.\nRegions lack separate legislative authority and therefore cannot write their own statutory law. They levy their own taxes and, in return, receive a decreasing part of their budget from the central government, which gives them a portion of the taxes it levies. They also have considerable budgets managed by a regional council \"(conseil r\u00e9gional)\" made up of representatives voted into office in regional elections.\nA region's primary responsibility is to build and furnish high schools. In March 2004, the French central government unveiled a controversial plan to transfer regulation of certain categories of non-teaching school staff to the regional authorities. Critics of this plan contended that tax revenue was insufficient to pay for the resulting costs, and that such measures would increase regional inequalities.\nIn addition, regions have considerable discretionary power over infrastructural spending, e.g., education, public transit, universities and research, and assistance to business owners. This has meant that the heads of wealthy regions such as \u00cele-de-France or Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes can be high-profile positions.\nProposals to give regions limited legislative autonomy have met with considerable resistance; others propose transferring certain powers from the departments to their respective regions, leaving the former with limited authority.\nRegional control.\nNumber of regions controlled by each coalition since 1986.\nOverseas regions.\nOverseas region () is a recent designation, given to the overseas departments that have similar powers to those of the regions of metropolitan France. As integral parts of the French Republic, they are represented in the National Assembly, Senate and Economic and Social Council, elect a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) and use the euro as their currency.\nAlthough these territories have had these political powers since 1982, when France's decentralisation policy dictated that they be given elected regional councils along with other regional powers, the designation \"overseas regions\" dates only to the 2003 constitutional change; indeed, the new wording of the constitution aims to give no precedence to either appellation \"overseas department\" or \"overseas region\", although the second is still virtually unused by French media.\nThe following have overseas region status:\n ^ Saint Pierre and Miquelon (located just south of Newfoundland, Canada, in North America), once an overseas department, was demoted to a territorial collectivity in 1985.\nSee also.\nGeneral:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOverseas regions"}
{"id": "58848", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58848", "title": "Fiona Apple", "text": "American musician (born 1977)\nFiona Apple McAfee-Maggart (born September 13, 1977) is an American singer-songwriter. All five of her albums have reached the top 20 on the \"Billboard\" 200 since 1996, and as of 2021, she has sold over 15 million records worldwide. Apple has received numerous accolades, including three Grammy Awards, two MTV Video Music Awards, and a \"Billboard\" Music Video Award. Three of her albums appear on \"Rolling Stone\"'s \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\" list.\nThe youngest daughter of the actor Brandon Maggart, Apple was born in New York City and was raised alternating between her mother's home in New York and her father's in Los Angeles. She studied piano as a child and began writing songs when she was eight years old. Her debut album, \"Tidal\" (1996), comprises songs written during her teens, and won Best Female Rock Performance at the 39th Annual Grammy Awards for its single \"Criminal\". Her second album, produced by Jon Brion, \"When the Pawn...\" (1999), was met with critical acclaim, and received platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).\nFor her third album, \"Extraordinary Machine\" (2005), Apple again collaborated with Brion and began recording the album in 2002. Apple, however, was reportedly unhappy with the production and opted not to release the record, leading fans to protest Epic Records, erroneously believing that the label was withholding its release. The album was eventually re-produced without Brion and released in October 2005. The album was certified gold, and nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album. In 2012, she released her fourth studio album, \"The Idler Wheel...\", which received critical praise and was followed by a tour of the United States, also receiving a nomination for Best Alternative Music Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards. Apple's fifth studio album, \"Fetch the Bolt Cutters\" (2020), won two Grammy Awards: Best Alternative Music Album and Best Rock Performance for the lead single \"Shameika.\"\nEarly life and education.\nFiona Apple was born Fiona Apple McAfee-Maggart on September 13, 1977, in New York City to singer Diane McAfee and actor Brandon Maggart, who met when both were cast in the Broadway musical \"Applause\". Her father is from Tennessee, and through him, Apple has Melungeon ancestry. Her maternal grandparents were dancer Millicent Green and big band vocalist Johnny McAfee. Her sister Amber sings cabaret under the stage name Maude Maggart, and actor Garett Maggart is her half brother. Apple grew up in Morningside Gardens in Harlem with her mother and sister, but spent summers with her father in Los Angeles, California.\nShe attended the private Episcopal school St. Hilda's &amp; St. Hugh's School and later Alexander Hamilton High School (Los Angeles), as well as being homeschooled. As she studied piano, she would often transcribe guitar tablature into standard notation. Apple later began to play along with jazz standards, discovering Billie Holiday and Ella Fitzgerald, who became major influences.\nSince childhood, Apple has struggled with obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, depression, and anxiety, and has also been diagnosed with complex post-traumatic stress disorder. At age twelve she was raped outside the apartment she shared with her mother, step-father, and sister in Harlem. She subsequently developed an eating disorder, purposely slimming her developing body, which she saw as \"bait\" for potential predators. \"I definitely did have an eating disorder\", she recalled. \"What was really frustrating for me was that everyone thought I was anorexic, and I wasn't. I was just really depressed and self-loathing.\" She also described how her OCD developed into avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, requiring food to be a certain color or shape.\nAfter the rape, Apple began attending Model Mugging classes, practicing self-defense, but continued to suffer panic attacks while walking home from school, which led to her relocating to Los Angeles to live with her father for one year. In Los Angeles, Apple attended Alexander Hamilton High School for her second year.\nIn a 2000 interview, Apple stated that, despite speculation from journalists, she did not write songs about the trauma surrounding her rape: \"It doesn't get into the writing. It's a boring pain. It's such a fuckin' old pain that, you know, there's nothing \"poetic\" about it.\"\nCareer.\n1994\u20132001: \"Tidal\" and \"When the Pawn...\".\nApple was introduced to the music industry in 1994, when she gave a demo tape containing the songs \"Never Is a Promise\", \"Not One of Those Times\", and \"He Takes a Taxi\" to her friend who was the babysitter for music publicist Kathryn Schenker. Schenker then passed the tape along to Sony Music executive Andy Slater. Apple's abilities captured his attention, and Slater signed her to a record deal.\nIn 1996, Apple's debut album, \"Tidal\", was released by Work Records and Columbia Records. The record was largely inspired by Apple's recent breakup with her first boyfriend. The album sold 2.7\u00a0million copies and was certified three times Platinum in the U.S. \"Criminal\", the third single, became a hit and the song reached the Top 40 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100. The song's controversial Mark Romanek-directed music video played on MTV. Other singles from \"Tidal\" included \"Shadowboxer\", \"Sleep to Dream\", and \"Never Is a Promise\". Apple accepted the MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist at the 1997 MTV Video Music Awards for her song \"Sleep to Dream\", during her acceptance speech she said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This world is bullshit. And you shouldn't model your life\u2014wait a second\u2014you shouldn't model your life about what you think that we think is cool and what we're wearing and what we're saying and everything. Go with yourself.\nApple responded to criticisms of her acceptance speech in \"Rolling Stone\" in January 1998, stating, \"When I have something to say, I'll say it.\" During this period, Apple also covered the Beatles' \"Across the Universe\" and Percy Mayfield's \"Please Send Me Someone to Love\" for the soundtrack of the film \"Pleasantville\". She later canceled the last 21 dates on a tour in support of her album due to \"personal family problems\". In 1997, Apple met director Paul Thomas Anderson during a photoshoot, and the two began a relationship that lasted until 2002.\nApple's second album, \"When the Pawn...\", was released in 1999. Its full title is a poem Apple wrote after reading letters that appeared in \"Spin\" regarding an article that had cast her in a negative light in an earlier issue. The title's length earned it a spot in the \"Guinness Book of Records\" for 2001. However, as of October 2007, it no longer has the longest album title, as Soulwax released \"Most of the Remixes\", a remix album whose title surpasses \"When the Pawn\"'s length by 100 characters. \"When the Pawn\" was cultivated during Apple's relationship with film director Paul Thomas Anderson. \"When the Pawn,\" which was produced by Jon Brion, used more expressive lyrics, experimented more with drum loops, and incorporated both the Chamberlin and drummer Matt Chamberlain. The album received a positive reception from publications such as \"Rolling Stone\". It did not fare as well commercially as her debut, though it was an RIAA-certified Platinum album and sold one million copies in the U.S. The album's lead single, \"Fast as You Can\", reached the top twenty on \"Billboard\"'s Modern Rock Tracks chart and became Apple's first Top 40 hit in the UK. The videos for two follow-up singles, \"Paper Bag\" and \"Limp\" (directed by then-boyfriend Anderson), received very little play.\nIn a February 2000 set hampered by equipment issues to 3,000 audience members at the New York City Roseland Ballroom, a frustrated Apple left the stage without returning. Her performance saw Apple appearing distraught at the sound quality, apologizing numerous times for the sound and crying. After completing a concert tour in support of her second album in 2000, Apple relocated to Los Angeles, where she still resides as of 2020.\n2002\u20132010: \"Extraordinary Machine\" and release delays.\nDuring her hiatus, Apple contemplated retiring from her recording career. Apple sang with Johnny Cash on a cover of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" that ended up on his album \"\" and was nominated for a Grammy Award for \"Best Country Collaboration with Vocals\". She also collaborated with Cash on Cat Stevens's \"Father and Son\", which was included in his 2003 collection \"Unearthed\".\nApple's third album, \"Extraordinary Machine\", was originally produced by Jon Brion. In spring 2002, Apple and Brion, her longtime friend and producer on \"When the Pawn,\" met for their weekly lunch meeting. Brion reportedly \"begged\" Apple to make another album. Apple agreed, and Brion went to Apple's label, Epic Records, with strict stipulations (including no deadline), which the label eventually agreed to. Recording sessions began in 2002, at Ocean Way Studios in Nashville, Tennessee, but later moved to the Paramour Mansion in Los Angeles. Work on the album continued until 2003, and in May of that year it was submitted to Sony executives. In 2004 and 2005, tracks were leaked on the Internet in MP3 format and played on U.S. and international radio. Subsequently, MP3s of the entire album went online. Although a website distributing the album was quickly shut down, it soon reached P2P networks and was downloaded by fans. A fan-led campaign supported the album's official release.\nMike Elizondo, who had previously played bass on \"Pawn\", was brought back as co-producer to complete the tracks he had begun with Brion and Apple. \"Spin\" later reported the following: \"Fans erroneously thought that Apple's record label, Epic, had rejected the first version of \"Extraordinary Machine\"...\u00a0in reality, according to Elizondo, Apple was unhappy with the results, and it was her decision to redo the record, not her label's.\" In August 2005, the album was given an October release date. Production had been largely redone \"from scratch\" by Elizondo and was co-produced by Brian Kehew. Two of the 11 previous leaked tracks were relatively unchanged, and one new song was also included. Despite suggestions that the album had caused a rift between Brion and Apple, they regularly perform together at Largo, a club in Los Angeles, including a joint appearance with Elizondo on bass just before the news broke of an official release. \"Extraordinary Machine\" debuted at number seven and was nominated for a Grammy Award for \"Best Pop Vocal Album\". It was eventually certified Gold, though its singles (\"Parting Gift\", \"O' Sailor\", \"Not About Love\", and \"Get Him Back\") failed to enter any \"Billboard\" charts. Apple went on a live tour to promote the album.\nBeginning in the mid-2000s, Apple dated writer and television creator Jonathan Ames.\nIn June 2006, Apple appeared on the joke track \"Come Over and Get It (Up in 'Dem Guts)\" by comedian Zach Galifianakis. Galifianakis previously appeared in the music video for Apple's \"Not About Love\". Apple recorded a cover of \"Sally's Song\" for the 2006 special edition release of the soundtrack for the Tim Burton film \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\". In May 2006, Apple paid tribute to Elvis Costello on VH1's concert series \"Decades Rock Live!,\" by performing Costello's hit \"I Want You\". Her version was subsequently released as a digital single. Apple toured the East Coast during August 2007, with Nickel Creek. In 2008, Apple recorded a duet titled \"Still I\" with Christophe Deluy. In 2009, Apple covered \"Why Try to Change Me Now\" and \"I Walk A Little Faster\" for \"The Best Is Yet to Come \u2013 The Songs of Cy Coleman\".\nIn January 2010, Apple and Brion performed together at \"Love and Haiti, Too: A Music Benefit\", a charity concert for the people hurt by the Haiti earthquake. Apple sang a cover of \"(S)he's Funny That Way\", composed by Neil Moret, lyrics by Richard Whiting, which is often associated with the singer Billie Holiday. In June 2010, Apple released a song titled \"So Sleepy\", produced by Brion and written by children involved with the non-profit organization 826LA. The song was included on a compilation album released by the organization titled \"Chickens in Love\". Apple collaborated with Margaret Cho on her album \"Cho Dependent\", which was released on August 24, 2010.\n2011\u20132018: \"The Idler Wheel...\", tour, and legal troubles.\nIn late 2010, \"Billboard\" published an article stating that Apple was planning on releasing a new album in spring 2011, with musician Michelle Branch claiming to have heard some of the new tracks. Drummer Charley Drayton also told \"Modern Drummer\" magazine that he was co-producing the record. However, the album was not released in the spring and \"Billboard\" reported later that Epic was not aware of a record. Apple delayed the album's release until 2012, explaining that she was waiting \"until her label found a new president and that she didn't want her work to be mishandled amid corporate disarray.\" In January 2012, after its new record label head, LA Reid hinted at new music from Apple, Epic Records announced that the album would be released later in the year. Apple announced performances at the South by Southwest Festival and a spring 2012 tour soon after.\n\"The Idler Wheel...\", Apple's fourth studio album, was released on June 19, 2012, in the United States. It became Apple's most successful album on the \"Billboard\" 200, where it peaked at number three, and received critical acclaim. According to an article in \"American Songwriter\", \"\"The Idler Wheel\" isn't always pretty, but it pulses with life, brutal and true.\"\nWhile promoting \"The Idler Wheel\", Apple revealed in a June 2012 interview that she had briefly married an unnamed French photographer, later revealed to be Lionel Deluy, \"for complicated reasons\" and had a passing liaison with a younger woman. She subsequently gave an in-depth interview on Marc Maron's \"WTF\" podcast in July, in which she described her experience with obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder throughout her adult life. She also divulged that she had recently decided to quit drinking. On September 19, 2012, Apple was arrested at an internal U.S. Border Patrol checkpoint in Sierra Blanca, Texas, and charged with possession of hashish, detaining her en route to a concert in Austin, Texas, at the Hudspeth County Jail.\nApple contributed a previously unreleased song entitled \"Dull Tool\" to the soundtrack of the 2012 Judd Apatow film \"This Is 40\". Another song was recorded for the film but was not used, ending up as the track \"Cosmonauts\" on her 2020 album \"Fetch the Bolt Cutters\". In November 2012, Apple wrote a letter to her fans \u2013 a scan of which was posted to her website and her Facebook page \u2013 postponing the South American leg of her tour due to the health of her dog, Janet. According to the letter, the dog has Addison's disease and has had a tumor \"idling in her chest\" for two years.\nIn September 2013, a Chipotle ad appeared online with a soundtrack of Apple covering \"Pure Imagination\" from the 1971 film \"Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory\". The video, which follows a scarecrow as he discovers the truth about factory farming and processed food, was described as \"haunted\", \"dystopian\", \"bizarre\", and \"beautiful\".\nIn 2014, Apple wrote the opening theme, \"Container\", for the Showtime drama series \"The Affair\". During 2014, Apple also appeared at a number of performances by Blake Mills, including in New York City and Cambridge, Massachusetts, during his tour in support of his second full-length album, \"Heigh Ho\". The pair first publicly collaborated on an acoustic version of Apple's song \"I Know\" in 2013.\nApple has collaborated with Andrew Bird, and in 2016, she was featured in the song \"Left Handed Kisses\" from the album \"Are You Serious\". In September 2017, Apple played rarities at the Ohana Festival in Dana Point, California. Also in 2017, she released \"Tiny Hands\" for the Women's March on Washington. In 2018, she joined Shirley Manson at the female-driven Girl School Festival in Los Angeles for a cover of \"You Don't Own Me\" by Lesley Gore, wearing a white T-shirt with \"KNEEL, PORTNOW\" written across it in ink. This was considered in response to Grammy head Neil Portnow's heavily criticized comments that women need to \"step up\" to earn more Grammy nods.\n2019\u2013present: \"Fetch the Bolt Cutters\".\nIn January 2019, Apple collaborated with King Princess on a version of her 1999 song \"I Know\". The song was released for Spotify's RISE program on January 25. Apple was featured in the documentary and soundtrack for \"Echo in the Canyon\" with Jakob Dylan covering songs by artists such as the Beach Boys and the Byrds. In November, she covered \"Whole of the Moon,\" a Waterboys song, for the series finale of Showtime's \"The Affair\".\nIn two Instagram posts in March 2019, Apple hinted at the recording of a fifth album. In a September 2019 interview with \"Vulture\", she confirmed that the album was in its final stages, recorded with a band and planned for an early 2020 release. In a follow-up interview with \"Vulture\" in January 2020, she said her new album would likely be out \"in a few months.\" On March 8, 2020, Apple posted a video of herself fingerspelling the phrase \"M-Y-R-E-C-O-R-D-I-S-D-O-N-E\". In an interview with \"The New Yorker\", it was announced that the album was to be titled \"Fetch the Bolt Cutters\". The album, which consists of 13 self-produced tracks, was released digitally on April 17, 2020. The album was met with widespread acclaim by music critics. At the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards, the album won Best Alternative Music Album and the lead single \"Shameika\" won Best Rock Performance.\nOn June 17, 2020, Apple was confirmed as an additional musician featuring on Bob Dylan's 39th album \"Rough and Rowdy Ways\", playing piano on the track \"Murder Most Foul\". On April 15, 2021, Apple covered Sharon Van Etten's \"Love More\", from the 10th anniversary of Van Etten's second album, \"Epic\". In December, she was featured on a cover of the Christmas classic \"Silent Night\" released by Phoebe Bridgers alongside her Christmas EP \"If We Make It Through December\". Apple joined with Bear McCreary to perform his composition \"Where the Shadows Lie\", the end credits theme for \", the final episode of the first season of \". The song features Apple singing the Ring Verse, part of which is inscribed upon the One Ring in Black Speech.\nIn March 2025, she featured on The Waterboys' single, \"Letter from an Unknown Girlfriend\" from their album \"Life, Death and Dennis Hopper\". On April 25, 2025, Apple covered Neil Young's \"Heart of Gold\" as part of the tribute album \"Heart Of Gold: The Songs Of Neil Young Volume I\". On May 7, 2025, the singer released \"Pretrial (Let Her Go Home)\", a protest song against the impact of cash bail upon working-class families which was inspired by her time as a volunteer court watcher.\nMusical style and influences.\nApple's music has been labeled as art pop, baroque pop, chamber pop, art rock, alternative rock, and jazz pop. According to Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic, \"[Apple's] roots lay in jazz, show tunes, and classic '70s singer/songwriters, [a] blend that came into sharper focus on her second album, When the Pawn.\"\nPhilanthropy.\nOn June 30, 2019, Apple pledged to donate two years' worth of earnings from TV and movie placements of her song \"Criminal\" to the While They Wait fund, which assists refugees with basic necessities, immigration fees and legal services. In 2020, While They Wait's Scott Hechinger revealed to \"Vulture\" that Apple had donated $90,000, which would help 15 families. Since 2021, Apple has been a volunteer court watcher for Courtwatch PG. In June 2020, Apple pledged to donate two years' worth of earnings from TV and movie placements of her song \"Shameika\" to the Harlem Children's Zone.\nAwards and nominations.\nApple's debut album earned her a Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance for \"Criminal\" and the MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist in a Video for \"Sleep to Dream\". For \"When the Pawn...\", Apple won the California Music Award for Outstanding Female Vocalist. For \"Extraordinary Machine\", she won an Esky Music Award for Best Songbird. \"Fetch the Bolt Cutters\" won a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album and the song \"Shameika\" won a Grammy Award for Best Rock Performance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58849", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58849", "title": "Gender studies", "text": "Interdisciplinary field of study\nGender studies is an interdisciplinary academic field devoted to analysing gender identity and gendered representation. Gender studies originated in the field of women's studies, concerning women, feminism, gender, and politics. The field now overlaps with queer studies and men's studies. Its rise to prominence, especially in Western universities after 1990, coincided with the rise of deconstruction.\nDisciplines that frequently contribute to gender studies include the fields of literature, linguistics, human geography, history, political science, archaeology, economics, sociology, psychology, anthropology, cinema, musicology, media studies, human development, law, public health, and medicine. Gender studies also analyzes how race, ethnicity, location, social class, nationality, and disability intersect with the categories of gender and sexuality. In gender studies, the term \"gender\" is often used to refer to the social and cultural constructions of masculinity and femininity, rather than biological aspects of the male or female sex; however, this view is not held by all gender scholars.\nGender is pertinent to many disciplines, such as literary theory, drama studies, film theory, performance theory, contemporary art history, anthropology, sociology, sociolinguistics and psychology. These disciplines sometimes differ in their approaches to how and why gender is studied. In politics, gender can be viewed as a foundational discourse that political actors employ in order to position themselves on a variety of issues. Gender studies is also a discipline in itself, incorporating methods and approaches from a wide range of disciplines.\nMany fields came to regard \"gender\" as a practice, sometimes referred to as something that is performative. Feminist theory of psychoanalysis, articulated mainly by Julia Kristeva and Bracha L. Ettinger, and informed both by Sigmund Freud, Jacques Lacan and the object relations theory, is very influential in gender studies.\nInfluences.\nPsychoanalytic theory.\nA number of theorists have influenced the field of gender studies significantly, specifically in terms of psychoanalytic theory. Among these are Sigmund Freud, Jacques Lacan, Julia Kristeva, and Bracha L. Ettinger. Gender studied under the lens of each of these theorists looks somewhat different. In a Freudian system, women are \"mutilated and must learn to accept their lack of a penis\" (in Freud's terms a \"deformity\"). Lacan, however, organizes femininity and masculinity according to different unconscious structures. Both male and female subjects participate in the \"phallic\" organization, and the feminine side of sexuation is \"supplementary\" and not opposite or complementary. Lacan uses the concept of sexuation (sexual situation), which posits the development of gender-roles and role-play in childhood, to counter the idea that gender identity is innate or biologically determined. According to Lacan, the sexuation of an individual has as much, if not more, to do with their development of a gender identity as being genetically sexed male or female.\nKristeva contends that patriarchal cultures, like individuals, have to exclude the maternal and the feminine so that they can come into being. Bracha L. Ettinger transformed subjectivity in contemporary psychoanalysis since the early 1990s with the Matrixial feminine-maternal and prematernal Eros of borderlinking (bordureliance), borderspacing (bordurespacement) and co-emergence. The matrixial feminine difference defines a particular gaze and it is a source for trans-subjectivity and transjectivity in both males and females. Ettinger rethinks the human subject as informed by the archaic connectivity to the maternal and proposes the idea of a Demeter-Persephone Complexity.\nFeminist psychoanalytic theory.\nFeminist theorists such as Juliet Mitchell, Nancy Chodorow, Jessica Benjamin, Jane Gallop, Bracha L. Ettinger, Shoshana Felman, Griselda Pollock, Luce Irigaray and Jane Flax have developed a Feminist psychoanalysis and argued that psychoanalytic theory is vital to the feminist project and must, like other theoretical traditions, be criticized by women as well as transformed to free it from vestiges of sexism (i.e. being censored). Shulamith Firestone, in \"The Dialectic of Sex\", calls Freudianism the misguided feminism and discusses how Freudianism is \"almost\" completely accurate, with the exception of one crucial detail: everywhere that Freud writes \"penis\", the word should be replaced with \"power\".\nCritics such as Elizabeth Grosz accuse Jacques Lacan of maintaining a sexist tradition in psychoanalysis. Others, such as Judith Butler, Bracha L. Ettinger and Jane Gallop have used Lacanian work, though in a critical way, to develop gender studies. According to J. B. Marchand, \"The gender studies and queer theory are rather reluctant, hostile to see the psychoanalytic approach.\" For Jean-Claude Guillebaud, gender studies (and activists of sexual minorities) \"besieged\" and consider psychoanalysis and psychoanalysts as \"the new priests, the last defenders of the genital normality, morality, moralism or even obscurantism\".\nJudith Butler's worries about the psychoanalytic outlook under which sexual difference is \"undeniable\" and pathologizing any effort to suggest that it is not so paramount and unambiguous ...\". According to Daniel Beaune and Caterina Rea, the gender-studies \"often criticized psychoanalysis to perpetuate a family and social model of patriarchal, based on a rigid and timeless version of the parental order\".\nLiterary theory.\nPsychoanalytically oriented French feminism focused on visual and literary theory all along. Virginia Woolf's legacy as well as \"Adrienne Rich's call for women's revisions of literary texts, and history as well, has galvanized a generation of feminist authors to reply with texts of their own\". Griselda Pollock and other feminists have articulated Myth and poetry and literature, from the point of view of gender.\nPost-modern influence.\nThe emergence of post-modernism theories affected gender studies, causing a movement in identity theories away from the concept of fixed or essentialist gender identity, to post-modern fluid or multiple identities. The impact of post-structuralism, and its literary theory aspect post-modernism, on gender studies was most prominent in its challenge of grand narratives. Post-structuralism paved the way for the emergence of queer theory in gender studies, which necessitated the field expanding its purview to sexuality.\nIn addition to the expansion to include sexuality studies, under the influence of post-modernism gender studies has also turned its lens toward masculinity studies, due to the work of sociologists and theorists such as R. W. Connell, Michael Kimmel, and E. Anthony Rotundo. These changes and expansions have led to some contentions within the field, such as the one between second wave feminists and queer theorists. The line drawn between these two camps lies in the problem as feminists see it of queer theorists arguing that everything is fragmented and there are not only no grand narratives but also no trends or categories. Feminists argue that this erases the categories of gender altogether but does nothing to antagonize the power dynamics reified by gender. In other words, the fact that gender is socially constructed does not undo the fact that there are strata of oppression between genders.\nDevelopment of theory.\nHistory.\nThe history of gender studies looks at the different perspectives of gender. This discipline examines the ways in which historical, cultural, and social events shape the role of gender in different societies. The field of gender studies, while focusing on the differences between men and women, also looks at sexual differences and less binary definitions of gender categorization.\nAcademic Institutions.\nEarly.\n\"Institut f\u00fcr Sexualwissenschaft\" (Institute for Sexual Science) was a German Institution that preexisted Nazi rule in Germany. The research based institute was in operation from 1919\u20131933. The Institute was lost to two waves of attacks that led to the loss of approximately 12,000-20,000 journals, books and articles, with others suggesting larger numbers, not including other media materials.\nPost-structural - Modern.\nAfter the universal suffrage revolution of the twentieth century, the women's liberation movement of the 1960s and 1970s promoted a revision from the feminists to \"actively interrogate\" the usual and accepted versions of history as it was known at the time. It was the goal of many feminist scholars to question original assumptions regarding women's and men's attributes, to actually measure them, and to report observed differences between women and men. Initially, these programs were essentially feminist, designed to recognize contributions made by women as well as by men. Soon, men began to look at masculinity the same way that women were looking at femininity, and developed an area of study called \"men's studies\". It was not until the late 1980s and 1990s that scholars recognized a need for study in the field of sexuality. This was due to the increasing interest in lesbian and gay rights, and scholars found that most individuals will associate sexuality and gender together, rather than as separate entities.\nContemporary.\nAlthough doctoral programs for women's studies have existed since 1990, the first doctoral program for a potential PhD in gender studies in the United States was approved in November 2005. In 2015, Kabul University became the first university in Afghanistan to offer a master's degree course in gender and women's studies. After the Taliban took over the Afghan capital, the university fell under their control and banned women from attending.\nWomen's studies.\nWomen's studies is an interdisciplinary academic field devoted to topics concerning women, feminism, gender, and politics. It often includes feminist theory, women's history (e.g. a history of women's suffrage) and social history, women's fiction, women's health, feminist psychoanalysis and the feminist and gender studies-influenced practice of most of the humanities and social sciences.\nMen's studies.\nMen's studies is an interdisciplinary academic field devoted to topics concerning men, gender, and politics. It often includes feminist theory, men's history and social history, men's fiction, men's health, feminist psychoanalysis and the feminist and gender studies-influenced practice of most of the humanities and social sciences. Timothy Laurie and Anna Hickey-Moody suggest that there 'have always been dangers present in the institutionalisation of \"masculinity studies\" as a semi-gated community', and note that 'a certain triumphalism vis-\u00e0-vis feminist philosophy haunts much masculinities research'.\nWithin studies on men, it is important to distinguish the specific approach often defined as Critical Studies on Men. This approach was largely developed in the anglophone countries from the early 1980s \u2013 especially in the United Kingdom \u2013 centred then around the work of Jeff Hearn, David Morgan and colleagues. The influence of the approach has spread globally since then. It is inspired primarily by a range of feminist perspectives (including socialist and radical) and places emphasis on the need for research and practice to explicitly challenge men's and boys' sexism. Although it explores a very broad range of men's practices, it tends to focus especially on issues related to sexuality and/or men's violences. Although originally largely rooted in sociology, it has since engaged with a broad range of other disciplines including social policy, social work, cultural studies, gender studies, education and law. In more recent years, Critical Studies on Men research has made particular use of comparative and/or transnational perspectives. Like Men's Studies and Masculinity Studies more generally, Critical Studies on Men has been critiqued for its failure to adequately focus on the issue of men's relations with children as a key site for the development of men's masculinity formations \u2013 men's relations with women and men's relations with other men being the two sites which are heavily researched by comparison.\nGender in Asia and Polynesia.\nCertain issues associated with gender in Eastern Asia and the Pacific Region are more complex and depend on location and context. For example, in China, Vietnam, Thailand, Philippines and Indonesia, a heavy importance of what defines a woman comes from the workforce. In these countries, \"gender related challenges tend to be related to economic empowerment, employment, and workplace issues, for example related to informal sector workers, feminization of migration flows, work place conditions, and long term social security\". However, in countries who are less economically stable, such as Papua New Guinea, Timor-Leste, Laos, Cambodia, and some provinces in more remote locations, \"women tend to bear the cost of social and domestic conflicts and natural disasters\".\nPlaces such as India and Polynesia have widely identified third-gender categories. For example, the hijra/kinnar/kinner people of India are often regarded as being a third-gender. Hijra is often considered an offensive term, so the terms kinnar &amp; kinner are often used for these individuals. In places such as India and Pakistan, these individuals face higher rates of HIV infection, depression, and homelessness. Polynesian languages are also consistent with the idea of a third-gender or non-binary gender. The Samoan term \"fa'afafine\", meaning \"in the manner of a woman\", is used to refer to a third-gender/non-binary role in society. These sexualities are expressed across a spectrum, although some literature has suggested that \"fa'afafine\" individuals do not form sexual relations with one another.\nOne issue that remains consistent throughout all provinces in different stages of development is women having a weak voice when it comes to decision-making. One of the reasons for this is the \"growing trend to decentralization [which] has moved decision-making down to levels at which women's voice is often weakest and where even the women's civil society movement, which has been a powerful advocate at national level, struggles to organize and be heard\".\nEast Asia Pacific's approach to help mainstream these issues of gender relies on a three-pillar method. Pillar one is partnering with middle-income countries and emerging middle-income countries to sustain and share gains in growth and prosperity. Pillar two supports the developmental underpinnings for peace, renewed growth and poverty reduction in the poorest and most fragile areas. The final pillar provides a stage for knowledge management, exchange and dissemination on gender responsive development within the region to begin. These programs have already been established, and successful in, Vietnam, Thailand, China, as well as the Philippines, and efforts are starting to be made in Laos, Papua New Guinea, and Timor-Leste as well. These pillars speak to the importance of showcasing gender studies.\nJudith Butler.\nPhilosopher and gender studies Judith Butler's work \"Gender Trouble\" discussed gender performativity. In Butler's terms the performance of gender, sex, and sexuality is about power in society. They locate the construction of the \"gendered, sexed, desiring subject\" in \"regulative discourses\". A part of Butler's argument concerns the role of sex in the construction of \"natural\" or coherent gender and sexuality. In their account, gender and heterosexuality are constructed as natural because the opposition of the male and female sexes is perceived as natural in the social imaginary. \"Men's and Women's Beliefs About Gender and Sexuality\" is an article written by authors Emily Kane and Mimi Schippers, which explicitly focuses on the social construct of social opposition between men and women. Parallel to Butler's argument, this article also argues that gender is constructed as \"natural\" within our society when in reality it contains arbitrary aspects. By pointing out distinct differences between gender aspects of both men and women, this article reveals the source of opposition that Butler mentions, arguing that \"men and women share a variety of interests based on personal circumstances and on social locations other than gender, but men's and women's gender interests do tend to differ.\"\nCriticism.\nHistorian and theorist Bryan Palmer argues that gender studies' current reliance on post-structuralism \u2013 with its reification of discourse and avoidance of the structures of oppression and struggles of resistance \u2013 obscures the origins, meanings, and consequences of historical events and processes, and he seeks to counter current trends in gender studies with an argument for the necessity to analyze lived experiences and the structures of subordination and power. Psychologist Debra W. Soh postulates that gender studies is composed of dubious scholarship, that it is an unscientific ideology, and that it causes needless disruption in the lives of children.\nFeminist philosopher Rosi Braidotti has criticized gender studies as \"the take-over of the feminist agenda by studies on masculinity, which results in transferring funding from feminist faculty positions to other kinds of positions. There have been cases... of positions advertised as 'gender studies' being given away to the 'bright boys'. Some of the competitive take-over has to do with gay studies. Of special significance in this discussion is the role of the mainstream publisher Routledge who, in our opinion, is responsible for promoting gender as a way of deradicalizing the feminist agenda, re-marketing masculinity and gay male identity instead.\" Calvin Thomas countered that, \"as Joseph Allen Boone points out, 'many of the men in the academy who are feminism's most supportive 'allies' \"are\" gay,'\" and that it is \"disingenuous\" to ignore the ways in which mainstream publishers such as Routledge have promoted feminist theorists.\nGender studies, and more particularly queer studies within gender studies, has been criticized by Catholic Church bishops and cardinals as an attack on human biology. Pope Francis has said that teaching about gender identity in schools is \"ideological colonization\" that threatens traditional families and fertile heterosexuality. France was one of the first countries where this claim became widespread when Catholic movements marched in the streets of Paris against the bill on gay marriage and adoption. Scholar of law and gender Bruno Perreau argues that this fear has deep historical roots, and that the rejection of gender studies and queer theory expresses anxieties about national identity and minority politics. Jayson Harsin argues that the French anti\u2013'gender theory' movement demonstrates qualities of global right-wing populist post-truth politics.\nTeaching certain aspects of gender studies was banned in public schools in New South Wales after an independent review into how the state teaches sex and health education and the controversial material included in the teaching materials.\nGovernment attitudes.\nIn Central and Eastern Europe, anti-gender movements are on the rise, especially in Hungary, Poland, and Russia.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, gender studies is currently tolerated; however, state-supported practices follow the traditional gender perspectives of those in power. The law related to prosecuting and sentencing domestic violence, for instance, was greatly limited in 2017. Since 2010, the Russian government has also been leading a campaign at the UNHRC to recognise Russian \"traditional values\" as a legitimate consideration in human rights protection and promotion.\nHungary.\nGender studies programs were banned in Hungary in October 2018. In a statement released by Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orb\u00e1n's office, a spokesperson stated that \"The government's standpoint is that people are born either male or female, and we do not consider it acceptable for us to talk about socially constructed genders rather than biological sexes.\" The ban has attracted criticism from several European universities which offer the program, among them the Budapest-based Central European University, whose charter was revoked by the government, and is widely seen as part of the Hungarian ruling party's move away from democratic principles.\nChina.\nThe Central People's Government supports studies of gender and social development of gender in history and practices that lead to gender equality. Citing Mao Zedong's philosophy, \"Women hold up half the sky\", this may be seen as continuation of equality of men and women introduced as part of Cultural Revolution.\nRomania.\nThe Romanian Senate approved by broad majority in June 2020 an update of National Education Law that would ban theories and opinions on gender identity according to which gender is a separate concept from biological sex. In December 2020, the Constitutional Court of Romania overturned the ban; earlier, President Klaus Iohannis had challenged the bill.\nUnited States.\nThe United States currently allows academic institutions to offer courses in gender and sexuality studies, women's studies, feminist studies, queer studies and LGBT studies. Institutions that offer such courses include Harvard, Stanford, USC, UCLA, Lehigh University, and Lafayette College.\nDonald Trump issued Executive Order 14168 during his second presidency, which called for, among other things, \"end[ing] the Federal funding of gender ideology.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58850", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58850", "title": "Niccolo Tartaglia", "text": ""}
{"id": "58851", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58851", "title": "Fiddle styles", "text": ""}
{"id": "58852", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58852", "title": "Niels Abel", "text": ""}
{"id": "58853", "revid": "3096019", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58853", "title": "Juniperus", "text": ""}
{"id": "58855", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58855", "title": "Joseph Bonanno", "text": "American organized crime boss (1905\u20132002)\nJoseph Charles Bonanno (born Giuseppe Carlo Bonanno; ; January 18, 1905 \u2013 May 11, 2002), sometimes referred to as Joe Bananas, was an Italian-American crime boss of the Bonanno crime family of New York City, which he ran between 1931 and 1968.\nBonanno was born in Castellammare del Golfo, Sicily, where his father was also involved in organized crime. At the age of 3, Bonanno emigrated to New York with his family, where he lived for about ten years moving back to Italy. He later slipped back into the United States in 1924, stowing away on a Cuban fishing boat bound for Tampa, Florida. After the Castellammarese War, during which Salvatore Maranzano was murdered in 1931, Bonanno reorganized most of Maranzano's crime family as the Bonanno family. At age 26, Bonanno became one of the youngest-ever bosses of a crime family.\nIn 1963, Bonanno made plans with Joseph Magliocco to assassinate several rivals on The Commission, the governing body of the American Mafia. When Magliocco gave the contract to one of his top hit men, Joseph Colombo, he revealed the plot to its targets. The Commission spared Magliocco's life but forced him into retirement, while Bonanno fled to Canada. In 1964, he briefly returned to New York before disappearing until 1966. The \"Banana War\" ensued and lasted until 1968, when Bonanno retired to Arizona. Later in life, he became a writer, publishing the book \"A Man of Honor: The Autobiography of Joseph Bonanno\" in 1983. Bonanno died on May 11, 2002, in Tucson, Arizona.\nEarly life.\nJoseph Bonanno was born on January 18, 1905, in Castellammare del Golfo, Sicily, to Salvatore Bonanno and Catherine Bonventre. Joseph's uncles, Giuseppe Bonanno and his older brother and advisor, Stefano, were involved in the Sicilian Mafia and led a clan in Castellammare del Golfo. The clan's strongest ally was the leader of the Magaddino clan, Stefano Magaddino, the brother of Joseph's maternal grandmother. During the 1900s, the clans feuded with Felice Buccellato, the boss of the Buccellato clan. After the murders of Giuseppe and Stefano Bonanno, their younger brother Salvatore took revenge by killing members of the Buccellatos. In 1902, Magaddino arrived in New York and became a powerful member of the Castellammarese clan.\nWhen Joseph was three years old, his family moved to New York City and settled in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, for about ten years before returning to Italy. His father had returned to Sicily in 1911, and died of a heart attack in 1915. In 1921, Magaddino fled to Buffalo, New York, to avoid murder charges.\nBonanno slipped back into the United States in 1924, stowing away on a Cuban fishing boat bound for Tampa, Florida, with Magaddino's son, Peter. According to Bonanno, upon arriving at a train station in Jacksonville, Bonanno was detained by immigration officers and was later released under $1,000 bail. He was welcomed by Willie Moretti and an unidentified man. It was later revealed that Magaddino was responsible for the bailout as a favour for Giovanni Bonventre, Bonanno's uncle. Bonanno first worked at a bakery owned by his uncle and later took up acting classes near Union Square, Manhattan. He had become active in the Mafia during his youth in Italy, and he fled to the U.S. after Benito Mussolini initiated a crackdown. Bonanno himself claimed years later that he fled because he was ardently anti-Fascist.\nBonanno became involved in bootlegging activities. He operated a distillery located inside an apartment building basement with Gaspar DiGregorio and Giovanni Romano, who was later killed in the distillery due to an accidental explosion. During this time, boss Salvatore Maranzano took a liking to Bonanno and became his mentor.\nThe Castellammarese War and aftermath.\nDuring the Castellammarese War, between 1930 and 1931, Maranzano and Bonanno fought against a rival group based in Brooklyn, led by Joe Masseria and Giuseppe Morello. However, a third, secret, faction soon emerged, composed of younger \"mafiosi\" on both sides. These younger mafiosi were disgusted with the old-world predilections of Masseria, Maranzano and other old-line \"mafiosi\", whom they called \"Mustache Petes.\" This group of \"Young Turk\" \"mafiosi\" was led by Masseria's second-in-command, Lucky Luciano, and included Frank Costello, Vito Genovese, Joe Adonis, Carlo Gambino and Albert Anastasia on Masseria's side and Joe Profaci, Tommy Gagliano, Tommy Lucchese, Joseph Magliocco and Stefano Magaddino on Maranzano's. Although Bonanno was more steeped in the old-school traditions of \"honor\", \"tradition\", \"respect\" and \"dignity\" than other \"mafiosi\" of his generation, he saw the need to modernize and joined forces with the Young Turks.\nIn a secret deal with Maranzano, Luciano agreed to engineer the death of his boss, Masseria, in return for receiving Masseria's rackets and becoming Maranzano's second-in-command; he was killed April 15, 1931. However, although Maranzano was slightly more forward-thinking than Masseria, Luciano had come to believe that Maranzano was even more greedy and hidebound than Masseria had been, declaring himself \"capo di tutti capi\" (boss of all bosses); as a consequence, Luciano arranged Maranzano's murder on September 10, 1931.\nAfter Maranzano's death, Bonanno became boss\u2013or as he called himself, \"Father\"\u2013of the bulk of Maranzano's family. At the age of 26, Bonanno became one of the youngest-ever bosses of a crime family. Bonanno's role in the events leading up to Maranzano's death has been disputed. Years later, Bonanno wrote in his autobiography that he did not know about Luciano's plans; he claimed to have only learned about them from Magaddino. According to Bonanno, he subsequently learned that Maranzano and Luciano had had a falling out over influence in the Garment District. Reportedly, relations between the two had soured to the point that Maranzano was planning to kill Luciano as early as one day after Maranzano was ultimately assassinated. Maranzano had given the contract to Irish gangster Vincent \"Mad Dog\" Coll, who was actually on his way to Maranzano's office on the day of Maranzano's death. According to Bonanno, he concluded that going to war with Luciano would serve no purpose, since Luciano only wanted to be left alone to run his own rackets and \"demanded nothing from us.\" He also believed that his soldiers would not be enthused about going to the mattresses again so soon after the end of the Castellamarese War. For this reason, Bonanno said, he decided to choose \"the path of peace.\" However, according to mob expert Anthony Bruno, it \"defies mob logic\" to believe that Luciano would have allowed Bonanno to stay alive had Bonanno still supported Maranzano.\nIn place of the \"capo di tutti capi\" in Maranzano's plan, Luciano established a national commission in which each of the families would be represented by their boss and to which each family would owe allegiance. Each family would be largely autonomous in their designated area, but the Commission would arbitrate disputes between gangs.\nIn 1931, two months after Maranzano was murdered, Bonanno was married to Fay Labruzzo (December 31, 1905 \u2013 September 9, 1980). They had three children: Salvatore \"Bill\" Bonanno, Catherine, and Joseph Charles Jr.\nBonanno had property in Hempstead, New York, and later Middletown, New York. His son, Bill developed a severe mastoid ear infection at the age of 10; his parents enrolled him in a Catholic boarding school in the dry climate of Tucson, Arizona. After this, Bonanno also maintained a home in Tucson from the early 1940s.\nBonanno family.\nBonanno had several legitimate businesses, including three coat manufacturing companies, laundries, cheese suppliers (through Lino Saputo between 1964 and 1979), funeral homes, and a trucking company. The funeral parlor Bonanno owned in Brooklyn was suspected to be used as a front for disposing of bodies, building double-decker coffins to fit more than one body so that both would be buried in one grave. Bonanno became a U.S. citizen in 1945. Later that year, he was convicted of violating wage laws and fined $450.\nBonanno allegedly attended the Grand Hotel et des Palmes Mafia meeting in Palermo in October 1957. A month later, in November 1957, the Apalachin Conference was called by Vito Genovese to discuss the future of Cosa Nostra, which Bonanno was reported to have attended. However, the meeting was aborted when police investigated the destination of the many out-of-state attendees' vehicles and arrested many of the fleeing \"mafiosi\". Bonanno claimed he had skipped the meeting, but the attending \"capo\" Gaspar DiGregorio was carrying Bonanno's recently renewed driver's license. An official police report instead lists him as being caught fleeing on foot. All those apprehended were fined, up to $10,000 each, and given prison sentences ranging from three to five years. However, all the convictions were overturned on appeal in 1960. In any case, Bonanno suffered a heart attack and was removed from testifying in the trial.\nCommission plot and disappearance.\nIn 1963, Bonanno made plans to assassinate several rivals on the Mafia Commission\u2014bosses Tommy Lucchese, Carlo Gambino, and Stefano Magaddino, as well as Frank DeSimone. Bonanno sought Profaci crime family boss Joseph Magliocco's support, and Magliocco readily agreed due to his bitterness from being denied a seat on the Commission previously. Bonanno's audacious goal was to take over the Commission and make Magliocco his right-hand man.\nMagliocco was assigned the task of killing Lucchese and Gambino, and gave the contract to one of his top hit men, Joseph Colombo. However, the opportunistic Colombo revealed the plot to its targets. The other bosses realized that Magliocco could not have planned this himself. Remembering how close Bonanno was with Magliocco (and before him, Joe Profaci), as well as their close ties through marriages, the other bosses concluded Bonanno was the real mastermind.\nThe Commission summoned Bonanno and Magliocco to explain themselves. In mid 1964, Bonanno fled to Montreal, leaving Magliocco to deal with the Commission. Badly shaken and in failing health, Magliocco confessed his role in the plot. The Commission spared Magliocco's life, but forced him to retire as Profaci family boss and pay a $50,000 fine. As a reward for turning on his boss, Colombo took control of the Profaci family. On Bonanno's immigration documents, he falsely declared that he had never been convicted of a criminal offense. Bonanno was detained for nearly 90 days at Bordeaux Prison until he was forced to leave Canada.\nIn October 1964, he returned to Manhattan, but on October 21, 1964, the day before Bonanno was scheduled to testify to a grand jury inquiry, his lawyers said that after having dinner with them, Bonanno was kidnapped, allegedly by Magaddino's men, as he entered the apartment house where one of his lawyers lived on Park Avenue and East 36th Street. FBI recordings of New Jersey boss Sam \"The Plumber\" DeCavalcante revealed that the other bosses were taken by surprise when Bonanno disappeared, and other FBI recordings captured angry Bonanno soldiers saying, \"That son-of-a-bitch took off and left us here alone.\"\nThe \"Banana War\".\nDuring Bonanno's two-year absence, Gaspar DiGregorio took advantage of family discontent over Bill Bonanno's role to claim family leadership. The Mafia Commission named DiGregorio as Bonanno family boss, and the DiGregorio revolt led to four years of strife in the Bonanno family, labeled by the media as the \"Banana War\". This led to a divide in the family between loyalists to Bill and loyalists to DiGregorio.\nIn early 1966, DiGregorio allegedly contacted Bill about having a peace meeting. Bill agreed and suggested his grand-uncle's house on Troutman Street in Brooklyn as a meeting site. On January 28, 1966, as Bill and his loyalists approached the house, they were met with gunfire; no one was wounded during this confrontation.\nBonanno reappeared on May 17, 1966, at Foley Square. In 1968, DiGregorio was wounded by machine gun fire and later suffered a heart attack. The Commission eventually became dissatisfied with DiGregorio's efforts at quelling the family rebellion, and eventually dropped DiGregorio and swung their support to Paul Sciacca. In 1968, after a heart attack, Bonanno ended the family warfare by agreeing to retire as boss and move to Arizona. As part of this peace agreement, Bill also resigned as \"consigliere\" and moved out of New York with his father.\nLater career in Arizona and California.\nIn 1974, Bonanno and his son subsequently moved to Arizona, living in the Catalina Vista neighborhood of Tucson, Arizona with his family.\nIn the late 1970s, his two sons, Bill and Joe Jr., were under increased scrutiny from law enforcement in Northern California after getting involved with Lou Peters, a Cadillac-Oldsmobile dealer, in San Jose, Lodi and Stockton. Louis E. Peters turned into a confidential informant for the FBI, helping them indict Bonanno.\nIn September 1980, Bonanno was convicted in federal court in San Jose of conspiracy to obstruct justice in a grand jury investigation into organized crime money laundering. Bonanno received the first prison sentence of his underworld career when U.S. District Judge William Ingram sentenced him to five years in prison and fined him $10,000 on January 12, 1981. The sentence was later reduced due to Bonanno's ill health.\nIn April 1983, Joseph Bonanno and his son Bill appeared on the CBS News TV program \"60 Minutes\" to be interviewed by correspondent Mike Wallace.\nLater in 1983, he served eight months in prison for obstruction of justice. In 1985, he was imprisoned for 14 months for contempt of court after refusing to testify in a federal racketeering case. Assigned federal inmate number 07255-008, he was transferred from the Federal Correctional Institution in Tucson, Arizona to the U.S. Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri due to ill health at his advanced age and released on November 1, 1986.\nDuring Bill Bonanno's trial, he gave interviews to author Gay Talese that formed part of the basis of his 1971 true crime book \"Honor Thy Father\". Joseph Bonanno was initially infuriated by the book and refused to speak to Bill for a year. By the late 1970s, however, Bonanno's attitude had changed; he had become interested in writing an autobiography to offer his own take on his life. Bonanno's book was published in 1983 as \"A Man of Honor: The Autobiography of Joseph Bonanno\". Bonanno justified his decision to write \"A Man of Honor\" on the grounds that omert\u00e0 represented a lifestyle and tradition greater than or beyond just the code of silence it is generally understood to be: as he had not been compelled to reveal his secrets by becoming an informant or government witness, Bonanno reasoned, he did not violate his code of honor. Bonanno's editor for \"A Man of Honor\" was publisher Michael Korda who said of Bonanno, \"In a world where most of the players were, at best, semiliterate, Bonanno read poetry, boasted of his knowledge of the classics, and gave advice to his cohorts in the form of quotes from Thucydides or Machiavelli.\"\nBonanno died on May 11, 2002, of heart failure at the age of 97. He is buried at Holy Hope Cemetery and Mausoleum in Tucson.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1991, Bonanno's daughter-in-law, Rosalie Profaci Bonanno, published the memoir \"Mafia Marriage: My Story\". This book was eventually converted to the 1993 Lifetime network film \"\". Bonanno was portrayed by Ben Gazzara.\nIn the 1991 film \"Mobsters\", Joe Bonanno is portrayed by actor John Chappoulis.\nIn 1999, Showtime produced a biographical film called \"Bonanno: A Godfather's Story\", released on DVD as \"Youngest Godfather\". The film chronicles the rise and fall of organized crime in the United States. Bonanno was portrayed by Tony Nardi.\nIn 2004, Joe's daughter-in-law began putting Joe's personal items up for auction on eBay. This continued until 2008.\nIn 2006, episode 66 of \"The Sopranos\", \"Members Only\", Eugene Pontecorvo wants to retire and uses Joe Bonanno as an example of a retired mob member. Also in episode 76, \"Cold Stones\", Tony mentions that \"Joe Bananas\" went to war against Carlo Gambino for seven years.\nIn 2009, Joe's cousin, Thomas Bonanno, participated as a Mafia expert in the filming of \"Deadliest Warrior\": \"\", demonstrating his skills and marksmanship with a Thompson submachine gun as well as talking about \"true\" Sicilian Mafia philosophy and culture.\nIn 2014, \"Eldorado\", the series finale of \"Boardwalk Empire\", Joe Bonanno, played by Amadeo Fusca, has a non-speaking cameo role. He is seen sitting at the table as Lucky Luciano gathers the country's most powerful crime bosses and forms The Commission.\nHe is portrayed by Chazz Palminteri in the 2019 TV series \"Godfather of Harlem\".\nIn the 2019 film \"The Irishman\", Frank Sheeran (played by Robert De Niro) compares Bonanno's \"kidnapping\", in a telephone conversation with the wife of Jimmy Hoffa, to her husband's disappearance.\nHe is portrayed by Sal Landi on the 2022 TV series \"The Offer\".\nHe is portrayed by Louis Mustillo in the 2025 film \"The Alto Knights\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58856", "revid": "561624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58856", "title": "Locksmith", "text": ""}
{"id": "58857", "revid": "6677662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58857", "title": "Gymnosporangium", "text": "Genus of fungi\nGymnosporangium is a genus of heteroecious plant-pathogenic fungi which alternately infect members of the family Cupressaceae, primarily species in the genus \"Juniperus\" (junipers), and members of the family Rosaceae in the subfamily Amygdaloideae (apples, pears, quinces, shadbush, hawthorns, rowans and their relatives). The common name cedar-apple rusts has been used for these fungi. According to the \"Dictionary of the Fungi\" (10th edition, 2008), there were 57 species in the genus. In 2023, Species Fungorum lists up to 74 species.\nIn junipers (the primary hosts, see photo), some species form a ball-like gall about 2\u20134\u00a0cm in diameter which produces a set of orange tentacle-like spore tubes called telial horns. These horns expand and have a jelly like consistency when wet. In other species, such as in \"G. clarvariforme\", the telia are produced directly from the bark of the juniper with no obvious gall formation or swelling. The basidiospores are released and travel on the wind until they infect an apple, pear, hawthorn or suitable tree.\nOn the secondary hosts, the fungus produces yellowish depressions on the leaves. It also infects the fruit, which grows whitish tubes like a Medusa head. These are the spore tubes. These aeciospores must then infect a juniper to complete the life cycle. All the types of spores can spread over long distances.\nThe fungus does not cause serious damage to junipers, but apple and pear trees can suffer serious loss of fruit production due to the effects of the fungus. Although the genus has a worldwide distribution, its impact depends on availability of its two host plant species. Individual species are found in Northern and Central America, Asia, Europe and the Middle East.\nDue to the economic impacts of the rusts in some areas where orchards are of commercial importance, some regions have attempted to ban the planting of and/or eradicate the coniferous hosts.\nIn 2020, the monotypic family \"Gymnosporangiaceae\" was proposed to accommodate \"Gymnosporangium\". As accepted by Wijayawardene et al. 2020.\nFull list of species.\nAs accepted by Species Fungorum;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58858", "revid": "42796477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58858", "title": "Regions of New Zealand", "text": "Top administrative divisions of New Zealand\nThe regions of New Zealand are the administrative jurisdictions of the country's regional councils and unitary authorities; the country is divided into sixteen such areas. The councils derive their powers from the central government, as New Zealand is a unitary state rather than a federation.\nEleven are currently administered by regional councils, whilst the other five are administered by unitary authorities. Most of New Zealand's outlying Islands are not included within its regions, with the Solander Islands being the exception as they are within the Southland Region. The Chatham Islands are not within any region, having their own specially legislated territorial authority.\nCurrent regions.\nHistory and statutory basis.\nThe regional councils are listed in Part 1 of Schedule 2 of the Local Government Act 2002, along with reference to the \"Gazette\" notices that established them in 1989. The act requires regional councils to promote sustainable development\u00a0\u2013 the social, economic, environmental and cultural well-being of their communities.\nThe current regions and most of their councils came into being through a local government reform in 1989 that took place under the Local Government Act 1974. The regional councils replaced the more than 700 ad hoc bodies that had been formed in the preceding century \u2013 roads boards, catchment boards, drainage boards, pest control boards, harbour boards, domain and reserve boards. In addition they took over some roles that had previously been performed by county councils.\nThe boundaries of the regions are based largely on drainage basins. This anticipated the responsibilities of the Resource Management Act 1991. Most regional boundaries conform with territorial authority boundaries but there are a number of exceptions. An example is Taupo District, split between four regions, although most of its area is in the Waikato region. There is often a high degree of co-operation between regional and territorial councils as they have complementary roles.\nResource management functions.\nRegional councils have these specific functions under the Resource Management Act 1991:\nOther functions.\nRegional councils have responsibility for functions under other statutes;\nProposed abolition.\nIn mid 2025, Prime Minister Christopher Luxon and Regional Development Minister Shane Jones proposed scrapping the 11 regional councils as part of the Sixth National Government's proposed overhaul of the Resource Management Act 1991. In late November 2025, Local Government Minister Simon Watts and RMA Reform Minister Chris Bishop confirmed the Government would seek to abolish regional councils and transfer their responsibilities to the 67 local district and city councils.\nThe Government has released two replacement proposals. First, abolishing elected regional councillors and replacing them with Combined Territories Boards (CTBs). These CTBs would consist of the mayors of the district councils within the former regions. While the regional councils as organisations would remain, they would be run by the mayors of the constituent regions. The Government's second proposal would be to get the Combined Territories Boards to prepare a regional reorganisation plan within two years of their establishment, subject to approval by the Local Government Minister. These plans would focus on the delivery of infrastructure, public services and regulatory functions, and would be tested against criteria based on housing, infrastructure, and manageable rates services. Public consultation on the proposed legislative changes is open until 20 February 2026. The legislation is expected to be introduced in mid-2026 with the goal of passing it into law by 2027.\nThe Government's proposal to abolish the regional councils attracted a mixture of reactions. The proposal was supported by Otago Regional councillor Michael Laws and Dunedin City councillor Lee Vandervis, who described the regional councils as an \"excessive level\" of bureaucracy and argued that their dissolution would lower rates and red tape. By contrast, the proposal was opposed by Mayor of Wellington Andrew Little, Otago Regional councillor Alan Somerville, Te W\u0101nanga o Raukawa environmental planning lecturer Dr Mahina-a-rangi Baker, Te Rununga O Makaawhio chair Paul Madgwick and Mayor of Dunedin Sophie Barker on the grounds that abolishing the regional councils would erode environmental protections, reduce M\u0101ori input in regional-level decision-making, infringe on Treaty of Waitangi obligations and add further to mayors and territorial authorities' workloads. Meanwhile, Mayor of Central Otago Tamah Alley, Mayor of Gisborne Rehette Stoltz and Labour leader Chris Hipkins expressed concerns about accountability, the loss of technical expertise, and the nature of the proposed reforms.\nList of regions.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAreas outside regional boundaries.\nSome outlying islands are not included within regional boundaries. The Chatham Islands is not in a region, although its council has some of the powers of a regional council under the Resource Management Act 1991. The Kermadecs and the subantarctic islands are inhabited only by a small number of Department of Conservation staff and there is no regional council for these islands.\nGovernance.\nRegional councils are popularly elected every three years in accordance with the Local Electoral Act 2001. Councils may use a first-past-the-post or single transferable vote system. The chairperson is selected by the elected council members.\nFinances.\nRegional councils are funded through property rates, subsidies from central government, income from trading, and user charges for certain public services. Councils set their own levels of rates, though the mechanism for collecting it usually involves channelling through the territorial authority collection system.\nPredecessors of current structure.\nAuckland.\nThe Auckland Regional Council (now the Auckland Council) was preceded by the Auckland Regional Authority (ARA), which existed from 1963 to 1989.\nWellington.\nThe Wellington Regional Council was first formed in 1980 from a merger of the Wellington Regional Planning Authority and the Wellington Regional Water Board.\nUnited councils.\nIn 1978, legislation was passed enabling the formation of regions that had \"united councils\". Twenty regions were designated, excluding the Auckland and Wellington areas. For most of the country this was the first time there had been a regional level of government since the abolition of provinces in 1876.\nCouncillors were not elected directly \u2013 they were appointed from the various territorial local authorities (TLAs) within the region.\nThe only responsibilities mandated by the legislation were coordination of civil defence and development of a regional plan, although the constituent TLAs could agree on additional responsibilities at the point of formation of each united council. For example, in a number of cases the united council took responsibility for the allocation of revenue from regional petrol taxes.\nThe united councils were based in the facilities of the largest TLA in the region and largely dependent on the TLAs for resources. They were allowed to levy rates but in most cases had minimal operating budgets (below $100,000 per annum). The notable exception was Canterbury, where the united council had a number of responsibilities. Only one united council undertook any direct operational activity \u2013 a forestry project in Wanganui.\nSource: \"Summary of the Functions and Activities of United Councils\". Dept of Internal Affairs, 1984.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58859", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58859", "title": "Allergen", "text": "Type of antigen that produces an abnormally vigorous immune response\nAn allergen is an otherwise harmless substance that triggers an allergic reaction in sensitive individuals by stimulating an immune response.\nIn technical terms, an allergen is an antigen that is capable of stimulating a type-I hypersensitivity reaction in atopic individuals through immunoglobulin E (IgE) responses. Most humans mount significant immunoglobulin E responses only as a defense against parasitic infections. However, some individuals may respond to many common environmental antigens. In atopic individuals, non-parasitic antigens stimulate inappropriate IgE production, leading to type I hypersensitivity.\nSensitivities vary widely from one person (or from one animal) to another. A very broad range of substances can be allergens to sensitive individuals.\nExamples.\nAllergens can be found in a variety of sources, such as dust mite excretion, pollen, pet dander, or even royal jelly. Food allergies are not as common as food sensitivity, but some foods such as peanuts (a legume), nuts, seafood and shellfish are the cause of serious allergies in many people.\nThe United States Food and Drug Administration recognizes nine foods as major food allergens: peanuts, tree nuts, eggs, milk, shellfish, fish, wheat, soy, and most recently sesame, as well as sulfites (chemical-based, often found in flavors and colors in foods) at 10ppm and over. In other countries, due to differences in the genetic profiles of their citizens and different levels of exposure to specific foods, the official allergen lists will vary. Canada recognizes all nine of the allergens recognized by the US as well as mustard. The European Union additionally recognizes other gluten-containing cereals as well as celery and lupin.\nAnother allergen is urushiol, a resin produced by poison ivy and poison oak, which causes the skin rash condition known as urushiol-induced contact dermatitis by changing a skin cell's configuration so that it is no longer recognized by the immune system as part of the body. Various trees and wood products such as paper, cardboard, MDF etc. can also cause mild to severe allergy symptoms through touch or inhalation of sawdust such as asthma and skin rash.\nAn allergic reaction can be caused by any form of direct contact with the allergen\u2014consuming food or drink one is sensitive to (ingestion), breathing in pollen, perfume or pet dander (inhalation), or brushing a body part against an allergy-causing plant (direct contact). Other common causes of serious allergy are wasp, fire ant and bee stings, penicillin, and latex. An extremely serious form of an allergic reaction is called anaphylaxis. One form of treatment is the administration of sterile epinephrine to the person experiencing anaphylaxis, which suppresses the body's overreaction to the allergen, and allows for the patient to be transported to a medical facility.\nAlthough allergic reactions typically require prior sensitization to a specific allergen, clinical symptoms can sometimes occur upon first exposure to a food or substance; this is explained by IgE cross-reactivity, where prior sensitization to structurally homologous proteins from other sources leads the immune system to recognize similar proteins in the new allergen as triggers, even though the affected individual has never previously consumed or contacted it.\nCommon.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn addition to foreign proteins found in foreign serum (from blood transfusions) and vaccines, common allergens include:\nSeasonal.\nSeasonal allergy symptoms are commonly experienced during specific parts of the year, usually during spring, summer or fall when certain trees or grasses pollinate. This depends on the kind of tree or grass. For instance, some trees such as oak, elm, and maple pollinate in the spring, while grasses such as Bermuda, timothy and orchard pollinate in the summer.\nGrass allergy is generally linked to hay fever because their symptoms and causes are somehow similar to each other. Symptoms include rhinitis, which causes sneezing and a runny nose, as well as allergic conjunctivitis, which includes watering and itchy eyes. Also an initial tickle on the roof of the mouth or in the back of the throat may be experienced.\nAlso, depending on the season, the symptoms may be more severe and people may experience coughing, wheezing, and irritability. A few people even become depressed, lose their appetite, or have problems sleeping. Moreover, since the sinuses may also become congested, some people experience headaches.\nIf both parents have had allergies in the past, there is a 66% chance for the individual to experience seasonal allergies, and the risk lowers to 60% if just one parent has had allergies. The immune system also has strong influence on seasonal allergies, because it reacts differently to diverse allergens like pollen. When an allergen enters the body of an individual that is predisposed to allergies, it triggers an immune reaction and the production of antibodies. These allergen antibodies migrate to mast cells lining the nose, eyes, and lungs. When an allergen drifts into the nose more than once, mast cells release a slew of chemicals or histamines that irritate and inflame the moist membranes lining the nose and produce the symptoms of an allergic reaction: scratchy throat, itching, sneezing and watery eyes. Some symptoms that differentiate allergies from a cold include:\nAmong seasonal allergies, there are some allergens that fuse together and produce a new type of allergy. For instance, grass pollen allergens cross-react with food allergy proteins in vegetables such as onion, lettuce, carrots, celery, and corn. Besides, the cousins of birch pollen allergens, like apples, grapes, peaches, celery, and apricots, produce severe itching in the ears and throat. The cypress pollen allergy brings a cross reactivity between diverse species like olive, privet, ash and Russian olive tree pollen allergens. In some rural areas, there is another form of seasonal grass allergy, combining airborne particles of pollen mixed with mold.\nRecent research has suggested that humans might develop allergies as a defense to fight off parasites. According to Yale University Immunologist Ruslan Medzhitov, protease allergens cleave the same sensor proteins that evolved to detect proteases produced by the parasitic worms. Additionally, a new report on seasonal allergies called \"Extreme allergies and Global Warming\", have found that many allergy triggers are worsening due to climate change. 16 states in the United States were named as \"Allergen Hotspots\" for large increases in allergenic tree pollen if global warming pollution keeps increasing. Therefore, researchers on this report claimed that global warming is bad news for millions of asthmatics in the United States whose asthma attacks are triggered by seasonal allergies. Seasonal allergies are one of the main triggers for asthma, along with colds or flu, cigarette smoke and exercise. In Canada, for example, up to 75% of asthmatics also have seasonal allergies.\nDiagnosis.\nBased on the symptoms seen on the patient, the answers given in terms of symptom evaluation and a physical exam, doctors can make a diagnosis to identify if the patient has a seasonal allergy. After performing the diagnosis, the doctor is able to tell the main cause of the allergic reaction and recommend the treatment to follow. Two tests have to be done in order to determine the cause: a blood test and a skin test. Allergists do skin tests in one of two ways: either dropping some purified liquid of the allergen onto the skin and pricking the area with a small needle; or injecting a small amount of allergen under the skin.\nAlternative tools are available to identify seasonal allergies, such as laboratory tests, imaging tests, and nasal endoscopy. In the laboratory tests, the doctor will take a nasal smear and it will be examined microscopically for factors that may indicate a cause: increased numbers of eosinophils (white blood cells), which indicates an allergic condition. If there is a high count of eosinophils, an allergic condition might be present.\nAnother laboratory test is the blood test for IgE (immunoglobulin production), such as the radioallergosorbent test (RAST) or the more recent enzyme allergosorbent tests (EAST), implemented to detect high levels of allergen-specific IgE in response to particular allergens. Although blood tests are less accurate than the skin tests, they can be performed on patients unable to undergo skin testing. Imaging tests can be useful to detect sinusitis in people who have chronic rhinitis, and they can work when other test results are ambiguous. There is also nasal endoscopy, wherein a tube is inserted through the nose with a small camera to view the passageways and examine any irregularities in the nose structure. Endoscopy can be used for some cases of chronic or unresponsive seasonal rhinitis.\nFungal.\nIn 1952 basidiospores were described as being possible airborne allergens and were linked to asthma in 1969. Basidiospores are the dominant airborne fungal allergens. Fungal allergies are associated with seasonal asthma. They are considered to be a major source of airborne allergens. The basidiospore family include mushrooms, rusts, smuts, brackets, and puffballs. The airborne spores from mushrooms reach levels comparable to those of mold and pollens. The levels of mushroom respiratory allergy are as high as 30% of those with allergic disorder, but it is believed to be less than 1% of food allergies. Heavy rainfall (which increases fungal spore release) is associated with increased hospital admissions of children with asthma. A study in New Zealand found that 22 percent of patients with respiratory allergic disorders tested positive for basidiospores allergies. Mushroom spore allergies can cause either immediate allergic symptomatology or delayed allergic reactions. Those with asthma are more likely to have immediate allergic reactions and those with allergic rhinitis are more likely to have delayed allergic responses. A study found that 27% of patients were allergic to basidiomycete mycelia extracts and 32% were allergic to basidiospore extracts, thus demonstrating the high incidence of fungal sensitisation in individuals with suspected allergies. It has been found that out of basidiomycete caps, mycelia, and spore extracts, the spore extracts are the most reliable extract for diagnosing basidiomycete allergy.\nIn Canada, 8% of children attending allergy clinics were found to be allergic to \"Ganoderma\", a basidiospore. \"Pleurotus ostreatus\", \"Cladosporium\", and \"Calvatia cyathiformis\" are significant airborne spores. Other significant fungal allergens include \"Aspergillus\" and \"Alternaria\"-\"Penicillium\" families. In India, \"Fomes pectinatus\" is a predominant air-borne allergen affecting up to 22% of patients with respiratory allergies. Some fungal air-borne allergens such as \"Coprinus comatus\" are associated with worsening of eczematous skin lesions. Children who are born during Autumn months (during fungal spore season) are more likely to develop asthmatic symptoms later in life.\nTreatment.\nTreatment includes over-the-counter medications, antihistamines, nasal decongestants, allergy shots, and alternative medicine. In the case of nasal symptoms, antihistamines are normally the first option. They may be taken together with pseudoephedrine to help relieve a stuffy nose and they can stop the itching and sneezing. Over-the-counter options include clemastine. However, these antihistamines may cause extreme drowsiness, therefore, people are advised to not operate heavy machinery or drive while taking this kind of medication. Other side effects include dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, difficulty with urination, confusion, and lightheadedness. There is also a newer second generation of antihistamines that are generally classified as non-sedating antihistamines or anti-drowsy, which include cetirizine, loratadine, and fexofenadine.\nAn example of nasal decongestants is pseudoephedrine and its side-effects include insomnia, restlessness, and difficulty urinating. Some other nasal sprays are available by prescription, including azelastine and ipratropium bromide. Some of their side-effects include drowsiness. For eye symptoms, it is important to first bathe the eyes with plain eyewash to reduce irritation. People should not wear contact lenses during episodes of conjunctivitis.\nAllergen immunotherapy treatment involves administering doses of allergens to accustom the body to induce specific long-term tolerance. Allergy immunotherapy can be administered orally (as sublingual tablets or sublingual drops), or by injections under the skin (subcutaneous). Immunotherapy contains a small amount of the substance that triggers the allergic reactions.\nGradual introduction is also used for egg and milk allergies as a home-based therapy mainly for children. Such methods cited in the UK involve the gradual introduction of the allergen in a cooked form where the protein allergenicity has been reduced to become less potent. By reintroducing the allergen from a fully cooked, usually baked, state, research suggests that a tolerance can emerge to certain egg and milk allergies under the supervision of a dietitian or specialist. The suitability of this treatment is debated between British and North American experts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "58861", "revid": "1123", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58861", "title": "Casimir Kuratowski", "text": ""}
{"id": "58862", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=58862", "title": "Three utilities problem", "text": "Mathematical puzzle of avoiding crossings\nThe three utilities problem, also known as water, gas and electricity, is a mathematical puzzle that asks for non-crossing connections to be drawn between three houses and three utility companies on a plane. When posing it in the early 20th century, Henry Dudeney wrote that it was already an old problem. It is an impossible puzzle: it is not possible to connect all nine lines without any of them crossing. Versions of the problem on nonplanar surfaces such as a torus or M\u00f6bius strip, or that allow connections to pass through other houses or utilities, can be solved.\nThis puzzle can be formalized as a problem in topological graph theory by asking whether the complete bipartite graph formula_1, with vertices representing the houses and utilities and edges representing their connections, has a graph embedding in the plane. The impossibility of the puzzle corresponds to the fact that formula_1 is not a planar graph. Multiple proofs of this impossibility are known, and form part of the proof of Kuratowski's theorem characterizing planar graphs by two forbidden subgraphs, one of which is formula_1. The question of minimizing the number of crossings in drawings of complete bipartite graphs is known as Tur\u00e1n's brick factory problem, and for formula_1 the minimum number of crossings is one.\nformula_1 is a graph with six vertices and nine edges, often referred to as the utility graph in reference to the problem. It has also been called the Thomsen graph after 19th-century chemist Julius Thomsen. It is a well-covered graph, the smallest triangle-free cubic graph, and the smallest non-planar minimally rigid graph.\nHistory.\nA review of the history of the three utilities problem is given by . He states that most published references to the problem characterize it as \"very ancient\". In the earliest publication found by Kullman, Henry Dudeney\u00a0(1917) names it \"water, gas, and electricity\". However, Dudeney states that the problem is \"as old as the hills...much older than electric lighting, or even gas\". Dudeney also published the same puzzle previously, in \"The Strand Magazine\" in 1913. A competing claim of priority goes to Sam Loyd, who was quoted by his son in a posthumous biography as having published the problem in 1900.\nAnother early version of the problem involves connecting three houses to three wells. It is stated similarly to a different (and solvable) puzzle that also involves three houses and three fountains, with all three fountains and one house touching a rectangular wall; the puzzle again involves making non-crossing connections, but only between three designated pairs of houses and wells or fountains, as in modern numberlink puzzles. Loyd's puzzle \"The Quarrelsome Neighbors\" similarly involves connecting three houses to three gates by three non-crossing paths (rather than nine as in the utilities problem); one house and the three gates are on the wall of a rectangular yard, which contains the other two houses within it.\nAs well as in the three utilities problem, the graph formula_1 appears in late 19th-century and early 20th-century publications both in early studies of structural rigidity and in chemical graph theory, where Julius Thomsen proposed it in 1886 for the then-uncertain structure of benzene. In honor of Thomsen's work, formula_1 is sometimes called the Thomsen graph.\nStatement.\nThe three utilities problem can be stated as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Suppose three houses each need to be connected to the water, gas, and electricity companies, with a separate line from each house to each company. Is there a way to make all nine connections without any of the lines crossing each other?\nThe problem is an abstract mathematical puzzle which imposes constraints that would not exist in a practical engineering situation. Its mathematical formalization is part of the field of topological graph theory which studies the embedding of graphs on surfaces. An important part of the puzzle, but one that is often not stated explicitly in informal wordings of the puzzle, is that the houses, companies, and lines must all be placed on a two-dimensional surface with the topology of a plane, and that the lines are not allowed to pass through other buildings; sometimes this is enforced by showing a drawing of the houses and companies, and asking for the connections to be drawn as lines on the same drawing.\nIn more formal graph-theoretic terms, the problem asks whether the complete bipartite graph formula_1 is a planar graph. This graph has six vertices in two subsets of three: one vertex for each house, and one for each utility. It has nine edges, one edge for each of the pairings of a house with a utility, or more abstractly one edge for each pair of a vertex in one subset and a vertex in the other subset. Planar graphs are the graphs that can be drawn without crossings in the plane, and if such a drawing could be found, it would solve the three utilities puzzle.\nPuzzle solutions.\nUnsolvability.\nAs it is usually presented (on a flat two-dimensional plane), the solution to the utility puzzle is \"no\": there is no way to make all nine connections without any of the lines crossing each other.\nIn other words, the graph formula_1 is not planar. Kazimierz Kuratowski stated in 1930 that formula_1 is nonplanar, from which it follows that the problem has no solution. , however, states that \"Interestingly enough, Kuratowski did not publish a detailed proof that [ formula_1 ] is non-planar\".\nOne proof of the impossibility of finding a planar embedding of formula_1 uses a case analysis involving the Jordan curve theorem. In this solution, one examines different possibilities for the locations of the vertices with respect to the 4-cycles of the graph and shows that they are all inconsistent with a planar embedding.\nAlternatively, it is possible to show that any bridgeless bipartite planar graph with formula_13 vertices and formula_14 edges has formula_15 by combining the Euler formula formula_16 (where formula_17 is the number of faces of a planar embedding) with the observation that the number of faces is at most half the number of edges (the vertices around each face must alternate between houses and utilities, so each face has at least four edges, and each edge belongs to exactly two faces). In the utility graph, formula_18 and formula_19 so in the utility graph it is untrue that formula_15. Because it does not satisfy this inequality, the utility graph cannot be planar.\nChanging the rules.\nformula_1 is a toroidal graph, which means that it can be embedded without crossings on a torus, a surface of genus one. These embeddings solve versions of the puzzle in which the houses and companies are drawn on a coffee mug or other such surface instead of a flat plane. There is even enough additional freedom on the torus to solve a version of the puzzle with four houses and four utilities. Similarly, if the three utilities puzzle is presented on a sheet of a transparent material, it may be solved after twisting and gluing the sheet to form a M\u00f6bius strip.\nAnother way of changing the rules of the puzzle that would make it solvable, suggested by Henry Dudeney, is to allow utility lines to pass through other houses or utilities than the ones they connect.\nProperties of the utility graph.\nBeyond the utility puzzle, the same graph formula_1 comes up in several other mathematical contexts, including rigidity theory, the classification of cages and well-covered graphs, the study of graph crossing numbers, and the theory of graph minors.\nRigidity.\nThe utility graph formula_1 is a Laman graph, meaning that for almost all placements of its vertices in the plane, there is no way to continuously move its vertices while preserving all edge lengths, other than by a rigid motion of the whole plane, and that none of its spanning subgraphs have the same rigidity property. It is the smallest example of a nonplanar Laman graph. Despite being a minimally rigid graph, it has non-rigid embeddings with special placements for its vertices. For general-position embeddings, a polynomial equation describing all possible placements with the same edge lengths has degree 16, meaning that in general there can be at most 16 placements with the same lengths. It is possible to find systems of edge lengths for which up to eight of the solutions to this equation describe realizable placements.\nOther graph-theoretic properties.\nformula_1 is a triangle-free graph, in which every vertex has exactly three neighbors (a cubic graph). Among all such graphs, it is the smallest. Therefore, it is the (3,4)-cage, the smallest graph that has three neighbors per vertex and in which the shortest cycle has length four.\nLike all other complete bipartite graphs, it is a well-covered graph, meaning that every maximal independent set has the same size. In this graph, the only two maximal independent sets are the two sides of the bipartition, and are of equal sizes. formula_1 is one of only seven 3-regular 3-connected well-covered graphs.\nGeneralizations.\nTwo important characterizations of planar graphs, Kuratowski's theorem that the planar graphs are exactly the graphs that contain neither formula_1 nor the complete graph formula_27 as a subdivision, and Wagner's theorem that the planar graphs are exactly the graphs that contain neither formula_1 nor formula_27 as a minor, make use of and generalize the non-planarity of formula_1.\nP\u00e1l Tur\u00e1n's \"brick factory problem\" asks more generally for a formula for the minimum number of crossings in a drawing of the complete bipartite graph formula_31 in terms of the numbers of vertices formula_32 and formula_33 on the two sides of the bipartition. The utility graph formula_1 may be drawn with only one crossing, but not with zero crossings, so its crossing number is one.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
