{"id": "61184", "revid": "50937776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61184", "title": "The Patriot (2000 film)", "text": "2000 film by Roland Emmerich\nThe Patriot is a 2000 American epic historical drama war film directed by Roland Emmerich and written by Robert Rodat. The film stars Mel Gibson, Heath Ledger, Joely Richardson, Jason Isaacs, Chris Cooper, and Tom Wilkinson. Set in Berkeley County, South Carolina, it follows Benjamin Martin (Gibson), an American colonist who is opposed to going to war with Great Britain but, along with his son Gabriel (Ledger), gets swept into the American Revolutionary War when his home life is disrupted, and one of his sons is murdered by a cruel British officer (Isaacs). Rodat has said Martin is a composite character based on four historical men: Andrew Pickens, Francis Marion, Daniel Morgan and Thomas Sumter.\n\"The Patriot\" had its world premiere in Century City on June 27, 2000, and was theatrically released in the United States on June 30, 2000. It received positive reviews from critics and grossed $215.3 million against a $110 million budget. The film generated controversy due to themes of anti-British sentiment and was criticized by historians over its fictionalized portrayal of British figures and atrocities.\nPlot.\nIn 1776, during the American Revolutionary War, Benjamin Martin, a French and Indian War veteran and a widower with seven children, is called to Charles Town (Charleston) to vote in the South Carolina General Assembly on a levy supporting the Continental Army. Benjamin abstains, fearing war against Great Britain and not wanting to force others to fight when he himself would not. Still, the vote passes, and Benjamin's oldest son, Gabriel, joins the Continental Army against his father's wishes.\nFour years later, in 1780, Charlestown falls to the British Army, and a wounded Gabriel returns home carrying rebel dispatches. The Martins care for wounded British and American soldiers before British dragoons arrive, led by Colonel William Tavington. Tavington press gangs the Martins' African-American former slaves into the army and arrests Gabriel as a spy. Gabriel's brother Thomas tries to free him, but Tavington kills Thomas, then orders the Martins' house burned and all the wounded Americans executed. After the British leave, Benjamin and two of his younger sons ambush the British convoy transporting Gabriel. They succeed in killing all the soldiers and rescuing Gabriel.\nGabriel rejoins the Continentals, and Benjamin soon follows, leaving the younger children in the care of his sister-in-law, Charlotte. Benjamin meets his former commanding officer, Colonel Harry Burwell, who appoints him as colonel to raise a militia unit and places Gabriel under his father's command. Benjamin is tasked with weakening Lord Cornwallis's regiments by guerrilla warfare. French Major Jean Villeneuve helps train the militia and promises more French aid. Gabriel asks his father why Villeneuve and other militia often mention Fort Wilderness, and Benjamin tells him that while fighting in the British Army, Benjamin and his men discovered atrocities against British colonists by French soldiers in the Blue Ridge Mountains. Enraged, they caught up with the retreating French at Fort Wilderness and killed all but two of them. The survivors had to present the severed heads of their comrades to the Cherokee, which convinced the tribe to betray the French. Though regarded as a hero, Benjamin never forgave himself.\nBenjamin's militia ambushes many British patrols and supply caravans, including some of Cornwallis's personal effects and his two Great Danes, and burns bridges and ferries that Cornwallis needs. After Benjamin uses a dishonorable and embarrassing ploy to free his captured men, Cornwallis allows Tavington to do everything possible to arrest him.\nWith the aid of Wilkins, a local Loyalist, Tavington has several militiamen's homes burned and their families executed. Benjamin's family flees Charlotte's plantation to live in a Gullah settlement with formerly enslaved residents. There, Gabriel marries his betrothed, Anne. Tavington's brigade raids Anne's town and assembles everyone in the church, including Anne; knowing that they are secretly aiding the militia, he demands the location of their camp. Despite one townsperson giving it away, Tavington burns the church, killing everyone inside. Upon discovering the tragedy, Gabriel and several other soldiers attack Tavington's encampment, where Tavington kills Gabriel before fleeing. Benjamin contemplates desertion, but after seeing the American flag Gabriel repaired, he is reminded of his son's patriotic dedication and decides to rejoin the others.\nBenjamin devises a battlefield tactic that uses Cornwallis's pride against him. Benjamin's militia joins the Continental Army regiment and confronts Cornwallis's troops at Cowpens. Benjamin and Tavington engage in personal combat. Tavington wounds Benjamin and prepares to deliver the coup de gr\u00e2ce, but Benjamin dodges the attack and impales Tavington, killing him. The battle becomes a Continental victory, and Cornwallis retreats.\nCornwallis is besieged at Yorktown, where his subordinate surrenders to the American and French forces. Afterwards, Benjamin returns to his family and discovers that his former militia is rebuilding his homestead in honor of Gabriel's dream of building a new world.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nScript.\nScreenwriter Robert Rodat wrote seventeen drafts of the script before there was an acceptable one. In an early version, Anne is pregnant with Gabriel's child when she dies in the burning church. Rodat wrote the script with Mel Gibson in mind for Benjamin Martin and gave the character six children to signal that preference to studio executives. After the birth of Gibson's seventh child, the script was changed so that Martin has seven children. Like the character William Wallace, which Gibson had portrayed in \"Braveheart\" five years earlier, Martin is a man who seeks to live his life in peace until revenge drives him to lead a cause against a national enemy after the life of an innocent family member is taken.\nCasting.\nHarrison Ford turned down the lead role of Benjamin Martin because he considered the film \"too violent\" and that \"it boiled the American Revolution down to one guy wanting revenge.\" Gibson was paid a record salary of $25 million. Jude Law was offered the role of William Tavington, but turned it down, the role eventually went to Jason Issacs after submitting an audition tape. Joshua Jackson, Elijah Wood, Jake Gyllenhaal, and Brad Renfro were considered to play Gabriel Martin. The producers and director narrowed their choices for the role of Gabriel to Ryan Phillippe and Heath Ledger, with Ledger chosen because Roland Emmerich thought he possessed \"exuberant youth.\"\nFilming.\nThe film's German director Emmerich said \"these were characters I could relate to, and they were engaged in a conflict that had a significant outcome\u2014the creation of the first modern democratic government.\"\nThe film was shot entirely on location in South Carolina, including Charleston, Rock Hill\u2014for many of the battle scenes, and Lowrys\u2014for the farm of Benjamin Martin, as well as nearby Fort Lawn. Filming began on September 7, 1999, and ended on January 20, 2000. Other scenes were filmed at Mansfield Plantation, an antebellum rice plantation in Georgetown, Middleton Place in Charleston, South Carolina, at the Cistern Yard on the campus of College of Charleston, and Hightower Hall and Homestead House at Brattonsville, South Carolina, along with the grounds of the Brattonsville Plantation in McConnells, South Carolina. Producer Mark Gordon said the production team \"tried their best to be as authentic as possible\" because \"the backdrop was serious history,\" giving attention to details in period dress. Producer Dean Devlin and the film's costume designers examined actual Revolutionary War uniforms at the Smithsonian Institution prior to shooting.\nMusical score.\nThe musical score for \"The Patriot\" was composed and conducted by John Williams and was nominated for an Academy Award. David Arnold, who composed the scores to Emmerich's \"Stargate\", \"Independence Day\", and \"Godzilla\", created a demo for \"The Patriot\" that was ultimately rejected. As a result, Arnold never returned to compose for any of Emmerich's subsequent films and was replaced by Harald Kloser and Thomas Wander.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, \"The Patriot\" holds an approval rating of 61% based on 137 reviews, with an average rating of 6.10/10. The site's critics consensus reads: \"\"The Patriot\" can be entertaining to watch, but it relies too much on formula and melodrama.\" On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 63 out of 100, based on 35 critics, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\". Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\n\"The New York Times\" critic Elvis Mitchell gave the film a generally negative review, although he praised its casting and called Mel Gibson \"an astonishing actor\", particularly for his \"on-screen comfort and expansiveness\". He said the film is a \"gruesome hybrid, a mix of sentimentality and brutality\". Jamie Malanowski, also writing in \"The New York Times\", said \"The Patriot\" \"will prove to many a satisfying way to spend a summer evening. It's got big battles and wrenching hand-to-hand combat, a courageous but conflicted hero and a dastardly and totally guilt-free villain, thrills, tenderness, sorrow, rage and a little bit of kissing\". In his review of the film, the critic Roger Ebert wrote, \"I enjoyed the strength and conviction of Gibson's performance, the sweep of the battle scenes, and the absurdity of the British caricatures. None of it has much to do with the historical reality of the Revolutionary War, but with such an enormous budget at risk, how could it?\"\nFalse reviews controversy.\nA highly positive review was purportedly written by a critic named David Manning, who was credited to \"The Ridgefield Press\", a small Connecticut weekly news publication. During an investigation into Manning's quotes, \"Newsweek\" reporter John Horn discovered that the newspaper had never heard of him. The story emerged at around the same time as an announcement that Sony had used employees posing as moviegoers in television commercials to praise the film. All of those occurrences raised questions and controversies about ethics in film promotion practices.\nOn the June 10, 2001 episode of \"Le Show\", host Harry Shearer conducted an in-studio interview with Manning, whose \"review\" of the film was positive. The voice of Manning was provided by a computer voice synthesizer.\nOn August 3, 2005, Sony made an out-of-court settlement and agreed to refund $5 each to dissatisfied customers who saw that and four other films in American theaters as a result of Manning's reviews.\nBox office.\n\"The Patriot\" opened in 3,061 venues at #2 with $22,413,710 domestically in its opening weekend, falling slightly short of expectations (predictions had the film opening #1 with roughly $25 million ahead). The film opened behind Warner Bros.'s \"The Perfect Storm\", which opened at #1 with $41,325,042. The film closed on October 16, 2000, with a domestic total of $113,330,342. It saw a similar level of success in foreign markets, earning $101,964,000 there for a grand total of $215,294,342, against a production budget of $110 million.\nAccolades.\n\"The Patriot\" was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Cinematography, Best Original Score, and Best Sound (Kevin O'Connell, Greg P. Russell and Lee Orloff). It also received several guild awards, including the American Society of Cinematographers award to Caleb Deschanel for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography and the Hollywood Makeup Artist and Hair Stylist Guild Award for Best Period Makeup and Best Period Hair Styling.\nHistorical authenticity.\nDuring development, Emmerich and his team consulted experts at the Smithsonian Institution on set, props, and costumes; advisor Rex Ellis even recommended the Gullah village as an appropriate place for Martin's family to hide. In addition, screenwriter Robert Rodat read through many journals and letters of colonists as part of his preparation for writing the screenplay.\nProducer Mark Gordon said that in making the film, \"while we were telling a fictional story, the backdrop was serious history\". Some of the resulting characters and events thus were composites of real characters and events that were designed to serve the fictional narrative without losing the historical flavor. Rodat said of Gibson's character: \"Benjamin Martin is a composite character made up of Thomas Sumter, Daniel Morgan, Andrew Pickens, and Francis Marion, and a few bits and pieces from a number of other characters.\" Rodat also indicated that the fictional Colonel William Tavington is \"loosely based on Colonel Banastre Tarleton, who was particularly known for his brutal acts\".\nWhile some events, such as Tarleton's pursuit of Francis Marion and his fellow irregular soldiers who escaped by disappearing into the swamps of South Carolina, were loosely based on history, and others were adapted, such as the final battle in the film which combined elements of the Battles of Cowpens and Battle of Guilford Court House, most of the plot events in the film are pure fiction.\nCriticism of Benjamin Martin as based on Francis Marion.\nThe film was harshly criticized in the British press in part because of its connection to Francis Marion, a militia leader in South Carolina known as the \"Swamp Fox\". After the release of \"The Patriot\", the British newspaper \"The Guardian\" denounced Marion as \"a serial rapist who hunted Red Indians for fun.\" Historian Christopher Hibbert told the \"Daily Express\" about Marion:\nThe truth is that people like Marion committed atrocities as bad, if not worse, than those perpetrated by the British.\n\"The Patriot\" does not depict the American character Benjamin Martin as innocent of atrocities; a key plot point revolves around the character's guilt over acts he engaged in, such as torturing, killing, and mutilating prisoners during the French and Indian War, leading him to repentantly repudiate General Cornwallis for the brutality of his men.\nConservative radio host Michael Graham rejected Hibbert's criticism of Marion in a commentary published in \"National Review\":\nWas Francis Marion a slave owner? Was he a determined and dangerous warrior? Did he commit acts in an 18th century war that we would consider atrocious in the current world of peace and political correctness? As another great American film hero might say: 'You're damn right.' \"That's what made him a hero, 200 years ago and today.\"\nGraham also refers to what he describes as \"the unchallenged work of South Carolina's premier historian\" Dr. Walter Edgar, who claimed in his 1998 \"South Carolina: A History\" that Marion's partisans were \"a ragged band of both black and white volunteers\".\nAmy Crawford, in \"Smithsonian\" magazine, stated that modern historians such as William Gilmore Simms and Hugh Rankin have written accurate biographies of Marion, including Simms' \"The Life of Francis Marion\". The introduction to the 2007 edition of Simms' book was written by Sean Busick, a professor of American history at Athens State University in Alabama, who wrote:\nMarion deserves to be remembered as one of the heroes of the War for Independence...Francis Marion was a man of his times: he owned slaves, and he fought in a brutal campaign against the Cherokee Indians...Marion's experience in the French and Indian War prepared him for more admirable service.\nDuring pre-production, the producers debated on whether Martin would own slaves, ultimately deciding not to make him a slave owner. This decision received criticism from Spike Lee, who in a letter to \"The Hollywood Reporter\" accused the film's portrayal of slavery as being \"a complete whitewashing of history\". Lee wrote that after he and his wife went to see the film, \"we both came out of the theatre fuming. For three hours \"The Patriot\" dodged around, skirted about or completely ignored slavery.\" Gibson himself remarked: \"I think I would have made him a slave holder. Not to seems kind of a cop-out.\"\nCriticism of Tavington as based on Tarleton.\nAfter release, several British voices criticized the film for its depiction of the film's villain Tavington and defended the historical character of Banastre Tarleton. Ben Fenton, commenting in \"The Daily Telegraph\", wrote:\nThere is no evidence that Tarleton, called 'Bloody Ban' or 'The Butcher' in rebel pamphlets, ever broke the rules of war and certainly did not ever shoot a child in cold blood.\nAlthough Tarleton gained the reputation among Americans as a butcher for his involvement in the Battle of Waxhaws in South Carolina, he was a hero in the City of Liverpool. Liverpool City Council, led by Mayor Edwin Clein, called for a public apology for what they viewed as the film's \"character assassination\" of Tarleton.\nWhat happened during the Battle of The Waxhaws, known to some Americans as the Buford Massacre or as the Waxhaw massacre, is the subject of debate. Forty years after the event, Robert Brownfield, a surgeon's mate in the Continental Army at the time, was asked for his story. According to him Col. Buford raised a white flag of surrender, \"expecting the usual treatment sanctioned by civilized warfare\". While Buford was calling for quarter, Tarleton's horse was struck by a musket ball and fell. This gave the Loyalist cavalrymen the impression that the Continentals had shot at their commander while asking for mercy. Enraged, the Loyalist troops charged at the Virginians. According to Brownfield, the Loyalists attacked, carrying out \"indiscriminate carnage never surpassed by the most ruthless atrocities of the most barbarous savages\". However, Brownfield treated the wounded and did not see the battle.\nWhile Patriot accounts don't agree on who carried a flag or what happened to it, British reports don't mention a flag of surrender at all. In Tarleton's own account, he stated that his horse had been shot from under him during the initial charge in which he was knocked out for several minutes and that his men, thinking him dead, engaged in \"a vindictive asperity not easily restrained\".\nTarleton's role in the Revolutionary War in the Carolinas is examined by Ben Rubin who shows that historically, while the actual events of the Battle of the Waxhaws were presented differently according to which side was recounting them, the story of Tarleton's atrocities at Waxhaws and on other occasions became a rallying cry, particularly at the Battle of King's Mountain. The tales of Tarleton's atrocities were a part of standard U.S. accounts of the war and were described by Washington Irving and by Christopher Ward in his 1952 history, \"The War of the Revolution\", where Tarleton is described as \"cold-hearted, vindictive, and utterly ruthless. He wrote his name in letters of blood all across the history of the war in the South.\" Not until Anthony Scotti's 2002 book, \"Brutal Virtue: The Myth and Reality of Banastre Tarleton\", were Tarleton's actions fully reexamined. Scotti challenged the factual accounts of atrocities and stressed the \"propaganda value that such stories held for the Americans both during and after the war\". Scotti's book, however, did not come out until two years after \"The Patriot\". Screenwriters consulting American works to build the character Tavington based on Tarleton would have commonly found descriptions of him as barbaric and accounts of his name being used for recruiting and motivation during the Revolutionary War itself.\nWhereas Tavington is depicted as aristocratic but penniless, Tarleton came from a wealthy Liverpool merchant family. Tarleton did not die in battle or from impalement, as Tavington did in the film. Tarleton died on January 16, 1833, in Leintwardine, Herefordshire, England, at the age of 78, nearly 50 years after the war ended. He outlived Col. Francis Marion, who died in 1795, by 38 years. Before his death, Tarleton had achieved the military rank of General, equal to that held by the overall British commanders during the American Revolution, and became a baronet and a member of the British Parliament.\nDepiction of atrocities in the Revolutionary War.\n\"The Patriot\" was criticized for misrepresenting atrocities during the Revolutionary War, including the killing of prisoners of war and wounded soldiers and Tavington's burning a church filled with civilians. Although historians have noted that both sides during the conflict committed atrocities, they \"generally agree that the rebels probably violated the rules of war more often than the British\" . According to \"Salon.com\", the church-burning scene in the film is based on the Oradour-sur-Glane massacre committed by German forces in 1944, though \"[there] is no evidence that a similar event took place during the American Revolution\". Historian Bill Segars noted that there was no record of the British ever burning a church full of civilians during the Revolutionary War, though British and Loyalist forces did burn several empty churches such as the St. Philip's Church in Brunswick Town and Indiantown Presbyterian Church.\nThe \"New York Post\" film critic Jonathan Foreman was one of several focusing on this distortion in the film and wrote the following in an article at \"Salon.com\":\nThe most disturbing thing about \"The Patriot\" is not just that German director Roland Emmerich (director of\" Independence Day)\" and his screenwriter Robert Rodat (who was criticized for excluding the roles played by British and other Allied troops in the Normandy landings from his script for \"Saving Private Ryan\") depicted British troops as committing savage atrocities, but that those atrocities bear such a close resemblance to war crimes carried out by German troops\u2014particularly the SS in World War II. It's hard not to wonder if the filmmakers have some kind of subconscious agenda... They have made a film that will have the effect of inoculating audiences against the unique historical horror of Oradour\u2014and implicitly rehabilitating the Nazis while making the British seem as evil as history's worst monsters... So it's no wonder that the British press sees this film as a kind of blood libel against the British people.\n\"The Washington Post\" film critic Stephen Hunter said: \"Any image of the American Revolution which represents you Brits as Nazis and us as gentle folk is almost certainly wrong. It was a very bitter war, a total war, and that is something that I am afraid has been lost to history...[T]he presence of the Loyalists (colonists who did not want to join the fight for independence from Britain) meant that the War of Independence was a conflict of complex loyalties.\" The historian Richard F. Snow, editor of \"American Heritage\" magazine, said of the church-burning scene: \"Of course it never happened\u2014if it had do you think Americans would have forgotten it? It could have kept us out of World War I.\"\nHome media.\n\"The Patriot\" was released on DVD and VHS on October 24, 2000, a Blu-ray release followed on July 3, 2007. The film was later released on 4K UHD Blu-ray on May 22, 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61186", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61186", "title": "The Big House (1930 film)", "text": "1930 film directed by George W. Hill\nThe Big House is a 1930 American pre-Code prison drama film directed by George Hill, released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and starring Chester Morris, Wallace Beery, Lewis Stone and Robert Montgomery. The story and dialogue were written by Frances Marion, who won the Academy Award for Best Writing Achievement. As one of the first prison movies, it inspired many others of this genre.\nPlot.\nKent (Robert Montgomery), a drunk driver who carelessly kills a man, is sentenced to ten years for manslaughter. In an overcrowded prison designed for 1800 and actually holding 3000, he is placed in a cell with Butch (Wallace Beery) and Morgan (Chester Morris), the two leaders of the inmates. Butch is alternately menacing and friendly, while Morgan tries to help out the frightened, inexperienced youngster, but Kent rebuffs his overtures.\nWhen Butch is ordered into solitary confinement for sparking a protest over the prison food, he passes along his knife before being searched. It ends up in Kent's hands. Meanwhile, Morgan is notified that he is to be paroled. Prior to a search of their cell, Kent hides the knife in Morgan's bed. When it is found, Morgan's parole is canceled, and he is put in solitary as well. He vows to make Kent pay for what he has done.\nWhen Morgan is let out of solitary, he escapes by switching places with a corpse on the way to the morgue. He makes his way to the bookstore run by Kent's beautiful sister, Anne (Leila Hyams). She, however, recognizes him. She manages to get his gun and starts to call the police, but then changes her mind and gives him back his pistol. Morgan (who has been attracted to Anne since he saw Kent's photograph of her) gets a job and becomes better acquainted with Anne and her family. They all like him, especially Anne. However, he is caught and sent back to prison.\nWhen Butch tells Morgan of his plan for a jailbreak on Thanksgiving, Morgan tells him that he is going straight. In return for a promise of freedom, Kent informs the warden (Lewis Stone) of the attempt, though he is not privy to the details. Despite the warning, the inmates succeed in taking over the prison, capturing many of the guards, though they are unable to force their way out. Thwarted, Butch threatens to shoot the guards one by one unless they are allowed to escape. When the warden stands firm, Butch shoots the warden's right-hand man in cold blood, then tosses the dying man out for all to see.\nArmy tanks are called to break down the entrance. Morgan grabs a pistol from the prisoner assigned to watch the guards. He finds Kent cowering with the guard but spares him. Kent panics and flees before Morgan locks the guards in to save their lives. When Kent tries to open the front doors, he is killed in the crossfire. Butch is told that Morgan was the \"stoolie\" who tipped off the warden and learns he has put the guards out of danger. He sets out to kill his former friend. In the ensuing gunfight, both are wounded, Butch fatally. Before he dies, he learns that Kent was actually the informer, and he and Morgan reconcile. For his efforts, Morgan is given a full pardon. When he exits the prison, Anne rushes to embrace him.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBackground.\nThe story was inspired by a spate of prison riots in 1929 and resulting federal investigation. In response, George Hill wrote a twenty-seven page story treatment called \"The Reign of Terror: A Story of Crime and Punishment\". Irving Thalberg gave the go ahead for the screenplay and assigned Frances Marion to work with George Hill.\nLon Chaney was originally chosen for the role of Butch, a violent career criminal who rules the prison cellblock, but the cancer from which he was to die in August 1930 had already advanced too far and the role went to Wallace Beery. The movie launched Beery's sound career to new heights; a top supporting actor and frequent leading man in silents, he had been dropped by his previous studio Paramount when sound came in even though he recorded a successful voice test. After \"The Big House\" became a hit and his performance earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor in a Leading Role, he became the world's highest-paid actor within two years.\nThe story and dialogue were written by Frances Marion, with additional dialogue by Joe Farnham and Martin Flavin. Marion won the Academy Award for Best Writing Achievement. Douglas Shearer also won the first Academy Award for Sound. The film was nominated for Best Picture. \"The Big House\" was one of the first prison films ever made and was tremendously influential on the genre.\nForeign-language versions.\nIn the early days of sound films, it was common for Hollywood studios to produce \"Foreign Language Versions\" of their films using the same sets, costumes and so on. While many of these versions no longer exist, the French, Spanish and German-language versions of \"The Big House\" survive, which are entitled \"R\u00e9volte dans la prison\", \"El presidio\" and \"Menschen hinter Gittern\". The French and Spanish versions are available with the original in a triple feature set from the Warner Archives.\nReception.\nMordaunt Hall of \"The New York Times\" described it as \"a film in which the direction, the photography, the microphone work and the magnificent acting take precedence over the negligible story.\"\n\"Variety\" called it a \"virile, realistic melodrama\". John Mosher of \"The New Yorker\" wrote, \"So expert are many of the scenes, so effective the photography, so direct and spare the dialogue, that certain obvious, silly, and dull moments may almost be overlooked.\"\nWallace Beery was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in \"The Big House\", cementing his career in sound films, and won the following year for \"The Champ\" (1931).\nAccording to MGM records \"The Big House\" took in approximately $1,279,000 in theater rentals from the United States and Canada, an additional $436,000 from foreign rentals, and earned a profit of $462,000.\nThe February 2020 issue of \"New York Magazine\" lists \"The Big House\" as among \"The Best Movies That Lost Best Picture at the Oscars.\"\nEvaluation in film guides.\n\"Steven H. Scheuer's TV Movie Almanac &amp; Ratings 1958 &amp; 1959\" gave \"The Big House\" a \"Good\" rating of 3 stars (out of 4), summarizing its plot as \"[D]esperate convicts try a prison break\", with the evaluation, \"[T]his early example of prison melodrama is still entertaining\". \"Leonard Maltin's TV Movies &amp; Video Guide\" (1989 edition) also put the rating at 3 (out of 4 stars), describing it as \"[T]he original prison drama\" and indicating that \"this set the pattern for all later copies; it's still good, hard-bitten stuff with one of Beery's best tough-guy roles\". In the third edition (2015) of his \"Classic Movie Guide\", Maltin also mentioned the surviving French and Spanish-language versions and added that \"Charles Boyer stars in the former\".\nBritish references had some positive words for the film, with the 1984 edition of \"David Shipman's The Good Film and Video Guide\" giving 1 star out of 4 (\"Recommended with reservations\"), noting that it is \"[An] untypical MGM film, about prison life which is now laughably conventional but was then very influential\". Shipman describes Wallace Beery and Chester Morris as \"two old lags\" and Robert Montgomery as \"the wealthy guy too weak for the system\". Leslie Halliwell in the 5th edition (1985) of his \"Film and Video Guide\", rated it 2 stars out of 4 and described it as an \"[A]rchetypal prison melodrama and a significant advance in form for early talkies.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61187", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61187", "title": "Dimensionless parameter", "text": ""}
{"id": "61188", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61188", "title": "Scottish Parliament", "text": "Devolved parliament of Scotland \nThe Scottish Parliament ( ; ) is the devolved, unicameral legislature of Scotland. It is located in the Holyrood area of Edinburgh, and is frequently referred to by the metonym \"Holyrood\". It is a democratically elected body and its role is to scrutinise the Scottish Government and legislate on devolved matters that are not reserved to the Parliament of the United Kingdom.\nThe Scottish Parliament comprises 129 members known as Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs), elected for five-year terms under the regionalised form of Additional-member system (MMP): 73 MSPs represent individual geographical constituencies elected by the plurality (first-past-the-post) system, while a further 56 are returned as list members from eight additional member regions. Each region elects seven party-list MSPs. Each region elects 15 to 17 MSPs in total. The most recent general election to the Parliament was held on 6 May 2021, with the Scottish National Party winning a plurality.\nThe original Parliament of Scotland was the national legislature of the independent Kingdom of Scotland and existed from the early 13th century until the Kingdom of Scotland merged with the Kingdom of England under the Acts of Union 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain. As a consequence, the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of England were subsumed into the Parliament of Great Britain. In practice, all of the traditions, procedures, and standing orders of the English parliament were retained, with the addition of Scottish members in both the Commons and Lords.\nFollowing a referendum in 1997, in which the Scottish electorate voted for devolution, the powers of the devolved legislature were specified by the Scotland Act 1998. The Act delineates the legislative competence of the Parliament \u2013 the areas in which it can make laws \u2013 by explicitly specifying powers that are \"reserved\" to the Parliament of the United Kingdom. The Scottish Parliament has the power to legislate in all areas that are not explicitly reserved to Westminster. The UK Parliament retains the ability to amend the terms of reference of the Scottish Parliament, and can extend or reduce the areas in which it can make laws. The first meeting of the reconvened Parliament took place on 12 May 1999.\nThe legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament has been amended numerous times since then. The Scotland Act 2012 and Scotland Act 2016 expanded the Parliament's powers, especially over taxation and welfare. The purpose of the United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020, the most recent amendment, is to constrain the powers of the devolved institutions and restrict the exercise of devolved competences. Its effect is to undermine the freedom of action, regulatory competence and authority of the Parliament, limiting its ability to make different economic or social choices to those made by Westminster.\nHistory.\nBefore the Treaty of Union 1707 united the Kingdom of Scotland and the Kingdom of England into a new state called \"Great Britain\", Scotland had an independent parliament known as the Parliament of Scotland. Initial Scottish proposals during negotiations suggested that Scotland's parliament could continue to exist in the new union, but this was not accepted by the English negotiators. For the next 290 years, Scotland was governed by the Parliament of Great Britain and the subsequent Parliament of the United Kingdom, both seated at Westminster.\nSuggestions for a 'devolved' Parliament were made before 1914, but were shelved due to the outbreak of the First World War.A sharp rise in nationalism in Scotland during the late 1960s fuelled demands for some form of home rule or complete independence, and in 1969 prompted the incumbent Labour government of Harold Wilson to set up the Kilbrandon Commission to consider the British constitution. One of the principal objectives of the commission was to examine ways of enabling more self-government for Scotland, within the unitary state of the United Kingdom. Kilbrandon published his report in 1973 recommending the establishment of a directly elected Scottish Assembly to legislate for the majority of domestic Scottish affairs.\nDuring this time, the discovery of oil in the North Sea and the following \"It's Scotland's oil\" campaign of the Scottish National Party (SNP) resulted in rising support for Scottish independence, as well as the SNP. The party argued that the revenues from the oil were not benefitting Scotland as much as they should. The combined effect of these events led to Prime Minister Wilson committing his government to some form of devolved legislature in 1974. Under the terms of the Scotland Act 1978, an elected assembly would be set up in Edinburgh if the public approved it in a referendum be held on 1 March 1979. A narrow majority of 51.6% to 48.4% voted in favour of a Scottish Assembly, but the Act also required that at least 40% of the total electorate vote in favour of the proposal. As the turnout was only 63.6%, the vote in favour represented only 32.9% of the eligible voting population, and the Assembly was not established. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, demand for a Scottish Parliament grew, in part because the government of the United Kingdom was controlled by the Conservative Party, while Scotland itself elected relatively few Conservative MPs. In the aftermath of the 1979 referendum defeat, the Campaign for a Scottish Assembly was initiated as a pressure group, leading to the 1989 Scottish Constitutional Convention with various organisations such as Scottish churches, political parties and representatives of industry taking part. Publishing its blueprint for devolution in 1995, the Convention provided much of the basis for the structure of the Parliament. Devolution continued to form part of the platform of the Labour Party which won power under Tony Blair in May 1997. In September 1997, the Scottish devolution referendum was put to the Scottish electorate and secured a majority in favour of the reestablishment of the Scottish Parliament, with tax-varying powers, in Edinburgh.\nOpening of the new Scottish Parliament.\nAn election was held on 6 May 1999, and on 1 July of that year power was transferred from Westminster to the new reconvened Parliament. While the permanent building at Holyrood was being constructed, a temporary home for the Parliament was found in Edinburgh. The General Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland on the Royal Mile was chosen to host the Parliament. Official photographs and television interviews were held in the courtyard adjoining the Assembly Hall, which is part of the School of Divinity of the University of Edinburgh. This building was vacated twice to allow for the meeting of the Church's General Assembly. In May 2000, the Parliament was temporarily relocated to the former Strathclyde Regional Council debating chamber at Strathclyde House in Glasgow, and to the University of Aberdeen in May 2002.\nSince September 2004, the official home of the Scottish Parliament has been a new Scottish Parliament Building, in the Holyrood area of Edinburgh. The Scottish Parliament building was designed by Spanish architect Enric Miralles in partnership with local Edinburgh Architecture firm RMJM which was led by Design Principal Tony Kettle. Some of the principal features of the complex include leaf-shaped buildings, a grass-roofed branch merging into adjacent parkland and gabion walls formed from the stones of previous buildings. Throughout the building there are many repeated motifs, such as shapes based on Raeburn's Skating Minister. Crow-stepped gables and the upturned boat skylights of the Garden Lobby, complete the unique architecture. Queen Elizabeth II opened the new building on 9 October 2004.\nIn September 2024, the Scottish Parliament celebrated its 25th anniversary, with the King and Queen in attendance.\nOfficials.\nAfter each election to the Scottish Parliament, at the beginning of each parliamentary session, Parliament elects one MSP to serve as Presiding Officer, the equivalent of the speaker in other legislatures, and two MSPs to serve as deputies. The Presiding Officer (currently Alison Johnstone) and deputies (currently Annabelle Ewing and Liam McArthur) are elected by a secret ballot of the 129 MSPs, which is the only secret ballot conducted in the Scottish Parliament. Principally, the role of the Presiding Officer is to chair chamber proceedings and the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body. When chairing meetings of the Parliament, the Presiding Officer and his/her deputies must be politically impartial. During debates, the Presiding Officer (or the deputy) is assisted by the parliamentary clerks, who give advice on how to interpret the standing orders that govern the proceedings of meetings. A vote clerk sits in front of the Presiding Officer and operates the electronic voting equipment and chamber clocks.\nAs a member of the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body, the Presiding Officer is responsible for ensuring that the Parliament functions effectively and has the staff, property and resources it requires to operate. Convening the Parliamentary Bureau, which allocates time and sets the work agenda in the chamber, is another of the roles of the Presiding Officer. Under the Standing Orders of the Parliament the Bureau consists of the Presiding Officer and one representative from each political party with five or more seats in the Parliament. Amongst the duties of the Bureau are to agree the timetable of business in the chamber, establish the number, remit and membership of parliamentary committees and regulate the passage of legislation (bills) through the Parliament. The Presiding Officer also represents the Scottish Parliament at home and abroad in an official capacity.\nThe Presiding Officer controls debates by calling on members to speak. The Presiding Officer rules on points of order raised by members, which are not subject to debate or appeal. The Presiding Officer may also discipline members who fail to observe the rules of the Parliament.\nParliamentary chamber.\nThe debating chamber of the Scottish Parliament has seating arranged in a hemicycle, a design which is common across European legislatures, intended to encourage consensus and compromise. There are 131 seats in the debating chamber. Of the total 131 seats, 129 are occupied by the Parliament's elected MSPs and two are seats for the Scottish Law Officers\u2014the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General for Scotland, who are not elected members of the Parliament but are members of the Scottish Government. As such, the Law Officers may attend and speak in the plenary meetings of the Parliament but, as they are not elected MSPs, cannot vote.\nMembers are able to sit anywhere in the debating chamber, but typically sit in their party groupings. The First Minister, Scottish cabinet ministers and law officers sit in the front row, in the middle section of the chamber. The largest party in the Parliament sits in the middle of the semicircle, with opposing parties on either side. The Presiding Officer, parliamentary clerks and officials sit opposite members at the front of the debating chamber.\nIn front of the Presiding Officers' desk is the parliamentary mace, which is made from silver and inlaid with gold panned from Scottish rivers and inscribed with the words: \"Wisdom\", \"Compassion\", \"Justice\" and \"Integrity\". The words \"There shall be a Scottish Parliament\", which are the first words of the Scotland Act, are inscribed around the head of the mace, which has a ceremonial role in the meetings of Parliament, representing the authority of the Parliament to make laws. Presented to the Scottish Parliament by the Queen upon Parliament's official opening in July 1999, the mace is displayed in a glass case, suspended from the lid. At the beginning of each sitting in the chamber, the lid of the case is rotated so that the mace is above the glass, to symbolise that a full meeting of the Parliament is taking place.\nProceedings.\nParliament typically sits Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays from early January to late June and from early September to mid December, with two-week recesses in April and October. Plenary meetings in the debating chamber usually take place on Wednesday afternoons from 2\u00a0pm to 6\u00a0pm and on Thursdays from 9:15\u00a0am to 6\u00a0pm. Chamber debates and committee meetings are open to the public. Entry is free, but booking in advance is recommended due to limited space. Parliament TV is a webcast and archive of Parliamentary business back to 2012. and on the BBC's parliamentary channel BBC Parliament. Proceedings are also recorded in text form, in print and online, in the \"Official Report\", which is the substantially verbatim transcript of parliamentary debates.\nSince September 2012, the first item of business on Tuesday afternoons is usually Time for Reflection at which a speaker addresses members for up to four minutes, sharing a perspective on issues of faith. This contrasts with the formal style of \"Prayers\", which is the first item of business in meetings of the House of Commons. Speakers are drawn from across Scotland and are chosen to represent the balance of religious beliefs according to the Scottish census. Invitations to address Parliament in this manner are determined by the Presiding Officer on the advice of the parliamentary bureau. Faith groups can make direct representations to the Presiding Officer to nominate speakers. Before September 2012, Time for reflection was held on Wednesday afternoons.\nThe Presiding Officer (or Deputy Presiding Officer) decides who speaks in chamber debates and the amount of time for which they are allowed to speak. Normally, the Presiding Officer tries to achieve a balance between different viewpoints and political parties when selecting members to speak. Typically, ministers or party leaders open debates, with opening speakers given between 5 and 20 minutes, and succeeding speakers allocated less time. The Presiding Officer can reduce speaking time if a large number of members wish to participate in the debate. Debate is more informal than in some parliamentary systems. Members may call each other directly by name, rather than by constituency or cabinet position, and hand clapping is allowed. Speeches to the chamber are normally delivered in English, but members may use Scots, Gaelic, or any other language with the agreement of the Presiding Officer. The Scottish Parliament has conducted debates in the Gaelic language.\nEach sitting day, normally at 5\u00a0pm, MSPs decide on all the motions and amendments that have been moved that day. This \"Decision Time\" is heralded by the sounding of the division bell, which is heard throughout the Parliamentary campus and alerts MSPs who are not in the chamber to return and vote. At Decision Time, the Presiding Officer puts questions on the motions and amendments by reading out the name of the motion or amendment as well as the proposer and asking \"\"Are we all agreed?\", to which the chamber first votes orally. If there is audible dissent, the Presiding Officer announces \"There will be a division\"\" and members vote by means of electronic consoles on their desks. Each MSP has a unique access card with a microchip which, when inserted into the console, identifies them and allows them to vote. As a result, the outcome of each division is known in seconds.\nThe outcome of most votes can be predicted since political parties normally instruct members which way to vote. Parties entrust some MSPs, known as whips, with the task of ensuring that party members vote according to the party line. MSPs do not tend to vote against such instructions, since those who do are unlikely to reach higher political ranks in their parties. Errant members can be deselected as official party candidates during future elections, and, in serious cases, may be expelled from their parties outright. Thus, as with many Parliaments, the independence of Members of the Scottish Parliament tends to be low, and backbench rebellions by members who are discontent with their party's policies are rare. In some circumstances, however, parties announce \"free votes\", which allows Members to vote as they please. This is typically done on moral issues.\nImmediately after Decision Time a \"Members Debate\" is held, which lasts for 45 minutes. Members Business is a debate on a motion proposed by an MSP who is not a Scottish minister. Such motions are on issues which may be of interest to a particular area such as a member's own constituency, an upcoming or past event or any other item which would otherwise not be accorded official parliamentary time. As well as the proposer, other members normally contribute to the debate. The relevant minister, whose department the debate and motion relate to \"winds up\" the debate by speaking after all other participants.\nCommittees.\nMuch of the work of the Scottish Parliament is done in committee. The role of committees is stronger in the Scottish Parliament than in other parliamentary systems, partly as a means of strengthening the role of backbenchers in their scrutiny of the government and partly to compensate for the fact that there is no revising chamber. The principal role of committees in the Scottish Parliament is to take evidence from witnesses, conduct inquiries and scrutinise legislation. Committee meetings take place on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday morning when Parliament is sitting. Committees can also meet at other locations throughout Scotland.\nCommittees comprise a small number of MSPs, who look at specific subjects such as health, the economy or justice. They play a central role in the work of the Scottish parliament because, unlike the UK Parliament, the Scottish parliament is a single-chamber parliament. The committees can thus, consider and amend proposals for new laws, they can also propose new laws themselves. The committees can investigate any area that is within their remit and publish recommendations, and can also report on petitions that have been submitted by members of the public or groups. The current Mandatory Committees in the fourth Session of the Scottish Parliament are: Public Audit; Equal Opportunities; European and External Relations; Finance; Public Petitions; Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments; and Delegated Powers and Law Reform.\nSubject Committees are established at the beginning of each parliamentary session, and again the members on each committee reflect the balance of parties across Parliament. Typically each committee corresponds with one (or more) of the departments (or ministries) of the Scottish Government. The current Subject Committees in the fourth Session are: Economy, Energy and Tourism; Education and Culture; Health and Sport; Justice; Local Government and Regeneration; Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment; Welfare Reform; and Infrastructure and Capital Investment.\nA further type of committee is normally set up to scrutinise private bills submitted to the Scottish Parliament by an outside party or promoter who is not a member of the Scottish Parliament or Scottish Government. Private bills normally relate to large-scale development projects such as infrastructure projects that require the use of land or property. Private Bill Committees have been set up to consider legislation on issues such as the development of the Edinburgh Tram Network, the Glasgow Airport Rail Link, the Airdrie\u2013Bathgate rail link and extensions to the National Gallery of Scotland.\nLegislative functions and powers.\nThe Scotland Act 1998, which was passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom and given royal assent by Queen Elizabeth II on 19 November 1998, governs the functions and role of the Scottish Parliament and delimits its legislative competence. Since the establishment of the Parliament, there have been a number of changes to its legislative competence.\nThe Parliament is able to debate any issue (including those reserved to Westminster) but is unable to make laws on issues that are outside its legislative competence. As the Scottish Parliament is able to make laws on the areas constitutionally devolved to it, the legislative process begins with bills (draft laws) which are presented to Parliament. Bills can be introduced to Parliament in a number of ways; the Scottish Government can introduce new laws or amendments to existing laws as a bill; a committee of the Parliament can present a bill in one of the areas under its remit; a member of the Scottish Parliament can introduce a bill as a private member; or a private bill can be submitted to Parliament by an outside proposer. Most draft laws are government bills introduced by ministers in the governing party (or parties). Bills pass through Parliament in a number of stages before receiving royal assent, whereupon they become Acts of the Scottish Parliament.\nThe Scotland Act 2012 and the Scotland Act 2016 extended the devolved competencies, including areas such as taxation powers, welfare and elections to the Scottish parliament. The United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020 is intended to restrict the operation of devolved powers. The latter legislation, passed under the regime of Boris Johnson, gives UK ministers extended powers to enforce mutual recognition of regulations across the UK, and the exemptions permitted for the devolved administrations are significantly less extensive than previous exemptions under the EU Single Market rules. It both legally and practically restrains the legislative competence of the Parliament and undermines devolution. The business secretary tacitly acknowledged this fact in the impact assessment that the BEIS department was obliged to publish alongside the bill, which states: \"The final cost of this legislation is the potentially reduced ability for different parts of the UK to achieve local policy benefits. While this legislation does not constrain the ability of different parts of the UK to introduce distinct policies, to the extent that those policies may be enforceable on a reduced number of businesses might make it harder to realise fully the benefits of those policies.\" Although the UK Government stated on publication that the proposed bill sought to \"protect the integrity of the UK's single market\", the legislation has been heavily criticised for its dealings with the devolved nations. First Minister Nicola Sturgeon called the bill a \"full frontal assault on devolution\". The legislation undermines the freedom of action, regulatory competence and authority of the Parliament, limiting its ability to make different economic or social choices from those made in Westminster, and to focus and plan investment in infrastructure in Scotland.\nUnder the terms of the Scotland Acts, the Parliament of the United Kingdom agreed to devolve some of its responsibilities over Scottish domestic policy to the Scottish Parliament. The Scotland Act 1998 enabled the Scottish Parliament to pass primary legislation on these issues, and to hold the Scottish Government to account. Although the Westminster Parliament retains the authority to legislate on devolved matters, under the Sewell convention it is understood that it will not do so without the consent of the Scottish Parliament.\nPowers of the Scottish Parliament.\nAll matters that are not specifically stated in Schedule 5 to the Scotland Act as reserved matters are automatically devolved to the Scottish Parliament. The Scottish Parliament has powers over areas such as:\nReserved powers.\nReserved matters are subjects that are outside the legislative competence of the Scottish Parliament and are reserved to the United Kingdom Parliament. These include:\nScrutiny of government.\nThe party, or parties, that hold the majority of seats in the Parliament forms the Scottish Government. In contrast to many other parliamentary systems, Parliament elects a First Minister from a number of candidates at the beginning of each parliamentary term (after a general election). Any member can put their name forward to be First Minister, and a vote is taken by all members of Parliament. Normally, the leader of the largest party is returned as First Minister, and head of the Scottish Government. Theoretically, Parliament also elects the Scottish Ministers who form the government of Scotland and sit in the Scottish cabinet, but such ministers are, in practice, appointed to their roles by the First Minister. Junior ministers, who do not attend cabinet, are also appointed to assist Scottish ministers in their departments. Most ministers and their juniors are drawn from amongst the elected MSPs, with the exception of Scotland's Chief Law Officers: the Lord Advocate and the Solicitor General. Whilst the First Minister chooses the ministers \u2013 and may decide to remove them at any time \u2013 the formal appointment or dismissal is made by the Sovereign.\nSeveral procedures enable the Scottish Parliament to scrutinise the Government. The First Minister or members of the cabinet can deliver statements to Parliament upon which MSPs are invited to question. For example, at the beginning of each parliamentary year, the First Minister delivers a statement to the chamber setting out the Government's legislative programme for the forthcoming year. After the statement has been delivered, the leaders of the opposition parties and other MSPs question the First Minister on issues related to the substance of the statement.\nParliamentary time is also set aside for question periods in the debating chamber. A \"General Question Time\" takes place on a Thursday between 11:40\u00a0a.m. and noon where members can direct questions to any member of the Scottish Government. At 2:30\u00a0pm, a 40-minute-long themed \"Question Time\" takes place, where members can ask questions of ministers in departments that are selected for questioning that sitting day, such as health and justice or education and transport. Between noon and 12:30\u00a0p.m. on Thursdays, when Parliament is sitting, First Minister's Question Time takes place. This gives members an opportunity to question the First Minister directly on issues under their jurisdiction.\nMembers who wish to ask general or themed questions, or questions of the First Minister, must lodge them with parliamentary clerks beforehand and selections are made by the Presiding Officer. Written questions may also be submitted by members to ministers. Written questions and answers are published in the \"Official Report\".\nThe first session of Leaders' Virtual Question Time, or virtual First Minister's Questions, was held on 9 April 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nMembers, constituencies and voting systems.\nElections for the Scottish Parliament were amongst the first in Britain to use a Mixed-member proportional representation (MMP) system. The system is a regionalized form of MMP, known as the additional member system (AMS) of proportional representation in Britain. Under the system, voters are given two votes: one for a specific candidate and one for a political party. The one vote is used to elect the local member; the other is grouped with votes from other districts in the region to compose party-proportional representation within the region. (There are no overall levelling seats.)\nOf the 129 MSPs, 73 are elected to represent first-past-the-post constituencies and are known as \"Constituency MSPs\". Voters choose one member to represent the constituency, and the member with most votes is returned as a constituency MSP. The 73 Scottish Parliament constituencies shared the same boundaries as the UK Parliament constituencies in Scotland, prior to the 2005 reduction in the number of Scottish MPs, with the exception of Orkney and Shetland which each return their own constituency MSP. Currently, the average Scottish Parliament constituency comprises 55,000 electors. Given the geographical distribution of population in Scotland, this results in constituencies of a smaller area in the Central Lowlands, where the bulk of Scotland's population live, and much larger constituency areas in the north and west of the country, which have a low population density. The island archipelagos of Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles comprise a much smaller number of electors, due to their dispersed population. If a constituency MSP resigns from Parliament, this triggers a by-election in his or her constituency, where a replacement MSP is returned by the plurality system.\nThe remaining 56 MSPs, called \"List MSPs\", are elected by an additional members system, which seeks to make the overall results more proportional, countering any distortions in the constituency results. Seven list MSPs are elected from each of eight electoral regions, of which constituencies are sub-divisions:\nEach political party draws up a list of candidates standing in each electoral region, from which the list MSPs are elected. Independents can also stand in regions, in which case they are treated as a one-person \"list\". Candidates can stand for both a constituency and a list; should they be elected for a constituency, this takes precedence and they are skipped over when apportioning seats from their party list. If a list MSP later leaves the Parliament, the next person on the resigning MSPs' party's list takes the seat. Should a list MSP leave their party, however, they retain their seat and are not replaced. If an independent list MSP leaves the Parliament, they are not replaced and the seat is left vacant until the next general election.\nThe total number of seats in the Parliament is allocated to parties proportionally to the number of votes received in the second vote of the ballot using the d'Hondt method. For example, to determine who is awarded the first list seat, the number of list votes cast for each party is divided by one plus the number of seats the party won in the region (at this point just constituency seats). The party with the highest quotient is awarded the seat, which is then added to its constituency seats in allocating the second seat. This is repeated iteratively until all available list seats are allocated. As the allocation of seats to parties mirrors the popular vote, it is commonplace for the most successful party in the election not to win an outright majority of the seats, thereby requiring them to seek some form and level of cross-party support for their initiatives in government. Nonetheless, the 2011 election saw the SNP become the first\u2013and to date, only\u2013party to win a majority government.\nAs in the House of Commons, a number of qualifications apply to being an MSP. Such qualifications were introduced under the House of Commons Disqualification Act 1975 and the British Nationality Act 1981. Specifically, members must be over the age of 18 and must be a citizen of the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, one of the countries in the Commonwealth of Nations, a citizen of a British overseas territory, or a European Union citizen resident in the UK. Members of the police and the armed forces are disqualified from sitting in the Scottish Parliament as elected MSPs, and similarly, civil servants and members of foreign legislatures are disqualified. An individual may not sit in the Scottish Parliament if he or she is judged to be insane under the terms of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 2003. There is no legal prohibition on holding a dual mandate, sitting in both the Scottish Parliament and the House of Commons. However, while several members of the original Scottish Parliament held seats at Westminster, it is now rare; since 2011, only one MSP has served concurrently as an MP for a significant period of time.\nElections.\nElections for the Scottish Parliament are for all 129 seats using the Additional Member System. There have been six elections to the Parliament, in 1999, 2003, 2007, 2011, 2016 and 2021.\nUnder the Scotland Act 1998, ordinary general elections for the Scottish Parliament are held on the first Thursday in May every four years (1999, 2003, 2007 and so on). The date of the poll may be varied by up to one month either way by the Monarch on the proposal of the Presiding Officer. If the Parliament itself resolves that it should be dissolved (with at least two-thirds of the Members voting in favour), or if the Parliament fails to nominate one of its members to be First Minister within 28 days of a General Election or of the position becoming vacant, the Presiding Officer proposes a date for an extraordinary general election and the Parliament is dissolved by the Monarch by royal proclamation. Extraordinary general elections are in addition to ordinary general elections, unless held less than six months before the due date of an ordinary general election, in which case they supplant it. The following ordinary election reverts to the first Thursday in May, a multiple of four years after 1999 (i.e., 5 May 2011, 7 May 2015, etc.).\nThe latest Scottish Parliament election was held on Thursday 6 May 2021. Under the Scotland Act 1998, an ordinary general election to the Scottish Parliament would normally have been held on the first Thursday in May four years after the 2016 election, i.e. in May 2020. This would have coincided with the proposed date of the next United Kingdom general election until an early UK election was called in 2017. In November 2015, the Scottish Government published a Scottish Elections (Dates) Bill, which proposed to extend the term of the Parliament to five years. That Bill was passed by the Scottish Parliament on 25 February 2016 and received Royal Assent on 30 March 2016, setting the new date for the election as 6 May 2021.\nCitizens of the UK, Ireland, EU member states and other countries who have permission to enter or remain in the UK (or who do not need such permission), and are resident in Scotland, are entitled to vote. The minimum voting age is 16. This differs from elections to the Westminster parliament, which are restricted to citizens of the UK, Ireland and qualifying Commonwealth citizens, with a minimum voting age of 18. Citizens of other non-Commonwealth EU member states who are resident in Scotland have been entitled to vote in elections to the Scottish Parliament since 1999. Since this date, the franchise has been further extended, with a two-thirds majority being required to make changes to the franchise under the Scotland Act 2016. From the 2016 election, the franchise for Scottish Parliament elections was expanded to include 16- and 17-year-olds. In 2020, the Scottish Parliament voted to extend the right to vote in Scotland to all foreign nationals with leave to remain (limited or indefinite).\nCriticism.\nThe resignation of Henry McLeish as First Minister, brought on by an office expenses scandal, generated controversy in the first years of the Scottish Parliament. Various academics have written on how the Scottish Parliament can be improved as a governing institution.\nWest Lothian question.\nAs a consequence of the establishment of the Scottish Parliament, Scottish MPs sitting in the UK House of Commons are able to vote on domestic legislation that applies only to England, Wales, and Northern Ireland \u2013 whilst English, Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish Westminster MPs are unable to vote on the domestic legislation of the Scottish Parliament. This phenomenon is known as the West Lothian question and has led to criticism. Following the Conservative victory in the 2015 UK election, standing orders of the House of Commons were changed to give MPs representing English constituencies a new \"veto\" over laws only affecting England, known as English votes for English laws. The mechanism was abolished in 2021.\nAbolition.\nParties such as the Abolish the Scottish Parliament Party, the UK Independence Party (UKIP), and Scottish Unionist Party (SUP) have advocated abolition of the Scottish Parliament.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61189", "revid": "48203874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61189", "title": "Disraeli (1929 film)", "text": "1929 film\nDisraeli is a 1929 American sound (All-Talking) pre-Code historical film directed by Alfred E. Green, released by Warner Bros. Pictures, Inc., and adapted by Julien Josephson (screenplay) and De Leon Anthony (titles) from the 1911 play \"Disraeli\" by Louis N. Parker.\nThe lobby card states, \"Mr. George Arliss in his greatest picture Disraeli\". His performance as British prime minister Benjamin Disraeli won him the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. The story revolves around the British plan to buy the Suez Canal and the efforts of two spies to stop it.\nAs with the original 1911 Broadway play and its 1917 revival, and the 1921 silent film, Arliss' wife Florence appeared opposite him in the role of Disraeli's wife, Mary Anne (Lady Beaconsfield).\nPlot.\nIn 1874, Disraeli's ambitious foreign policy, aimed at extending the British empire, is voted down by the House of Commons after a speech by his great rival, William Gladstone. Later, Disraeli receives the welcome news that the spendthrift Khedive of Egypt is in dire need of money and is willing to sell the controlling shares in the Suez Canal. The purchase of the canal would secure control of India, but Michael Probert, head of the Bank of England, makes it clear to Disraeli that he is vehemently opposed to any such plan. Disraeli then summons Hugh Myers, a leading Jewish banker.\nMeanwhile, Lord Charles Deeford proposes to Lady Clarissa Pevensey. Although she is in love with him, she turns him down. He is content to enjoy his wealth and high social standing, and lacks the ambition she wants in a husband; further, she is a great admirer of the Prime Minister and Charles has no strong opinion about him. Disraeli, seeing promise in the young man and wanting Clarissa to be happy, convinces Charles to come work for him, and tells him about the canal purchase but he does not tell him about the spies.\nRussia, eager to seize India for itself, has assigned two spies to watch Disraeli: Mrs. Travers, who has entree to the highest social circles, and Mr. Foljambe. Disraeli was not fooled; he has hired Foljambe as his personal government secretary, the better to deceive him. When Foljambe asks Charles if Myers is there to provide financial backing for the purchase of the canal, Charles says nothing, but his manner makes it clear that Foljambe has guessed correctly. Mrs. Travers orders Foljambe to leave the country and warn their masters.\nDisraeli soon discovers what has happened. When he decides to send an agent to the Khedive immediately, Clarissa suggests he send Charles. Charles persuades the Khedive to accept Myers' cheque in exchange for the shares, also proving his own worth to Clarissa.\nDisraeli is elated when he receives the news. However, Myers comes and informs him that his banking house has been driven into bankruptcy by sabotage; the cheque is worthless. Disraeli tells him to keep his situation secret for the moment. When the prying Mrs. Travers arrives, Disraeli allows her to learn of the purchase, and she exultantly admits to her key part in sabotaging Myers.\nThinking quickly, Disraeli summons Probert. Though the banker initially refuses to help, Disraeli forces him to sign a paper giving unlimited credit to Myers by threatening to have Parliament revoke the bank's charter. (After Probert leaves, Disraeli confesses to his wife and Clarissa that he was bluffing.) Myers' solvency is restored, the deal is completed, and as a result of Disraeli's success, Queen Victoria can add Empress of India to her other titles. Disraeli is honored when he and his wife, who has recovered from serious illness, attend a reception for the Queen.\nProduction.\n\"The Green Goddess\" was filmed in 1929 and completed before \"Disraeli\", but was held out of release until 1930 at the request of Arliss because he felt this film was a better vehicle for his talkie debut. Silent film versions of Parker's play, both also titled \"Disraeli\", had previously been produced: A 1916 version produced by British company NB Films; and the 1921 version produced by Arliss' production company, Distinctive Productions, and released by United Artists.\nBox office.\nAccording to Warner Bros records the film earned $924,000 domestically and $574,000 foreign.\nReception.\nThe film received three Academy Award nominations. George Arliss' win for Best Actor made him the first British actor to win, the first actor to win for a remake of a previously produced movie, and the first to win for reprising a movie role. The film was also nominated for Outstanding Production, but lost to \"All Quiet on the Western Front.\" Screenwriter Julien Josephson was nominated for Best Writing Achievement in a year when only one award was given for screenwriting. (In most years, he would have been nominated for Best Adapted Screenplay.) He lost to Frances Marion for \"The Big House\". The film was also awarded the \"Photoplay Magazine\" Medal of Honor in 1929.\nThe \"New Zealand Herald\" praised the film, saying it \"raises a set standard\" and especially praising Arliss, who \"is the whole picture.\" In a retrospective review, Richard Gilliam praised the film for Arliss's performance in a \"compelling portrait,\" though criticizing its sound and set design.\nPreservation status.\nThe film survives in its 1934 re-release form, when it was converted from its original sound-on-disc technology to sound-on-film. To provide space for the soundtrack, the image was noticeably cropped on the left side, except for the opening credit sequence and end title, which were replaced and are centered. Some pre-Code footage, about three minutes, was also deleted and is believed to be lost.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61190", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61190", "title": "Cauchy's integral theorem", "text": "Theorem in complex analysis\nIn mathematics, the Cauchy integral theorem (also known as the Cauchy\u2013Goursat theorem) in complex analysis, named after Augustin-Louis Cauchy (and \u00c9douard Goursat), is an important statement about line integrals for holomorphic functions in the complex plane. Essentially, it says that if formula_1 is holomorphic in a simply connected domain \u03a9, then for any simply closed contour formula_2 in \u03a9, that contour integral is zero. \nformula_3\nStatement.\nFundamental theorem for complex line integrals.\nIf \"f\"(\"z\") is a holomorphic function on an open region U, and formula_4 is a curve in U from formula_5 to formula_6 then,\nformula_7\nAlso, when \"f\"(\"z\") has a single-valued antiderivative in an open region U, then the path integral formula_8 is path independent for all paths in U.\nFormulation on simply connected regions.\nLet formula_9 be a simply connected open set, and let formula_10 be a holomorphic function. Let formula_11 be a smooth closed curve. Then:\nformula_12\nGeneral formulation.\nLet formula_9 be an open set, and let formula_10 be a holomorphic function. Let formula_11 be a smooth closed curve. If formula_4 is homotopic to a constant curve, then:\nformula_12where formula_21.\n(Recall that a curve is homotopic to a constant curve if there exists a smooth homotopy (within formula_13) from the curve to the constant curve. Intuitively, this means that one can shrink the curve into a point without exiting the space.) The first version is a special case of this because on a simply connected set, every closed curve is homotopic to a constant curve.\nMain example.\nIn both cases, it is important to remember that the curve formula_4 does not surround any \"holes\" in the domain, or else the theorem does not apply. A famous example is the following curve: \nformula_24\nwhich traces out the unit circle. Here the following integral:\nformula_25\nis nonzero. The Cauchy integral theorem does not apply here since formula_26 is not defined at formula_27. Intuitively, formula_4 surrounds a \"hole\" in the domain of formula_29, so formula_4 cannot be shrunk to a point without exiting the space. Thus, the theorem does not apply.\nDiscussion.\nAs \u00c9douard Goursat showed, Cauchy's integral theorem can be proven assuming only that the complex derivative formula_31 exists everywhere in formula_13. This is significant because one can then prove Cauchy's integral formula for these functions, and from that deduce these functions are infinitely differentiable.\nThe condition that formula_13 be simply connected means that formula_13 has no \"holes\" or, in homotopy terms, that the fundamental group of formula_13 is trivial; for instance, every open disk formula_36, for formula_37, qualifies. The condition is crucial; consider\nformula_38\nwhich traces out the unit circle, and then the path integral\nformula_39\nis nonzero; the Cauchy integral theorem does not apply here since formula_26 is not defined (and is certainly not holomorphic) at formula_27.\nOne important consequence of the theorem is that path integrals of holomorphic functions on simply connected domains can be computed in a manner familiar from the fundamental theorem of calculus: let formula_13 be a simply connected open subset of formula_43, let formula_10 be a holomorphic function, and let formula_4 be a piecewise continuously differentiable path in formula_13 with start point formula_47 and end point formula_48. If formula_49 is a complex antiderivative of formula_29, then\nformula_51\nThe Cauchy integral theorem is valid with a weaker hypothesis than given above, e.g. given formula_13\",\" a simply connected open subset of formula_43, we can weaken the assumptions to formula_29 being holomorphic on formula_13 and continuous on formula_56 and formula_4 a rectifiable simple loop in formula_56.\nThe Cauchy integral theorem leads to Cauchy's integral formula and the residue theorem.\nProof.\nIf one assumes that the partial derivatives of a holomorphic function are continuous, the Cauchy integral theorem can be proven as a direct consequence of Green's theorem and the fact that the real and imaginary parts of formula_59 must satisfy the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations in the region bounded by formula_4, and moreover in the open neighborhood U of this region. Cauchy provided this proof, but it was later proven by Goursat without requiring techniques from vector calculus, or the continuity of partial derivatives.\nWe can break the integrand formula_29, as well as the differential formula_62 into their real and imaginary components:\nformula_63\nformula_64\nIn this case we have\nformula_65\nBy Green's theorem, we may then replace the integrals around the closed contour formula_4 with an area integral throughout the domain formula_67 that is enclosed by formula_4 as follows:\nformula_69\nformula_70\nBut as the real and imaginary parts of a function holomorphic in the domain formula_67, formula_72 and formula_73 must satisfy the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations there:\nformula_74\nformula_75\nWe therefore find that both integrands (and hence their integrals) are zero\nformula_76\nformula_77\nThis gives the desired result\nformula_78\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61191", "revid": "1311063515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61191", "title": "The Divorcee", "text": "1930 film\nThe Divorcee is a 1930 American pre-Code drama film directed by Robert Z. Leonard. It was written by Nick Grind\u00e9, Zelda Sears, and John Meehan, based on the 1929 novel \"Ex-Wife\" by Ursula Parrott. At the 3rd Academy Awards, \"The Divorcee\" received nominations for Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Writing (Meehan), and Norma Shearer won the award for Best Actress for her work on the film.\nPlot.\nTed, Jerry, Paul, and Dorothy are part of the New York in-crowd. Jerry's decision to marry Ted crushes Paul. He gets drunk and drives, causing an accident that leaves Dorothy's face disfigured. Out of guilt, Paul marries Dorothy.\nOn the evening of Jerry and Ted's third anniversary, she discovers he has had a brief affair with another woman, though he tells Jerry it did not \"mean a thing\". Upset, and with Ted away on a business trip, Jerry spends the night with his best friend, Don. Upon Ted's return, she tells him that she \"balanced our accounts\", withholding Don's name. Ted is outraged, and they argue, which ends with Ted leaving her and the couple filing for divorce. While Jerry turns to partying to forget her sorrows, Ted becomes an alcoholic.\nSometime later, Paul and Jerry run into each other on a train. She discovers he still loves her and is willing to leave Dorothy, with whom he is in a loveless, resentful marriage, to be with her. They spend two weeks together and make plans for their future.\nDorothy comes to speak with Jerry at her home, but Paul is coincidentally meeting Jerry for dinner, and the three have an awkward exchange. Despite good arguments from Paul, Dorothy\u2019s desperation not to lose him forces Jerry to reevaluate her decision to leave with Paul. Ultimately, Jerry admits she regrets giving up on her first marriage, and decides to see if Ted will reconcile, disappointing Paul bitterly a second time.\nWeeks later, on her third attempt to locate Ted in Paris, Jerry finally finds him at a New Year's Eve party. After a polite exchange, Ted expresses his regret at how he reacted before the divorce. Jerry tells Ted her true feelings, and the two kiss at midnight to begin the new year, and their new lives, together.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Norma Shearer as Jerry Martin, n\u00e9e Bernard\nProduction.\nMGM production head Irving Thalberg bought the rights to \"Ex-Wife\" in the summer of 1929, his original choice for the lead role of Jerry being Joan Crawford. Norma Shearer, Thalberg's wife, originally was not in the running to play Jerry because it was believed that she did not have enough sex appeal. Only after she arranged a special photo session with independent portrait photographer George Hurrell, and Thalberg saw the result, did he relent and give her the role.\nReception.\nNorma Shearer won the award for Best Actress at the 3rd Academy Awards for her work on the film, which was also nominated for Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Writing.\nHome media.\nOn March 4, 2008, Warner Home Video released \"The Divorcee\" (on the same disc as 1931's \"A Free Soul\", also starring Shearer) as part of a DVD box set of five pre-Code films called \"Forbidden Hollywood Collection, Vol. 2\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61193", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61193", "title": "Externality", "text": "In economics, an imposed cost or benefit\nIn economics, an externality is a cost or benefit to an uninvolved third party that arises as an effect of another party's (or parties') activity. Externalities can be considered as unpriced components that are involved in either consumer or producer consumption. Air pollution from motor vehicles is one example. The cost of air pollution to society is not paid by either the producers or users of motorized transport. Water pollution from mills and factories are another example. All (water) consumers are made worse off by pollution but are not compensated by the market for this damage.\nThe concept of externality was first developed by Alfred Marshall in the 1890s and achieved broader attention in the works of economist Arthur Pigou in the 1920s. The prototypical example of a negative externality is environmental pollution. Pigou argued that a tax, equal to the marginal damage or marginal external cost, (later called a \"Pigouvian tax\") on negative externalities could be used to reduce their incidence to an efficient level. Subsequent thinkers have debated whether it is preferable to tax or to regulate negative externalities, the optimally efficient level of the Pigouvian taxation, and what factors cause or exacerbate negative externalities, such as providing investors in corporations with limited liability for harms committed by the corporation.\nExternalities often occur when the production or consumption of a product or service's private price equilibrium cannot reflect the true costs or benefits of that product or service for society as a whole. This causes the externality competitive equilibrium to not adhere to the condition of Pareto optimality. Thus, since resources can be better allocated, externalities are an example of market failure.\nExternalities can be either positive or negative. Governments and institutions often take actions to internalize externalities, thus market-priced transactions can incorporate all the benefits and costs associated with transactions between economic agents. The most common way this is done is by imposing taxes on the producers of this externality. This is usually done similar to a quote where there is no tax imposed and then once the externality reaches a certain point there is a very high tax imposed. However, since regulators do not always have all the information on the externality it can be difficult to impose the right tax. Once the externality is internalized through imposing a tax the competitive equilibrium is now Pareto optimal.\nHistory of the concept.\nThe term \"externality\" was first coined by the British economist Alfred Marshall in his seminal work, \"Principles of Economics,\" published in 1890. Marshall introduced the concept to elucidate the effects of production and consumption activities that extend beyond the immediate parties involved in a transaction. Marshall's formulation of externalities laid the groundwork for subsequent scholarly inquiry into the broader societal impacts of economic actions. While Marshall provided the initial conceptual framework for externalities, it was Arthur Pigou, a British economist, who further developed the concept in his influential work, \"The Economics of Welfare,\" published in 1920. Pigou expanded upon Marshall's ideas and introduced the concept of \"Pigovian taxes\" or corrective taxes aimed at internalizing externalities by aligning private costs with social costs. His work emphasized the role of government intervention in addressing market failures resulting from externalities.\nAdditionally, the American economist Frank Knight contributed to the understanding of externalities through his writings on social costs and benefits in the 1920s and 1930s. Knight's work highlighted the inherent challenges in quantifying and mitigating externalities within market systems, underscoring the complexities involved in achieving optimal resource allocation. Throughout the 20th century, the concept of externalities continued to evolve with advancements in economic theory and empirical research. Scholars such as Ronald Coase and Harold Hotelling made significant contributions to the understanding of externalities and their implications for market efficiency and welfare.\nThe recognition of externalities as a pervasive phenomenon with wide-ranging implications has led to its incorporation into various fields beyond economics, including environmental science, public health, and urban planning. Contemporary debates surrounding issues such as climate change, pollution, and resource depletion underscore the enduring relevance of the concept of externalities in addressing pressing societal challenges.\nDefinitions.\nA negative externality is any difference between the private cost of an action or decision to an economic agent and the social cost. In simple terms, a negative externality is anything that causes an indirect cost to individuals. An example is the toxic gases that are released from industries or mines, these gases cause harm to individuals within the surrounding area and have to bear a cost (indirect cost) to get rid of that harm. Conversely, a positive externality is any difference between the private benefit of an action or decision to an economic agent and the social benefit. A positive externality is anything that causes an indirect benefit to individuals and for which the producer of that positive externality is not compensated. For example, planting trees makes individuals' property look nicer and it also cleans the surrounding areas.\nIn microeconomic theory, externalities are factored into competitive equilibrium analysis as the social effect, as opposed to the private market which only factors direct economic effects. The social effect of economic activity is the sum of the indirect (the externalities) and direct factors. The Pareto optimum, therefore, is at the levels in which the social marginal benefit equals the social marginal cost. \nExternalities are the residual effects of economic activity on persons not directly participating in the transaction. The consequences of producer or consumer behaviors that result in external costs or advantages imposed on others are not taken into account by market pricing and can have both positive and negative effects. To further elaborate on this, when expenses associated with the production or use of an item or service are incurred by others but are not accounted for in the market price, this is known as a negative externality. The health and well-being of local populations may be negatively impacted by environmental deterioration resulting from the extraction of natural resources. Comparably, the tranquility of surrounding inhabitants might be disturbed by noise pollution from industry or transit, which lowers their quality of life. On the other hand, positive externalities occur when the activities of producers or consumers benefit other parties in ways that are not accounted for in market exchanges. A prime example of a positive externality is education, as those who invest in it gain knowledge and production for society as a whole in addition to personal profit.\nGovernment involvement is frequently necessary to address externalities. This can be done by enacting laws, Pigovian taxes, or other measures that encourage positive externalities or internalize external costs. Through the integration of externalities into economic research and policy formulation, society may endeavor to get results that optimize aggregate well-being and foster sustainable growth.\nImplications.\nA voluntary exchange may reduce societal welfare if external costs exist. The person who is affected by the negative externalities in the case of air pollution will see it as lowered utility: either subjective displeasure or potentially explicit costs, such as higher medical expenses. The externality may even be seen as a trespass on their health or violating their property rights (by reduced valuation). Thus, an external cost may pose an ethical or political problem. Negative externalities are Pareto inefficient, and since Pareto efficiency underpins the justification for private property, they undermine the whole idea of a market economy. For these reasons, negative externalities are more problematic than positive externalities.\nAlthough positive externalities may appear to be beneficial, while Pareto efficient, they still represent a failure in the market as it results in the production of the good falling under what is optimal for the market. By allowing producers to recognise and attempt to control their externalities production would increase as they would have motivation to do so. With this comes the free rider problem. The free rider problem arises when people overuse a shared resource without doing their part to produce or pay for it. It represents a failure in the market where goods and services are not able to be distributed efficiently, allowing people to take more than what is fair. For example, if a farmer has honeybees a positive externality of owning these bees is that they will also pollinate the surrounding plants. This farmer has a next door neighbour who also benefits from this externality even though he does not have any bees himself. From the perspective of the neighbour he has no incentive to purchase bees himself as he is already benefiting from them at zero cost. But for the farmer, he is missing out on the full benefits of his own bees which he paid for, because they are also being used by his neighbour. \nThere are a number of theoretical means of improving overall social utility when negative externalities are involved. The market-driven approach to correcting externalities is to internalize third party costs and benefits, for example, by requiring a polluter to repair any damage caused. But in many cases, internalizing costs or benefits is not feasible, especially if the true monetary values cannot be determined.\nLaissez-faire economists such as Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman sometimes refer to externalities as \"neighborhood effects\" or \"spillovers\", although externalities are not necessarily minor or localized. Similarly, Ludwig von Mises argues that externalities arise from lack of \"clear personal property definition.\"\nExamples.\nExternalities may arise between producers, between consumers or between consumers and producers. Externalities can be negative when the action of one party imposes costs on another, or positive when the action of one party benefits another.\nNegative.\nA negative externality (also called \"external cost\" or \"external diseconomy\") is an economic activity that imposes a negative effect on an unrelated third party, not captured by the market price. It can arise either during the production or the consumption of a good or service. Pollution is termed an externality because it imposes costs on people who are \"external\" to the producer and consumer of the polluting product. Barry Commoner commented on the costs of externalities:\nClearly, we have compiled a record of serious failures in recent technological encounters with the environment. In each case, the new technology was brought into use before the ultimate hazards were known. We have been quick to reap the benefits and slow to comprehend the costs.\nMany negative externalities are related to the environmental consequences of production and use. The article on environmental economics also addresses externalities and how they may be addressed in the context of environmental issues.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The corporation is an externalizing machine (moving its operating costs and risks to external organizations and people), in the same way that a shark is a killing machine.\" - Robert Monks (2003) Republican candidate for Senate from Maine and corporate governance adviser in the film \"The Corporation\".\nNegative production externalities.\nExamples for negative production externalities include:\nNegative consumption externalities.\nExamples of negative consumption externalities include:\nPositive.\nA positive externality (also called \"external benefit\" or \"external economy\" or \"beneficial externality\") is the positive effect an activity imposes on an unrelated third party. Similar to a negative externality, it can arise either on the production side, or on the consumption side.\nA positive production externality occurs when a firm's production increases the well-being of others but the firm is uncompensated by those others, while a positive consumption externality occurs when an individual's consumption benefits other but the individual is uncompensated by those others.\nPositive production externalities.\nExamples of positive production externalities\nPositive consumption externalities.\nExamples of positive consumption externalities include:\nCollective solutions or public policies are implemented to regulate activities with positive or negative externalities.\nPositional.\nThe sociological basis of positional externalities is rooted in the theories of conspicuous consumption and positional goods.\nConspicuous consumption (originally articulated by Veblen, 1899) refers to the consumption of goods or services primarily for the purpose of displaying social status or wealth. In simpler terms, individuals engage in conspicuous consumption to signal their economic standing or to gain social recognition. Positional goods (introduced by Hirsch, 1977) are such goods, whose value is heavily contingent upon how they compare to similar goods owned by others. Their desirability is or derived utility is intrinsically tied to their relative scarcity or exclusivity within a particular social context.\nThe economic concept of Positional externalities originates from Duesenberry's Relative Income Hypothesis. This hypothesis challenges the conventional microeconomic model, as outlined by the Common Pool Resource (CPR) mechanism, which typically assumes that an individual's utility derived from consuming a particular good or service remains unaffected by other's consumption choices. Instead, Duesenberry posits that individuals gauge the utility of their consumption based on a comparison with other consumption bundles, thus introducing the notion of relative income into economic analysis. Consequently, the consumption of positional goods becomes highly sought after, as it directly impacts one's perceived status relative to others in their social circle.\nExample: consider a scenario where individuals within a social group vie for the latest luxury cars. As one member acquires a top-of-the-line vehicle, others may feel compelled to upgrade their own cars to preserve their status within the group. This cycle of competitive consumption can result in inefficient allocation of resources and exacerbate income inequality within society.\nThe consumption of positional goods engenders negative externalities, wherein the acquisition of such goods by one individual diminishes the utility or value of similar goods held by others within the same reference group. This positional externality, can lead to a cascade of overconsumption, as individuals strive to maintain or improve their relative position through excessive spending.\nPositional externalities are related, but not similar to Percuniary externalities.\nPecuniary.\nPecuniary externalities are those which affect a third party's profit but not their ability to produce or consume. These externalities \"occur when new purchases alter the relevant context within which an existing positional good is evaluated.\" Robert H. Frank gives the following example:\nif some job candidates begin wearing expensive custom-tailored suits, a side effect of their action is that other candidates become less likely to make favorable impressions on interviewers. From any individual job seeker's point of view, the best response might be to match the higher expenditures of others, lest her chances of landing the job fall. But this outcome may be inefficient since when all spend more, each candidate's probability of success remains unchanged. All may agree that some form of collective restraint on expenditure would be useful.\"\nFrank notes that treating positional externalities like other externalities might lead to \"intrusive economic and social regulation.\" He argues, however, that less intrusive and more efficient means of \"limiting the costs of expenditure cascades\"\u2014i.e., the hypothesized increase in spending of middle-income families beyond their means \"because of indirect effects associated with increased spending by top earners\"\u2014exist; one such method is the personal income tax.\nThe effect that rising demand has on prices in marketplaces with intense competition is a typical illustration of pecuniary externalities. Prices rise in response to shifts in consumer preferences or income levels, which raise demand for a product and benefit suppliers by increasing sales and profits. But other customers who now have to pay more for identical goods might also suffer from this price hike. As a result, consumers who were not involved in the initial transaction suffer a monetary externality in the form of diminished buying power, while producers profit from increased prices. Furthermore, markets with economies of scale or network effects may experience pecuniary externalities. For example, when it comes to network products, like social media platforms or communication networks, the more people use the technology or engage in it, the more valuable the product becomes. Consequently, early adopters could gain financially from positive pecuniary externalities such as enhanced network effects or greater resale prices of related products or services. As a conclusion, pecuniary\u00a0externalities draw attention to the intricate relationships that exist between market players and the effects that market transactions have on distribution. Comprehending pecuniary externalities is essential for assessing market results and formulating policies that advance economic efficiency and equality, even if they might not have the same direct impact on welfare or resource allocation as traditional externalities.\nInframarginal.\nThe concept of inframarginal externalities was introduced by James Buchanan and Craig Stubblebine in 1962. Inframarginal externalities differ from other externalities in that there is no benefit or loss to the marginal consumer. At the relevant margin to the market, the externality does not affect the consumer and does not cause a market inefficiency. The externality only affects at the inframarginal range outside where the market clears. These types of externalities do not cause inefficient allocation of resources and do not require policy action.\nTechnological.\nTechnological externalities directly affect a firm's production and therefore, indirectly influence an individual's consumption; and the overall impact of society; for example Open-source software or free software development by corporations.\nThese externalities occur when technology spillovers from the acts of one economic agent impact the production or consumption potential of another agency. Depending on their nature, these spillovers may produce positive or negative externalities. The creation of new technologies that help people in ways that go beyond the original inventor is one instance of positive technical externalities. Let us examine the instance of research and development (R&amp;D) inside the pharmaceutical sector. \nIn addition to possible financial gain, a pharmaceutical company's R&amp;D investment in the creation of a new medicine helps society in other ways. Better health outcomes, higher productivity, and lower healthcare expenses for both people and society at large might result from the new medication. Furthermore, the information created via research and development frequently spreads to\u00a0other businesses and sectors, promoting additional innovation and economic expansion. For example, biotechnology advances could have uses in agriculture, environmental cleanup, or renewable energy, not just in the pharmaceutical industry. \nHowever, technical externalities can also take the form of detrimental spillovers that cost society money. Pollution from industrial manufacturing processes is a prime example. Businesses might not be entirely responsible for the expenses of environmental deterioration if they release toxins into the air or rivers as a result of their production processes. Rather, these expenses are shifted to society in the form of decreased quality of life for impacted populations, harm to the environment, and health risks. \nIn addition, workers in some industries may experience job displacement and unemployment as a result of disruptive developments in labor markets brought about by technological improvements. For instance, individuals with outdated skills may lose their jobs as a result of the automation of manufacturing processes through robots and artificial intelligence, causing social and economic unrest in the affected areas.\nSupply and demand diagram.\nThe usual economic analysis of externalities can be illustrated using a standard supply and demand diagram if the externality can be valued in terms of money. An extra supply or demand curve is added, as in the diagrams below. One of the curves is the \"private cost\" that consumers pay as individuals for additional quantities of the good, which in competitive markets, is the marginal private cost. The other curve is the \"true\" cost that society as a whole pays for production and consumption of increased production the good, or the marginal social cost. Similarly, there might be two curves for the demand or benefit of the good. The social demand curve would reflect the benefit to society as a whole, while the normal demand curve reflects the benefit to consumers as individuals and is reflected as effective demand in the market.\nWhat curve is added depends on the type of externality that is described, but not whether it is positive or negative. Whenever an externality arises on the production side, there will be two supply curves (private and social cost). However, if the externality arises on the consumption side, there will be two demand curves instead (private and social benefit). This distinction is essential when it comes to resolving inefficiencies that are caused by externalities.\nExternal costs.\nThe graph shows the effects of a negative externality. For example, the steel industry is assumed to be selling in a competitive market \u2013 before pollution-control laws were imposed and enforced (e.g. under laissez-faire). The marginal private cost is less than the marginal social or public cost by the amount of the external cost, i.e., the cost of air pollution and water pollution. This is represented by the vertical distance between the two supply curves. It is assumed that there are no external benefits, so that social benefit \"equals\" individual benefit.\nIf the consumers only take into account their own private cost, they will end up at price Pp and quantity Qp, instead of the more efficient price Ps and quantity Qs. These latter reflect the idea that the marginal social benefit should equal the marginal social cost, that is that production should be increased \"only\" as long as the marginal social benefit exceeds the marginal social cost. The result is that a free market is \"inefficient\" since at the quantity Qp, the social benefit is less than the social cost, so society as a whole would be better off if the goods between Qp and Qs had not been produced. The problem is that people are buying and consuming \"too much\" steel.\nThis discussion implies that negative externalities (such as pollution) are \"more than\" merely an ethical problem. The problem is one of the disjunctures between marginal private and social costs that are not solved by the free market. It is a problem of societal communication and coordination to balance costs and benefits. This also implies that pollution is not something solved by competitive markets. Some \"collective\" solution is needed, such as a court system to allow parties affected by the pollution to be compensated, government intervention banning or discouraging pollution, or economic incentives such as green taxes.\nExternal benefits.\nThe graph shows the effects of a positive or beneficial externality. For example, the industry supplying smallpox vaccinations is assumed to be selling in a competitive market. The marginal private benefit of getting the vaccination is less than the marginal social or public benefit by the amount of the external benefit (for example, society as a whole is increasingly protected from smallpox by each vaccination, including those who refuse to participate). This marginal external benefit of getting a smallpox shot is represented by the vertical distance between the two demand curves. Assume there are no external costs, so that social cost \"equals\" individual cost.\nIf consumers only take into account their own private benefits from getting vaccinations, the market will end up at price Pp and quantity Qp as before, instead of the more efficient price Ps and quantity Qs. This latter again reflect the idea that the marginal social benefit should equal the marginal social cost, i.e., that production should be increased as long as the marginal social benefit exceeds the marginal social cost. The result in an unfettered market is \"inefficient\" since at the quantity Qp, the social benefit is greater than the societal cost, so society as a whole would be better off if more goods had been produced. The problem is that people are buying \"too few\" vaccinations.\nThe issue of external benefits is related to that of public goods, which are goods where it is difficult if not impossible to exclude people from benefits. The production of a public good has beneficial externalities for all, or almost all, of the public. As with external costs, there is a problem here of societal communication and coordination to balance benefits and costs. This also implies that vaccination is not something solved by competitive markets. The government may have to step in with a collective solution, such as subsidizing or legally requiring vaccine use. If the government does this, the good is called a merit good. Examples include policies to accelerate the introduction of electric vehicles or promote cycling, both of which benefit public health.\nCauses.\nExternalities often arise from poorly defined property rights. [All contents in this section are highly controversial and provide a one-sided, biased, poorly researched and ideologically laden view of externalities and the concept or property rights. This entire section needs to be redrafted and peer-reviewed,as its current contents is highly tendentious, elevating a simplistic libertarian understanding of property rights and truncating Coasian insights into supposed universal truths. The entire section is highly political, and indistinguishable from propaganda or ideological advocacy for a very narrow view of externalities and property rights that would appear highly problematic when submitted to any decently reviewed journal on economics or political economy.] \nWhile property rights to some things, such as objects, land, and money can be easily defined and protected, air, water, and wild animals often flow freely across personal and political borders, making it much more difficult to assign ownership. This incentivizes agents to consume them without paying the full cost, leading to negative externalities. Positive externalities similarly accrue from poorly defined property rights. For example, a person who gets a flu vaccination cannot own part of the herd immunity this confers on society, so they may choose not to be vaccinated.\nWhen resources are managed poorly or there are no well-defined property rights, externalities frequently result, especially when it comes to common pool resources. Due to their rivalrous usage and non-excludability, common pool resources including fisheries, forests, and grazing areas are vulnerable to abuse and deterioration when access is unrestrained. Without clearly defined property rights or efficient management structures, people or organizations may misuse common pool resources\u00a0without thinking through the long-term effects, which might have detrimental externalities on other users and society at large. This phenomenon\u2014famously referred to by Garrett Hardin as the \"tragedy of the commons\"\u2014highlights people's propensity to put their immediate self-interests ahead of the sustainability of shared resources.\nImagine, for instance, that there are no rules or limits in place and that several fishers have access to a single fishing area. In order to maintain their way of life and earn income, fishers are motivated to maximize their catches, which eventually causes overfishing and the depletion of fish populations. Fish populations decrease, and as a result, ecosystems are irritated, and the fishing industry experiences financial losses. These consequences have an adverse effect on subsequent generations and other people who depend on the resource. Nevertheless, the reduction of externalities linked to resources in common pools frequently necessitates the adoption of collaborative management approaches, like community-based management frameworks, tradable permits, and quotas. Communities can lessen the tragedy of the commons and encourage sustainable resource use and conservation for the benefit of current and future generations by establishing property rights or controlling access to shared resources.\nAnother common cause of externalities is the presence of transaction costs. Transaction costs are the cost of making an economic trade. These costs prevent economic agents from making exchanges they should be making. The costs of the transaction outweigh the benefit to the agent. When not all mutually beneficial exchanges occur in a market, that market is inefficient. Without transaction costs, agents could freely negotiate and internalize all externalities.\nIn order to further understand transactional costs, it is crucial to discuss Ronald Coase's methodologies. The standard theory of externalities, which holds that internalizing external costs or benefits requires government action through measures like Pigovian taxes or regulations, has been challenged by Coase. He presents the idea of transaction costs, which include the expenses related to reaching, upholding, and keeping an eye on agreements between parties. In the existence of externalities, transaction costs may hinder the effectiveness of private bargaining and result in worse-than-ideal results, according to Coase. He does, however, contend that private parties can establish mutually advantageous arrangements to internalize externalities without the involvement of the government, provided that there are minimal transaction costs and clearly defined property rights. Nevertheless, Coase uses the example of the distribution of property rights between a farmer and a rancher to support his claims. Assume there is a negative externality because the farmer's crops are harmed by the rancher's livestock. In a society where property rights are well-defined and transaction costs are minimal, the farmer and rancher can work out a voluntary agreement to settle the dispute. For example, the farmer may invest in preventive measures to lessen the impact, or the rancher could pay the farmer back for the harm the cattle caused. Coase's approach emphasizes how crucial it is to take property rights and transaction costs into account when managing externalities. He highlights that voluntary transactions between private parties can allow private parties to internalise externalities and that property rights distribution and transaction cost reduction can help make this possible.\nPossible solutions.\nSolutions in market economies.\nThere are several general types of solutions to the problem of externalities, including both public- and private-sector resolutions:\nA Pigovian tax (also called Pigouvian tax, after economist Arthur C. Pigou) is a tax imposed that is equal in value to the negative externality. In order to fully correct the negative externality, the per unit tax should equal the marginal external cost. The result is that the market outcome would be reduced to the efficient amount. A side effect is that revenue is raised for the government, reducing the amount of distortionary taxes that the government must impose elsewhere. Governments justify the use of Pigovian taxes saying that these taxes help the market reach an efficient outcome because this tax bridges the gap between marginal social costs and marginal private costs.\nSome arguments against Pigovian taxes say that the tax does not account for all the transfers and regulations involved with an externality. In other words, the tax only considers the amount of externality produced. Another argument against the tax is that it does not take private property into consideration. Under the Pigovian system, one firm, for example, can be taxed more than another firm, even though the other firm is actually producing greater amounts of the negative externality.\nFurther arguments against Pigou disagree with his assumption every externality has someone at fault or responsible for the damages. Coase argues that externalities are reciprocal in nature. Both parties must be present for an externality to exist. He uses the example of two neighbors. One neighbor possesses a fireplace, and often lights fires in his house without issue. Then one day, the other neighbor builds a wall that prevents the smoke from escaping and sends it back into the fire-building neighbor's home. This illustrates the reciprocal nature of externalities. Without the wall, the smoke would not be a problem, but without the fire, the smoke would not exist to cause problems in the first place. Coase also takes issue with Pigou's assumption of a \"benevolent despot\" government. Pigou assumes the government's role is to see the external costs or benefits of a transaction and assign an appropriate tax or subsidy. Coase argues that the government faces costs and benefits just like any other economic agent, so other factors play into its decision-making.\nHowever, the most common type of solution is a tacit agreement through the political process. Governments are elected to represent citizens and to strike political compromises between various interests. Normally governments pass laws and regulations to address pollution and other types of environmental harm. These laws and regulations can take the form of \"command and control\" regulation (such as enforcing standards and limiting process variables), or environmental pricing reform (such as ecotaxes or other Pigovian taxes, tradable pollution permits or the creation of markets for ecological services). The second type of resolution is a purely private agreement between the parties involved.\nGovernment intervention might not always be needed. Traditional ways of life may have evolved as ways to deal with external costs and benefits. Alternatively, democratically run communities can agree to deal with these costs and benefits in an amicable way. Externalities can sometimes be resolved by agreement between the parties involved. This resolution may even come about because of the threat of government action.\nThe use of taxes and subsidies in solving the problem of externalities\nCorrection tax, respectively subsidy, means essentially any mechanism that increases, respectively decreases, the costs (and thus price) associated with the activities of an individual or company.\nThe private-sector may sometimes be able to drive society to the socially optimal resolution. Ronald Coase argued that an efficient outcome can sometimes be reached without government intervention. Some take this argument further, and make the political argument that government should restrict its role to facilitating bargaining among the affected groups or individuals and to enforcing any contracts that result.\nThis result, often known as the Coase theorem, requires that\nIf all of these conditions apply, the private parties can bargain to solve the problem of externalities. The second part of the Coase theorem asserts that, when these conditions hold, whoever holds the property rights, a Pareto efficient outcome will be reached through bargaining.\nThis theorem would not apply to the steel industry case discussed above. For example, with a steel factory that trespasses on the lungs of a large number of individuals with pollution, it is difficult if not impossible for any one person to negotiate with the producer, and there are large transaction costs. Hence the most common approach may be to regulate the firm (by imposing limits on the amount of pollution considered \"acceptable\") while paying for the regulation and enforcement with taxes. The case of the vaccinations would also not satisfy the requirements of the Coase theorem. Since the potential external beneficiaries of vaccination are the people themselves, the people would have to self-organize to pay each other to be vaccinated. But such an organization that involves the entire populace would be indistinguishable from government action.\nIn some cases, the Coase theorem is relevant. For example, if a logger is planning to clear-cut a forest in a way that has a negative impact on a nearby resort, the resort-owner and the logger could, in theory, get together to agree to a deal. For example, the resort-owner could pay the logger not to clear-cut \u2013 or could buy the forest. The most problematic situation, from Coase's perspective, occurs when the forest literally does not belong to anyone, or in any example in which there are not well-defined and enforceable property rights; the question of \"who\" owns the forest is not important, as any specific owner will have an interest in coming to an agreement with the resort owner (if such an agreement is mutually beneficial).\nHowever, the Coase theorem is difficult to implement because Coase does not offer a negotiation method. Moreover, Coasian solutions are unlikely to be reached due to the possibility of running into the assignment problem, the holdout problem, the free-rider problem, or transaction costs. Additionally, firms could potentially bribe each other since there is little to no government interaction under the Coase theorem. For example, if one oil firm has a high pollution rate and its neighboring firm is bothered by the pollution, then the latter firm may move depending on incentives. Thus, if the oil firm were to bribe the second firm, the first oil firm would suffer no negative consequences because the government would not know about the bribing.\nIn a dynamic setup, Rosenkranz and Schmitz (2007) have shown that the impossibility to rule out Coasean bargaining tomorrow may actually justify Pigouvian intervention today. To see this, note that unrestrained bargaining in the future may lead to an underinvestment problem (the so-called hold-up problem). Specifically, when investments are relationship-specific and non-contractible, then insufficient investments will be made when it is anticipated that parts of the investments' returns will go to the trading partner in future negotiations (see Hart and Moore, 1988). Hence, Pigouvian taxation can be welfare-improving precisely because Coasean bargaining will take place in the future. Antr\u00e0s and Staiger (2012) make a related point in the context of international trade.\nKenneth Arrow suggests another private solution to the externality problem. He believes setting up a market for the externality is the answer. For example, suppose a firm produces pollution that harms another firm. A competitive market for the right to pollute may allow for an efficient outcome. Firms could bid the price they are willing to pay for the amount they want to pollute, and then have the right to pollute that amount without penalty. This would allow firms to pollute at the amount where the marginal cost of polluting equals the marginal benefit of another unit of pollution, thus leading to efficiency.\nFrank Knight also argued against government intervention as the solution to externalities. He proposed that externalities could be internalized with privatization of the relevant markets. He uses the example of road congestion to make his point. Congestion could be solved through the taxation of public roads. Knight shows that government intervention is unnecessary if roads were privately owned instead. If roads were privately owned, their owners could set tolls that would reduce traffic and thus congestion to an efficient level. This argument forms the basis of the traffic equilibrium. This argument supposes that two points are connected by two different highways. One highway is in poor condition, but is wide enough to fit all traffic that desires to use it. The other is a much better road, but has limited capacity. Knight argues that, if a large number of vehicles operate between the two destinations and have freedom to choose between the routes, they will distribute themselves in proportions such that the cost per unit of transportation will be the same for every truck on both highways. This is true because as more trucks use the narrow road, congestion develops and as congestion increases it becomes equally profitable to use the poorer highway. This solves the externality issue without requiring any government tax or regulations.\nSolutions to greenhouse gas emission externalities.\nThe negative effect of carbon emissions and other greenhouse gases produced in production exacerbate the numerous environmental and human impacts of anthropogenic climate change. These negative effects are not reflected in the cost of producing, nor in the market price of the final goods. There are many public and private solutions proposed to combat this externality\nEmissions fee.\nAn emissions fee, or carbon tax, is a tax levied on each unit of pollution produced in the production of a good or service. The tax incentivised producers to either lower their production levels or to undertake abatement activities that reduce emissions by switching to cleaner technology or inputs.\nCap-and-trade systems.\nThe cap-and-trade system enables the efficient level of pollution (determined by the government) to be achieved by setting a total quantity of emissions and issuing tradable permits to polluting firms, allowing them to pollute a certain share of the permissible level. Permits will be traded from firms that have low abatement costs to firms with higher abatement costs and therefore the system is both cost-effective and cost-efficient. The cap and trade system has some practical advantages over an emissions fee such as the fact that:\n1. it reduces uncertainty about the ultimate pollution level. \n2. If firms are profit maximizing, they will utilize cost-minimizing technology to attain the standard which is efficient for individual firms and provides incentives to the research and development market to innovate. \n3. The market price of pollution rights would keep pace with the price level while the economy experiences inflation.\nThe emissions fee and cap and trade systems are both incentive-based approaches to solving a negative externality problem.\nCommand-and-control regulations.\nCommand-and-control regulations act as an alternative to the incentive-based approach. They require a set quantity of pollution reduction and can take the form of either a technology standard or a performance standard. A technology standard requires pollution producing firms to use specified technology. While it may reduce the pollution, it is not cost-effective and stifles innovation by incentivising research and development for technology that would work better than the mandated one. Performance standards set emissions goals for each polluting firm. The free choice of the firm to determine how to reach the desired emissions level makes this option slightly more efficient than the technology standard, however, it is not as cost-effective as the cap-and-trade system since the burden of emissions reduction cannot be shifted to firms with lower abatement.\nScientific calculation of external costs.\nA 2020 scientific analysis of external climate costs of foods indicates that external greenhouse gas costs are typically highest for animal-based products \u2013 conventional and organic to about the same extent within that ecosystem-subdomain \u2013 followed by conventional dairy products and lowest for organic plant-based foods and concludes that contemporary monetary evaluations are \"inadequate\" and that policy-making that lead to reductions of these costs to be possible, appropriate and urgent.&lt;ref name=\"10.1038/s41467-020-19474-6\"&gt; Available under https://.&lt;/ref&gt;\nCriticism.\nEcological economics criticizes the concept of externality because there is not enough system thinking and integration of different sciences in the concept.\nEcological economics is founded upon the view that the neoclassical economics (NCE) assumption that environmental and community costs and benefits are mutually cancelling \"externalities\" is not warranted. Joan Martinez Alier, for instance shows that the bulk of consumers are automatically excluded from having an impact upon the prices of commodities, as these consumers are future generations who have not been born yet. The assumptions behind future discounting, which assume that future goods will be cheaper than present goods, has been criticized by Fred Pearce and by the Stern Report (although the Stern report itself does employ discounting and has been criticized for this and other reasons by ecological economists such as Clive Spash).\nConcerning these externalities, some, like the eco-businessman Paul Hawken, argue an orthodox economic line that the only reason why goods produced unsustainably are usually cheaper than goods produced sustainably is due to a hidden subsidy, paid by the non-monetized human environment, community or future generations. These arguments are developed further by Hawken, Amory and Hunter Lovins to promote their vision of an environmental capitalist utopia in \"\".\nIn contrast, ecological economists, like Joan Martinez-Alier, appeal to a different line of reasoning. Rather than assuming some (new) form of capitalism is the best way forward, an older ecological economic critique questions the very idea of internalizing externalities as providing some corrective to the current system. The work by Karl William Kapp argues that the concept of \"externality\" is a misnomer. In fact the modern business enterprise operates on the basis of shifting costs onto others as normal practice to make profits. Charles Eisenstein has argued that this method of privatising profits while socialising the costs through externalities, passing the costs to the community, to the natural environment or to future generations is inherently destructive. Social ecological economist Clive Spash argues that externality theory fallaciously assumes environmental and social problems are minor aberrations in an otherwise perfectly functioning efficient economic system. Internalizing the odd externality does nothing to address the structural systemic problem and fails to recognize the all pervasive nature of these supposed 'externalities'. This is precisely why heterodox economists argue for a heterodox theory of social costs to effectively prevent the problem through the precautionary principle.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61194", "revid": "50283681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61194", "title": "A Prairie Home Companion", "text": "Live radio variety show\nA Prairie Home Companion was a weekly radio variety show created and hosted by Garrison Keillor that aired live from 1974 to 2016. In 2016, musician Chris Thile took over as host, and the successor show was eventually renamed \"Live from Here\" and ran until 2020. \"A Prairie Home Companion\" aired on Saturdays from the Fitzgerald Theater in Saint Paul, Minnesota; it was also frequently heard on tours to New York City and other U.S. cities. The show is known for its musical guests, especially folk and traditional musicians, tongue-in-cheek radio drama, and relaxed humor. Keillor's wry storytelling segment, \"News from Lake Wobegon,\" was the show's best-known feature during his long tenure.\nDistributed by Minnesota Public Radio's distribution arm, American Public Media, \"A Prairie Home Companion\" was heard on 690 public radio stations in the United States at its peak in spring 2015 and reached an audience of four million U.S. listeners each week. The show borrowed its name from a radio program in existence in 1969 that was named after the Prairie Home Cemetery near Concordia College, in Moorhead, Minnesota. It inspired a 2006 film of the same name, written by and featuring Keillor.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nThe Saturday-evening show was a partial spin-off of \"A Prairie Home Morning Show\" with Keillor and Tom Keith, which ran from 6 to 9\u00a0a.m. on Minnesota Public Radio and was continued by Keith and Dale Connelly for many years as \"The Morning Show\".\nAfter researching the \"Grand Ole Opry\" for an article, Keillor became interested in doing a variety show on the radio. On July 6, 1974, the first live broadcast of \"A Prairie Home Companion\" took place on Minnesota Public Radio. That show was broadcast from St. Paul in the Janet Wallace Auditorium of Macalester College. Twelve audience members turned out, mostly children. The second episode featured the first performance on the show by Butch Thompson, who became house pianist. Thompson stayed with the program until 1986 and frequently performed on the show until its 2016 conclusion.\nIn 1978, the show moved into the World Theater in St. Paul, which Minnesota Public Radio purchased and renovated in 1986 and renamed the Fitzgerald Theater in 1994. This is the same venue the program used to the end of its run.\n\"A Prairie Home Companion\" began national distribution in May 1980. Because National Public Radio (NPR) rejected the show due to its president Frank Mankiewicz perceiving the show as too expensive and insulting towards small towns, the show was initially distributed through a public radio satellite system that had been completed by June 1980 and allowed NPR member stations to distribute programs outside the NPR network. In 1983, Minnesota Public Radio president William Kling started a new company to distribute \"A Prairie Home Companion\" called American Public Radio, which would later be renamed Public Radio International in 1994.\nHiatus.\nThe show went off the air in 1987, with a \"final performance\" on June 13, and Keillor married and spent some time abroad during the following two years. For a brief time, the show was replaced \u2014 both on the air and in the World Theater \u2014 by \"Good Evening\", hosted by Noah Adams, a live variety show designed by ex-\"Prairie Home\" and \"All Things Considered\" staffers to retain the audience Keillor had cultivated over the years. However, many stations opted instead to continue \"APHC\" repeats in its traditional Saturday time slot.\nIn 1989, Keillor returned to radio with \"The American Radio Company of the Air\" (renamed \"Garrison Keillor's American Radio Company\" in its second season), broadcast originally from the Brooklyn Academy of Music. The new program featured a broadly similar format to \"A Prairie Home Companion\", with sketches and musical guests reflecting a more New York sensibility, rather than the country and folk music predominant in \"APHC\". Also, while Keillor sang and delivered a regular monologue on \"American Radio Company\", Lake Wobegon was initially downplayed, as he felt it was \"cruel\" to talk to a Brooklyn audience about life in a small town. During this period, Keillor revived the full \"APHC\" format only for \"annual farewell performances.\" In the fall of 1992, Keillor returned to the Fitzgerald Theater with \"ARC\" for the majority of the season, with Lake Wobegon and other \"APHC\" elements gradually but unmistakably returning to prominence.\nReturn to broadcast.\nThe following year, on October 2, 1993, the program officially reverted to the \"A Prairie Home Companion\" name and format.\nThe show was originally distributed nationally by Minnesota Public Radio in association with Public Radio International. Later, its distributor was Minnesota Public Radio's distribution unit, American Public Media.\nGuest hosts.\nSinger Sara Watkins of San Diego, California, hosted the January 15, 2011, broadcast. The format was the same, but Keillor appeared only as a guest actor and to deliver the \"News from Lake Wobegon\". He claimed he had taken the chance to see the show being performed for himself. It was reported that this could be the beginning of a trend toward Keillor's eventual retirement, and on March 16, 2011, Keillor stated in an interview with the AARP that he would most likely retire from the show by the time he turned 70 in August 2012.\nIn September 2011, Keillor told \"The Tuscaloosa News\" that his last broadcast would be recorded in \"early July 2013\", and that instead of a permanent replacement host, there would be \"a whole group of people. A rotation of hosts\", but in December 2011 Keillor said he had changed his mind and reconsidered his plans to retire because he still enjoyed hosting the show.\nOn February 7 and 14, 2015, mandolinist Chris Thile hosted the show (like Sara Watkins, a member of Nickel Creek). As when Watkins hosted, the format remained largely unchanged, but Keillor did not make an appearance. Instead, storyteller Tristan Jimerson appeared on the February 7 show and comedienne/storyteller Elna Baker on the February 14 show. Thile's band Punch Brothers performed on the February 7 show. Thile was named permanent host of the show in late June 2015, and took over as permanent host on October 15, 2016.\nKeillor's departure.\nWhen Keillor formally announced his departure from \"APHC\" at the show's airing on July 21, 2015, he indicated that Thile would succeed him as permanent host in 2016. Keillor recorded his final regular episode as host live at the Hollywood Bowl before an audience of 18,000, on July 1, 2016; it was aired on the following day. The episode was titled , and was a vocal duet show of \"time-honored American ballads, British Invasion romps, country-western weepers, and Broadway classics,\" guest-starring Sara Watkins, Sarah Jarosz, Aoife O'Donovan, Heather Masse, and Christine DiGiallonardo, alongside the \"Royal Academy of Radio Actors,\" Tim Russell, Sue Scott, and Fred Newman, and the \"APHC\" band, with music director and pianist Rich Dworsky and Bernie Dresel (drums), Larry Kohut (bass), Richard Kriehn (mandolin and fiddle), and Chris Siebold (guitar).\nBarack Obama recorded a telephone call into the show, which ran on the Saturday broadcast, and Keillor performed his last \"Lives of the Cowboys\" sketch as regular host, with regulars Scott, Russell, and Newman, and including a series of duets with the guests Masse, O'Donovan, Jarosz, DiGiallonardo, and Watkins. \nWhile the July 2 Hollywood Bowl performance was the last regular episode of \"A Prairie Home Companion\", Garrison Keillor also hosted a final live performance titled \"The Minnesota Show\" at the Minnesota State Fair on September 2, 2016, including the last-ever \"Guy Noir\" and \"News from Lake Wobegon\" segments.\nSince his departure from the radio show, Keillor has continued to tour with his stage show also called \"A Prairie Home Companion.\"\nName change.\nOn November 29, 2017, Minnesota Public Radio terminated its contract with Keillor because of \"allegations of his inappropriate behavior with an individual who worked with him.\" Because Keillor still owned artistic rights and the trademark to the show's name, MPR also announced that it would change the name. After two episodes under the placeholder name \"The Show with Chris Thile\", the new title was announced as \"Live from Here\" live on the December 16, 2017, broadcast of the show. MPR also announced it would cease distributing reruns of \"A Prairie Home Companion\" featuring Keillor. Keillor stated he had been \"fired\" from MPR, but he had technically not been employed by MPR/APM since 2002, working instead as an independent contractor. When it was announced in 2019 that \"Live from Here\" was going to be based in and broadcast out of New York City, many Minnesotan fans publicly complained that the radio show was losing its Midwestern style. \"Live from Here\" was canceled in 2020.\nBroadcast archives.\nOn April 13, 2018, Minnesota Public Radio posted a message stating its intent to reinstate the free online archives of \"A Prairie Home Companion\" and \"The Writer's Almanac\". The portion of the PrairieHome.org website containing the archives was restored later in the year.\nFormat.\nFrom the show's inception until 1987, its theme song was Hank Snow's hit \"Hello Love\". After 1987, each show has opened with Spencer Williams' composition \"Tishomingo Blues\" as the theme song, with lyrics by Garrison Keillor written especially for \"A Prairie Home Companion\".\nMusic was a main feature of the program; the show was a significant outlet for American folk music of many genres, especially country, bluegrass, blues, and gospel, but it also had guest performers from a wide variety of other styles of music, including classical, opera, and music from a number of different countries. The country musician and former record company executive Chet Atkins appeared on the show many times, as did singer-songwriters Mark Knopfler (lead guitarist and frontman of the bands Dire Straits and the Notting Hillbillies) and Jeff Lang. Folk/gospel duo Robin and Linda Williams had been regular guests since 1976, and often join Keillor and another female performer, often Jearlyn Steele, to form \"The Hopeful Gospel Quartet\". Peter Ostroushko, Greg Brown, Jean Redpath, and Prudence Johnson, among others, were recurring guests on the program between 1974 and 1987. The Wailin' Jennys and Andra Suchy were also recurring guests, and when the show travelled, Keillor generally featured local musicians and acts.\nGreetings from members of the audience to friends and family at home (frequently humorous) were read each week by Keillor just after the show's intermission, at the top of the second hour. Birthdays and anniversaries of famous composers and musicians were also observed.\nFeatures.\nKeillor and the ensemble performed comedy skits. Notable skits and characters often recur, such as the satirical \"Guy Noir, Private Eye\", which parodied film noir and radio dramas. Guy Noir's popularity was such that the first few notes of the theme or the first lines of the announcer's introduction (\"A dark night in a city that knows how to keep its secrets\u00a0...\") often drew applause and cheers from the audience. Also regularly featured were the adventures of Dusty and Lefty, \"The Lives of the Cowboys\".\nNews from Lake Wobegon.\nOne of the show's best-known features was Keillor's \"News from Lake Wobegon\", a weekly storytelling monologue, claiming to be a report from his fictitious hometown of Lake Wobegon, \"the little town that time forgot and the decades cannot improve\u00a0... where all the women are strong, all the men are good-looking, and all the children are above average\". The opening words of the monologue usually did not change: \"Well, it's been a quiet week in Lake Wobegon, Minnesota, my hometown, out on the edge of the prairie.\" Keillor often poked fun at central Minnesota's large Scandinavian-American and German-American communities, and many of his fictional characters have names that reflect this. The \"News from Lake Wobegon\" did not have a set structure, but featured recurring characters and places such as the Chatterbox Caf\u00e9, the Sidetrack Tap, Pastor Ingqvist of the Lake Wobegon Lutheran Church and his successor Pastor Liz, Father Emil of Our Lady of Perpetual Responsibility Roman Catholic Church (a parody of Our Mother of Perpetual Help), the Lake Wobegon Whippets sports teams, various members of the Bunsen and Krebsbach families, and an assortment of nearby \"Norwegian bachelor farmers\".\nIn-jokes are sprinkled through the show, such as \"Piscacadawadaquoddymoggin\", a made-up word that's been used both for places and for people's names. The components of this made-up word are portions of Native American place names in the New England region of the United States, most of them in Maine (i.e.: Piscataqua, Passamaquoddy, and Androscoggin).\nAnnual \"Joke Show\".\nOnce a year the program featured a special \"joke show\", which generally included the Lake Wobegon monologue and musical acts, but with other skits replaced by the performers taking turns telling jokes. Humorists such as Paula Poundstone and Roy Blount Jr. often made guest appearances on those shows, and listeners and audience members were encouraged to submit jokes for use on the air. Portions of such shows were incorporated into a book and CDs.\nFictional sponsors.\nThe show creates advertisements for fictional products, performed in the style of live old-time radio commercials. The show acknowledges its actual underwriters at the beginning, end, and middle (break) of the show.\n\"Prairie Home\"'s most prominent \"sponsor\" is the fictitious \"Powdermilk Biscuits\". Before he and the band performed the product's jingle every week (\"Has your family tried 'em, Powdermilk?\"), Garrison Keillor would extol Powdermilk's virtues in this way:\nAmong its other \"sponsors\", Bebop-A-Reebop Rhubarb Pie (and Frozen Rhubarb Pie Filling) has been prominent, with ads featuring the Bebop-A-Reebop jingle, performed to the tune of \"Shortnin' Bread\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe jingle is usually sung after a bombastic, sound-effect-enhanced tale of woe, and is immediately followed by Keillor asking, \"Wouldn't this be a great time for a piece of rhubarb pie? Yes, nothing gets the taste of shame and humiliation out of your mouth quite like Bebop-A-Reebop Rhubarb Pie.\"\nAnother prominent \"sponsor\" is Bertha's Kitty Boutique, whose locations in the fictional \"Dales\" shopping centers (\"Roy 'n' Dale, Airedale, Teasdale, Clydesdale, Chippendale, Mondale, and all the other fine shopping centers\") allude to various real people and things, while also parodying Minnesota's similarly named real-life malls (Southdale, Brookdale, Rosedale, and Ridgedale). Additionally, there is The Catchup Advisory Board\u2014its name a portmanteau of the common \"catsup\" and \"ketchup\" spellings\u2014which has the tagline \"Catchup: For the good times.\"\nOther \"sponsors\" have included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn addition, the recurring segment \"The Lives of the Cowboys\" featured its own Western-themed sponsors, including Prairie Dog Granola Bars (\"healthier than chewing tobacco and you don't have to spit\") and Cowboy Toothpicks (\"the toothpick that's guaranteed not to splinter\").\nAlterations.\nThis was primarily a radio comedy program. Some of it was devoted to the sentimental. Other stories put together by Keillor and others, depicted tragedies. Occasionally political satire could be found in some episodes. Other occasions marked current events.\nWhen Minnesota leader Paul Wellstone's end came in a 2002 airplane crash, Mr. Keillor rewrote a portion of that program revolving around Senator Wellstone.\nMentions during a 2004 show regarded the passing of President Reagan.\nCast.\nActors.\nRegularly appearing actors included Tim Russell (beginning in 1994) and Sue Scott (beginning in 1989). When the show resumed as \"The American Radio Company of the Air\" in November 1989, radio comedian Bob Elliott, half of the longtime radio and comedy television duo Bob and Ray, became a regular cast member. Actor Bill Perry was a member. Walter Bobbie made frequent appearances, as early as 1989, and continuing through 2006\u20132007. Ivy Austin was a regular contributing comedienne (and vocalist) in the early '90s. Allison Janney also appeared regularly in the mid 1990s. Prudence Johnson has performed frequently on the show as an actress (and a singer). Mark Benninghofer joined the cast as a substitute actor for a brief time after Russell broke his ankle in February 2009, forcing him to take a month of medical leave. Erica Rhodes had been an occasional guest on the show, beginning in 1996 when she was 10 years old. Serena Brook joined the cast in October 2016 when Chris Thile became host.\nSound effects artists.\nThe sound effects artists on the show, Tom Keith and Fred Newman, primarily used mouth sounds for their effects, supplemented by props. Keith engineered the first two seasons of the show and then joined the cast. He performed on most shows until 2001. He retired doing his weekday morning radio show in 2008, but continued performing on Prairie Home broadcasts from the Fitzgerald Theater and other regional locations. He continued working on A Prairie home Companion until his death in 2011. Newman eventually took over full-time after Keith passed away.\nMusicians.\nRegular musicians in Guy's All-Star Shoe Band include Richard Dworsky, a composer who appeared weekly as pianist, bandleader, and music director, Gary Raynor on bass and bass guitar, Peter Johnson on percussion, Jevetta Steele on vocals, and Andy Stein on violin, tenor and bass saxophones, and vocals. When the Shoe Band had a horn section, Keillor referred to them as the Shoe Horns.\nOther frequent, occasional, former, or one-time musicians on the show include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilm.\nReleased on June 9, 2006, \"A Prairie Home Companion\" is a film about \"a dying radio show that bears striking similarities to 'A Prairie Home Companion,'\" with the actual \"APHC\" home venue, the Fitzgerald Theater in St. Paul chosen to serve \"as set piece, soundstage and framing device\". The film was written by Garrison Keillor and directed by Robert Altman, and shot digitally, with camera by Altman's son, Robert Altman Jr.; the film stars Keillor, Meryl Streep, Tommy Lee Jones, Lily Tomlin, Kevin Kline, John C. Reilly, Lindsay Lohan, Maya Rudolph, Woody Harrelson, Virginia Madsen, and L.Q. Jones. \"APHC\" regular Rich Dworsky appears as the bandleader, and served as the film's pianist, conductor, arranger, and composer. The film depicts the titular radio program's behind-the-scenes activities, and the relational dynamics within the cast over its anticipated, imminent cancellation. The antagonist, Axeman, \"who has come to shut the show down\", is played by Tommy Lee Jones. As described in a 2005 on-set piece by David Carr for \"The New York Times\", the film set's atmosphere had &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a kind of Spanky and Our Gang let's-put-on-a-show quality, with crew, marquee talent and \"Prairie Home\" acolytes and extras mixing freely. The dailies, the traditional day's-end look at finished footage, usually include[d] about 75 people, a vivid reminder of Mr. Altman's penchant for collaborative filmmaking. And because music is such an important part of the movie and the radio show, the set always seem[ed] to be lifted by the pluck of a mandolin or a three-part harmony rehearsal. The film, which makes no reference to Lake Wobegon, is of feature length, with its financing provided by GreeneStreet Films, River Road Entertainment, and local Minnesota sources. Its award nominations (2006, unless noted) include the Berlin International Film Festival-Golden Bear award for best film, the National Association of Film Critics-Bodil Award for Best American Film, the Film Independent (film association) Independent Spirit Award for Best Director, the Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Screenplay, the International Press Academy-Satellite Awards for Best Adapted Screenplay, the Independent Filmmaker Project-Gotham Independent Film Award for Best Ensemble Performance, the Broadcast Film Critics Association-Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Cast, and the Casting Society of America-Artios Award for Best Casting for Feature Film (Comedy); its wins include the Yomiuri Shimbun (film association) Hochi Film Award (2007) for Best Foreign Film. In addition, Meryl Streep was nominated for an International Press Academy-Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actress (Motion Picture), and won the National Society of Film Critics Award for the same category.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "61195", "revid": "34553183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61195", "title": "MPR", "text": "MPR may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61196", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61196", "title": "Minnesota Public Radio", "text": "Public radio network in Minnesota\nMinnesota Public Radio (MPR) is a public radio network for the US state of Minnesota. With its three services, News &amp; Information, YourClassical MPR and The Current, MPR operates a 46-station regional radio network in the upper Midwest.\nMPR has won more than 875 journalism awards, including the Peabody Award, both the RTNDA Edward R. Murrow Award and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting award of the same name, and the Alfred I. duPont-Columbia University Gold Baton Award. As of September 2011, MPR was tied with WNYC for most listener support for a public radio network, and had the highest level of recurring monthly donors of any public radio network in the nation.\nMPR also produces and distributes national public radio programming via American Public Media.\nHistory.\nMinnesota Public Radio began on January 22, 1967, when KSJR-FM first signed on from the campus of Saint John's University in Collegeville, just outside St. Cloud. Colman Barry, then president of Saint John's, saw promise in the then relatively new technology of FM radio, and believed radio was an appropriate extension of Saint John's cultural and artistic functions to the broader community. He hired a 23-year-old graduate of St. John's, William H. Kling, as director of broadcasting.\nThe network began more or less out of necessity. Shortly after KSJR signed on, it became apparent that St. Cloud and surrounding Stearns County did not have enough listeners for the station to be viable. Kling more than tripled KSJR's power in hopes of reaching the Twin Cities, but that only provided grade B coverage to Minneapolis and the western portion of the metro, and completely missed St. Paul and the east. Realizing that the station needed to cover the Twin Cities to have a realistic chance of survival, St. John's started KSJN, a low-powered repeater station for the Twin Cities, in 1968. The operation was awash in debt, and by 1969, St. John's realized it did not have adequate financial or personnel resources to operate a full-fledged noncommercial radio station. With Barry's support, Saint John's transferred KSJR/KSJN's assets to a community corporation, St. John's University Broadcasting. This corporation later changed its name to Minnesota Educational Radio, and finally Minnesota Public Radio. Kling led MPR as president and CEO for 44 years before retiring in 2011.\nMPR was a charter member of National Public Radio in 1971, and had helped lay the groundwork for forming that organization during 1969 and 1970. In 1971, operations moved from Collegeville to St. Paul, funded in part with a news programming \"demonstration\" grant from the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. New studios were built and KSJN became the flagship station. In the 1970s, additional stations were added across Minnesota. During this period KSJN's news department won numerous regional and national awards and became one of the region's most highly regarded news operations.\nIn 1974, MPR began live broadcasting of Garrison Keillor's \"A Prairie Home Companion\", one of the best-known programs on public radio, from the Park Square Theatre in Saint Paul. In the program's early days, members of the production staff worked hard to fill the theatre seats, sometimes bringing in radio station staff and urging passersby to come into the theatre from the street. In 1980, MPR originated the Peabody Award-winning classical music show \"Saint Paul Sunday\", which went national via syndication in 1981.\nMPR assisted in 1983 with the formation of American Public Radio, now known as Public Radio International, which merged with Public Radio Exchange in 2019.\nOriginally, MPR played a mix of classical music and NPR news/talk programming. But as NPR expanded its offerings, Kling made plans to split MPR into separate classical and news/talk networks. To that end, MPR sought to buy a second FM frequency in the Twin Cities from the late 1970s onward. As a fallback, in 1980 it bought WLOL (AM 1330), one of Minnesota's oldest stations, and changed its calls to KSJN (AM), a simulcast of KSJN-FM. In 1989, AM 1330 changed its calls to KNOW and began airing an expanded lineup of NPR programming. In 1991, MPR bought WLOL-FM, AM 1330's former FM sister, allowing it to finally split its services into two networks. The KNOW call letters and intellectual unit, including the NPR news and talk format, moved to KSJN's old frequency of 91.1. The KSJN calls moved to WLOL-FM's former frequency of 99.5, which began playing classical music full-time.\nMPR acquired Marketplace Productions, which produces \"Marketplace\", \"Marketplace Morning Report\" and \"Marketplace Money\", from studios in Los Angeles, in association with the University of Southern California, in 2000. The same year, MPR founded Southern California Public Radio, which entered into a public service operating agreement with Pasadena City College to run KPCC in Pasadena, California. In 2004, MPR began distributing its own shows through American Public Media, leaving PRI; APM was the third radio network in the U.S. to receive founding support from MPR, probably an unmatched record for an American radio station or network.\nIn 2004, MPR announced it would buy WCAL (89.3 FM), the classical music station operated by St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota. WCAL (and a repeater station, KMSE in Rochester), were sold in a deal valued at $10.5\u00a0million, which the Federal Communications Commission approved in 2004. The next year, following the acquisition by MPR, WCAL changed its call letters to KCMP and was transformed into MPR's third service, \"The Current\".\nIn 2008, a WCAL advocacy group took St. Olaf College to court for breach of trust in selling the radio station. (A June 2008 judge's opinion described the station as a charitable trust and therefore not the college's property to freely dispose of. https:// MPR's General Counsel and three attorneys took part in the proceedings.https:// In 2009 a court found in favor of MPR, ruling that the statute of limitations on the matter had expired, nullifying the advocacy group's standing.)\nToday, MPR serves a regional audience of one million listeners through 43 stations presenting three broadcast network services.\nOriginal materials from Minnesota Public Radio have been contributed to the American Archive of Public Broadcasting.\nServices.\nWith the addition of later stations, MPR originally offered a mix of classical music and NPR news/talk programming on a single service. Beginning in 1991, MPR's programming split in two, forming separate news and classical music services (although one station in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan still carries a combination of the two). The 2005 acquisition of WCAL in Northfield, Minnesota, which covers the Minneapolis\u2013St. Paul and Rochester areas, provided the opportunity to launch another music service, \"The Current.\" This third service has gradually expanded to most of southeastern Minnesota.\nMPR News.\nMPR's news and information service includes a mix of locally produced programs and national/international shows. The flagship station is KNOW-FM (91.1 FM) in the Twin Cities.\nThe MPR newsroom has garnered international acclaim, earning the inaugural Knight News Innovation EPpy Award in 2008. The newsroom is known for its Public Insight Network, a database of citizen sources who contribute their expertise on a wide array of topics. The Public Insight Network grew to 140,000 sources in 2011 and partners with other news media, journalism schools, foundations and community groups.\nAs of 2022, 24 full-power stations carry MPR's News and Information service and various translator signals around the state offer additional coverage.\nMPRNews.org is a nonprofit news website maintained by MPR. This online news source covers issues that affect the state including politics, business, education, health, environment, and the economy. MPR News offers headline news, video, blogs, audio, and multiple ways for readers to become involved in the news-making process.\nYourClassical MPR.\nMPR's classical music network is carried on 18 full-power stations and various translators offer additional coverage. The flagship station is KSJN (99.5 FM), in the Twin Cities. In April 2021, the station rebranded as \"YourClassical MPR\", aligning it with the umbrella branding used for American Public Media's digital classical music platforms and nationally distributed programming. Most of the network's schedule is a simulcast of APM's Classical 24 network, although statewide morning and afternoon shows air Monday through Friday and the network airs various specials and live broadcasts. The HD 2 signal of KSJN-FM offers a 24-hour feed of the Classical 24 network.\nOn September 10, 2020, Garrett McQueen, the host of Classical 24's Music Through the Night and MPR's only African-American classical music host, was terminated by American Public Media for \"not following programming guidelines.\" According to McQueen, he was \"given two warnings\u2014one of which was about his need to improve communication and the other warning was for switching out scheduled music to play pieces he felt were more appropriate to the moment and more diverse.\"\nThe Current.\nMPR's third service, The Current, debuted on January 24, 2005, and airs an adult album alternative format.\nSeveral people on The Current's initial staff are well known in the area for previous work at stations that highlight music from Minnesota and the Upper Midwest. Many of the staffers and on-air personalities came from other similar stations, such as the University of Minnesota's KUOM, community-oriented KFAI, and commercial alternative rock outlets REV 105 and Cincinnati, Ohio's WOXY.com.\nProgramming on The Current is mostly locally produced. The flagship station is KCMP (89.3 FM), licensed to Northfield on the southeastern periphery of the Twin Cities, though the signal covers most of the metro area. A lower-power station, KMSE (88.7 FM), serves Rochester and southeastern Minnesota, KZIO (104.3 FM) serves the Duluth area, and translators offer additional coverage in other parts of the state. The service is also carried as an HD service on several of MPR's full power stations. KPCC, the NPR affiliate in Los Angeles operated by MPR's parent company, APM, carries The Current on its HD 2 signal. The Current also streams online in a variety of formats.\nAdditional services.\nMinnesota Public Radio also programs several other music services, all available online, with a few offered on HD Radio in the Twin Cities area.\nCarbon Sound is the newest MPR service, focused on R&amp;B music and Black artists. In addition to streaming online, it is available on the HD 2 subchannel of KCMP in the Twin Cities.\nLocal Current is a service programmed by the staff of The Current, and features music from Minnesota artists. The service streams online.\nPurple Current is an R&amp;B and Hip-Hop service inspired by Prince.\nRock The Cradle is also programmed by personnel at The Current, and airs a variation of their AAA format, with music geared toward children and parents. It is available via a separate webstream.\nRadio Heartland features an eclectic mix of acoustic, Americana and roots music. The service can be found on the HD2 subchannel of KNOW-FM and also via a separate webcast. KNOW-FM also features an HD3 subchannel consisting of programming from NPR and the BBC World Service. The signal carries additional hours of Morning Edition and All Things Considered not available on KNOW's main signal. Several other NPR and APM shows air on the service.\nSubsidiary Communications Authority (SCA's) are used to transmit a Minnesota version of the Radio Talking Book Network to disabled listeners around the state, in cooperation with Minnesota State Services for the Blind. MPR also serves as the radio backbone for the radio portion of the state's Emergency Alert System, and as the backbone for the state's Amber alert system.\nMPR owns WGGL, the NPR affiliate serving Houghton, Michigan. The station airs a combination of NPR News, BBC World Service and Classical 24 programming. While MPR supplies weather updates, local MPR programming and news updates are not aired on the station.\nRevenue and expenses.\nMinnesota Public Radio is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization.\nMPR's funding comes from listener contributions (membership dues), foundations, corporate and private contributions, government grants, advertising, education partners, and publicly traded securities.\nThe for-profit Rivertown Trading Company, once a subsidiary of MPR's parent company, was sold in 1998 for $124\u00a0million. Profits went toward creating MPR's endowment, a percentage of which contributes to MPR's annual budget.\nAnnual expenses.\nTotal expenses for MPR for fiscal year 2023 (July 1, 2022, to June 30, 2023), as shown in the MPR Board of Trustees audit, was $117.1 million ($119.7 million the next year). That includes $17.7 million spent on fundraising and is distributed among the categories in the table below.\nOn MPR's federal 2021 tax form, total expenses are shown as $112,380,820.\nOn its federal 2021 tax form, MPR entered $9.2 million for \"Fees for services (nonemployees)\" under the category \"Other\". Since that amount is less than 10% (8.2%) of its total expenses, MPR is not required to provide details on Schedule O, and none were provided.\nOn MPR's federal 2022 tax form (the most recent available), total expenses are shown as $115,780,425.\nOn its federal 2022 tax form, MPR entered $10.4 million for \"Fees for services (nonemployees)\" under the category \"Other\". That amount is also less than 10% (8.9%) of its total expenses, and no details were provided on Schedule O.\nCompensation for officers, directors, trustees, and key employees.\nThe table below shows MPR's highest-compensated employees, as listed on MPR's 2021 tax return.\nPer the 2021 tax return, the average compensation for the eight highest-compensated employees was $486,805.\nPer the 2022 tax return, the average compensation for the eight highest-compensated employees was $550,073.\nRevenue details.\nTotal revenue shown on MPR's 2022 tax return was $113,958,386.\nTotal revenue shown on MPR's 2021 tax return was $174,153,779.\nThe amounts listed in the table below are from MPR's 2021 tax return.\nBroadcast coverage.\nMinnesota Public Radio broadcasts on several dozen stations that serve Minnesota and its neighboring communities and various translators providing additional local coverage. Stations are in Minnesota, South Dakota (Brookings and Sioux Falls), Michigan (Houghton), Iowa (Decorah), and Idaho (Sun Valley). MPR also operates KPCC in Pasadena, California.\nMost areas are served by both a classical music station and a news and information station. Duluth and Rochester are served by a classical music station, a news and information station, and The Current.\nMPR's newest service, The Current, is available in Austin, Hinckley, Mankato, the Twin Cities, New Ulm, Rochester, St. Cloud (Collegeville), and St. Peter.\nMinnesota Public Radio also broadcasts all three of its services\u2014News, Classical and The Current\u2014on HD Radio in several Minnesota communities. In the Twin Cities, MPR multicasts Classical 24, an additional news service and Purple Current.\nPublic Insight Network.\nPublic Insight Network (PIN), a newsgathering and networking initiative founded by MPR, was created by American Public Media in 2003. Through the PIN initiative, a community of citizens consigned their insights, personal experiences, and firsthand knowledge to journalists they trusted. This shared knowledge could then be included in printed materials, broadcast on live news, or shared on the Internet. PIN contributed to national shows such as Marketplace.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61202", "revid": "15390130", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61202", "title": "Vermes", "text": "Obsolete taxon of non-arthropod invertebrates\nVermes (\"vermin/vermes\") is an obsolete taxon used by Carl Linnaeus and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck for non-arthropod invertebrate animals.\nLinnaeus.\nIn Linnaeus's \"Systema Naturae\", the Vermes had the rank of class, occupying the 6th (and last) slot of his animal systematics. It was divided into the following orders, all except the Lithophyta containing (in modern terms) organisms from a variety of phyla:\nApart from the Mollusca, understood very differently from the modern phylum of that name, Linnaeus included a very diverse and rather mismatched assemblage of animals in the categories. The Intestina group encompassed various parasitic animals, among them the hagfish, which Linnaeus would have found in dead fish. Shelled molluscs were placed in the Testacea, together with barnacles and tube worms. Cnidarians (jellyfish and corals), echinoderms and polychaetes were spread across the other orders.\nLamarck.\nLinnaeus's system was revised by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck in his 1801 \"Syst\u00e8me des Animaux sans Vertebres\". In this work, he categorized echinoderms, arachnids, crustaceans and annelids, which he separated from \"Vermes\".\nModern.\nAfter Linnaeus, and especially with the advent of Darwinism, it became apparent that the Vermes animals are not closely related. Systematic works on phyla since Linnaeus continued to split up Vermes and sort the animals into natural systematic units.\nOf the classes of Vermes proposed by Linnaeus, only Mollusca has been kept as a phylum, and its composition has changed almost entirely. Linnaeus's early classification of the soft-bodied organisms was revolutionary in its day. A number of the organisms classified as Vermes by Linnaeus were very poorly known, and a number of them were not even viewed as animals.\nVermiform.\nWhile the \"Vermes\" is no longer a taxonomic group, anatomists continue to use the description \"vermiform\" of animals or organs that are worm-shaped. The word root is Latin, (worms) and (shaped). A well known example is the vermiform appendix, a small, blind section of the gut in humans and a number of other mammals.\nSeveral soft-bodied animal phyla including the annelids (earthworm and relatives) and the roundworms (mainly parasites), but also the minute parasitic mesozoans and some larger-bodied free-living phyla like the ribbon worms, peanut worms, and priapulids.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61204", "revid": "3637572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61204", "title": "US President", "text": ""}
{"id": "61207", "revid": "51056874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61207", "title": "Potsdam Declaration", "text": "Allied call for the surrender of all of the armed forces of Japan during World War II\nThe Potsdam Declaration, or the Proclamation Defining Terms for Japanese Surrender, was a statement that called for the surrender of all Japanese armed forces during World War II. On July 26, 1945, United States President Harry S. Truman, United Kingdom Prime Minister Winston Churchill, and President of China Chiang Kai-shek issued the document, which outlined the terms of surrender for the Empire of Japan, as agreed upon at the Potsdam Conference. The ultimatum stated that, if Japan did not surrender, it would face \"prompt and utter destruction.\"\nDrafting.\nAt the start of the conference, the United States delegation considered a proclamation demanding Japan's unconditional surrender by the heads of governments of the United States, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and China. The Potsdam Declaration went through many drafts until a version acceptable to all was found. Soviet leader Joseph Stalin ultimately declined to endorse the ultimatum at Potsdam, since the Soviet Union was not yet at war with Japan, and instead committed to subscribing to the declaration upon Soviet entry in the war which was scheduled for early August.\nKnowing on 24 July that the \"Joint Chiefs of Staff had reached an agreement on ... military strategy\", Truman gave Churchill a copy of the draft proclamation, which didn't mention the Soviet Union. The United States Delegation adopted all the suggested British amendments. \nSince Chiang Kai-shek had not been invited to the conference in a Berlin suburb, China did not participate in the drafting of the Potsdam Declaration. Chinese agreement on the issuance of the proposed proclamation was sought by telegram on 24 July. Ambassador Hurley delivered the message the next day in Chongqing. Chiang Kai-shek concurred with one amendment to the text, the listing of \u201cPresident of the National Government of the Republic of China\u201d before the Prime Minister of Great Britain, and the telegraphic reply sent from Chongqing at 11:05\u00a0a.m. on 26 July. \nChurchill had left the Berlin conference for the last time on 25 July, and that afternoon had flown to Northolt with his daughter and aide-de-camp Mary.\nChurchill was able to authorize the text as British Prime Minister, before submitting his resignation later on the evening of 26 July. In reality, the \u201csignatures\u201d of the Generalissimo and Prime Minister were in Truman\u2019s handwriting.\nTerms.\nOn July 26, the United States, Britain, and China released the declaration announcing the terms for Japan's surrender, with the warning as an ultimatum: \"We will not deviate from them. There are no alternatives. We shall brook no delay.\" For Japan, the terms of the declaration specified:\nOn the other hand, the declaration offered:\nThe mention of \"unconditional surrender\" came at the end of the declaration:\nContrary to what had been intended at its conception, which was to disenfranchise the Japanese leadership so that the people would accept a mediated transition, the declaration made no direct mention of the Japanese emperor at all. However, it insisted that \"the authority and influence of those who have deceived and misled the people of Japan into embarking on world conquest must be eliminated for all time.\" Allied intentions on issues of utmost importance to the Japanese, including the extent and number of Allied \"occupation points,\" the fate of Japan's minor islands, and the extent to which the Allies planned to \"control\" Japan's \"raw materials,\" as well as whether Hirohito was to be regarded as one of those who had \"misled the people of Japan\" or he might potentially become part of \"a peacefully inclined and responsible government,\" were thus left unstated, which essentially made it a blank check for the Allies.\nThe \"prompt and utter destruction\" clause has been interpreted as a veiled warning about American possession of the atomic bomb, which had been successfully tested in New Mexico on July 16, 1945, the day before the opening of the conference. Although the document warned of further destruction like the \"Operation Meetinghouse\" raid on Tokyo and other carpetbombing of Japanese cities, it did not mention anything about the atomic bomb.\nThe Potsdam Declaration had terms unclearly stated. It is not clear from the document itself whether a Japanese government would remain under Allied occupation or the occupation would be run by a foreign military government. In the same manner, it was not clear whether after the end of the occupation, Japan was to include any territory other than the four main Japanese islands. However, State Department policy showed an intent to obtain a free hand in running the affairs of Japan afterwards.\nIntentions of the Allied Powers.\nEach of the Allies who signed the Declaration had their own intentions for doing so, and all parties desired to receive reparations for war damages from the Japanese.\nRepublic of China.\nThe Republic of China desired immediate withdrawal of the Imperial Japanese Army and its subsidiary force the Kwantung Army from all Chinese territory, including Manchuria. Until the very end of the war the Japanese Army had been campaigning in China to assert the rule of the Japanese colonial state there, and the Chinese Nationalists and Communists had been fighting in tandem to expel them from the country. The Potsdam Declaration was issued in part to make clear the Chinese expectation of complete Japanese withdrawal from China.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom had lost control of its possessions in Southeast Asia and China to the Japanese advance in 1941\u201342. These included Singapore, Malaya, North Borneo, Hong Kong, and others. A key motivation of the British government was a restoration of control in its prewar possessions, along with a prompt end to the Japanese war effort, especially on the Indian front in Burma.\nUnited States.\nThe United States desired to keep maximum strategic latitude for itself upon the defeat of Japan. The American government had demanded in the past the unconditional surrender of Japan as the precondition to peace, and the text of the Declaration reiterated this demand. In the remainder of Asia, the American government had the goals of total rollback of the Empire of Japan's overseas possessions, as well as the additional goal of preventing the communists \u2013 with the support and patronage of the Soviet Union \u2013 from expanding influence in East Asia and Southeast Asia.\nLeaflets and radio broadcasts.\nThe declaration was released to the press in Potsdam on the evening of July 26 and was simultaneously transmitted to the Office of War Information (OWI) in Washington. By 5:00\u00a0p.m. Washington time, OWI's West Coast transmitters, aimed at the Japanese home islands, were broadcasting the text in English, and two hours later they began broadcasting it in Japanese. The declaration was never transmitted to the Japanese government by diplomatic channels, one reason being that the State Department did not want the United States to be seen as suing for peace. The Japanese ambassador to Moscow reacted to the news by calling the declaration \"a big scare-bomb directed against us\". American bombers dropped over 3\u00a0million leaflets describing the declaration over Japan, despite the fact that picking up enemy propaganda leaflets and listening to foreign radio broadcasts was illegal in Japan.\nThe initial English radio transmission was received in Japan by the Foreign Ministry, D\u014dmei News Agency, the Imperial Army, and the Imperial Navy. It was translated into Japanese by Takeso Shimoda of the Treaty Division of the Foreign Ministry. An internal discussion in the Foreign Ministry concluded that acceptance was unavoidable, but there was still room for negotiation. \"Remaining silent is prudent; the news media should be instructed to print it without any comments.\"\nAftermath.\nThe Potsdam Declaration and consideration of adopting it occurred before nuclear weapons were used. The terms of the declaration were hotly debated within the Japanese government. Upon receiving the declaration, Foreign Minister Shigenori T\u014dg\u014d hurriedly met with Prime Minister Kantar\u014d Suzuki and Cabinet Secretary Hisatsune Sakomizu. Sakomizu recalled that all felt the declaration must be accepted. Despite being sympathetic to accepting the terms, T\u014dg\u014d felt it was vague about the eventual form of government for Japan, disarmament, and the fate of accused war criminals. He also still had hope that the Soviet Union would agree to mediate negotiations with the Western Allies to obtain clarifications and revisions of the declaration's terms.\nShortly afterwards, T\u014dg\u014d met with Emperor Hirohito and advised him to treat the declaration with the utmost circumspection, but that a reply should be postponed until the Japanese received a response from the Soviets to mediate peace. According to Foreign Ministry official Toshikazu Kase, Hirohito \"said without hesitation that he deemed it [the declaration] acceptable in principle.\"\nMeanwhile, the Supreme Council for the Direction of the War met the same day to discuss the declaration. War Minister Korechika Anami, General Yoshijir\u014d Umezu, and Admiral Soemu Toyoda opposed accepting the declaration, argued that the terms were \"too dishonorable,\" and advised for the Japanese government to reject it openly. Suzuki, T\u014dg\u014d, and Admiral Mitsumasa Yonai leaned towards accepting it but agreed that clarification was needed over the status of the Emperor. T\u014dg\u014d's suggestion for the government not to respond until it received the Soviet response was accepted.\nSuzuki stated that the Japanese policy toward the declaration was one of , which the United States interpreted as meaning \"rejection by ignoring.\" That led to a decision by the White House to carry out the threat of destruction. After the White House decision, the United States Army Air Forces dropped the first atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima on August 6, 1945 and then the second atomic bomb on the Japanese city of Nagasaki on August 9, 1945. The bombings devastated the two cities, killing tens of thousands of people and destroying much of the cities' infrastructure as well as military bases and factories in a matter of seconds in a radius that stretched for more than 1 mile (1.6 kilometers).\nHowever, the word can also mean \"withholding comment.\" Since then, it has been alleged that the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki were attributable to English translations of having misrepresented Suzuki as rejecting the terms of the Potsdam Declaration; however, this claim is not universally accepted.\nOn August 9, 1945, Soviet general secretary Joseph Stalin, based on a secret agreement at the Yalta Conference in February, unilaterally abrogated the 1941 Soviet\u2013Japanese Neutrality Pact and declared war on Japan. Thus began the Soviet\u2013Japanese War, with the Soviets invading Manchuria on three fronts. The previous day, 8 August, the Soviet Union had agreed to adhere to the Potsdam Declaration.\nIn a widely broadcast speech after the bombing of Hiroshima, which was picked up by Japanese news agencies, Truman warned that if Japan failed to accept the terms of the Potsdam Declaration, it could \"expect a rain of ruin from the air, the like of which has never been seen on this earth.\" As a result, Suzuki felt compelled to meet the Japanese press, and he reiterated his government's commitment to ignore the Allies' demands and fight on.\nHowever, soon after that statement, it became clear to many that surrender was a realistic option. The thoroughness of the Allies' demands and the fact they were made public forced the Japanese leaders and populace to realize the success that Japan's enemies had achieved in the war. After the receipt of the Potsdam Declaration, the Japanese government attempted to maintain the issue of the Emperor's administrative prerogative within the Potsdam Declaration by its surrender offer of August 10, but in the end, it had to take comfort with US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes' reply: \"From the moment of surrender the authority of the Emperor and the Japanese Government to rule the state shall be subject to the Supreme Commander of the Allied powers who will take such steps as he deems proper to effectuate the surrender terms.\" Thus, at 1200 JST on August 15, 1945, the Emperor announced his acceptance of the Potsdam Declaration, which culminated in the surrender documents signature on board the on September 2, 1945. The radio announcement to the Japanese people was the first time many of them had actually heard the voice of the Emperor.\nThe Potsdam Declaration was intended from the start to serve as legal basis for handling Japan after the war. After the surrender of the Japanese government and the landing of General MacArthur in Japan in September 1945, the Potsdam Declaration served as the legal basis for the occupation's reforms.\nThe People's Republic of China cites the Potsdam Declaration as one of the bases for the One-China Principle that Taiwan is part of China.\nHistorical controversy.\nThe Imperial Japanese Government, under the direction of prime minister Suzuki Kantar\u014d, did not publicly entertain the possibility of surrender to the Allies. The historical controversy lies in whether or not the demand for an unconditional surrender by Japan stalled possible peace negotiations. If the demand for unconditional surrender had not been made, so the argument goes, there could be no argument for the necessity of the use of firebombing and nuclear weapons against Japan. This is the flashpoint around which much of historiographical controversy surrounding the Declaration revolves.\nAccording to American historian Tsuyoshi Hasegawa the Japanese cabinet remained averse to surrender, and no governmental record immediately pursuant to the Little Boy nuclear detonation over Hiroshima indicates a shift toward capitulation under the terms of the Potsdam Declaration.\nHasegawa also notes that Stalin told Truman at the Potsdam Conference that the Soviet Union would begin war with Japan within the beginning of August, but that American estimates placed the estimated time at the end of the month.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61209", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61209", "title": "Abu Qir", "text": " \nAbu Qir (, \"Abu Q\u012br\", or , ), formerly also spelled Abukir or Aboukir, is a town on the Mediterranean coast of Egypt, near the ruins of ancient Canopus and northeast of Alexandria by rail. It is located on Abu Qir Peninsula, with Abu Qir Bay to the east.\nName.\nThe town's present name is Arabic for \"Father Cyrus\", one of a pair of fourth century Christian martyrs venerated as Saints Cyrus and John by the Coptic Church.\nHistory.\nThe remains of many ancient buildings from the Egyptian, Greek and Roman periods can be found near the town. About southeast of the town are the ruins of the Ancient Egyptian coastal town of Canopus. A little farther east, the now-dry Canopic branch of the Nile once entered the Mediterranean.\nThe wide Abu Qir Bay (Khal\u012bj Ab\u016b Q\u012br) stretches eastward from the town as far as the Rosetta mouth of the Nile. On 1 August 1798 the bay was the location of the Battle of the Nile, fought by the British Admiral Horatio Nelson. The battle is often referred to as the \"Battle of Aboukir Bay\", though this title is more properly applied to Battle of Abukir of 1799, an engagement between the French expeditionary army and the Turks under Mustapha Pasha fought on 25 July the following year. Later in the war, on 8 March 1801 at the beginning of the Battle of Alexandria, units of the British army commanded by Sir Ralph Abercromby landed from their transports near the town, and faced strenuous opposition from General Louis Friant's French forces entrenched on the beach. The battle continued further down the peninsula toward Alexandria and did not end until 22 March.\nThe town contains a castle that was used as a state prison by Muhammad Ali in the early 19th century. The prison was known as Liman Abu Qir.\nIn 2000, an Italian archaeological team discovered the remains of British officers, sailors, marines, women, and children on Nelson's Island, which lies in the bay.\nClimate.\nK\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as hot desert (BWh), but it lies at the northern coast of Egypt, moderating its temperatures. Due to its proximity to Alexandria, it has a very similar climate. The wettest places in Egypt are Rafah, Alexandria, Abu Qir, Rosetta, Baltim, Kafr El Dawwar, Mersa Matruh.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "61211", "revid": "5641591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61211", "title": "Anatase", "text": "Mineral form of titanium dioxide\nAnatase is a metastable mineral form of titanium dioxide (TiO2) with a tetragonal crystal structure. Although colorless or white when pure, anatase in nature is usually a black solid due to impurities. Three other polymorphs (or mineral forms) of titanium dioxide are known to occur naturally: brookite, akaogiite, and rutile, with rutile being the most common and most stable of the bunch. Anatase is formed at relatively low temperatures and found in minor concentrations in igneous and metamorphic rocks. Glass coated with a thin film of TiO2 shows antifogging and self-cleaning properties under ultraviolet radiation.\nAnatase is always found as small, isolated, and sharply developed crystals, and like rutile, it crystallizes in a tetragonal system. Anatase is metastable at all temperatures and pressures, with rutile being the equilibrium polymorph. Nevertheless, anatase is often the first titanium dioxide phase to form in many processes due to its lower surface energy, with a transformation to rutile taking place at elevated temperatures. Although the degree of symmetry is the same for both anatase and rutile phases, there is no relation between the interfacial angles of the two minerals, except in the prism-zone of 45\u00b0 and 90\u00b0. The common octahedral crystal habit of anatase, with four perfect cleavage planes, has an angle over its polar edge of 82\u00b09', whereas rutile octahedra only has a polar edge angle of 56\u00b052\u00bd'. The steeper angle gives anatase crystals a longer vertical axis and skinnier appearance than rutile. Additional important differences exist between the physical characters of anatase and rutile. For example, anatase is less hard (5.5\u20136 vs. 6\u20136.5 on the Mohs scale) and less dense (specific gravity about 3.9 vs. 4.2) than rutile. Anatase is also optically negative, whereas rutile is optically positive. Anatase has a more strongly adamantine or metallic-adamantine luster than that of rutile as well.\nNomenclature.\nThe modern name was introduced by Ren\u00e9 Just Ha\u00fcy in 1801, but the mineral was known and described before. It derives from 'stretching out', because the crystals are stretched along an axis compared to other dipyramidal ones.\nAnother name commonly in use for anatase is \"octahedrite\", which is earlier than anatase and was given by Horace B\u00e9n\u00e9dict de Saussure because of the common (acute) octahedral habit of the crystals. Other names, now obsolete, are \"oisanite\" (by Jean-Claude Delam\u00e9therie) and \"dauphinite\", from the well-known French locality of Le Bourg-d'Oisans in Dauphin\u00e9.\nCrystal habit.\nTwo growth habits of anatase crystals may be distinguished. The more common occurs as simple acute octahedra with an indigo-blue to black color and steely luster. Crystals of this kind are abundant at Le Bourg-d'Oisans in Dauphin\u00e9, France, where they are associated with rock-crystal, feldspar, and axinite in crevices in granite and mica schist. Similar crystals of microscopic size are widely distributed in sedimentary rocks such as sandstones, clays, and slates, from which they may be separated by washing away the lighter constituents of the powdered rock. The (101) plane of anatase is the most thermodynamically stable surface and thus the most widely exposed facet in natural and synthetic anatase.\nCrystals of the second type have numerous pyramidal faces developed, and they are usually flatter or sometimes prismatic in habit. Their color is honey-yellow to brown. Such crystals closely resemble the mineral xenotime in appearance and were historically thought to be a special form of xenotime, termed \"wiserine\". They occur attached to the walls of crevices in gneisses in the Alps, a well-known locality being the Binnenthal near Brig in canton Valais, Switzerland.\nWhile anatase is not an equilibrium phase of TiO2, it is metastable near room temperature. At temperatures between 550 and about 1000\u00a0\u00b0C, anatase converts to rutile. The temperature of this transformation strongly depends on impurities, or dopants, as well as the morphology of the sample.\nSynthetic anatase.\nDue to its potential application as a semiconductor, anatase is often prepared synthetically. Crystalline anatase can be prepared in laboratories by chemical methods such as the sol-gel process. This might be done through controlled hydrolysis of titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) or titanium ethoxide. Often dopants are included in such synthesis processes to control the morphology, electronic structure, and surface chemistry of an anatase sample.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61212", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61212", "title": "Geographic information systems", "text": ""}
{"id": "61213", "revid": "7110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61213", "title": "Laurent series", "text": "Power series with negative powers\nIn mathematics, the Laurent series of a complex function formula_1 is a representation of that function as a power series which includes terms of negative degree. It may be used to express complex functions in cases where a Taylor series expansion cannot be applied. The Laurent series was named after and first published by Pierre Alphonse Laurent in 1843. Karl Weierstrass had previously described it in a paper written in 1841 but not published until 1894.\nDefinition.\nThe Laurent series for a complex function formula_1 about an arbitrary point formula_3 is given by\nformula_4\nwhere the coefficients formula_5 are defined by a contour integral that generalizes Cauchy's integral formula:\nformula_6\nThe path of integration formula_7 is counterclockwise around a Jordan curve enclosing formula_3 and lying in an annulus formula_9 in which formula_1 is holomorphic (analytic). The expansion for formula_1 will then be valid anywhere inside the annulus. The annulus is shown in red in the figure on the right, along with an example of a suitable path of integration labeled formula_7. When formula_7 is defined as the circle formula_14, where formula_15, this amounts\nto computing the complex Fourier coefficients of the restriction of formula_16 to formula_7. The fact that these integrals are unchanged by a deformation of the contour formula_7 is an immediate consequence of Green's theorem. \nOne may also obtain the Laurent series for a complex function formula_1 at formula_20. However, this is the same as when formula_21. \nThe above integral formula may not offer the most practical method for computing the coefficients\nformula_5 for a given function formula_1; instead, one often pieces together the Laurent series by combining known Taylor expansions. Because the Laurent expansion of a function is unique whenever\nit exists, any expression of this form that equals the given function \nformula_1 in some annulus must actually be the Laurent expansion of formula_1.\nConvergence.\nLaurent series with complex coefficients are an important tool in complex analysis, especially to investigate the behavior of functions near singularities.\nConsider for instance the function formula_26 with formula_27. As a real function, it is infinitely differentiable everywhere; as a complex function however it is not differentiable at formula_28. The Laurent series of formula_29 is obtained via the power series representation,\nformula_30\nwhich converges to formula_29 for all formula_32 except at the singularity formula_28. The graph on the right shows formula_29 in black and its Laurent approximations\nformula_35\nAs formula_36, the approximation becomes exact for all (complex) numbers formula_37 except at the singularity formula_38.\nMore generally, Laurent series can be used to express holomorphic functions defined on an annulus, much as power series are used to express holomorphic functions defined on a disc.\nSuppose \nformula_39\nis a given Laurent series with complex coefficients formula_5 and a complex center formula_3. Then there exists a unique inner radius formula_42 and outer radius formula_43 such that:\nIt is possible that formula_42 may be zero or formula_43 may be infinite; at the other extreme, it's not necessarily true that formula_42 is less than formula_43.\nThese radii can be computed by taking the limit superior of the coefficients formula_5 such that:\nformula_54\nWhen formula_55, the coefficient formula_56 of the Laurent expansion is called the residue of formula_1 at the singularity formula_3. For example, the function\nformula_59\nis holomorphic everywhere except at formula_60. The Laurent expansion about formula_61 can then be obtained from the power series representation:\nformula_62\nhence, the residue is given by formula_63.\nConversely, for a holomorphic function formula_1 defined on the annulus formula_44, there always exists a unique Laurent series with center formula_3 which converges (at least on formula_9) to formula_1.\nFor example, consider the following rational function, along with its partial fraction expansion:\nformula_69\nThis function has singularities at formula_70 and formula_71, where the denominator is zero and the expression is therefore undefined.\nA Taylor series about formula_60 (which yields a power series) will only converge in a disc of radius 1, since it \"hits\" the singularity at formula_70.\nHowever, there are three possible Laurent expansions about 0, depending on the radius of formula_74:\nUniqueness.\nSuppose a function formula_1 holomorphic on the annulus formula_88 has two Laurent series:\nformula_89\nMultiply both sides by formula_90, where k is an arbitrary integer, and integrate on a path \u03b3 inside the annulus,\nformula_91\nThe series converges uniformly on formula_92, where \"\u03b5\" is a positive number small enough for \"\u03b3\" to be contained in the constricted closed annulus, so the integration and summation can be interchanged. Substituting the identity\nformula_93\ninto the summation yields\nformula_94\nHence the Laurent series is unique.\nLaurent polynomials.\nA Laurent polynomial is a Laurent series in which only finitely many coefficients are non-zero. Laurent polynomials differ from ordinary polynomials in that they may have terms of negative degree.\nPrincipal part.\nThe principal part of a Laurent series is the series of terms with negative degree, that is\nformula_95\nIf the principal part of formula_16 is a finite sum, then formula_16 has a pole at formula_3 of order equal to (negative) the degree of the highest term; on the other hand, if formula_16 has an essential singularity at formula_3, the principal part is an infinite sum (meaning it has infinitely many non-zero terms).\nIf the inner radius of convergence of the Laurent series for formula_16 is 0, then formula_16 has an essential singularity at formula_3 if and only if the principal part is an infinite sum, and has a pole otherwise.\nIf the inner radius of convergence is positive, formula_16 may have infinitely many negative terms but still be regular at formula_3, as in the example above, in which case it is represented by a \"different\" Laurent series in a disk about\u00a0formula_3.\nLaurent series with only finitely many negative terms are well-behaved\u2014they are a power series divided by formula_107, and can be analyzed similarly\u2014while Laurent series with infinitely many negative terms have complicated behavior on the inner circle of convergence.\nMultiplication and sum.\nLaurent series cannot in general be multiplied.\nAlgebraically, the expression for the terms of the product may involve infinite sums which need not converge (one cannot take the convolution of integer sequences).\nGeometrically, the two Laurent series may have non-overlapping annuli of convergence.\nTwo Laurent series with only \"finitely\" many negative terms can be multiplied: algebraically, the sums are all finite; geometrically, these have poles at formula_3, and inner radius of convergence 0, so they both converge on an overlapping annulus.\nThus when defining formal Laurent series, one requires Laurent series with only finitely many negative terms.\nSimilarly, the sum of two convergent Laurent series need not converge, though it is always defined formally, but the sum of two bounded below Laurent series (or any Laurent series on a punctured disk) has a non-empty annulus of convergence.\nAlso, for a field formula_109, by the sum and multiplication defined above, formal Laurent series would form a field formula_110 which is also the field of fractions of the ring formula_111 of formal power series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61214", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61214", "title": "List of places and things named Paris", "text": ""}
{"id": "61215", "revid": "49434132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61215", "title": "Boles\u0142aw Bierut", "text": "Polish politician (1892\u20131956)\nBoles\u0142aw Bierut ( ; 18 April 1892 \u2013 12 March 1956) was a Polish communist activist and politician, leader of communist-ruled Poland from 1948 until 1956. He was President of the State National Council from 1944 to 1947, President of Poland from 1947 to 1952, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers' Party from 1948 to 1956, and Prime Minister of Poland from 1952 to 1954. Bierut is believed to have worked as an NKVD informant or agent prior to 1945, although his relationship with the Soviet agency has been a subject of debate among historians. As communist leader, he implemented aspects of the Stalinist system in Poland. Together with W\u0142adys\u0142aw Gomu\u0142ka, his main rival, Bierut is chiefly responsible for the historic changes that Poland underwent in the aftermath of World War II. Unlike any of his communist successors, Bierut led Poland until his death.\nBorn in Congress Poland on the outskirts of Lublin, Bierut joined the Polish Socialist Party in 1912. Later he became a member of the Communist Party of Poland and spent some years in the Soviet Union. He was sentenced to a prison term in 1935 for conducting illegal labor activity in Poland by the anti-communist Sanation government and was later released in 1938. During World War II, Bierut was an activist of the newly founded Polish Workers' Party (PPR) and subsequently the chairman of the State National Council (KRN), established by the PPR. Trusted by Joseph Stalin, Bierut participated in the Potsdam Conference, where he successfully lobbied for the establishment of Poland's western border at the Oder\u2013Neisse line.\nAfter the 1947 Polish legislative election, marked by electoral fraud, Bierut was made the first post-war President of Poland. In 1952, the new Constitution of the Polish People's Republic (until then known as the Republic of Poland) abolished the position of president and a Marxist\u2013Leninist government was officially imposed. Bierut supported the radical Stalinist policies as well as the systematic introduction of socialist realism in Poland. His regime was marked by a silent terror \u2013 he presided over the hunting down of armed opposition members and their eventual murder at the hands of the Ministry of Public Security (UB), including some former members of the Home Army. Under Bierut's supervision, the UB evolved into a notorious secret police, which was responsible for the execution of six thousand people between 1944 and 1956, according to the Hoover Institution. \nAs Poland's \"de facto\" leader, he resided in the Belweder Palace and headed the Polish United Workers' Party from the party headquarters at New World Street in central Warsaw, known as \"Dom Partii\". He was also the chief proponent for the reconstruction of Warsaw (rebuilding of the historic district) and the erection of the Palace of Culture and Science. Bierut died of a heart attack on 12 March 1956 in Moscow, after attending the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. His death was sudden, and many theories arose questioning the circumstances in which he died. His body was brought back to Poland and buried with honours in a monumental tomb at the Pow\u0105zki Military Cemetery.\nCareer.\nYouth and early career.\nBierut was born in Rury, Congress Poland (then part of the Russian Empire), now a part of Lublin, to Wojciech and Marianna Salomea (Wolska) Bierut, peasants from the Tarnobrzeg area, the youngest of their six children. In 1900, he attended an elementary school in Lublin. In 1905, he was removed from the school for instigating anti-Russian protests. From the age of fourteen he was employed in various trades, but obtained further education through self-studies. Influenced by the leftist intellectual Jan Hempel, who in 1910 arrived in Lublin, before World War I Bierut joined the Polish Socialist Party \u2013 Left (\"PPS \u2013 Lewica\").\nFrom 1915, Bierut was active in the cooperative movement. In 1916, he became trade manager of the Lublin Food Cooperative, and from 1918 was its top leader, declaring the cooperative's \"class-socialist\" character. During World War I, he stayed at times at Hempel's apartment in Warsaw and took trade and cooperative courses at the Warsaw School of Economics. In Warsaw, he established contacts with Maria Koszutska and in December 1918 some form of association with the newly created Communist Workers' Party of Poland (KPRP), from which, according to his later testimony, he withdrew in fall 1919. Bierut kept assuming ever higher offices in the cooperative movement. In 1919 he and Hempel went to Prague, where they represented the Polish cooperatives at the congress of their Czechoslovak counterparts. Bierut's increasingly radical views, however, eventually hindered his cooperative career and caused his departure from the leadership of the movement, beginning in 1921. From 1921, he officially functioned as a member of the KPRP.\nIn July 1921 Bierut married Janina G\u00f3rzy\u0144ska, a preschool teacher who had helped him a great deal when his illegal activities forced him to hide from the police. They were married by a priest at the Lublin Cathedral, even though the priest, according to Janina, excused them from the confession requirement. In February 1923 their daughter Krystyna was born, followed by son Jan in January 1925.\nCommunist party activism until 1939.\nIn 1922\u201325, Bierut was a member of the Cooperative Department of the KPRP Central Committee. He worked as an accountant and was active in Warsaw at the Polish Association of Freethinkers. In August 1923, he was sent for party work in the D\u0105browa Basin, to manage the Workers' Food Cooperative. He lived in Sosnowiec, where he brought his wife and daughter and where he experienced the first of his many arrests. Detained repeatedly in various parts of the country, in October 1924 he moved to Warsaw. He had become a full-time conspiratorial party activist and in 1925 was a member of the Temporary Secretariat of the Central Committee and then the head of the Cooperative Department there.\nAlready trusted by the Soviets and knowing the Russian language well, from October 1925 to June 1926 Bierut was in the Moscow area, sent there for training at the secret school of the Communist International.\nArrested in Warsaw in January 1927, he was released on 30 April, based on personal assurances issued on his behalf by Stanis\u0142aw Szwalbe and Zygmunt Zaremba. During the Fourth Congress of the Communist Party of Poland (KPP, the new name of the KPRP), which took place from 22 May to 9 August 1927, Bierut became a member of the Temporary Secretariat of the Central Committee again. In November, the party sent him to the International Lenin School in Moscow. He received positive evaluations there, except for not being entirely free of ideological right-wing errors, characteristic, in the school's opinion, of the Polish communist party.\nIn 1930\u201331, Bierut was sent by the Comintern to Austria, Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. Many details of his activities are not reliably known, but from 1 October 1930 he was an instructor at the executive committee of the Comintern. He later claimed having lived in Moscow in 1927\u201332, except for a nine-month period in 1931, and having been enrolled at the Lenin School until 1930. Jerzy Eisler wrote: \"... in light of the Soviet archival materials, in 1927\u201332 Bierut was a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), with his party seniority counted from 1921, the moment he formally joined the Polish communist party.\" In Moscow he met Ma\u0142gorzata Fornalska, a KPP activist. They became romantically involved and had a daughter, named Aleksandra, born in June 1932. Soon afterwards Bierut left for Poland, leaving in Moscow for the time being also his legal family, whom he had brought there.\nFor several months Bierut was district secretary of the KPP organization in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a. After the regional organization was demolished by arrests, in 1933 he became secretary of the Central Committee of the Polish section of the International Red Aid. On 18 December 1933, Bierut was arrested and in 1935 sentenced to seven years in prison. In 1936, while imprisoned, he was excluded \"in absentia\" from the KPP for an \"unworthy of a communist behavior during the investigation and the court trial\". The decision was invalidated and reversed by the Comintern on 7 September 1940 (even though the KPP by that time no longer existed). Bierut was found to have been a member of the moderate \"majority\" faction of the KPP, and the factional infighting in which he participated was determined not to amount to acting against the party.\nHe was released from prison on 20 December 1938, based on an earlier amnesty. He lived with his wife and children and worked in Warsaw cooperatives until the outbreak of war. The \"Sanation\" prison may have saved his life: while he was incarcerated, the KPP was disbanded by the Comintern and most of its leaders murdered in Stalin's purges.\nIn the Soviet Union.\nOn 1 September 1939, Nazi Germany attacked Poland. On 6 September the Polish military command issued a radio appeal for all able-bodied men to head east;\nBierut left Warsaw for Lublin, from where he proceeded to Kovel. Eastern Poland was soon occupied by the Red Army and Bierut was about to spend a part of World War II in the Soviet Union. From early October, he was employed by the Soviets in political capacities, including vice-chairmanship of a regional election commission before the Elections to the People's Assemblies of Western Ukraine and Western Belorussia. The two assemblies, once established, voted for the incorporation of the previously Polish territories into the respective Soviet republics.\nBierut spent the rest of 1939, 1940 and the first part of 1941 in the Soviet Union, in Kiev and Moscow, working, making efforts to sanitize his record as a communist and searching for Fornalska, whom he met in Moscow in July 1940 and again in May 1941 in Bia\u0142ystok, where she had moved with Aleksandra. The mother and daughter were evacuated to Yershov in the Soviet Union after the June 1941 outbreak of the Soviet-German war, but Bierut ended up in Minsk.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[a] From November 1941, he was employed there by the German occupation authorities as a manager in the trade and food distribution department of the city government. In the summer of 1943, Bierut arrived in Nazi-occupied Poland, likely dispatched there as a trusted Soviet operative. He came to join the leadership of the Polish Workers' Party (PPR), a new communist party founded in January 1942. He may have been recommended for the job by Fornalska; parachuted into the General Government in the spring of 1942, she was in charge of the PPR's radio communications with Moscow. Bierut became a member of the party Secretariat on 23 November 1943.\nWhile there are many accounts and stories relating to Bierut during the 1939\u20131943 period, not much is known with certainty about his activities and the accounts are often speculative or amount to hearsay.\nIn occupied Poland from 1943.\nUpon his arrival in Warsaw, Bierut became a member of the Central Committee of the PPR, which comprised several individuals. The Secretariat had three members: General Secretary Pawe\u0142 Finder, Franciszek J\u00f3\u017awiak and W\u0142adys\u0142aw Gomu\u0142ka, whom Bierut did not know, but who quickly became his principal rival. Bierut lost his first confrontation over the management of \"Trybuna Wolno\u015bci\" ('The Tribune of Freedom'), the party's press organ.\nIn a major blow to the re-emergent Polish communist party, Finder and Fornalska were arrested by the Gestapo on 14 November 1943. They were executed in July 1944. They were the only people with the knowledge of radio codes needed to communicate with Moscow and such communications were indeed interrupted for several months. On 23 November 1943, the PPR chose Gomu\u0142ka as its general secretary.\nOn 31 December 1943, Bierut assumed an important office: chairmanship of the State National Council (\"Krajowa Rada Narodowa\", KRN), a communist-led body established by Gomu\u0142ka and the PPR. The KRN was declared to be a wartime parliament of Poland and some splinter socialist and agrarian activists were co-opted. Starting with the KRN post, with Gomu\u0142ka and others, Bierut would play a leading role in the establishment of communist Poland.\nIn May 1944, the KRN delegation flew into Moscow. They were officially received at the Kremlin by Joseph Stalin; supremacy of the KRN was recognized by the Union of Polish Patriots, which operated in the Soviet Union under communist leadership.\nIn June 1944 Bierut wrote a letter, meant for the Soviet leadership and addressed to Georgi Dimitrov in Moscow. He accused his Polish communist rival Gomu\u0142ka of dictatorial tendencies and numerous offenses contrary to Marxist\u2013Leninist orthodoxy; if taken seriously, the accusations could have cost Gomu\u0142ka his life but they were not, and Gomu\u0142ka did not find out about the letter until 1948, when it was used against him in Poland.\nIn July 1944, the Polish Committee of National Liberation (PKWN) was established in liberated Lublin province. Just before the outbreak of the Warsaw Uprising, on 31 July 1944, Bierut came to \u015awider. The next day he crossed the front line and arrived in Lublin, the seat of the PKWN.\nIn Soviet-dominated Poland.\nContinuing as the KRN president, from August 1944 Bierut was secretly a member of the newly created Politburo of the PPR; he was officially presented to the public as a nonpartisan politician.\nAfter the outbreak of the Warsaw Uprising, Bierut arrived in Moscow. On 6\u20137 August 1944, together with Wanda Wasilewska and Micha\u0142 Rola-\u017bymierski, he conducted negotiations with Prime Minister Stanis\u0142aw Miko\u0142ajczyk of the Polish government-in-exile. Miko\u0142ajczyk refused their offer of the job of prime minister in a coalition government, which otherwise would be dominated by the communists. Bierut's daughter Krystyna participated in the uprising as a soldier of \"Armia Ludowa\" and was gravely wounded.\nA KRN and PKWN delegation, led by Bierut, was summoned to Moscow, where it stayed from 28 September to 3 October. Stalin, assisted by Wasilewska, had two meetings with the leaders from Poland, during which he lectured them on a number of issues, but was especially displeased by the lack of progress in implementing the land reform decree passed by the PKWN on 6 September. Stalin urged them to proceed forcefully with the agrarian revolution and to eliminate the great land owners class without further delay or undue legal concerns; Bierut felt that the remarks were addressed to him in particular.\nOn 12 October, the anniversary of the Battle of Lenino, the KRN for the first time deliberated in Lublin. The proceedings were interrupted to allow the deputies (including Bierut), together with officials of the PKWN and Nikolai Bulganin representing the Soviet Union, to participate in a field mass celebrated for the occasion and in the military parade that followed. Such participation in religious ceremonies by leading communist politicians continued for a while; it was one of the manifestations of the officially proclaimed after the war democratic and pluralistic policies, which included preservation of religious freedoms. Marshal Rola-\u017bymierski recalled kneeling together with Bierut before the altar at another field mass in May 1946, on the first anniversary of World War II victory. In conversations with Stanis\u0142aw \u0141ukasiewicz, his press secretary, Bierut expressed his support for moderate and liberal policies. His personal views were anti-clerical and he thought the reform proposals put forward by Miko\u0142ajczyk's Polish People's Party (PSL), the legally existing opposition, would be abandoned in the event of PSL victory.\nA military department of the PPR Central Committee was created on 31 October 1944 and included Bierut and Gomu\u0142ka, in addition to three generals. Its goal was to politicize the armed forces, currently fighting the war, and to establish a politically reliable officer corps. According to Eisler, Bierut and Gomu\u0142ka are both responsible for the post-war persecution of many former Home Army soldiers and other groups and individuals. The terror policies, particularly brutal in the 1944\u201348 period, were directed against declared opponents of the regime, including the legally functioning PSL, and had nor yet involved society as a whole.\nIn February 1945, the Yalta Conference took place in Crimea. At that time Bierut, together with the PPR leadership and government departments, moved to the capital city of Warsaw. The city was in ruins and its rebuilding and expansion became a major concern and preoccupation for Bierut during the years that followed.\nIn June 1945, the Provisional Government of National Unity was established in Moscow. In July, Bierut and other Polish leaders participated in the Potsdam Conference, where, together with Stalin, they successfully lobbied for the establishment of Poland's western border at the Oder\u2013Neisse line. The Polish administration in the formerly German lands was to continue until the final delimitation of the frontier in the (future) peace settlement. Poland's newly acquired \"Recovered Territories\" had thus reached their maximum attainable size.\nReferendum and election, Bierut's presidency.\nOn 30 June 1946, the Polish people's referendum took place. It was done in preparation for the Yalta-mandated national elections; affirmative answers to the three questions given were supposed to demonstrate public support for the issues promoted by the communists. The results were falsified.\nOn 22 September 1946, the KRN passed the electoral rules and in November set the date; the delayed legislative elections were held on 19 January 1947. The PPR-led coalition, running as the Democratic Bloc, was opposed by Miko\u0142ajczyk's PSL. \nMiko\u0142ajczyk's Peasant Party, although it also had progressive overtones, had grown to be publicly associated with the traditional Polish right, which had engaged in antisemitic and anti-communist repressions before the war. The government dissolved the explicitly antisemitic right-wing parties still active after the war, but many of their supporters joined PSL since it was the only remaining legal opposition. The long-standing trope of the \"Judeo-Bolshevik\", or \"\u017bydokomuna\", was used by the far-right in anti-communist propaganda to cast Polish communism as a plot to control Poland by Russian Jews. \nThe government also engaged in heavy interference with the election. Due to the electoral rules passed in September, 1 million people, or about 8% of the electorate, were disqualified on the grounds that they collaborated with the German Nazis during occupation or with underground fascist organizations still active in the country. Additionally, Peasant Party lists in 10 of the 52 districts were disqualified on the basis that they were composed of rightists. In places where Peasant Party observers were not allowed to oversee the election process, results were directly falsified. Lastly, peasant participation was limited by the fact that the elections were set in January, when most rural roads were covered in snow. The falsified results saw the Democratic Bloc receiving 80.1% of the vote, and Miko\u0142ajczyk only getting 10.3%. The PSL was practically eliminated as the legal opposition.\nThe newly elected \"Sejm\" convened on 4 February 1947 and on the following day it elected Bierut President of the Republic of Poland. The installation ceremony was done in a traditional format and ended with the new president uttering the words \"so help me God\".\nOn 16 November 1947, during the opening ceremony of the Polish Radio broadcasting station in Wroc\u0142aw, President Bierut made a speech entitled \"For the dissemination of culture\". \"The artistic and cultural creative process should reflect the great breakthrough that the nation is experiencing. It should, but so far it isn't\", he said. Bierut called for greater centralization and planning in culture and art, which, according to him, should form, educate and engross society. The speech was a harbinger of the upcoming norm of socialist realism in Poland.\nSometimes, Bierut on his own undertook special interventions with Stalin. He repeatedly and at different times asked Stalin and Lavrentiy Beria about the whereabouts of the missing Polish communists (former members of the disbanded KPP), many of whom were murdered in the Great Purge in the 1930s, but others may have survived. He also kept looking for the missing family of Fornalska. While Stalin and Beria discouraged and ridiculed Bierut's efforts, in some cases his exertions brought positive results. Besides the communists, mostly surviving women, Bierut was able to bring back to Poland many other Poles, including former Home Army soldiers exiled in the Soviet Union.\nBierut was a gallant man, well-liked by women. His wife Janina did not live with him and was not known to many of his associates. She occasionally visited him in his offices and seemed intimidated by the surroundings and her husband's position. On the other hand, his son and two daughters had seen Bierut frequently; they spent with him holidays and vacations and he appeared to genuinely enjoy their company. Bierut's actual female partner, after Fornalska's arrest, was Wanda G\u00f3rska. She worked as his secretary and in other capacities, controlled access to him and visitors often thought of her as Bierut's wife.\nTop leader of Stalinist Poland.\nGomu\u0142ka, general secretary of the PPR (and until that time the principal figure in post-war Polish communist establishment), was accused of a \"right-wing nationalistic deviation\" and removed from his position during a plenary meeting of the Central Committee in August 1948. The move was Stalin-orchestrated and Stalin's choice to fill the vacated job was President Bierut, who had thus become both the top party leader and top state official.\nThe historic PPS was practically taken over by the PPR at the Unification Congress, held in Warsaw in December 1948. The resulting \"Marxist\u2013Leninist\" Polish United Workers' Party (PZPR) was nearly synonymous with the state and Bierut became its first general secretary. The Three-Year Plan of post-war rebuilding and economic consolidation ended in 1949 and was followed by the Six-Year Plan, which intensified the industrialisation process and brought extensive urbanization of Poland.\nIn November 1949, Bierut asked the Soviet government to make available Marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky, a Polish-Soviet politician and famous World War II commander, for service in the government of Poland. Rokossovsky subsequently became a Marshal of Poland and Minister of National Defense.\nIn early August 1951, Bierut had his main rival Gomu\u0142ka arrested. Gomu\u0142ka, though imprisoned, refused to cooperate with his accusers and displayed remarkable ability to defend himself, while Bierut's people bungled the prosecution. According to Edward Ochab, though, Stalin and Beria ordered the arrest and trial of Gomu\u0142ka, while Bierut and Jakub Berman tried to protect him and caused delays in the proceedings. Informal political reforms, slow to take hold after Stalin's death, eventually materialized and in December 1954 Gomu\u0142ka was released.\nDuring the lifetime of Stalin, Bierut was strictly subservient to the Soviet leader. Bierut routinely received instructions from Stalin over the telephone or was summoned to Moscow for consultations. Bierut still had far more power in Poland than any of his successors as First Secretary of the PZPR. He ruled jointly with his two closest associates, Berman and Hilary Minc. Security issues he also consulted with Stanis\u0142aw Radkiewicz, head of the Ministry of Public Security.\nBierut's 60th birthday, constitution of the Polish People's Republic.\nThe apogee of Bierut's cult, promoted by the authorities over a number of years, was the celebration of his sixtieth birthday on 18 April 1952. It included various industrial and other production or accomplishment commitments undertaken by institutions and individuals. The University of Wroc\u0142aw and some state enterprises were named in his honor. The History Department of the party's Central Committee prepared a special book about Bierut and his life, while Polish poets, including some notable ones, generated a book of poems dedicated to the leader. Many postage stamps dedicated to Bierut were issued.\nAs the PZPR leadership felt ready to sanction its rule in a fundamental legal document, a new constitution was being worked on. On 26 May 1951, the \"Sejm\" passed a statute concerning the preparation and passing of the constitution. The Constitutional Committee, led by Bierut, commenced its deliberations on 19 September. In the fall of 1951, a Russian translation of the draft constitution was examined by Stalin, who inserted dozens of corrections, subsequently implemented in the Polish text by Bierut. The officially proclaimed national public discussion resulted in hundreds of other proposed changes. After all the delays and the necessary extension of the term of the \"Sejm\", the Constitution of the Polish People's Republic was officially proclaimed on 22 July 1952.\nThe Polish People's Republic (\"Polska Rzeczpospolita Ludowa\") was the new name of the state. The \"Sejm\" was designated as the highest national authority; it represented \"the working people of towns and villages\". The office of the president was eliminated and replaced with the collegial Council of State, elected by the \"Sejm\" from its members. The first chairman of the new council was Aleksander Zawadzki. Bierut replaced J\u00f3zef Cyrankiewicz as prime minister in November 1952. The constitution, amended many times, remained in force until a new Constitution of Poland came into effect in October 1997, in what was then the Republic of Poland.\nBierut's last years.\nIn March 1953, Bierut led the Polish delegation for Stalin's funeral in Moscow.\nThe regime's relations with the Catholic Church kept deteriorating. The authorities imprisoned Bishop Czes\u0142aw Kaczmarek and interned Poland's primate, Cardinal Stefan Wyszy\u0144ski.\nIn the Soviet Union, changes were initiated by the new leader of the communist party, Nikita Khrushchev. The collective leadership concept, promoted first in the Soviet Union, made its way to other communist countries, including Poland. It meant, among other things, giving top party and state functions to different officials.\nThe Second Congress of the PZPR deliberated from 10 to 17 March 1954 in Warsaw. Bierut's party chief's title was changed from general secretary to first secretary. Because of the separation of functions requirement, Bierut remained only a party secretary and Cyrankiewicz returned to the post of prime minister. The Six-Year Plan was modified and some of the heavy industrial investment resources were shifted toward production of consumer articles.\nWhen Khrushchev, a guest at the congress, inquired about the reasons for the continuing imprisonment of Gomu\u0142ka, Bierut professed his own ignorance on that issue.\nDeath and funeral.\nThe 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union deliberated on 14\u201325 February 1956. Afterwards, Bierut did not return to Poland with the rest of the Polish delegation, but remained in Moscow, hospitalized with bad influenza, which turned into pneumonia and heart complications.\nOn 3 March, during a conference of PZPR activists in Warsaw, Stefan Staszewski and others severely criticized the contemporary party leadership, including the absent Bierut.\nBierut died of a heart attack on 12 March 1956, having read the text of Nikita Khrushchev's \"Secret Speech\", in which Khrushchev criticized Stalin's cult of personality.\nBierut, however, would not die until sixteen days after that speech and four members of the delegation of Polish students who studied in Moscow, who met him on 25 February 1956, told Eisler that the first secretary showed signs of physical distress already at that time.\nThe deceased leader was given a splendid funeral in Warsaw. A period of national mourning was declared. Catholic bishops conceded to the demand that church bells ring all over the country on the day of the funeral.\nIn a radio address on 14 March, Helena Jaworska, chairperson of the board of the Union of Polish Youth, eulogized Bierut on behalf of the Polish youth. She recalled Bierut's war and post-war activities and declared that \"the beloved friend of the youth has departed\". She spoke of the \"great son of the Polish nation\" and \"a beautiful, loved person\".\nThe funeral, which took place on 16 March, was transmitted by the Polish Radio over many hours. Warsaw residents were given a day-off from work to be able to participate. Large crowds of people gathered and joined the funeral procession, which began at the Palace of Culture and Science and proceeded toward the Pow\u0105zki Military Cemetery, where the burial took place and where, for logistic reasons, only invited guests and delegations could enter.\nRemembrance in communist and post-communist Poland.\nKhrushchev, who participated in Bierut's funeral, stayed in Warsaw for several days and attended the Sixth Plenum of the PZPR Central Committee. On 20 March, Edward Ochab was chosen there as the party's new first secretary. Prime Minister Cyrankiewicz delivered a detailed account of the history of Bierut's illness, going back to the early spring of 1950, when Bierut experienced his first myocardial infarction. The report was not made public.\nAccording to historian Andrzej Garlicki, Bierut died just in time to make possible the political demise of Berman and Minc and the triumphal return of Gomu\u0142ka. Had Bierut lived much longer, the de-Stalinization process in Poland could have been stalled.\nSoon after Bierut's death, on 18 April 1956, a merchant ship newly built in Gda\u0144sk Shipyard was named \"Boles\u0142aw Bierut\".\nDuring Gomu\u0142ka's rule as first secretary (1956\u201370), the memory of Bierut was marginalized. After 1970, First Secretary Edward Gierek brought Bierut back into public consciousness. Some books about him were published and in July 1979, on the 35th anniversary of communist Poland, Bierut's monument was erected in Lublin. Bierut's legend was sustained and cultivated during the 1970s. Gierek and his team, according to Eisler, idealized Bierut and his period and introduced a soft version of Stalinism, lacking the terror component of the original.\nDuring the brief but turbulent Solidarity period, the University of Wroc\u0142aw attempted to reclaim its original name, but the Ministry of Higher Education declined to implement the faculty resolution in January 1982.\nOn 1 June 1987, a factory in Skierniewice was given Bierut's name, which was likely the last such outcome. In 1989, the University of Wroc\u0142aw got its old name back, Bierut's monument in Lublin was taken down, and soon all the mention of Bierut was removed from public space. However, memorials dedicated to countless many public and other figures and groups, judged compromised by their activities or connections with the communist regime, as well as other objects and names, including monuments of Soviet World War II soldiers or Polish Eastern Front soldiers, met the same fate.\nCommunist historian Zenobiusz Kozik wrote of the \"important role of Bierut in the deep social, economic and civilizational processes of those years. Processes that caused the rapid economic development of the country and great cultural advancement of entire groups and social spheres, especially the great masses of young people. (Regardless of the negative results and side effects, especially destroying the value of existing structures and the unconditional breaking of continuity). The civilizational advancement of Poland influenced the judgements regarding Bierut's place in the history of Poland, especially for a certain generation\".\nEisler countered this argument by writing of \"the brutal and bloody persecution of soldiers of the independence-seeking underground, clandestine murders, fake political trials, and also the falsified referendum of 1946 and the elections of the following year, and finally the Sovietization of Poland in practically all areas of public life\".\nSzwalbe related that Bierut tried to persuade him that \"every social revolution has to result in victims, including innocent ones. [...] Bierut considered himself a student of Stalin. He found making statements and declarations with the intent of obfuscating reality to be purposeful and justified (like Stalin did), and also the liquidation of the so-called adversaries in the process of the so-called successive stages of the revolution...\"\nAccording to the historians Eleonora and Bronis\u0142aw Syzdek, Bierut \"brought to mind no associations with a figure of despot or dictator\". \"He knew how to listen and express himself competently, although formally he completed only five grades of elementary schooling and trade-cooperative courses. The knowledge he possessed, he acquired through self-education.\" \"People from Bierut's immediate surroundings, whom he always treated with proper respect, while keeping the necessary distance in formal relations, to this day have retained a sympathetic view of him and try to defend the former president of People's Poland against negative judgements\".\nLeon Chajn spoke of Bierut: \"Refined, tactful, composed. Not an eagle, but valued intelligence in others. A great patriot,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[b] enthusiast of Stalin's concepts but opponent of his methods.\" Stanis\u0142aw \u0141ukasiewicz wrote about Bierut: \"Always read a lot and wrote a lot, especially in prison. The years spent in prison were for him the period of his university studies.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"a.\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ After his arrival in Minsk, in September 1941, Bierut met Anastasia Kalesnikova, a woman fifteen years his junior and wife of the composer Isaac Luban, who had fled to Moscow leaving his family in Minsk. Bierut obtained \"Aryan\" (non-Jewish) documents for the family and moved into their apartment. Reportedly, Bierut and Kalesnikova had a daughter. After the war, Kalesnikova lived in Minsk again and was discreetly supported financially by Bierut. In 1974, suffering from material hardship, she wrote to First Secretary Edward Gierek of the PZPR, introducing herself as a \"friend, wife and helper of his great fellow countryman, the outstanding party activist Boles\u0142aw Bierut\". She asked for Polish retirement pay for herself and her family and the Polish authorities granted her request.\n\"b.\"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ In a sense, Bierut's patriotism was recognized by Primate Stefan Wyszy\u0144ski: \"People of Mr Bierut type honestly care for the future of Poland. At the present time, they see no other opportunity to serve Poland than through communizing of the country.\" In 1952 Polish legislative election, Wyszy\u0144ski himself voted for Bierut.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61218", "revid": "1130897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61218", "title": "Octahedrite", "text": "Structural class of iron meteorites\nOctahedrites are the most common structural class of iron meteorites. The structures occur because the meteoric iron has a certain nickel concentration that leads to the exsolution of kamacite out of taenite while cooling.\nStructure.\nOctahedrites derive their name from the crystal structure paralleling an octahedron. Opposite faces are parallel so, although an octahedron has 8 faces, there are only 4 sets of kamacite plates.\nDue to a long cooling time in the interior of the parent asteroids, these alloys have crystallized into intermixed millimeter-sized bands (from about 0.2\u00a0mm to 5\u00a0cm). When polished and acid etched the classic Widmanst\u00e4tten patterns of intersecting lines of lamellar kamacite, are visible.\nIn gaps between the kamacite and taenite lamellae, a fine-grained mixture called plessite is often found. An iron nickel phosphide, schreibersite, is present in most nickel-iron meteorites, as well as an iron-nickel-cobalt carbide, cohenite. Graphite and troilite occur in rounded nodules up to several cm in size.\nSubgroups.\nOctahedrites can be grouped by the dimensions of kamacite lamellae in the Widmanst\u00e4tten pattern, which are related to the nickel content:\nMineral.\nOctahedrite is an obsolete synonym for anatase, one of the three known titanium dioxide minerals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61219", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61219", "title": "Heinrich Bruning", "text": ""}
{"id": "61220", "revid": "50579427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61220", "title": "Spintronics", "text": "Solid-state electronics based on electron spin\nSpintronics (a portmanteau of spin transport electronics), also known as spin electronics, is the study of the intrinsic spin of the electron and its associated magnetic moment, in addition to its fundamental electronic charge, in solid-state devices. The field of spintronics concerns spin-charge coupling in metallic systems; the analogous effects in insulators fall into the field of multiferroics.\nSpintronics fundamentally differs from traditional electronics in that, in addition to charge state, electron spins are used as a further degree of freedom, with implications in the efficiency of data storage and transfer. Spintronic systems are most often realised in dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS) and Heusler alloys and are of particular interest in the field of quantum computing, such as atomtronics computation.\nHistory.\nSpintronics emerged from discoveries in the 1980s concerning spin-dependent electron transport phenomena in solid-state devices. This includes the observation of spin-polarized electron injection from a ferromagnetic metal to a normal metal by Johnson and Silsbee (1985) and the discovery of giant magnetoresistance independently by Albert Fert et al. and Peter Gr\u00fcnberg et al. (1988). The origin of spintronics can be traced to the ferromagnet/superconductor tunneling experiments pioneered by Meservey and Tedrow and initial experiments on magnetic tunnel junctions by Julliere in the 1970s. The use of semiconductors for spintronics began with the theoretical proposal of a spin field-effect-transistor by Datta and Das in 1990 and of the electric dipole spin resonance by Rashba in 1960.\nIn 2012, persistent spin helices of synchronized electrons were made to persist for more than a nanosecond, a 30-fold increase over earlier efforts, and longer than the duration of a modern processor clock cycle.\nIn 2025, at crystalline NiI2 was reported to exhibit p-wave magnetism, in which the spins of nickel atoms became arranged in a spiral pattern in two orientations. The orientations can be switched via a small electrical current. Applied in digital devices, this spintronics behavior requires far less current than the conventional charge-based electronics that powers devices such as computers and phones.\nTheory.\nThe spin of the electron is an intrinsic angular momentum that is separate from the angular momentum due to its orbital motion. The magnitude of the projection of the electron's spin along an arbitrary axis is formula_1, implying that the electron acts as a fermion by the spin-statistics theorem. Like orbital angular momentum, the spin has an associated magnetic moment, the magnitude of which is expressed as\nformula_2.\nIn a solid, the spins of many electrons can act together to affect the magnetic and electronic properties of a material, for example endowing it with a permanent magnetic moment as in a ferromagnet.\nIn many materials, electron spins are equally present in both the up and the down state, and no transport properties are dependent on spin. A spintronic device requires generation or manipulation of a spin-polarized population of electrons, resulting in an excess of spin up or spin down electrons. The polarization of any spin dependent property X can be written as\nformula_3.\nA net spin polarization can be achieved either through creating an equilibrium energy split between spin up and spin down. Methods include putting a material in a large magnetic field (Zeeman effect), the exchange energy present in a ferromagnet or forcing the system out of equilibrium. The period of time that such a non-equilibrium population can be maintained is known as the spin lifetime, formula_4.\nIn a diffusive conductor, a spin diffusion length formula_5 can be defined as the distance over which a non-equilibrium spin population can propagate. Spin lifetimes of conduction electrons in metals are relatively short (typically less than 1 nanosecond). An important research area is devoted to extending this lifetime to technologically relevant timescales.\nThe mechanisms of decay for a spin polarized population can be broadly classified as spin-flip scattering and spin dephasing. Spin-flip scattering is a process inside a solid that does not conserve spin, and can therefore switch an incoming spin up state into an outgoing spin down state. Spin dephasing is the process wherein a population of electrons with a common spin state becomes less polarized over time due to different rates of electron spin precession. In confined structures, spin dephasing can be suppressed, leading to spin lifetimes of milliseconds in semiconductor quantum dots at low temperatures.\nSuperconductors can enhance central effects in spintronics such as magnetoresistance effects, spin lifetimes and dissipationless spin-currents.\nThe simplest method of generating a spin-polarised current in a metal is to pass the current through a ferromagnetic material. The most common applications of this effect involve giant magnetoresistance (GMR) devices. A typical GMR device consists of at least two layers of ferromagnetic materials separated by a spacer layer. When the two magnetization vectors of the ferromagnetic layers are aligned, the electrical resistance will be lower (so a higher current flows at constant voltage) than if the ferromagnetic layers are anti-aligned. This constitutes a magnetic field sensor.\nTwo variants of GMR have been applied in devices: (1) current-in-plane (CIP), where the electric current flows parallel to the layers and (2) current-perpendicular-to-plane (CPP), where the electric current flows in a direction perpendicular to the layers.\nOther metal-based spintronics devices:\nDevice types.\nSpintronic-logic.\nNon-volatile spin-logic devices to enable scaling are being extensively studied. Spin-transfer, torque-based logic devices that use spins and magnets for information processing have been proposed. These devices are part of the ITRS exploratory road map. Logic-in memory applications are already in the development stage. A 2017 review article can be found in \"Materials Today\".\nA generalized circuit theory for spintronic integrated circuits has been proposed so that the physics of spin transport can be utilized by SPICE developers and subsequently by circuit and system designers for the exploration of spintronics for \"beyond CMOS computing\".\nSemiconductor.\nDoped semiconductor materials display dilute ferromagnetism. In recent years, dilute magnetic oxides (DMOs) including ZnO based DMOs and TiO2-based DMOs have been the subject of numerous experimental and computational investigations. Non-oxide ferromagnetic semiconductor sources (like manganese-doped gallium arsenide ), increase the interface resistance with a tunnel barrier, or using hot-electron injection.\nSpin detection in semiconductors has been addressed with multiple techniques:\nThe latter technique was used to overcome the lack of spin-orbit interaction and materials issues to achieve spin transport in silicon.\nBecause external magnetic fields (and stray fields from magnetic contacts) can cause large Hall effects and magnetoresistance in semiconductors (which mimic spin-valve effects), the only conclusive evidence of spin transport in semiconductors is demonstration of spin precession and dephasing in a magnetic field non-collinear to the injected spin orientation, called the Hanle effect.\nStorage media.\nAntiferromagnetic storage media have been studied as an alternative to ferromagnetism, especially since with antiferromagnetic material the bits can be stored as well as with ferromagnetic material. Instead of the usual definition 0\u00a0\u2194 'magnetisation upwards', 1\u00a0\u2194 'magnetisation downwards', the states can be, e.g., 0\u00a0\u2194 'vertically alternating spin configuration' and 1\u00a0\u2194 'horizontally-alternating spin configuration'.).\nThe main advantages of antiferromagnetic material are:\nResearch is being done into how to read and write information to antiferromagnetic spintronics as their net zero magnetization makes this difficult compared to conventional ferromagnetic spintronics. In modern MRAM, detection and manipulation of ferromagnetic order by magnetic fields has largely been abandoned in favor of more efficient and scalable reading and writing by electrical current. Methods of reading and writing information by current rather than fields are also being investigated in antiferromagnets as fields are ineffective anyway. Writing methods currently being investigated in antiferromagnets are through spin-transfer torque and spin-orbit torque from the spin Hall effect and the Rashba effect. Reading information in antiferromagnets via magnetoresistance effects such as tunnel magnetoresistance is also being explored.\nApplications.\nMRAM.\nRead heads of magnetic hard drives are based on the GMR or TMR effect.\nMotorola developed a first-generation 256\u00a0kb magnetoresistive random-access memory (MRAM) based on a single magnetic tunnel junction and a single transistor that has a read/write cycle of under 50 nanoseconds. Everspin has since developed a 4\u00a0Mb version. Two second-generation MRAM techniques are in development: thermal-assisted switching (TAS) and spin-transfer torque (STT).\nRacetrack memory.\nAnother design, racetrack memory, a novel memory architecture proposed by Dr. Stuart S. P. Parkin, encodes information in the direction of magnetization between domain walls of a ferromagnetic wire.\nSemiconductor laser.\nApplications using spin-polarized electrical injection have shown threshold current reduction and controllable circularly polarized coherent light output. Examples include semiconductor lasers. Future applications may include a spin-based transistor having advantages over MOSFET devices such as steeper sub-threshold slope.\nMagnetic-tunnel transistor.\nThe magnetic-tunnel transistor with a single base layer has the following terminals:\nThe magnetocurrent (MC) is given as:\nformula_6\nAnd the transfer ratio (TR) is\nformula_7\nMTT promises a highly spin-polarized electron source at room temperature.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61221", "revid": "30090373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61221", "title": "\u00c9cole nationale sup\u00e9rieure des t\u00e9l\u00e9communications de Bretagne", "text": "University in France\n\u00c9cole nationale sup\u00e9rieure des t\u00e9l\u00e9communications de Bretagne (ENSTB; ; transl.\u2009\"Brittany National School of Telecommunications\") was a French grande \u00e9cole of engineering, and a research center providing training in information technologies and telecommunications. In 2017, it merged with \u00c9cole des mines de Nantes to form IMT Atlantique, which has consistently been ranked high in French and international rankings, e.g. 98 for Computer Science and 151-200th for Electrical Engineering in the 2023 QS Ranking.\nAs a member of the Institut Mines-T\u00e9l\u00e9com, it had three campuses:\nT\u00e9l\u00e9com Bretagne had been the source of breakthroughs in the world of telecommunications, notably the turbo codes (first published in Proc. IEEE ICC'93) used extensively in 3G, 4G mobile telephony standards and other wireless systems including space communications.\nHistory.\nMaster of engineering.\nFor students admitted in \"formation initiale\" (FI, literally \"initial formation\"), the curriculum takes three years and deals with six main domains in 1st and 2nd year:\nand four options in 3rd year:\nMaster of Sciences.\nT\u00e9l\u00e9com Bretagne delivers http:// degrees, which are fully compliant with the Bologna system. MSc is a two-year training course leading to a high level of expertise in Information Technologies (IT):\nAdmission.\nAdmission for the Engineering degree is decided, for most French students, through competitive examination after two to three years of mostly theoretical physics and mathematics classes in CPGE. Foreign students and a few French students are selected after undergraduate or graduate studies based on their results and specific tests.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61223", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61223", "title": "Enstb", "text": ""}
{"id": "61229", "revid": "42341427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61229", "title": "Straightedge and compass construction", "text": "Method of drawing geometric objects\nIn geometry, straightedge-and-compass construction \u2013 also known as ruler-and-compass construction, Euclidean construction, or classical construction \u2013 is the construction of lengths, angles, and other geometric figures using only an idealized ruler and a compass.\nThe idealized ruler, known as a straightedge, is assumed to be infinite in length, have only one edge, and no markings on it. The compass is assumed to have no maximum or minimum radius, and is assumed to \"collapse\" when lifted from the page, so it may not be directly used to transfer distances. (This is an unimportant restriction since, using a multi-step procedure, a distance can be transferred even with a collapsing compass; see compass equivalence theorem. Note however that whilst a non-collapsing compass held against a straightedge might seem to be equivalent to marking it, the neusis construction is still impermissible and this is what unmarked really means: see Markable rulers below.) More formally, the only permissible constructions are those granted by the first three postulates of Euclid's \"Elements\".\nIt turns out to be the case that every point constructible using straightedge and compass may also be constructed using compass alone, or by straightedge alone if given a single circle and its center.\nAncient Greek mathematicians first conceived straightedge-and-compass constructions, and a number of ancient problems in plane geometry impose this restriction. The ancient Greeks developed many constructions, but in some cases were unable to do so. Gauss showed that some polygons are constructible but that most are not. Some of the most famous straightedge-and-compass problems were proved impossible by Pierre Wantzel in 1837 using field theory, namely trisecting an arbitrary angle and doubling the volume of a cube (see \u00a7 impossible constructions). Many of these problems are easily solvable provided that other geometric transformations are allowed; for example, neusis construction can be used to solve the former two problems.\nIn terms of algebra, a length is constructible if and only if it represents a constructible number, and an angle is constructible if and only if its cosine is a constructible number. A number is constructible if and only if it can be written using the four basic arithmetic operations and the extraction of square roots but of no higher-order roots.\nStraightedge and compass tools.\nThe \"straightedge\" and \"compass\" of straightedge-and-compass constructions are idealized versions of real-world rulers and compasses.\nActual compasses do not collapse and modern geometric constructions often use this feature. A 'collapsing compass' would appear to be a less powerful instrument. However, by the compass equivalence theorem in Proposition 2 of Book 1 of Euclid's Elements, no power is lost by using a collapsing compass. Although the proposition is correct, its proofs have a long and checkered history. In any case, the equivalence is why this feature is not stipulated in the definition of the ideal compass.\nEach construction must be mathematically \"exact\". \"Eyeballing\" distances (looking at the construction and guessing at its accuracy) or using markings on a ruler are not permitted. Each construction must also \"terminate\". That is, it must have a finite number of steps and not be the limit of ever closer approximations. (If an unlimited number of steps is permitted, some otherwise-impossible constructions become possible by means of infinite sequences converging to a limit.)\nStated this way, straightedge-and-compass constructions appear to be a parlour game, rather than a serious practical problem; but the purpose of the restriction is to ensure that constructions can be \"proven\" to be \"exactly\" correct.\nHistory.\nThe ancient Greek mathematicians first attempted straightedge-and-compass constructions, and they discovered how to construct sums, differences, products, ratios, and square roots of given lengths. They could also construct half of a given angle, a square whose area is twice that of another square, a square having the same area as a given polygon, and regular polygons of 3, 4, or 5 sides (or one with twice the number of sides of a given polygon). But they could not construct one third of a given angle except in particular cases, or a square with the same area as a given circle, or regular polygons with other numbers of sides. Nor could they construct the side of a cube whose volume is twice the volume of a cube with a given side.\nHippocrates and Menaechmus showed that the volume of the cube could be doubled by finding the intersections of hyperbolas and parabolas, but these cannot be constructed by straightedge and compass. In the fifth century BCE, Hippias used a curve that he called a quadratrix to both trisect the general angle and square the circle, and Nicomedes in the second century BCE showed how to use a conchoid to trisect an arbitrary angle; but these methods also cannot be followed with just straightedge and compass.\nNo progress on the unsolved problems was made for two millennia, until in 1796 Gauss showed that a regular polygon with 17 sides could be constructed; five years later he showed the sufficient criterion for a regular polygon of \"n\" sides to be constructible.\nIn 1837 Pierre Wantzel published a proof of the impossibility of trisecting an arbitrary angle or of doubling the volume of a cube, based on the impossibility of constructing cube roots of lengths. He also showed that Gauss's sufficient constructibility condition for regular polygons is also necessary.\nThen in 1882 Lindemann showed that formula_1 is a transcendental number, and thus that it is impossible by straightedge and compass to construct a square with the same area as a given circle.\nThe basic constructions.\nAll straightedge-and-compass constructions consist of repeated application of five basic constructions using the points, lines and circles that have already been constructed. These are:\nFor example, starting with just two distinct points, we can create a line or either of two circles (in turn, using each point as centre and passing through the other point). If we draw both circles, two new points are created at their intersections. Drawing lines between the two original points and one of these new points completes the construction of an equilateral triangle.\nTherefore, in any geometric problem we have an initial set of symbols (points and lines), an algorithm, and some results. From this perspective, geometry is equivalent to an axiomatic algebra, replacing its elements by symbols. Probably Gauss first realized this, and used it to prove the impossibility of some constructions; only much later did Hilbert find a complete set of axioms for geometry.\nCommon straightedge-and-compass constructions.\nThe most-used straightedge-and-compass constructions include:\nConstructible points.\nOne can associate an algebra to our geometry using a Cartesian coordinate system made of two lines, and represent points of our plane by vectors. Finally we can write these vectors as complex numbers.\nUsing the equations for lines and circles, one can show that the points at which they intersect lie in a quadratic extension of the smallest field \"F\" containing two points on the line, the center of the circle, and the radius of the circle. That is, they are of the form formula_2, where \"x\", \"y\", and \"k\" are in \"F\".\nSince the field of constructible points is closed under \"square roots\", it contains all points that can be obtained by a finite sequence of quadratic extensions of the field of complex numbers with rational coefficients. By the above paragraph, one can show that any constructible point can be obtained by such a sequence of extensions. As a corollary of this, one finds that the degree of the minimal polynomial for a constructible point (and therefore of any constructible length) is a power of\u00a02. In particular, any constructible point (or length) is an algebraic number, though not every algebraic number is constructible; for example, is algebraic but not constructible.\nConstructible angles.\nThere is a bijection between the angles that are constructible and the points that are constructible on any constructible circle. The angles that are constructible form an abelian group under addition modulo 2\u03c0 (which corresponds to multiplication of the points on the unit circle viewed as complex numbers). The angles that are constructible are exactly those whose tangent (or equivalently, sine or cosine) is constructible as a number. For example, the regular heptadecagon (the seventeen-sided regular polygon) is constructible because\nformula_3\nas discovered by Gauss.\nThe group of constructible angles is closed under the operation that halves angles (which corresponds to taking square roots in the complex numbers). The only angles of finite order that may be constructed starting with two points are those whose order is either a power of two, or a product of a power of two and a set of distinct Fermat primes. In addition there is a dense set of constructible angles of infinite order.\nRelation to complex arithmetic.\nGiven a set of points in the Euclidean plane, selecting any one of them to be called 0 and another to be called 1, together with an arbitrary choice of orientation allows us to consider the points as a set of complex numbers.\nGiven any such interpretation of a set of points as complex numbers, the points constructible using valid straightedge-and-compass constructions alone are precisely the elements of the smallest field containing the original set of points and closed under the complex conjugate and square root operations (to avoid ambiguity, we can specify the square root with complex argument less than \u03c0). The elements of this field are precisely those that may be expressed as a formula in the original points using only the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, complex conjugate, and square root, which is easily seen to be a countable dense subset of the plane. Each of these six operations corresponding to a simple straightedge-and-compass construction. From such a formula it is straightforward to produce a construction of the corresponding point by combining the constructions for each of the arithmetic operations. More efficient constructions of a particular set of points correspond to shortcuts in such calculations.\nEquivalently (and with no need to arbitrarily choose two points) we can say that, given an arbitrary choice of orientation, a set of points determines a set of complex ratios given by the ratios of the differences between any two pairs of points. The set of ratios constructible using straightedge and compass from such a set of ratios is precisely the smallest field containing the original ratios and closed under taking complex conjugates and square roots.\nFor example, the real part, imaginary part and modulus of a point or ratio \"z\" (taking one of the two viewpoints above) are constructible as these may be expressed as\nformula_4\nformula_5\nformula_6\n\"Doubling the cube\" and \"trisection of an angle\" (except for special angles such as any \"\u03c6\" such that \"\u03c6\"/(2\u03c0)) is a rational number with denominator not divisible by 3) require ratios which are the solution to cubic equations, while \"squaring the circle\" requires a transcendental ratio. None of these are in the fields described, hence no straightedge-and-compass construction for these exists.\nImpossible constructions.\nThe ancient Greeks thought that the construction problems they could not solve were simply obstinate, not unsolvable. With modern methods, however, these straightedge-and-compass constructions have been shown to be logically impossible to perform.\nSquaring the circle.\nThe most famous of these problems, squaring the circle, otherwise known as the quadrature of the circle, involves constructing a square with the same area as a given circle using only straightedge and compass.\nSquaring the circle has been proved impossible, as it involves generating a transcendental number, formula_7. Only certain algebraic numbers can be constructed with ruler and compass alone, namely those constructed from the integers with a finite sequence of operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and taking square roots. The phrase \"squaring the circle\" is often used to mean \"doing the impossible\" for this reason.\nWithout the constraint of requiring solution by ruler and compass alone, the problem is easily solvable by a wide variety of geometric and algebraic means, and was solved many times in antiquity.\nA method which comes very close to approximating the \"quadrature of the circle\" can be achieved using a Kepler triangle.\nDoubling the cube.\nDoubling the cube is the construction, using only a straightedge and compass, of the edge of a cube that has twice the volume of a cube with a given edge. This is impossible because the cube root of 2, though algebraic, cannot be computed from integers by addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and taking square roots. This follows because its minimal polynomial over the rationals has degree\u00a03. This construction is possible using a straightedge with two marks on it and a compass.\nAngle trisection.\nAngle trisection is the construction, using only a straightedge and a compass, of an angle that is one-third of a given arbitrary angle. This is impossible in the general case. For example, the angle 2\u03c0/5 radians (72\u00b0\u00a0=\u00a0360\u00b0/5) can be trisected, but the angle of \u03c0/3 radians (60\u00b0) cannot be trisected. The general trisection problem is also easily solved when a straightedge with two marks on it is allowed (a neusis construction).\nDistance to an ellipse.\nThe line segment from any point in the plane to the nearest point on a circle can be constructed, but the segment from any point in the plane to the nearest point on an ellipse of positive eccentricity cannot in general be constructed. See Note that results proven here are mostly a consequence of the non-constructivity of conics. If the initial conic is considered as a given, then the proof must be reviewed to check if other distinct conic needs to be generated. As an example, constructions for normals of a parabola are known, but they need to use an intersection between circle and the parabola itself. So they are not constructible in the sense that the parabola is not constructible.\nAlhazen's problem.\nIn 1997, the Oxford mathematician Peter M. Neumann proved the theorem that there is no ruler-and-compass construction for the general solution of the ancient Alhazen's problem (billiard problem or reflection from a spherical mirror).\nConstructing regular polygons.\nSome regular polygons (e.g. a pentagon) are easy to construct with straightedge and compass; others are not. This led to the question: Is it possible to construct all regular polygons with straightedge and compass?\nCarl Friedrich Gauss in 1796 showed that a regular 17-sided polygon can be constructed, and five years later showed that a regular \"n\"-sided polygon can be constructed with straightedge and compass if the odd prime factors of \"n\" are distinct Fermat primes. Gauss conjectured that this condition was also necessary; the conjecture was proven by Pierre Wantzel in 1837.\nThe first few constructible regular polygons have the following numbers of sides:\n3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15, 16, 17, 20, 24, 30, 32, 34, 40, 48, 51, 60, 64, 68, 80, 85, 96, 102, 120, 128, 136, 160, 170, 192, 204, 240, 255, 256, 257, 272... (sequence in the OEIS)\nThere are known to be an infinitude of constructible regular polygons with an even number of sides (because if a regular \"n\"-gon is constructible, then so is a regular 2\"n\"-gon and hence a regular 4\"n\"-gon, 8\"n\"-gon, etc.). However, there are only 5 known Fermat primes, giving only 31 known constructible regular \"n\"-gons with an odd number of sides.\nConstructing a triangle from three given characteristic points or lengths.\nSixteen key points of a triangle are its vertices, the midpoints of its sides, the feet of its altitudes, the feet of its internal angle bisectors, and its circumcenter, centroid, orthocenter, and incenter. These can be taken three at a time to yield 139 distinct nontrivial problems of constructing a triangle from three points. Of these problems, three involve a point that can be uniquely constructed from the other two points; 23 can be non-uniquely constructed (in fact for infinitely many solutions) but only if the locations of the points obey certain constraints; in 74 the problem is constructible in the general case; and in 39 the required triangle exists but is not constructible.\nTwelve key lengths of a triangle are the three side lengths, the three altitudes, the three medians, and the three angle bisectors. Together with the three angles, these give 95 distinct combinations, 63 of which give rise to a constructible triangle, 30 of which do not, and two of which are underdefined.\nRestricted constructions.\nVarious attempts have been made to restrict the allowable tools for constructions under various rules, in order to determine what is still constructible and how it may be constructed, as well as determining the minimum criteria necessary to still be able to construct everything that compass and straightedge can.\nConstructing with only ruler or only compass.\nIt is possible (according to the Mohr\u2013Mascheroni theorem) to construct anything with just a compass if it can be constructed with a ruler and compass, provided that the given data and the data to be found consist of discrete points (not lines or circles). The truth of this theorem depends on the truth of Archimedes' axiom, which is not first-order in nature. Examples of compass-only constructions include Napoleon's problem.\nThe same cannot be said with constructions using only a ruler. Using just a ruler, it is impossible to take a square root, or mark the midpoint of a segment; but (by the Poncelet\u2013Steiner theorem) given a single circle and its center, they can be constructed.\nExtended constructions.\nThe ancient Greeks classified constructions into three major categories, depending on the complexity of the tools required for their solution. If a construction used only a straightedge and compass, it was called planar; if it also required one or more conic sections (other than the circle), then it was called solid; the third category included all constructions that did not fall into either of the other two categories. This categorization meshes nicely with the modern algebraic point of view. A complex number that can be expressed using only the field operations and square roots (as described above) has a planar construction. A complex number that includes also the extraction of cube roots has a solid construction.\nIn the language of fields, a complex number that is planar has degree a power of two, and lies in a field extension that can be broken down into a tower of fields where each extension has degree two. A complex number that has a solid construction has degree with prime factors of only two and three, and lies in a field extension that is at the top of a tower of fields where each extension has degree 2 or 3.\nSolid constructions.\nA point has a solid construction if it can be constructed using a straightedge, compass, and a (possibly hypothetical) conic drawing tool that can draw any conic with already constructed focus, directrix, and eccentricity. The same set of points can often be constructed using a smaller set of tools. For example, using a compass, straightedge, and a piece of paper on which we have the parabola \"y\" = \"x\"2 together with the points (0,0) and (1,0), one can construct any complex number that has a solid construction. Likewise, a tool that can draw any ellipse with already constructed foci and major axis (think two pins and a piece of string) is just as powerful.\nThe ancient Greeks knew that doubling the cube and trisecting an arbitrary angle both had solid constructions. Archimedes gave a neusis construction of the regular heptagon, which was interpreted by medieval Arabic commentators, Bartel Leendert van der Waerden, and others as being based on a solid construction, but this has been disputed, as other interpretations are possible. The quadrature of the circle does not have a solid construction.\nA regular \"n\"-gon has a solid construction if and only if \"n\" = 2\"a\"3\"b\"\"m\" where \"a\" and \"b\" are some non-negative integers and \"m\" is a product of zero or more distinct Pierpont primes (primes of the form 2\"r\"3\"s\" + 1). Therefore, regular \"n\"-gon admits a solid, but not planar, construction if and only if \"n\" is in the sequence\n7, 9, 13, 14, 18, 19, 21, 26, 27, 28, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 42, 45, 52, 54, 56, 57, 63, 65, 70, 72, 73, 74, 76, 78, 81, 84, 90, 91, 95, 97... (sequence in the OEIS)\nThe set of \"n\" for which a regular \"n\"-gon has no solid construction is the sequence\n11, 22, 23, 25, 29, 31, 33, 41, 43, 44, 46, 47, 49, 50, 53, 55, 58, 59, 61, 62, 66, 67, 69, 71, 75, 77, 79, 82, 83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 93, 94, 98, 99, 100... (sequence in the OEIS)\nLike the question with Fermat primes, it is an open question as to whether there are an infinite number of Pierpont primes.\nAngle trisection.\nWhat if, together with the straightedge and compass, we had a tool that could (only) trisect an arbitrary angle? Such constructions are solid constructions, but there exist numbers with solid constructions that cannot be constructed using such a tool. For example, we cannot double the cube with such a tool. On the other hand, every regular n-gon that has a solid construction can be constructed using such a tool.\nOrigami.\nThe mathematical theory of origami is more powerful than straightedge-and-compass construction. Folds satisfying the Huzita\u2013Hatori axioms can construct exactly the same set of points as the extended constructions using a compass and conic drawing tool. Therefore, origami can also be used to solve cubic equations (and hence quartic equations), and thus solve two of the classical problems.\nMarkable rulers.\nArchimedes, Nicomedes and Apollonius gave constructions involving the use of a markable ruler. This would permit them, for example, to take a line segment, two lines (or circles), and a point; and then draw a line which passes through the given point and intersects the two given lines, such that the distance between the points of intersection equals the given segment. This the Greeks called \"neusis\" (\"inclination\", \"tendency\" or \"verging\"), because the new line \"tends\" to the point.\nIn this expanded scheme, we can trisect an arbitrary angle (see http://) or extract an arbitrary cube root (due to Nicomedes). Hence, any distance whose ratio to an existing distance is the solution of a cubic or a quartic equation is constructible. Using a markable ruler, regular polygons with solid constructions, like the heptagon, are constructible; and John H. Conway and Richard K. Guy give constructions for several of them.\nThe neusis construction is more powerful than a conic drawing tool, as one can construct complex numbers that do not have solid constructions. In fact, using this tool one can solve some quintics that are not solvable using radicals. It is known that one cannot solve an irreducible polynomial of prime degree greater or equal to 7 using the neusis construction, so it is not possible to construct a regular 23-gon or 29-gon using this tool. Benjamin and Snyder proved that it is possible to construct the regular 11-gon, but did not give a construction. It is still open as to whether a regular 25-gon or 31-gon is constructible using this tool.\nComputation of binary digits.\nIn 1998 Simon Plouffe gave a ruler-and-compass algorithm that can be used to compute binary digits of certain numbers, such as formula_8. The algorithm involves the repeated doubling of an angle and becomes physically impractical after about 20 binary digits.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61230", "revid": "47812464", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61230", "title": "Candy", "text": "Sweet confection\nCandy, alternatively called sweets or lollies, is a confection that features sugar as a principal ingredient. The category, also called \"sugar confectionery\", encompasses any sweet confection, including chocolate, chewing gum, and sugar candy. Vegetables, fruit, or nuts which have been glazed and coated with sugar are said to be \"candied\".\nPhysically, candy is characterized by the use of a significant amount of sugar or sugar substitutes. Unlike a cake or loaf of bread that would be shared among many people, candies are usually made in smaller pieces. However, the definition of candy also depends upon how people treat the food. Unlike sweet pastries served for a dessert course at the end of a meal, candies are normally eaten casually, often with the fingers, as a snack between meals. Each culture has its own ideas of what constitutes candy rather than dessert. The same food may be a candy in one culture and a dessert in another.\nHistory.\nThe word candy entered the English language from the Old French \"\u00e7ucre candi\" (\"sugar candy\"). The French term probably has earlier roots in the Arabic \"qandi\", Persian \"qand\" and Sanskrit \"khanda\", all words for sugar.\nSugarcane is indigenous to tropical South and Southeast Asia. Pieces of sugar were produced by boiling sugarcane juice in ancient India and consumed as \"khanda\". Between the 6th and 4th centuries BCE, the Persians, followed by the Greeks, discovered the people in India and their \"reeds that produce honey without bees\". They adopted and then spread sugar and sugarcane agriculture.\nBefore sugar was readily available, candy was based on honey. Honey was used in Ancient China, the Middle East, Egypt, Greece and the Roman Empire to coat fruits and flowers to preserve them or to create forms of candy. Candy is still served in this form today, though now it is more typically seen as a type of garnish.\nBefore the Industrial Revolution, candy was often considered a form of medicine, either used to calm the digestive system or cool a sore throat. In the Middle Ages candy appeared on the tables of only the most wealthy at first. At that time, it began as a combination of spices and sugar used as an aid to digestion. Banquet hosts typically served these types of 'candies' at banquets for their guests. One of these candies, sometimes called \"chamber spice\", was made with cloves, ginger, aniseed, juniper berries, almonds and pine kernels dipped in melted sugar.\nThe Middle English word \"candy\" began to be used in the late 13th century.\nThe first candy came to America during the early 18th century from Britain and France. Only a few of the early colonists were proficient in sugar work and sugary treats were generally only enjoyed by the very wealthy. Even the simplest form of candy \u2013 rock candy, made from crystallized sugar \u2013 was considered a luxury.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nThe candy business underwent a drastic change in the 1830s when technological advances and the availability of sugar opened up the market. The new market was not only for the enjoyment of the rich but also for the pleasure of the working class. There was also an increasing market for children. While some fine confectioners remained, the candy store became a favorite of the child of the American working class. Penny candies epitomized this transformation of candy. Penny candy became the first material good that children spent their own money on. For this reason, candy store-owners relied almost entirely on the business of children to keep them running. Even penny candies were directly descended from medicated lozenges that held bitter medicine in a hard sugar coating.\nIn 1847, the invention of the candy press (also known under the surprising name of a \"toy machine\") made it possible to produce multiple shapes and sizes of candy at once. In 1851, confectioners began to use a revolving steam pan to assist in boiling sugar. This transformation meant that the candy maker was no longer required to continuously stir the boiling sugar. The heat from the surface of the pan was also much more evenly distributed and made it less likely the sugar would burn. These innovations made it possible for only one or two people to successfully run a candy business.\nAs the path from producer to market became increasingly complicated, many foods were affected by adulteration and the addition of additives which ranged from relatively harmless ingredients, such as cheap cornstarch and corn syrup, to poisonous ones. Some manufacturers produced bright colors in candy by the addition of hazardous substances for which there was no legal regulation: green (chromium(III) oxide and copper acetate), red (lead(II,IV) oxide and mercury sulfide), yellow (lead chromate) and white (chalk, arsenic trioxide).\nIn an 1885 cover cartoon for \"Puck\", Joseph Keppler satirized the dangers of additives in candy by depicting the \"mutual friendship\" between striped candy, doctors, and gravediggers. By 1906, research into the dangers of additives, expos\u00e9s of the food industry, and public pressure led to the passage of the Pure Food and Drug Act, the first federal United States law to regulate food and drugs, including candy.\nClassification.\nSugar candies include hard candies, soft candies, caramels, marshmallows, taffy, and other candies whose principal ingredient is sugar. Commercially, sugar candies are often divided into groups according to the amount of sugar they contain and their chemical structure.\nHard-boiled candies made by the vacuum cooking process include stick candy, lemon drops and horehound drops. Open-fire candy, like molasses taffy and cream taffy, is cooked in open kettles and then pulled. Pan work candies include nuts and other candies like jelly beans and sugar-coated almonds, made by coating with sugar in revolving copper kettles. Gum work candy is cooked in large kettles fashioned for melting and molded, dried and sugared like gum drops. They are soaked for a time in sugar syrup to allow crystals to form.\nSugar candies can be classified into noncrystalline and crystalline types. This is based on microscopic crystal structure, and not on the visible appearance of the candy, so a piece of candy that looks like a crystal may well be a noncrystalline type. Noncrystalline candies are homogeneous and may be chewy or hard; they include hard candies, caramels, toffees, and nougats. Crystalline candies incorporate small crystals in their structure, meaning they have a creamy texture that melts in the mouth or are easily chewed; these include fondant and fudge. In 2022, flavorless candy was developed that was hard but not sweet.\nChocolate is sometimes treated as a separate branch of confectionery. In this model, chocolate candies like chocolate candy bars and chocolate truffles are included. Hot chocolate or other cocoa-based drinks are excluded, as is candy made from white chocolate. When chocolate is treated as a separate branch, it also includes confections whose classification is otherwise difficult, being neither exactly candies nor exactly baked goods, like chocolate-dipped foods, tarts with chocolate shells, and chocolate-coated cookies.\nProduction.\nSugar candy is made by dissolving sugar in water or milk to form a syrup, which is boiled until it reaches the desired concentration or starts to caramelize. Candy comes in a wide variety of textures, from soft and chewy to hard and brittle. The texture of candy depends on the ingredients and the temperatures that the candy is processed at.\nThe final texture of sugar candy depends primarily on the concentration of sugar. As the syrup is heated, it boils, water evaporates, the sugar concentration increases and the boiling point rises. A given temperature corresponds to a particular sugar concentration. These are called sugar stages. In general, higher temperatures and greater sugar concentrations result in hard, brittle candies, and lower temperatures result in softer candies. Once the syrup reaches or higher, the sucrose molecules break down into many simpler sugars, creating an amber-colored substance known as caramel. This should not be confused with caramel candy, although it is the candy's main flavoring.\nMost candies are made commercially. The industry relies significantly on trade secret protection, because candy recipes cannot be copyrighted or patented effectively, but are very difficult to duplicate exactly. Seemingly minor differences in the machinery, temperature, or timing of the candy-making process can cause noticeable differences in the final product.\nPackaging.\n\"Candy wrapper\" or \"sweets wrapper\" is a common term for this packaging.\nPurposes of packaging.\nPackaging preserves aroma and flavor and eases shipping and dispensation. Wax paper seals against air, moisture, dust, and germs, while cellophane is valued by packagers for its transparency and resistance to grease, odors and moisture. In addition, it is often resealable. Polyethylene is another form of film sealed with heat, and this material is often used to make bags in bulk packaging. Plastic wraps are also common. Aluminum foils wrap chocolate bars and prevent a transfer of water vapor while being lightweight, non-toxic and odor proof. Vegetable parchment lines boxes of high-quality confections like gourmet chocolates. Cardboard cartons are less common, though they offer many options concerning thickness and movement of water and oil.\nPackages are often sealed with a starch-based adhesive derived from tapioca, potato, wheat, sago, or sweet potato. Occasionally, glues are made from the bones and skin of cattle and hogs for a stronger and more flexible product, but this is not as common because of the expense.\nHistory.\nPrior to the 1900s, candy was commonly sold unwrapped from carts in the street, where it was exposed to dirt and insects. By 1914, there were some machines to wrap gum and stick candies, but this was not the common practice. After the polio outbreak in 1916, unwrapped candies garnered widespread censure because of the dirt and germs. At the time, only upscale candy stores used glass jars. With advancements in technology, wax paper was adopted, and foil and cellophane were imported to the U.S. from France by DuPont in 1925. Necco packagers were one of the first companies to package without human touch. Kiosks and vending machines were introduced around the beginning of the 20th century.\nCandy packaging played a role in its adoption as the most popular treat given away during trick-or-treating for Halloween in the US. In the 1940s, most treats were homemade. During the 1950s, small, individually wrapped candies were recognized as convenient and inexpensive. By the 1970s, after widely publicized but largely false stories of poisoned candy myths circulating in the popular press, factory-sealed packaging with a recognizable name brand on it became a sign of safety.\nMarketing and design.\nPackaging helps market the product as well. Manufacturers know that candy must be hygienic and attractive to customers. In the children's market quantity, novelty, large size and bright colors are the top sellers. Many companies redesign the packaging to maintain consumer appeal.\nShelf life.\nBecause of its high sugar concentration, bacteria are not usually able to grow in candy. As a result, the shelf life is longer for candy than for many other foods. Most candies can be safely stored in their original packaging at room temperature in a dry, dark cupboard for months or years. As a rule, the softer the candy or the damper the storage area, the sooner it goes stale.\nShelf life considerations with most candies are focused on appearance, taste, and texture, rather than about the potential for food poisoning; that is, old candy may not look appealing or taste very good, even though it is very unlikely to make the eater sick. Candy can be made unsafe by storing it badly, such as in a wet, moldy area. Typical recommendations are these:\nNutrition.\nMost sugar candies are defined in US law as a food of minimal nutritional value.\nEven in a culture that eats sweets frequently, candy is not a significant source of nutrition or food energy for most people. The average American eats about 1.1\u00a0kg (2.5 pounds) of sugar or similar sweeteners each week, but almost 95% of that sugar\u2014all but about 70 grams (2.5 ounces)\u2014comes from non-candy sources, especially soft drinks and processed foods.\nMeal replacements.\nCandy is considered a source of empty calories, because it provides little or no nutritional value beyond food energy. At the start of the 20th century, when undernutrition was a serious problem, especially among poor and working-class people, and when nutrition science was a new field, the high calorie content was promoted as a virtue. Researchers suggested that candy, especially candy made with milk and nuts, was a low-cost alternative to normal meals. To get the food energy necessary for a day of labor, candy might cost half as much as eggs. During the 1920s and 1930s, candy bars selling for five cents were often marketed as replacements for lunch.\nAt the 1904 World Fair, the Quaker Oats Company made a candy-coated puffed cereal, a wheat-based product similar to Cracker Jack's candy-coated popcorn. The product concept was re-introduced unsuccessfully in 1939 by another business as Ranger Joe, the first pre-sweetened, candy-coated breakfast cereal. Post Foods introduced their own version in 1948, originally called Happy Jax and later Sugar Crisp. They marketed it as both a replacement for unsweetened breakfast cereals and also for eating as a snack or as candy, using three animated cartoon bears as the mascots: Candy, Handy, and Dandy. The early slogans said, \"As a cereal it's dandy\u2014for snacks it's so handy\u2014or eat it like candy!\"\nIn more recent times, a variety of snack bars have been marketed. These include bars that are intended as meal replacements as well as snack bars that are marketed as having nutritional advantages when compared to candy bars, such as granola bars. However, the actual nutritional value is often not very different from candy bars, except for usually a higher sodium content, and the flavors (most popularly, chocolate, fudge, and caramel) and the presentation mimic candy bars.\nAmong the Bengali people, candy may be eaten for an entire meal, especially during festivals. Candy may also be offered to vegetarian guests in lieu of fish or meat dishes in India.\nVegetarianism.\nMost candy contains no meat or other animal parts, and many contain no milk or other animal products. Some candy, including marshmallows and gummy bears, contains gelatin derived from animal collagen, a protein found in skin and bones, and is thus avoided by vegans and some vegetarians. \"Kosher gelatin\" is also unsuitable for vegetarians and vegans, as it is derived from fish bones. Other substances, such as agar, pectin, starch and gum arabic may also be used as setting and gelling agents, and can be used in place of gelatin.\nOther ingredients commonly found in candy that are not suitable for vegetarian or vegan diets include carmine, a red dye made from cochineal beetles, and confectioner's glaze, which contains shellac, a resin excreted by female lac bugs.\nHealth effects.\nCavities.\nCandy generally contains sugar, which is a key environmental factor in the formation of dental caries (cavities). Several types of bacteria commonly found in the mouth consume sugar, particularly \"Streptococcus mutans\". When these bacteria metabolize the sugar found in most candies, juice, or other sugary foods, they produce acids in the mouth that demineralize the tooth enamel and can lead to dental caries. Heavy or frequent consumption of high-sugar foods, especially lollipops, sugary cough drops, and other sugar-based candies that stay in the mouth for a long time, increases the risk of tooth decay. Candies that also contain enamel-dissolving acids, such as acid drops, increase the risk. Cleaning the teeth and mouth shortly after eating any type of sugary food, and allowing several hours to pass between eating such foods, reduces the risk and improves oral health.\nThe link between candy and caries was formally identified through the Vipeholm experiments, where intellectually disabled people were fed copious amounts of candy and were found to develop poor dental health. The experiments are today considered to have violated multiple principles of medical ethics.\nGlycemic index.\nMost candy, particularly low-fat and fat-free candy, has a high glycemic index (GI), which means that it causes a rapid rise in blood sugar levels after ingestion. This is chiefly a concern for people with diabetes, but could also be dangerous to the health of non-diabetics.\nContamination.\nSome kinds of candy have been contaminated with an excessive amount of lead in it. Claims of contamination have been made since shortly after industrial-scale candy factories began producing candy in the mid-19th century, although these early claims were rarely true.\nContamination by infectious agents such as virus or bacteria is unlikely through sweets, including unwrapped sweets. This is in part because bacteria can not replicate in the very dry and sweet environment of candy.\nChoking deaths.\nHard, round candies are a leading cause of choking deaths in children. Some types of candy, such as Lychee Mini Fruity Gels, have been associated with so many choking deaths that their import or manufacture is banned by some countries.\nNon-nutritive toy products such as chocolate eggs containing packaging with a toy inside are banned from sale in the US. If the material attached to confectionery has a function and will not cause any injury to the consumer, it is allowed to be marketed. In the EU, however, the Toy Safety Directive 2009/48/EC specifies that toys contained in food only need separate packaging that cannot be swallowed.\nSales.\nGlobal sales of candies were estimated to have been approximately US$118 billion in 2012. In the United States, $2 is spent on chocolate for every $1 spent on non-chocolate candy.\nBecause each culture varies in how it treats some foods, a food may be considered a candy in one place and a dessert in another. For example, in Western countries, baklava is served on a plate and eaten with a fork as a dessert, but in the Middle East, Northern Africa, and Eastern Europe, it is treated as a candy.\nCultural significance.\nCandy is the source of several cultural themes.\nAdults worry that other people will use candy to poison or entice children into harmful situations. Stranger danger warnings include telling children not to take candy from strangers, for fear of the child being abducted. Poisoned candy myths persist in popular culture, especially around trick-or-treating at Halloween, despite the rarity of actual incidents.\nThe phrase \"like taking candy from a baby\" is a common simile, and means that something is very easy to do.\nA 1959 Swedish dental health campaign encouraged people to reduce the risk of dental problems by limiting consumption of candy to once a week. The slogan, \"All the sweets you want, but only once a week\", started a tradition of buying candy every Saturday, called \"l\u00f6rdagsgodis\" (literally \"Saturday candy\"). However, the widespread availability of bulk confectionery has made Swedes the world\u2019s largest consumers of candy since at least 2009.\nHolidays.\nAssociation with Halloween.\nThe process of going door to door to receive free candy during Halloween, has become a major draw for children, particularly in America. Children dress up in costume, and residents buy candy for children and hand it out in small increments. The main form of candy passed out is pre-packaged sweets. Parents feel more comfortable allowing their children to eat pre-packaged candies because of the quality control. As a result, name brand candies have become a staple for Halloween and trick-or-treating. Some candies continue to be popular with US trick-or-treaters, such as Reese's Cups, which was the top chocolate Halloween candy, and Skittles, which were the top non-chocolate candy of 2025. \nThe tradition of handing out treats on Halloween originated from the holiday of All Hallows Day, or All Saints Day, which derives from Christian tradition. On this day, children would travel across town, saying prayers. They prayed mainly for all those who had died. In between their prayers, these children would arrive at the doorsteps of houses. As a reward for their actions, they were given homemade cakes referred to as soul cakes, made by the homeowners. These soul cakes resembled a form of biscuit and were usually filled with raisins or cinnamon among other ingredients. Many cakes were also given to the poor. The soul cakes gave these children the incentive to pray intensely in exchange for sweets.\nThe idea of providing trick-or-treaters with candy began in the 1950s in the US. Up until then many households continued to provide children with soul cakes among other homemade goods. However, it was discovered by candy producers that Halloween could be marketed to sell their products. As a result, many households began to buy candy. The main draw to these candy products were that they were inexpensive, took no time to prepare, and came in bulk. Nevertheless, candy would not fully take over until the 1970s. Up until then, givers would continue to make treats or package small toys and coins specifically for Halloween.\nThe main cause for the shift from homemade treats to pre-packaged candies was the result of speculation concerning tampered food. Parents were concerned their children were being exposed to chemicals within their halloween goods. The lack of packaging made it much easier for a person to put dangerous substances in. These worries were heightened because of a large number of false reports concerning medical attention relating to dangerous halloween treats. As a result, parents became more likely to allow their children to participate in Halloween festivities when packed candy was introduced. They noticed it would be harder for someone to tamper with factory-packaged sweets because the seal would be torn.\nIn 2025, consumer spending on Halloween candy was expected to reach $12 billion, a new record. Candy continues to be a staple for the Halloween season and remains the biggest draw for participation.\nIn October 2025, retailers reported an increase in cocoa prices was driving up the price of Halloween candy. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61231", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61231", "title": "Confectionary", "text": ""}
{"id": "61233", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61233", "title": "Seventeenth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61235", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61235", "title": "First century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61236", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61236", "title": "Second century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61237", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61237", "title": "Third century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61238", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61238", "title": "Fourth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61239", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61239", "title": "Fifth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61240", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61240", "title": "Sixth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61241", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61241", "title": "Seventh century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61242", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61242", "title": "Eighth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61243", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61243", "title": "Ninth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61244", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61244", "title": "Tenth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61245", "revid": "1307743952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61245", "title": "List of former counties of Quebec", "text": "Overview of historical counties and territories in Quebec\nHistorical counties and territories in Quebec, Canada, and their county seats are listed below. The list is alphabetized by county, but can also be alphabetized by seat.\nIn terms of internal division, there are four types of counties:\nParishes as a land unit division arise from the elevation of municipalities based on religious parish limits (parish municipalities). Quebec's counties were dissolved in the early 1980s and Quebec was then divided into regional county municipalities."}
{"id": "61246", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61246", "title": "Eleventh century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61247", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61247", "title": "Twelth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61248", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61248", "title": "Twelfth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61249", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61249", "title": "Thirteenth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61250", "revid": "15955234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61250", "title": "Twelveth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61251", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61251", "title": "Fourteenth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61252", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61252", "title": "Fifteenth century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61254", "revid": "15955238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61254", "title": "Twentyfirst century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61255", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61255", "title": "Bacterial artificial chromosome", "text": "DNA construct\nA bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) is a DNA construct, based on a functional fertility plasmid (or F-plasmid), used for transforming and cloning in bacteria, usually \"E. coli\". F-plasmids play a crucial role because they contain partition genes that promote the even distribution of plasmids after bacterial cell division. The bacterial artificial chromosome's usual insert size is 150\u2013350 kbp. A similar cloning vector called a PAC has also been produced from the DNA of P1 bacteriophage.\nBACs were often used to sequence the genomes of organisms in genome projects, for example the Human Genome Project, though they have been replaced by more modern technologies. In BAC sequencing, short piece of the organism's DNA is amplified as an insert in BACs, and then sequenced. Finally, the sequenced parts are rearranged \"in silico\", resulting in the genomic sequence of the organism. BACs were replaced with faster and less laborious sequencing methods like whole genome shotgun sequencing and now more recently next-gen sequencing.\nDisease modeling.\nInherited.\nBACs are now being utilized to a greater extent in modeling genetic disease, often alongside transgenic mice. BACs have been useful in this field as complex genes may have several regulatory sequences upstream of the encoding sequence, including various promoter sequences that will govern a gene's expression level. BACs have been used to some degree of success with mice when studying neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's disease or as in the case of aneuploidy associated with Down syndrome. There have also been instances when they have been used to study specific oncogenes associated with cancers. They are transferred over to these genetic disease models by electroporation/transformation, transfection with a suitable virus or microinjection. BACs can also be utilized to detect genes or large sequences of interest and then used to map them onto the human chromosome using BAC arrays. BACs are preferred for these kind of genetic studies because they accommodate much larger sequences without the risk of rearrangement, and are therefore more stable than other types of cloning vectors.\nInfectious.\nThe genomes of several large DNA viruses and RNA viruses have been cloned as BACs. These constructs are referred to as \"infectious clones\", as transfection of the BAC construct into host cells is sufficient to initiate viral infection. The infectious property of these BACs has made the study of many viruses such as the herpesviruses, poxviruses and coronaviruses more accessible. Molecular studies of these viruses can now be achieved using genetic approaches to mutate the BAC while it resides in bacteria. Such genetic approaches rely on either linear or circular targeting vectors to carry out homologous recombination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61256", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61256", "title": "Twenty-second century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61257", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61257", "title": "Twenty-third century", "text": ""}
{"id": "61258", "revid": "1320192187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61258", "title": "Rod Steiger", "text": "American actor (1925\u20132002)\nRodney Stephen Steiger ( ; April 14, 1925 \u2013 July 9, 2002) was an American actor, noted for his portrayal of offbeat, often volatile and crazed characters. Ranked as \"one of Hollywood's most charismatic and dynamic stars\", he is closely associated with the art of method acting, embodying the characters he played, which at times led to clashes with directors and co-stars. He starred as Marlon Brando's mobster brother Charley in \"On the Waterfront\" (1954), the title character Sol Nazerman in \"The Pawnbroker\" (1964) which won him the Silver Bear for Best Actor, and as police chief Bill Gillespie opposite Sidney Poitier in the film \"In the Heat of the Night\" (1967) which won him the Academy Award for Best Actor.\nSteiger was born in Westhampton, New York, the son of a vaudevillian. He had a difficult childhood, running away from home to escape an alcoholic mother at the age of 16. After serving in the South Pacific during World War II, he began his acting career with television roles in 1947, and went on to garner critical acclaim for his portrayal of the main character in the teleplay \"Marty\" (1953). He made his stage debut in 1946, in a production of \"Curse You, Jack Dalton!\" at the Civic Repertory Theatre of Newark, and subsequently appeared in productions such as \"An Enemy of the People\" (1950), Clifford Odets's \"Night Music\" (1951), \"Seagulls Over Sorrento\" (1952), and \"Rashomon\" (1959).\nSteiger made his film debut in Fred Zinnemann's \"Teresa\" in 1951, and subsequently appeared in films such as \"The Big Knife\" (1955), \"Oklahoma!\" (1955), \"Jubal\" (1956), \"Across the Bridge\" (1957), and \"Al Capone\" (1959). After his performance in \"The Pawnbroker\" in 1964, in which he played an embittered Jewish Holocaust survivor working as a pawnbroker in New York City, he portrayed an opportunistic Russian politician in David Lean's \"Doctor Zhivago\" (1965). \"In the Heat of the Night\" (1967) won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Actor for Steiger, who was lauded for his performance as a Mississippi police chief who learns to respect an African-American officer (Poitier) as they search for a killer. The following year, he played a serial killer of many guises in \"No Way to Treat a Lady\".\nDuring the 1970s, Steiger increasingly turned to European productions in his search for more demanding roles. He portrayed Napoleon Bonaparte in \"Waterloo\" (1970), a Mexican bandit in Sergio Leone's \"Duck, You Sucker!\" (1971), Benito Mussolini in \"Last Days of Mussolini\" (1975), and ended the decade playing a disturbed priest in\" The Amityville Horror\" (1979). By the 1980s, heart problems and depression took their toll on Steiger's career, and he found it difficult to find employment, agreeing to appear in low-budget B movies. One of his final roles was as judge H. Lee Sarokin in the prison drama \"The Hurricane\" (1999), which reunited him with \"In the Heat of the Night\" director Norman Jewison. Steiger was married five times, and had a daughter, opera singer Anna Steiger, and a son, Michael Steiger. He died of pneumonia and kidney failure as a result of complications from surgery for a gallbladder tumor in 2002, aged 77, in Los Angeles. His fifth wife was Joan Benedict Steiger.\nEarly life and acting background.\nSteiger was born on April 14, 1925, in Westhampton, New York, the only child of Lorraine (n\u00e9e Driver) and Frederick Steiger, of French, Scottish, and German descent. Rod was raised as a Lutheran. He never knew his father, a vaudevillian who had been part of a travelling song-and-dance team with Steiger's mother, but was told that he was a handsome Latino-looking man, who was a talented musician and dancer. Biographer Tom Hutchinson describes him as a \"shadowy, fugitive figure\", one who \"haunted\" Rod throughout his life and was an \"invisible presence and unseen influence\".\nHutchinson described Steiger's mother as \"plump, energetic and small, with long auburn hair\". She had a good singing voice and nearly became a Hollywood actress, but after a leg surgery permanently impaired her walking ability, she gave up acting and turned to alcohol. As a result, she quit show business and moved away from Westhampton to raise her son. They moved through several towns, including Irvington and Bloomfield, before settling in Newark, New Jersey. Her alcoholism caused Steiger much embarrassment, and the family was frequently mocked by other children and their parents within the community. At the age of five he was sexually abused by a pedophile who lured him in with a butterfly collection. Steiger said of his troubled family background: \"If you had the choice of having the childhood you experienced, with your alcoholic mother and being the famous actor you are today, or having a loving, secure childhood and not being famous, which would you take? A loving, secure childhood in a New York minute\". During the last 11 years of her life, Steiger's mother stayed sober and regularly attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. Steiger recalled: \"I was so proud of her. She turned herself around. She came alive again\".\nDuring his childhood, and owing to his considerable strength and bulk, Steiger became known as \"The Rock\". Despite being mocked over his mother's alcoholism, he was a popular figure at school and an able softball player. He displayed an interest in writing poetry and acting during his adolescent years, and appeared in several school plays while at West Side High School in Newark. Tired of fighting with his mother, he ran away from home at age sixteen to join the United States Navy during World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI realised that they had killed their first human beings. Everything in their life, religion, society, parents had conditioned them not to kill. They were shocked that they had killed. To see this at first hand was shocking, but it was eventually useful for me as an actor even though it was a very difficult experience. That look in the eye was unforgettable.\n \u2014 Steiger recalling his encounters with Marines who fought on Guadalcanal \nHe enlisted on May 11, 1942, and received his training at the US Naval Training Station in Newport, Rhode Island. He joined the newly commissioned USS \"Taussig\" (DD-746) on May 20, 1944. While serving as a torpedoman on destroyers, he saw action in the South Pacific, including the Battle of Iwo Jima. Steiger later commented: \"I loved the Navy. I was stupid enough to think I was being heroic.\" His experiences during the war haunted him for the rest of his life, particularly the loss of Americans during the Battle of Iwo Jima, as well as the sinking of vessels by the \"Taussig\" which were known to have women and children aboard. On December 17, 1944, off the coast of Luzon in the Philippines, Steiger and the \"Taussig\" encountered Typhoon Cobra, which became known as \"Halsey's Typhoon\", with winds reaching one hundred knots (115\u00a0mph) and waves. As a result, three U.S. destroyers were lost, but the \"Taussig\" survived, with Steiger tying a rope to himself on deck and flattening himself as waves engulfed the ship.\nAfter the war, the GI Bill paid for his rent at a room on West 81st Street in New York City, an income of just over $100 a month, and four years of schooling. He initially found a job oiling machines and washing floors. He decided to attend a drama class, primarily because of its membership of attractive young women. Known as the Civil Service Little Theater group, it was conducted by the Office of Dependents and Beneficiaries, where he was employed at the time. This led him to start a two-year course at the New School for Social Research, run by German \u00e9migr\u00e9 Erwin Piscator. During one audition, Steiger was cast after barely uttering a few words, the director exclaiming he had a \"fresh, wonderful quality\". Another talented pupil at the time was Walter Matthau, who dubbed the institution \"The Neurotic School for Sexual Research\". Steiger was surprised to discover his own talent as an actor, and he was encouraged to pursue further studies at the Dramatic Workshop. One of the main reasons he wanted to be an actor was to regain public respect for his family name, which had so humiliated him during childhood. Another important factor was his belief that he did not \"have the temperament for a regular job\", and would have ended up a miserable, violent alcoholic. His only role model as an actor was Paul Muni, who he thought was \"the greatest\", although he also had a deep respect for French actor Harry Baur and, according to biographer Hutchinson, he admired Charlie Chaplin \"to the point of adoration\".\nCareer.\nEarly career and breakthrough (1946\u20131956).\nSteiger made his stage debut in a production of \"Curse You, Jack Dalton!\" (1946) at the Civic Repertory Theatre of Newark. Subsequent to this, he received an invitation from one of his teachers, Daniel Mann, to attend the Actors Studio, established by Elia Kazan, Robert Lewis, and Cheryl Crawford in October 1947. It was here, along with Marlon Brando, Karl Malden, and Eli Wallach, that he studied method acting, which became deeply engrained in him. Lacking matin\u00e9e idol looks, much like Malden and Wallach, he began pursuing a career as a character actor rather than as a leading man. Steiger's stage work continued in 1950, with a minor role as a townperson in a stage production of \"An Enemy of the People\" at the Music Box Theatre. His first major role on Broadway came in Clifford Odets's production of \"Night Music\" (1951), where he played A. L. Rosenberger. The play was held at the ANTA Playhouse. The following year, he played a telegraphist in the play \"Seagulls Over Sorrento\", performed at the John Golden Theatre beginning on September 11, 1952.\nSteiger's early roles, although minor, were numerous, especially in television series during the early 1950s, when he appeared in more than 250 live television productions over a five-year period. He was spotted by Fred Coe, NBC's manager of program development, who increasingly gave him bigger parts. Steiger considered television to be what repertory theatre had been for an earlier generation, and saw it as a place where he could test his talent with a plethora of different roles. Soon afterward he began receiving positive reviews from critics such as John Crosby, who noted that Steiger regularly gave \"effortless persuasive performances\". Among Steiger's credits were \"Danger\" (1950\u201353), \"Lux Video Theatre\" (1951), \"Out There\" (1951), \"Tales of Tomorrow\" (1952\u201353), \"The Gulf Playhouse\" (1953), \"Medallion Theatre\" (1953), \"Goodyear Television Playhouse\" (1953), and as Shakespeare's Romeo in \"The First Command Performance of Romeo and Juliet (1957)\" episode of \"You Are There\" in 1954, under director Sidney Lumet. He continued to make appearances in various playhouse television productions, appearing in five episodes of \"Kraft Theatre\" (1952\u201354), which earned him praise from critics, six episodes of \"The Philco Television Playhouse\" (1951\u201355) and two episodes of \"Schlitz Playhouse of Stars\" (1957\u201358). Steiger made his big screen debut in 1953, with a small role in Fred Zinnemann's \"Teresa\", shot in 1951. Steiger, who described himself as \"cocky\", won over Zinnemann by praising his direction. Zinnemann recalled that Steiger was \"very popular, extremely articulate and full of remarkable memories\", and the two remained highly respectful of each other for life.\nOn May 24, 1953, Steiger played the title role in Paddy Chayefsky's \"Marty\" episode of the Goodyear Television Playhouse. The role had originally been intended for Martin Ritt, who later became a director. \"Marty\" is the story of a lonely and homely butcher from the Bronx in search of love. The play was a critical success that increased Steiger's public exposure; Tom Stempel noted that he brought \"striking intensity to his performance as Marty, particularly in giving us Marty's pain\". As Steiger refused to sign a seven-year studio contract, he was replaced with Ernest Borgnine in the film \"Marty\" (1955), which won the Academy Award for Best Picture, as well as the Best Actor Oscar for Borgnine. 1953 proved to be Steiger's breakthrough year; he garnered Sylvania Awards for \"Marty\" and four other best performances of the year\u2014as Vishinsky and Rudolf Hess in two episodes of \"You Are There\", as gangster Dutch Schultz in a thriller, and as a radar operator in \"My Brother's Keeper\".\nFor his role as Charley \"the Gent\", the brother of Marlon Brando's character in Elia Kazan's \"On the Waterfront\" (1954), Steiger was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Film writer Leo Braudy wrote that the \"incessantly repeated images of its taxicab confrontation between Brando and Rod Steiger have made the film iconic\". The taxicab scene took eleven hours to shoot and was heavily scripted, despite Brando fuelling the popular myth in his autobiography that the scene was improvised. Brando stated that seven takes were needed because Steiger could not stop crying, which Steiger found to be unfair and inaccurate. Although Steiger retained great respect for Brando as an actor, he disliked him as a person and frequently complained during the production of Brando's \"predilection for leaving the set\" immediately after shooting his scenes. Steiger later remarked: \"We didn't get to know each other at all. He always flew solo and I haven't seen him since the film. I do resent him saying he's just a hooker, and that actors are whores\". Steiger also responded unfavorably when he learned that Kazan had been awarded an honorary Oscar by the Academy in 1999. In a 1999 interview with \"BBC News\", Steiger said he probably would not have done \"On the Waterfront\" if he'd known at the time that Kazan had provided the House Un-American Activities Committee with names of performers suspected of being Communists.\nSteiger played Jud Fry in the film version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical \"Oklahoma!\" (1955), in which he performed his own singing. It was one of the biggest location film productions of the 1950s, shot near Nogales, Arizona, with a crew of 325 people and some 70 trucks. Steiger portrayed a disturbed, emotionally isolated version of Jud, which television channel Turner Classic Movies (TCM) believed brought a \"complexity to the character that went far beyond the stock musical villain\". Steiger observed that James Dean, who auditioned for the role that went to Gordon MacRae, was a \"nice kid absorbed by his own ego, so much so that it was destroying him\", which he thought led to his death. Dean reportedly gave Steiger his prized copy of Ernest Hemingway's book \"Death in the Afternoon\", and had underlined every appearance of the word \"death\".\nLater in 1955, Steiger played an obnoxious film tycoon, loosely based on Columbia boss Harry Cohn, opposite Jack Palance and Ida Lupino in Robert Aldrich's film noir \"The Big Knife\". Steiger bleached his hair for the part, sought inspiration for the role from Russian actor Vladimir Sokoloff, read a book about the Treblinka extermination camp to understand his character thoroughly, and visited the perfume department of a store in Beverly Hills, California, to try to understand his character's contempt for women. Steiger and Palance did not get along during the production, and in one scene Palance threw several record albums at Steiger in frustration, feeling that he was trying to steal the scene. Steiger earned critical acclaim later that year for a role as a prosecuting major in Otto Preminger's \"The Court-Martial of Billy Mitchell\", alongside Gary Cooper and Charles Bickford.\nSteiger played the character \"Pinky\" in Columbia Pictures' western, \"Jubal\" (1956), which co-starred Glenn Ford and Ernest Borgnine. Steiger's character is a rancher, a \"sneering baddie\", who becomes jealous when his former mistress becomes attracted to Ford's character. Ford noted Steiger's deep commitment to method acting during production, considering him to be a \"fine actor but a real strange fellow\". Steiger disliked the experience and frequently clashed with director Delmer Daves, who was more favorable to Ford's lighthearted take on the film. Upon its release in April 1956, a writer for \"Variety\" was impressed with the \"evil venom\" displayed by his character, and remarked that there had not \"been as hateful a screen heavy around in a long time\".\nIn Mark Robson's 1956 boxing film noir \"The Harder They Fall\", Steiger played a crooked boxing promoter who hires a sports journalist (Humphrey Bogart). Steiger referred to Bogart as \"a professional\" who had \"tremendous authority\" during filming.\nStruggling actor (1957\u20131963).\nSteiger appeared in three films released in 1957. The first was John Farrow's film noir \"The Unholy Wife\", in which he played a wealthy Napa Valley vintner who marries a \"femme fatale\" named Phyllis (Diana Dors). In its original review of the film, \"The New York Times\" described Steiger's performance as \"curious\" further stating that the actor's voice modulation \"ranges from Marlon Brando to Ronald Colman and back\". During the production of Samuel Fuller's \"Run of the Arrow\", in which he played a Confederate army veteran who refuses to accept defeat following the surrender of General Robert E. Lee at Appomattox at the end of the American Civil War, Steiger badly sprained his ankle before shooting one of the battle scenes and was unable to walk, let alone run. Fuller instead got one of the Native American extras to run in Steiger's place, which is why the scene was shot showing only the feet, instead of using close-ups. Steiger had researched the history behind the film and decided to play the character as an Irishman, becoming \"the first Irish cowboy\" as he put it. Later that year, Steiger took the lead role in the British thriller \"Across the Bridge\", in which he played a German conman with British citizenship who goes into hiding in Mexico after embezzling company funds. Film critic Dennis Schwartz stated that Steiger gave \"one of his greatest performances\".\nSteiger portrayed a mastermind criminal seeking to obtain a $500,000 ransom, opposite James Mason and Inger Stevens, in Andrew L. Stone's \"Cry Terror!\" (1958) for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Paul Beckley of the \"Herald Tribune\" had thought Steiger \"superbly laconic\", but Dennis Schwartz dismissed the film as \"an ill-conceived attempt\" with \"too many coincidences and contrived plot points to sustain interest\". The following year, Steiger appeared with Claire Bloom (whom he later married) in a Fay and Michael Kanin stage production of Akira Kurosawa's 1950 film, \"Rashomon\", where he enacted the role of the bandit originally played by Toshiro Mifune. A major success, it was lauded by critics and nominated for three Tony Awards. Robert Coleman of the \"Daily Mirror\" described Steiger's performance as \"magnificently animalish\", while Kenneth Tynan of \"The New Yorker\" thought the acting helped set new standards for Broadway. The same year, Steiger portrayed iconic mobster Al Capone in the film of the same name. Steiger was particularly keen on demonstrating the showiness of Capone, speaking thunderously, slinging a camel-hair coat over his shoulders and wearing his hat at a jaunty angle. The film, noted for its deglamorized portrayal of the subject, earned Steiger a Laurel Award for Best Male Dramatic Performance nomination. Although Hutchinson, author of \"Rod Steiger: Memoirs of a Friendship\", perceived Steiger's portrayal of Capone to be more of a caricature, George Anastasia and Glen Macnow, authors of the book \"The Ultimate Book of Gangster Movies\", described it as one of the best screen portrayals of Capone.\nFollowing the success of \"Al Capone\", Steiger played sophisticated thief Paul Mason, who masterminds a caper to steal $4 million in French francs from the underground vault of the casino of Monte Carlo, in the Henry Hathaway heist film \"Seven Thieves\" (1960). Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\" gave a positive review of the film, praising the \"nerve-rackingly delicate plot\" and the \"most elaborate roles\" of Steiger and his co-star, Edward G. Robinson. The following year, he took the part of a prison psychiatrist who tries to cure the psychological demons of Stuart Whitman's character in \"The Mark\". Steiger's performance was so convincing that, after the film was released, he received a call from a psychiatric institution asking him to attend one of their board meetings. \"The Mark\" was followed by a role in the European film production of \"World in My Pocket\" alongside Nadja Tiller. Steiger increasingly played in films in Italy and France during this period. Not only did he believe he had greater credibility and esteem as an actor in Europe, but he approved of the more relaxed filming schedule prevalent there at that time.\nIn 1962, Steiger appeared on Broadway in \"Moby Dick\u2014Rehearsed\", at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre, as well as playing a detective searching for a scientist's (Alan Ladd) mugger in Philip Leacock's \"13 West Street\" for Columbia Pictures. Steiger played a small role of a destroyer commander among the large ensemble cast of \"The Longest Day\", which included John Wayne, Richard Todd, Robert Mitchum, Richard Burton, Sean Connery, and Henry Fonda. According to co-star Richard Burton, Steiger had privately admitted to him that he was in financial trouble at the time and had a face lift, which Burton thought made him look like \"one half of a naked ass-hole\". The following year, Steiger played ruthless Neapolitan land developer and city councilman Edoardo Nottola, who uses his political power to make personal profit in a large scale suburban real estate deal, in Francesco Rosi's Italian drama film \"Hands over the City\" (1963). According to biographer Francesco Bolzoni, Rosi had cast Steiger in the Italian-language film because he had wanted \"a rich interpreter of great capacity\" in the part of the land developer.\nMainstream film acclaim (1964\u20131969).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWell they never went away. 'The Pawnbroker', directed by Sidney Lumet, was an independent, so was 'The Sergeant'. They're just coming back stronger because the greed finally ran into a wall, and what proved it was all these small independent films getting nominations and winning awards where all these multi-million dollar films did nothing, and that really shook them up. I would always say the bigger the budget, the less imagination. In the old days, they had designers who, if they had to create a battleship, would get a bit of net and a bit of board and make one. Now there is no imagination. If they want a destroyer now, they ring up the government and get a real one. There aren't any challenges any more; they're home decorators.\n \u2014 Steiger on appearing in independent films \nShortly after \"Hands over the City\", Steiger agreed to appear in another Italian film, \"Time of Indifference\" (1964), in which he starred opposite Claudia Cardinale and Shelley Winters. Though Steiger's powerful performance was unaffected, the production was marred by a dispute between director Francesco Maselli and producer Franco Cristaldi, with one wanting it to be a purely political film and the other wanting emphasis on the erotic subplot and his relationship with Cardinale. In Sidney Lumet's gritty drama \"The Pawnbroker\" (1964), Steiger played an embittered, emotionally withdrawn survivor of the Holocaust living in New York City. Richard Harland Smith of TCM notes that Steiger's career was waning at the time, and he had to \"scramble for paying gigs for a decade\" before getting this part. Steiger agreed to a reduced fee of $50,000. He read Edward Lewis Wallant's novel and the script many times to develop an intimate understanding of the character, and insisted on reducing his lines to make his character more realistic and alienated from society. Lumet noted that during the production Steiger had a tendency to be overly dramatic, stating: \"Sure, Rod has weaknesses of rhetoric, but you can talk them through with him. I explained that this solitary Jew could not rise to heights of emotion; he had been hammered by life and by people. The faith he had to find was in other people, because God had betrayed him.\"\nSteiger remarked of the film: \"I think my best work is in \"The Pawnbroker\". The last scene, where I find the boy dead on the street. I think that's the highest moment, whatever it may be, with my talent.\" He drew upon inspiration for this climactic scene, in which he appears to show his frustration through a silent scream, from Picasso's \"Guernica\", which depicts war-ravaged villagers. Cecil Wilson of the \"Daily Mail\" wrote that Steiger's character \"seems to encompass all the agony ever inflicted on man\". Although the film attracted controversy and was accused of antisemitism, Steiger was widely acclaimed for his performance, which garnered him the prize for Best Actor at the Berlin International Film Festival and his second Best Actor nomination at the Oscars. Steiger was certain that he had produced an Oscar-winning performance; he was shocked when he lost to Lee Marvin.\nIn 1965, Steiger played an effeminate embalmer in Tony Richardson's comedy \"The Loved One\", about the funeral business in Los Angeles, based on the 1948 short satirical novel by Evelyn Waugh. His curly-haired appearance in the film was modeled on a bust of Apollo he once saw while meeting Richardson. Steiger offended Bosley Crowther of \"The New York Times\", who found his character repellent. His next role, as Komarovsky, a Russian politician and \"villainous opportunist\" who rapes Julie Christie's character in David Lean's \"Doctor Zhivago\" (1965), was one of his favorites. Steiger, one of only two Americans in the cast, was initially apprehensive about working with such great British actors as Ralph Richardson and Alec Guinness, and was pleased when the film was completed that he did not stand out as an American. The film was the biggest international box office draw of the 1960s, grossing $200 million worldwide. It has since been acclaimed as one of the greatest films ever made, and in 1998 was selected as the 39th best American film in the original AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list by the American Film Institute.\nSteiger had intended returning to the stage, and had signed on to play the title character in Bertolt Brecht's \"Galileo\", at the Lincoln Center Repertory Company in April 1967, but the production was cancelled when he became ill. Steiger won the Best Actor Oscar for his portrayal of Chief of Police Bill Gillespie in \"In the Heat of the Night\", opposite Sidney Poitier. He played a Southern police chief searching for a murderer. A stereotypical Southern racist, he jumps to the conclusion that the culprit is Virgil Tibbs (Poitier), an African-American man passing through town after visiting his mother, who later turns out to be an experienced homicide detective from Philadelphia. The film deals with the way the two men interact and join forces in solving the crime, as Steiger's Gillespie learns to greatly respect the black man he initially took to be a criminal. Steiger drew upon his experience in the Navy with a Southerner named \"King\", remembering his accent. Poitier considered Steiger and Spencer Tracy to have been the finest actors he had ever worked with, remarking in 1995, \"He's so good he made me dig into bags I never knew I had.\" A. D. Murphy of \"Variety\" described Steiger's performance as \"outstanding\", writing: \"Steiger's transformation from a diehard Dixie bigot to a man who learns to respect Poitier stands out in smooth comparison to the wandering solution of the murder.\" Steiger won a plethora of other awards, including a BAFTA, a Golden Globe, and awards for Best Actor from the National Society of Film Critics and the New York Film Critics Circle.\nIn 1968, Steiger played a serial killer opposite George Segal in Jack Smight's black comedy thriller \"No Way to Treat a Lady\". During the course of the film, he adopts various disguises, including those of an Irish priest, a New York City policeman, a German plumber, and a gay hairdresser, to avoid being identified, and to put his victims at ease, before strangling them and painting a pair of lips on their foreheads with garish red lipstick. The film and Steiger's performance were critically acclaimed, with Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" highlighting Steiger's \"beautifully uninhibited performance as a hammy\", and a writer for \"Time Out\" describing him as \"brilliant as a sort of Boston strangler, son of a great actress who has left her boy with a mother fixation\".\nLater in 1968, Steiger played a repressed gay non-commissioned officer opposite John Phillip Law in John Flynn's \"The Sergeant\" for Warner Bros.-Seven Arts, which earned him the David di Donatello Award for Best Foreign Actor. Despite the award win, film critic Pauline Kael of \"The New Yorker\" was particularly critical of the casting of Steiger as a homosexual and felt that he was \"totally outside his range\", to which Steiger concurred that he was ineffective.\nSteiger was cast as a short-tempered tattooed man with soon-to-be ex-wife Claire Bloom in the science fiction picture \"The Illustrated Man\" (1969). The film was a critical and commercial failure, and Ray Bradbury said: \"Rod was very good in it, but it wasn't a good film... the script was terrible\". Steiger had better luck alongside Bloom later that year in Peter Hall's British drama \"Three into Two Won't Go\", playing an Irishman who cheats on his wife with a young hiker. It was entered into the Berlin International Film Festival and became the 19th most popular film at the UK box office in 1969.\nHistorical roles and declining fortunes (1970\u20131981).\nSteiger was offered the title role in \"Patton\" (1970), but turned it down because he did not want to glorify war. The role was then given to George C. Scott, who won the Best Actor Oscar for his performance. Steiger called this refusal his \"dumbest career move\", remarking, \"I got on my high horse. I thought I was a pacifist.\" Instead, he chose to portray Napoleon Bonaparte opposite Christopher Plummer in Sergei Bondarchuk's \"Waterloo\" (1970), a co-production between the Soviet Union and Italy. Anatoly Efros wrote: \"I watched with extraordinary respect, no, that is not the right word, with enthusiasm, the acting of Rod Steiger in the role of Napoleon in Waterloo\", while literary critic Daniel S. Burt describes Steiger's Napoleon as an \"unusual interpretation\", finding him less convincing than Plummer's Wellington.\nIn 1971, Steiger played a chauvinistic big game hunter, explorer and war hero opposite Susannah York in Mark Robson's \"Happy Birthday, Wanda June\", before agreeing to star alongside James Coburn as Mexican bandit Juan Miranda in Sergio Leone's \"Duck, You Sucker!\", which was alternatively titled \"A Fistful of Dynamite\". Leone was initially dissatisfied with his performance in that he played his character as a serious, Zapata-like figure. As a result, tension grew between Steiger and Leone, including one incident that ended with Steiger walking off during the filming of the scene where Juan's stagecoach is destroyed. After the film's completion, Leone and Steiger were content with the final result, and Steiger praised Leone for his skills as a director. Steiger auditioned for the role of Michael Corleone in Francis Ford Coppola's \"The Godfather\" (1972), a film adaptation of Italian American author Mario Puzo's 1969 novel of the same name, but Puzo felt that Steiger was too old for the part and rejected him.\nSteiger played a rural Tennessee patriarch and father of Jeff Bridges, at odds with Robert Ryan's character, in \"Lolly-Madonna XXX\" (1973), which received mixed reviews. Later that year he was cast as the turban-wearing German officer Guenther von Lutz in Duccio Tessari's Italian war comedy \"The Heroes\", opposite Rod Taylor, and appeared as \"foul-mouthed Sicilian mobster\" Eugenio Giannini opposite Gian Maria Volont\u00e9's Lucky Luciano in Francesco Rosi's film of the same name.\nIn 1975, Steiger portrayed Italian dictator Benito Mussolini in Carlo Lizzani's \"Last Days of Mussolini\", which received a positive critical reception. He appeared in Claude Chabrol's French picture \"Innocents with Dirty Hands\", playing the role of Louis Wormser, the wealthy alcoholic husband of Romy Schneider's character Julie Wormser. It was poorly received by critics, and Steiger found the director, whom he had admired, a bitter disappointment. He was highly critical of Chabrol's lack of communication and aloofness from the production, and preference for playing chess on set instead of talking through scenes. Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\" dismissed it as \"little more than a soap opera\", writing: \"The performances are of a piece\u2014uniformly atrocious. Mr. Steiger surpasses his own earlier records for lumbering busyness. Within his first few minutes on screen he (1) gets drunk, (2) whines, (3) pleads for understanding, (4) weeps and (5) goes to bed alone.\" Later that year, Steiger starred as an Irish Republican Army terrorist who plans to blow up the Houses of Parliament in Don Sharp's British thriller \"Hennessy\". John Simon of \"New York Magazine\" wrote: \"This fellow Hennessy, as played by Rod Steiger, is about as interesting and likable as a Guy Fawkes dummy.\"\nThe following year, Steiger portrayed the comic actor W. C. Fields in an Arthur Hiller biopic, \"W. C. Fields and Me\", for Universal Pictures. The screenplay, which was based on a memoir by Carlotta Monti, who was Fields' mistress for the last 14 years of his life, was penned by Bob Merrill. Steiger read extensively about Fields in preparation for the role, and developed an encyclopaedic knowledge of his career and personal life. He concluded that he would base his characterization around his performance in \"The Bank Dick\" (1940). One day, Fields' mistress Monti turned up on set, and watched the scene where he briefly thanks everybody. Nervous that she might not approve, he broke down in tears after Monti met him after the scene and fondly said \"Woody, Woody, Woody, My Woody\", a nickname used only by those very close to Fields. Despite the energy Steiger put into the picture, like the actor's previous recent films, it was poorly received by critics. Canby called it \"dreadful\" and described Steiger's portrayal of Fields as a \"wax dummy of a character\". Lucia Bozzola of \"The New York Times\" later referred to Steiger's portrayal of Fields as \"superb\", but noted that his Hollywood career had \"undeniably fallen from his 1950s and '60s heights\".\nSteiger played Pontius Pilate in Franco Zeffirelli's TV miniseries \"Jesus of Nazareth\" (1977). Stacy Keach, who portrayed Barabbas, expressed his joy at the opportunity to work with Steiger, describing him as \"generous and opinionated\". In 1978, Steiger played a senator in Norman Jewison's \"F.I.S.T.\", opposite Sylvester Stallone, who played a Cleveland warehouse worker involved in the labor union leadership of the fictional organisation named Federation of Inter-State Truckers. \"Love and Bullets\", later that year, in which Steiger appeared as a mafia boss, was poorly received; Roger Ebert dismissed it as a \"hopelessly confused hodgepodge of chases, killings, enigmatic meetings and separations, and insufferably overacted scenes by Steiger alternating with alarmingly underacted scenes by [Charles] Bronson\". The following year, Steiger was cast as a general opposite Richard Burton and Robert Mitchum in Andrew V. McLaglen's war film \"Breakthrough\", set on the Western Front. In \"The Amityville Horror\" (1979), Steiger appeared as a disturbed priest, who is invited to perform an exorcism on a haunted house. Again Steiger was accused of overacting; Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"Mr. Steiger bellows and weeps and overdoes absolutely everything. He won't even pick up the phone before it's rung 12 or 15 times.\" Pauline Kael thought that Steiger's \"spiritual agony was enough to shatter the camera lens\".\nIn 1980, Steiger received two Genie Award for Best Performance by a Foreign Actor nominations for his roles in \"Klondike Fever\" and \"The Lucky Star\", both Canadian productions. \"Klondike Fever\" is based on Jack London's journey from San Francisco to the Klondike gold fields in 1898. Steiger revisited his role as Mussolini in \"Lion of the Desert\", a production that was financed by Muammar Gaddafi, and which co-starred Anthony Quinn as Bedouin tribal leader Omar Mukhtar, fighting the Italian army in the years leading up to World War II. The Italian authorities reportedly banned the film in 1982, as it was considered damaging to the army, and it was not shown on Italian television until a state visit by Gaddafi in 2009. It received critical acclaim in Britain, where it was praised in particular for the quality of its battle scenes. Later in 1981, Steiger won the Montr\u00e9al World Film Festival Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of white-bearded Orthodox rabbi Reb Saunders in Jeremy Kagan's \"The Chosen\". Janet Maslin commented that Steiger's \"slow, rolling delivery\" was more \"numbing than prepossessing\", though a critic from \"Variety\" thought it an \"exceptional performance as the somewhat tyrannical but loving patriarch\".\nB-movies and criticism (1982\u20131994).\nAfter his open-heart surgery in 1979, clinical depression and health problems during the 1980s directly affected Steiger's career, and he often turned to B movies, low-budget, independent productions, and TV miniseries. He admitted that during this period he accepted \"everything I was offered\", and knew that many of the films he appeared in were not great, but wanted to demonstrate his strong work ethic despite his issues. He later regretted the poorer films in which he appeared during the 1980s, and wished he had done more stage work. He sank into an even deeper depression when he was not involved in acting, but it bothered him more that his acting career had taken a turn for the worse and was no longer challenging. The major studio producers were wary of his problems and considered him a liability. Steiger spoke about the experience to a younger colleague while advising: \"Never tell anyone if you've got heart problems, kid. Never.\" His reputation as a fine character actor remained intact, and Joel Hirschhorn at the time considered his talent to be \"as strong as ever\".\nIn 1984, Steiger starred as a detective assigned to investigate the murder of a Chicago psychoanalyst (Roger Moore), a man whom he detests from a previous case, in Bryan Forbes's \"The Naked Face\". Richard Christiansen of the \"Chicago Tribune\" referred to it as a \"wimpy suspense movie shot in Chicago in the fall of 1983, [that] doesn't do much good for the city or for anyone connected with it\", and considered Steiger to be \"acting in his high hysteria gear\", who \"snarls and whines and overacts\". Steiger took a break from cinema in the mid-1980s, during which he appeared in the Yorkshire Television mini-series \"The Glory Boys\" (1984) with Anthony Perkins, and \"Hollywood Wives\" (1985) with Angie Dickinson. Steiger and Perkins were at loggerheads during the production of \"The Glory Boys\". Perkins resented the fact that Steiger insisted on a bigger trailer and felt that Steiger was trying to steal scenes from him, while Steiger had thought Perkins \"so jittery and jinxed by the chemicals he was taking\" that he felt sorry for him and believed that he was jeopardizing the success of the film. Steiger also performed on Joni Mitchell's 1985 album \"Dog Eat Dog\", where he provided the voice of an evangelist in the song \"Tax Free\".\nSteiger played a villain/antagonist role in the Argentine-American film \"Catch the Heat\" (1987), an action/martial arts picture about two undercover agents of the law who fight against an American-Brazilian drug baron who smuggles drugs into the United States inside showgirls' breast implants. According to director Fred Olen Ray, it was pulled from distribution within a week of release. In 1988, Steiger and Yvonne De Carlo played a spooky elderly couple with developmentally delayed children in John Hough's horror film \"American Gothic\". Universally panned by the critics, Caryn James of \"The New York Times\" wrote: \"Mr. Steiger addresses the camera as if he were reciting Shakespeare, he is truly, straightforwardly, hilariously bad.\" During the last year of the decade he played authority figures, including a mayor in \"The January Man\", and as Judge Prescott in \"Tennessee Waltz\". Although Steiger admitted that his performance in \"The January Man\" was \"way over the top\", he enjoyed the experience, thereby marking a positive turning point after a period of clinical depression.\nIn 1990, Steiger starred in \"Men of Respect\", a crime drama film adaptation of William Shakespeare's play \"Macbeth\". He played a character based on King Duncan, opposite John Turturro as Mike Battaglia (Macbeth), who plays a Mafia hitman who climbs his way to the top by killing Steiger's character. The film was critically panned, with Roger Ebert awarding it one star out of four, describing the concept as a \"very, very bad idea\". Steiger played another mobster, Sam Giancana, two years later in the miniseries \"Sinatra\" (1992).\nSteiger portrayed a reverend living in a small town in the American South in the macabre Merchant Ivory film production \"The Ballad of the Sad Caf\u00e9\" (1991), co-starring Vanessa Redgrave and Keith Carradine. The film met with generally lukewarm reviews, though it was entered into the 41st Berlin International Film Festival. Steiger auditioned for the part of an elderly Irishman in Ron Howard's \"Far and Away\", starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman. Steiger, who had long been bald, was ordered by Howard to wear a wig to the audition. He resented the fact that Howard insisted on taping the audition, which he believed to be a form of humiliation for actors, serving as after-dinner entertainment for the Hollywood executives. Steiger never forgave Howard, whom he referred to as a \"cocksucker\", for rejecting him for the part and giving it to Cyril Cusack.\nIn 1993, Steiger portrayed an aging gynaecologist who terrorizes his urban neighbors in a rural community in Burlington, Vermont, in \"The Neighbor\". Dennis Schwartz considered it to have been one of Steiger's creepiest roles, though he thought that the poor script had rendered the role awkward and \"mildly entertaining in the sense that Steiger is asked to carry the film and hams it up\". The following year, Steiger agreed to play the role of a Cuban mob boss opposite Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone in Luis Llosa's thriller \"The Specialist\", citing its purpose as a \"$40 million commercial\" to show a new generation that he existed. Critics panned the film, which has a four percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 27 reviews as of July 2015. The role earned Steiger a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor nomination, and the film was listed in \"The Official Razzie Movie Guide\" as one of \"The 100 Most Enjoyably Bad Movies Ever Made\".\nLater work and final years (1995\u20132002).\nFollowing \"The Specialist\" (1994), Steiger appeared in \"Tom Clancy's Op Center\" (1995), a film that was edited down into a TV miniseries, and featured in a \"Columbo\" television film, \"Strange Bedfellows\". The following year, he took a minor role as Doc Wallace in the Dale Rosenbloom family drama \"Shiloh\". He reprised the role three years later in . Also in 1996, Steiger played a \"jingoistic top general\" who \"petitions the president to go nuclear in the middle of a global crisis\" in the ensemble Tim Burton production of \"Mars Attacks!\".\nIn 1997, Steiger played Tony Vago, the mob boss of Vincent Gallo's character in Kiefer Sutherland's \"Truth or Consequences, N.M.\", a gritty \"noir\" about a drug heist gone wrong. Steiger played judges in Antonio Banderas's comedy-drama \"Crazy in Alabama\" and in the prison drama, \"The Hurricane\", both in 1999, the latter of which tells the story of former middleweight boxer Rubin Carter, who was wrongly convicted of a triple homicide in a bar in Paterson, New Jersey. \"The Hurricane\" reunited Steiger with Norman Jewison, who had directed him in \"In the Heat of the Night\". Steiger portrayed H. Lee Sarokin, the judge responsible for freeing Carter. Sarokin thought it was a \"marvellous film\" that was Oscar-worthy, but found Steiger's portrayal as overacted and a \"little arrogant and pompous\".\nAfter a minor role as a \"bombastic priest\" in \"End of Days\" (1999), Steiger was one of the lead actors in Burt Reynolds's \"The Last Producer\" (2000), a film about a washed-up, veteran producer (Reynolds) who tries to re-enter the movie business by producing a new film. Steiger's last film role was as the billiard hall manager, Nick, in \"Poolhall Junkies\" (2002); it was poorly received by critics.\nPersonal life.\nSteiger was married five times: he married actress Sally Gracie (1952\u20131958), actress Claire Bloom (1959\u20131969), secretary Sherry Nelson (1973\u20131979), singer Paula Ellis (1986\u20131997) and actress Joan Benedict Steiger (married 2000 until his death). He had a daughter, opera singer Anna Steiger (born in 1960) by Bloom, and a son, Michael Steiger (born in 1993), from his marriage to Ellis. In an interview with journalist Kenneth Passingham, Steiger stated that Bloom was \"all I ever wanted in a woman\", and that \"maybe our marriage was better than most because we were both established when we met\". The couple bought a home in Malibu, California, a community that appealed to Steiger but which Bloom found boring. They also purchased an apartment in Manhattan and a cottage in County Galway, close to John Huston's home. Financial considerations led Steiger to sell their New York apartment in the mid-1970s. It upset him greatly when his marriage with Bloom ended in 1969 and that she quickly remarried Broadway producer Hillard Elkins the same year, a man whom Steiger had entrusted to care for her while he was away shooting \"Waterloo\". Steiger was also close friends with actress Elizabeth Taylor.\nSteiger was an outspoken critic of McCarthyism. He later clashed on the subject with Charlton Heston, and referred to Heston as \"America\u2019s favourite fascist.\" For example, Heston published a column in the \"Los Angeles Times\" saying that he was shocked that the American Film Institute had not honored Elia Kazan, who had cooperated with the House Un-American Activities Committee and named several Communists. Steiger wrote a response letter, describing himself as \"appalled, appalled, appalled,\" and saying that Kazan's actions had resulted in actors and writers being forced to drive cabs because they were blacklisted and even committing suicide as a result. Heston did not reply.\nSteiger suffered from depression throughout much of his life. He described himself as \"incapacitated for about eight years with clinical depression\" before his Oscar win for \"In The Heat of the Night\". His career problems from the 1970s onwards were often exacerbated by health issues. He underwent open-heart surgery in 1976 and again in 1979 and struggled with obesity, though certain roles, such as Napoleon, required him to intentionally gain weight. After the decline of his third marriage in 1979, a deep depression, partly a side effect of his surgery, negatively affected his career during the 1980s. He became increasingly reclusive during this period, often confining himself to his apartment, watching American football for several hours. He said of the experience: \"You begin to lose self-esteem. You don't walk, you don't shave and if no one was watching you'd go to the bathroom right where you were sitting\". He would lie in bed at night thinking, \"You'll never act again. Why bother? You're no good\". Despite these challenges, Steiger continued to act into the 1990s and early 2000s. In one of his final interviews, he stated that there was a stigma wrongfully attached to sufferers of depression and that it was caused by a chemical imbalance, not a mental disease. He commented: \"Pain must never be a source of shame. It's a part of life, it's part of humanity.\"\nDeath.\nSteiger died in a Westside hospital in Los Angeles on July 9, 2002, at age 77, of pneumonia and kidney failure as a result of complications from surgery for a gallbladder tumor. He was buried in Forest Lawn \u2013 Hollywood Hills Cemetery. The film \"Saving Shiloh\", released in 2006, was dedicated to his memory.\nActing style.\nSteiger was one of Hollywood's most respected character actors. Hutchinson described him as \"one of Hollywood's most charismatic and dynamic stars\". Yet for Hutchinson, Steiger remained \"out of sympathy with Hollywood\" during his career, believing that accomplished actors often struggle to find challenging films as they got older. Steiger was an \"effusive talent\" according to Lucia Bozzola of \"The New York Times\", and was particularly noted for his intense portrayal of offbeat, often volatile and crazed characters. After \"On the Waterfront\" (1954), Steiger became somewhat typecast for playing tough characters and villains, and grew increasingly frustrated playing the \"Mafia heavy or a near-psychopath\" during the 1970s, roles that he could play menacingly, but provided little opportunity for him to showcase his talent. Gossip columnist Louella Parsons hailed him as \"the Screen's No.1 Bad Man\", while the newspaper \"London Evening News\" referred to him as \"the man you would love to hate if you had the courage\". A 1960 publication by Dean Jennings of \"The Saturday Evening Post\" referred to Steiger as an \"angry, hot-tempered newcomer of prodigious acting talents, [who] works best only at emotional white heat\", and remarked that he found it \"stimulating to carry theatrical fantasy into his private life\". Pauline Kael found his performances so powerful that she believed he \"often seems to take over a picture even when he isn't in the lead\". The journal \"Films and Filming\", surveying his career in 1971, noted that his talent \"developed steadily through films good and bad\", and that the secret of his success was that he stayed grounded, citing a 1956 interview where he said \"I pity the player who can't keep his feet on the ground. It's too easy to trade on success and forget that no performer can stand still.\"\nA product of the Actors Studio, Steiger is closely associated with method acting, embodying the characters he played. Writer James F. Scott notes that during his career, he \"many times put aside his own personality to think his way into an alien psyche\". Steiger once said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't like the term Method, but for the sake of argument method acting is a means to an end. It is something that helps you get involved in the part personally so that you can communicate with the audience. No matter what, the American actor of the fifties changed acting the world over. Montgomery Clift was perhaps the actor who started it, Brando caused the sensation and [James] Dean made it a cult.\nSteiger was so devoted to his craft that during the 1970s he turned to many foreign productions, especially in Italy, to obtain the sort of roles he desired, but often clashed with directors over his method acting techniques. In one of his last interviews, Steiger said: \"What is the greatest thing an artist in any profession can give to a person?\u2014that would be a constructive, warm memory. Because that gets into your brain and therefore into your life, so to speak. And that's it, when somebody says to me 'I'll never forget', that's worth more to me than five Academy Awards, I'm in that person's life\".\nFilm writer Paul Simpson notes how closely Steiger prepared for his roles, and how he \"effortlessly\" recreated the mannerisms of figures such as Mussolini, in a \"compelling take on an enigmatic figure\". Judith Crist of \"New York Magazine\", reviewing \"Duck, You Sucker!\", commented that Steiger was \"totally without mannerisms, always with manner\", and noted that his \"silences are stunningly effective\". Roger Ebert later echoed this statement, concurring that Steiger lacked mannerisms, writing, \"When he gets a character worth playing with, he creates it new from the bottom up, out of whole cloth. I don't know how he does it. It's almost as if he gets inside the skin of the guy he's playing and starts being that person for a while\". Steiger said: \"I always tried to do things different. If I got a role which was similar to another I'd try to do it a little different.\" His explosive screen performances were an influence on many later actors, including Robert De Niro, who used Steiger's portrayal of Al Capone as a reference for his own performance in \"The Untouchables\" (1987). Elvis Presley was highly impressed with Steiger's \"powerful and wrenching performance\" in \"The Pawnbroker\".\nDespite Steiger's acclaim as an actor, he was frequently accused of overacting and won his share of critics, particularly during the 1970s and 1980s. His acting was so dynamic at times that critics found him excessive and overbearing, and even uncomfortable or laughable to watch. Steiger once clashed with Armenian director Rouben Mamoulian, during a theatrical production of \"Oklahoma!\", as he was intolerant of Steiger's \"unusual acting technique\". Steiger ignored the director's concerns that he was mumbling his lines, and when he began chomping loudly on an apple during a scene with Gordon MacRae, Mamoulian exclaimed: \"Get out of my theater. Get out of my life!\", and fired him. Even Kazan found several of the Actors Studio's techniques disagreeable, preferring \"more humor and verve and less self-indulgence, self-pity and self-awareness\". Kazan felt that Steiger often displayed a competitive edge as an actor and tried to steal scenes from his co-stars. Steiger rejected these claims, insisting that he was merely \"trying to take the medium of acting to as far as I can go, and that why I sometimes go over the edge\".\nSeveral co-stars found working with Steiger difficult; Warren Oates, according to director Norman Jewison, viewed Steiger as \"somebody who had a tendency to go over the top\" during the making of \"In The Heat of the Night\". Writer Richard Dyer highlights the contrast in the film between the acting styles of Steiger and Poitier, with \"Poitier's stillness and implied intensity\" and \"Steiger's busy, exteriorised method acting\". Humphrey Bogart, Steiger's co-star in \"The Harder They Fall\", referred to Steiger's method acting as the \"scratch-your-ass-and-mumble school of acting\". Director Robert Aldrich notes that Steiger had a habit of changing his lines, which often confused his co-stars. Aldrich stated: \"Usually I lie awake at nights trying to think of ways to improve an actor's performance. With Steiger, the problem is to try and contain him\". Steiger was particularly aggressive towards director Kenneth Annakin during the making of \"Across the Bridge\", insisting on rewriting most of the script and changing many of the lines to better fit Steiger's idea of the character. Annakin stated that he had \"never known an actor to put so much thought and preparation into a performance\" as Steiger. Hutchinson revealed that Steiger often suffered from panic during filming and that fear of failure haunted him throughout his life, but fear also provided him with a source of strength in his acting.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61260", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61260", "title": "Filling station", "text": "Facility that sells gasoline and diesel\nA filling station (also known as a gas station [US] or petrol station [UK/AU]) is a facility that sells fuel and engine lubricants for motor vehicles. It serves as a local fuel depot and retailer who receive fuel products from refineries (via regular tank truck resupplies), keep the fuels in (typically underground) storage tanks, and distribute individual product to motorist consumers at a daily varied price.\nThe most common fuels sold are motor fuels such as gasoline (a.k.a. petrol, often as multiple products according to different octane ratings) and diesel fuel, as well as liquified petroleum gas (LPG, i.e. autogas), compressed natural gas, compressed hydrogen, hydrogen compressed natural gas, liquid hydrogen, kerosene, alcohol fuels (like methanol, ethanol, butanol, and propanol), biofuels (like straight vegetable oil and biodiesel), or other types of alternative fuels. Fuel dispensers are used to pump fuel into the fuel tanks within vehicles, gauge the volume of fuel transferred to the vehicle, and calculate the financial cost the consumer must pay. Besides fuel pumps, another significant device found in filling stations and capable of refueling certain (compressed-air) vehicles is an air compressor. However, these are generally used to inflate car tires. \nMany filling stations provide convenience stores, which may sell convenience food, beverages, tobacco products, lottery tickets, newspapers, magazines, and, in some cases, a small selection of grocery items, such as milk or eggs. Some also sell propane or butane and have added shops to their primary business. Conversely, some chain stores, such as supermarkets, discount stores, warehouse clubs, or traditional convenience stores, have provided fuel pumps on the premises.\nTerminology.\nIn North America, the colloquial generic term for motor fuels is \"gasoline\" or \"gas\" for short due to gasoline engines being the most ubiquitous car internal combustion engine, and the terms \"gas station\" and \"service station\" are used in the United States, Canada, and the Caribbean. In some regions of Canada, the term \"gas bar\" (or \"gasbar\") is used. \nIn the rest of the English-speaking world, the generic term for fuel is \"petrol\", which was originally the brand of a petroleum distillate made by Carless Refining and Marketing Ltd as a mineral oil solvent. As a result, the term \"petrol station\" or \"petrol pump\" is used in the United Kingdom. In Ireland, New Zealand and South Africa \"garage\" and \"forecourt\" are still commonly used. Similarly, in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and Ireland, the term \"service station\" describes any petrol station; Australians and New Zealanders also call it a \"servo\". In India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, it is called a \"petrol pump\" or a \"petrol bunk\". In Japanese, a commonly used term is although the abbreviation \"SS\" (for \"service station\") is also used.\nHistory.\nThe first known filling station was the city pharmacy in Wiesloch, Germany, where Bertha Benz refilled the tank of the first automobile on its maiden trip from Mannheim to Pforzheim back in 1888. Shortly thereafter, other pharmacies sold gasoline as a side business. Since 2008 the Bertha Benz Memorial Route commemorates this event.\nBrazil.\nThe first \"posto de gasolina\" of South America was opened in Santos, S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil, in 1920. It was located on Ana Costa Avenue, in front of the beach, in a corner that is located by the Hotel Atl\u00e2ntico, which occupies its area nowadays. It was owned by Esso and brought by Antonio Duarte Moreira, a taxi entrepreneur.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, the first filling stations appeared in 1911, when the Imperial Automobile Society signed an agreement with the partnership \"Br. Nobel\". By 1914, about 440 stations functioned in major cities across the country.\nIn the mid-1960s, in Moscow, there were about 250 stations. A significant boost in retail network development occurred with the mass launch of the car \"Zhiguli\" at the Volga Automobile Plant, which was built in Tolyatti in 1970. Gasoline for anything other than non-private cars was sold only with ration cards. This type of payment system stopped in the midst of perestroika in the early 1990s.\nSince the saturation of automobile filling stations in Russia is insufficient and lags behind that of leading countries, there is a need to add new stations in cities and along roads at different levels.\nUnited States.\nThe increase in automobile ownership after Henry Ford began selling automobiles the middle class could afford led to increased demand for filling stations. The world's first purpose-built gas station was constructed in St. Louis, Missouri, in 1905 at 420 South Theresa Avenue. The second station was built in 1907 by Standard Oil of California (now Chevron) in Seattle, Washington, at what is now Pier 32. Reighard's Gas Station in Altoona, Pennsylvania claims that it dates from 1909 and is the oldest existing filling station in the United States. Early on, they were known to motorists as \"filling stations\" and often washed vehicle windows for free.\nThe first drive-in filling station in the U.S. was the 1912 Standard Oil of Ohio auto filling station at the corner of Young and Oak streets in Columbus, Ohio. The motorist drove in the front door, had his tank filled, and drove out the back. Whitehill-Gleason Motors, the first Gulf Refining Company drive-in station, opened to the motoring public in Pittsburgh on December 1, 1913, at Baum Boulevard and St Clair's Street. On its first day, the station sold of gasoline at 27 cents per gallon (7 cents per litre). This was also the first architect-designed station and the first to distribute free road maps. Before the drive-in filling station, automobile drivers pulled into almost any general or hardware store, or even blacksmith shops to fill up their tanks. Several years would elapse before checking oil, water, and selling tires would give rise to the concept of a gas \"service\" station.\nThe first alternative fuel station was opened in San Diego, California, by Pearson Fuels in 2003.\nMaryland officials said that on September 26, 2019, RS Automotive in Takoma Park, Maryland became the first filling station in the country to convert to an EV charging station.\nDesign and function.\nThe majority of filling stations are built in a similar manner, with most of the fueling installation underground, pump machines in the forecourt and a point of service inside a building. Single or multiple fuel tanks are usually deployed underground. Local regulations and environmental concerns may require a different method, with some stations storing their fuel in container tanks, entrenched surface tanks or unprotected fuel tanks deployed on the surface. Fuel is usually offloaded from a tanker truck into each tank by gravity through a separate capped opening located on the station's perimeter. Fuel from the tanks travels to the dispenser pumps through underground pipes. For every fuel tank, direct access must be available at all times. Most tanks can be accessed through a service canal directly from the forecourt.\nOlder stations tend to use a separate pipe for every kind of available fuel and for every dispenser. Newer stations may employ a single pipe for every dispenser. This pipe houses a number of smaller pipes for the individual fuel types. Fuel tanks, dispenser and nozzles used to fill car tanks employ vapor recovery systems, which prevents releases of vapor into the atmosphere with a system of pipes. The exhausts are placed as high as possible. A vapor recovery system may be employed at the exhaust pipe. This system collects the vapors, liquefies them and releases them back into the lowest grade fuel tank available.\nThe forecourt is the part of a filling station where vehicles are refueled. Gasoline pumps are placed on concrete plinths as a precautionary measure against collision by motor vehicles. Additional elements may be employed, including metal barriers. The area around the gasoline pumps must have a drainage system. Since fuel sometimes spills onto the pavement, as little of it as possible should remain. Any liquids present on the forecourt will flow into a channel drain before it enters a petrol interceptor which is designed to capture any hydrocarbon pollutants and filter these from rainwater which may then proceed to a sanitary sewer, stormwater drain, or to ground.\nIf a filling station allows customers to pay at the dispenser, the data from the dispenser may be transmitted via RS-232, RS-485 or Ethernet to the point of sale, usually inside the filling station's building, and fed into the station's cash register operating system. The cash register system gives limited control over the gasoline pump, and is usually limited to allowing the clerks to turn the pumps on and off. A separate system is used to monitor the fuel tank's status and the quantity of fuel. With sensors directly in the fuel tank, the data is fed to a terminal in the back room, where it can be downloaded or printed out. Sometimes this method is bypassed, with the fuel tank data transmitted directly to an external database.\nUnderground filling stations.\nThe underground modular filling station is a construction model for filling stations that was developed and patented by U-Cont Oy Ltd in Finland in 1993. Afterwards, the same system was used in Florida, US. Above-ground modular stations were built in the 1980s in Eastern Europe and especially in Soviet Union, but they were not built in other parts of Europe due to the stations' lack of safety in case of fire.\nThe underground modular filling station's construction model reduces installation time, simplifies design, and lowers manufacturing costs. As proof of the model's installation speed, U-Cont Oy Ltd set an unofficial world record for filling station installation when a modular filling station was built in Helsinki, Finland, in less than three days, including groundwork. The safety of modular filling stations has been tested in a filling station simulator, in Kuopio, Finland. These tests have included, for instance, burning cars and explosions in the station simulator.\nNegative impacts.\nHuman health.\nGasoline contains a mixture of BTEX hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes). Prolonged exposure to toluene can cause permanent damage to the central nervous system, and chlorinated solvents can cause liver and kidney problems. Benzene in particular causes leukemia and is associated with non-Hodgkin lymphoma and multiple myeloma. People who work in filling stations, live near them, or attend school close to them are exposed to fumes and are at increased lifetime risk of cancer, with risk increased if there are multiple stations nearby. There is some evidence that living near a filling station is a risk for childhood leukemia. In addition to long-term exposure, there are bursts of short-term exposures to benzene when tanker trucks deliver fuel. \nHigh levels of benzene have been detected near stations across urban, suburban, and rural environments, though the causes (such as road traffic or congestion) can vary by location.\nGas station attendants have suffered adverse health consequences depending on the type of fuel used, exposure to vehicle exhaust, and types of personal protective equipment (PPE) offered. Studies have noted higher levels of chromosomal deletions and higher rates of miscarriage, and workers have reported headaches, fatigue, throat irritation and depression. Exposure to exhaust and fumes has been associated with eye irritation, nausea, dizziness, and cough.\nEnvironment.\nGasoline can leak into the surrounding soil and water, posing many health risks. Areas formerly occupied by filling stations are often contaminated, resulting in brownfields and urban blight. Underground storage tanks (USTs) were typically made of steel and were common in the United States, but were prone to corrosion. They began to receive national attention in 1983 after an episode of \"60 Minutes\" documented significant drinking water contamination from a Mobil gas station in the Canob Park neighborhood of Richmond, Rhode Island. It had been determined that the station's underground tanks had been leaking gasoline into the local water system since the station opened in 1968. This led to regulations banning these types of tanks in 1985. However, tanks at gas stations that ceased operation before 1986 are unlikely to have been recorded, and many old underground gasoline and oil storage tanks are thus unknowingly buried beneath redeveloped land, contributing to soil, groundwater, and indoor air pollution.\nBecause of the relatively small size of former stations (compared to larger brownfields), the cost-per-acre to rehabilitate the land is higher; the total cost in the United States is not known but is in the billions of dollars. Individual cleanups may be complex, with some in Canada taking decades and costing millions of dollars both for the cleanup efforts and in legal fees to determine whether individuals, governments, or corporations are liable for costs.\nEconomic costs.\nThe cost of potential cleanup of a former filling station can lower property values, discourage development of land, and depress neighbouring property values and potential tax revenue. When areas are known to be contaminated by leaking underground storage tanks, the sale value of the land and neighbouring area drops. An analysis of residential properties in Cuyahoga County, Ohio estimated the loss at about 17% when within or one block of a registered leaking tank. Active filling stations have similar negative effects on property values, with an analysis in Xuancheng, China finding a loss of 16% within and 9% when between and .\nMarketing.\nNorth America.\nIn the United States and Canada, there are generally two marketing types of filling stations: premium brands and discount brands.\nPremium brands.\nFilling stations with \"premium brands\" sell well-recognized and often international brands of fuel, including Exxon/Mobil and its Esso brand, Phillips 66/Conoco/76, Chevron, Mobil, Shell, Husky Energy, Sunoco (US), BP, Valero and Texaco. Non-international premium brands include Petrobras, Petro-Canada (owned by Suncor Energy Canada), QuikTrip, Hess, Sinclair, and Pemex. Premium-brand stations accept credit cards, often issue their own company cards (fuel cards or fleet cards) and may charge higher prices. In some cases, fuel cards for customers with a lower fuel consumption are ordered not directly from an oil company, but from an intermediary. Many premium brands have fully automated pay-at-the-pump facilities. Premium stations tend to be highly visible from highway and freeway exits, utilizing tall signs to display their brand logos.\nDiscount brands.\nDiscount brands are often smaller, regional chains or independent stations, offering lower fuel prices. Most purchase wholesale commodity gasoline from independent suppliers or the major petroleum companies. Lower-priced stations are also found at some supermarkets (Albertsons, Kroger, Big Y, Ingles, Lowes Foods, Giant, Weis Markets, Safeway, Hy-Vee, Vons, Meijer, Loblaws/Real Canadian Superstore, and Giant Eagle), convenience stores (7-Eleven, Circle K, Cumberland Farms, QuickChek, Road Ranger, Sheetz, Speedway and Wawa), discount stores (Walmart, Canadian Tire) and warehouse clubs (Costco, Sam's Club, and BJ's Wholesale Club). At some stations (such as Vons, Costco gas stations, BJ's Wholesale Club, or Sam's Club), consumers are required to hold a special membership card to be eligible for the discounted price, or pay only with the chain's cash card, debt card or a credit card issuer exclusive to that chain. In some areas, such as New Jersey, this practice is illegal, and stations are required to sell to all at the same price. Some convenience stores, such as 7-Eleven and Circle K, have co-branded their stations with one of the premium brands. After the Gulf Oil company was sold to Chevron, northeastern retail units were sold off as a chain, with Cumberland Farms controlling the remaining Gulf Oil outlets in the United States.\nState-controlled stations.\nSome countries have only one brand of filling station. In Malaysia, Shell is the dominant player by number of stations, with government-owned Petronas coming in second. In Indonesia, the dominant player by number of stations is the government-owned Pertamina, although other companies such as TotalEnergies and Shell are increasingly found in big cities such as the capital Jakarta or Surabaya. In Taiwan, the government-owned CPC Corporation is the dominant player by number of stations, with the privately owned and operated Formosa Petrochemical Corporation and NPC respectively in second and third place.\nGlobal and local branding.\nSome companies, such as Shell, use their brand worldwide, however, Chevron uses its inherited brand Caltex in Asia Pacific, Australia and Africa, and its Texaco brand in Europe and Latin America. ExxonMobil uses its Exxon and Mobil brands but is still known as Esso (the forerunner company name, Standard Oil or S.O.) in many places, most noticeably in Canada and Singapore.\nIn Brazil, the main operators are Vibra Energia and Ipiranga, but Esso and Shell (Ra\u00edzen) are also present.\nIn Mexico, the historical monopoly filling station operator, and still the largest, is Pemex, but ever since Mexico's energy laws were gradually liberalized starting from 2013, foreign brands such as Shell, BP, Mobil and Chevron, as well as the country's largest convenience store chain Oxxo, have also started operating filling stations.\nIn the United Kingdom, the three largest are BP, Esso and Shell; the \"Big Four\" supermarket chains, Morrisons, Sainsbury's, Asda and Tesco, also operate filling stations, as well as some smaller supermarket chains such as The Co-operative Group and Waitrose.\nIn Poland, the three largest operators are the partially state-owned PKN Orlen (including acquisitions Grupa Lotos and PGNiG), followed by Shell and BP. Smaller operators include Auchan, AVIA International, Circle K, MOL Group and \u017babka.\nIn Australia, the major operators are Ampol, BP, Chevron Australia (Caltex), EG Australia, ExxonMobil Australia (Mobil), Puma Energy, United Petroleum and Viva Energy (mostly under the dual Shell-Coles Express branding). Smaller operators include Costco, Liberty Oil, Seven &amp; i Holdings (operates servos under the 7-Eleven convenience store branding) and Shell Australia.\nIn India, the three major operators are the state-owned Hindustan Petroleum, Bharat Petroleum and Indian Oil Corporation, which together control approximately 87% of the market. Foreign brands such as BP (joint venture with Reliance Industries, branded as Jio-bp) and Shell are also present.\nIn Japan, the four major operators are: Cosmo Oil, Idemitsu (under the brand names \"apollostation\" and \"Idemitsu\"),\nENEOS Corporation (under the brand names \"ENEOS\", \"Express\" and \"General\") and San-Ai Oil (under the brand name \"Kygnus\"). Smaller operators include: Japan Agricultural Cooperatives (under the brand name JA-SS, except in Hokkaido where the brand name is operated by Hokuren Federation of Agricultural Cooperatives) and Mitsubishi Group (operates self-service stations under the Lawson convenience store branding). Previously, foreign filling station brands were also present in Japan: mainly Shell (operated by Idemitsu since its acquisition of Showa Shell Sekiyu in 2018\u201319, all rebranded to \"apollostation\" by 2023), Esso and Mobil (last operated by ENEOS Corporation under license from ExxonMobil, all rebranded to ENEOS in 2019).\nPayment methods.\nAustralia and New Zealand.\nMost service stations allow the customer to pump the fuel before paying. In recent years, some service stations have required customers to purchase their fuel first. In some small towns, the customer may hand the cash to the attendant on the forecourt if they are paying for a set amount of fuel and have no change; but usually customers will enter the service centre to pay a cashier. Some supermarkets have their own forecourts which are unmanned and payment is pay-at-pump only. Customers at the supermarket will receive a discount voucher which offers discounted fuel at their forecourt. The amount of discount varies depending on the amount spent on groceries at the supermarket, but normally starts at 4 cents a litre.\nIn New Zealand, BP has an app for smartphones that detects a user's location, then allows one to select the type of fuel, which pump, and how much to spend. The amount is then deducted from the user's account.\nCanada.\nIn British Columbia and Alberta, it is a legal requirement that customers either pre-pay for the fuel or pay at the pump. The law is called \"Grant's Law\" and is intended to prevent \"gas-and-dash\" crimes, where a customer refuels and then drives away without paying for it.\nIn other provinces, payment after filling is permitted and widely available, though some stations may require either a pre-payment or a payment at the pump during night hours.\nIreland.\nIn the Republic of Ireland, most stations allow customers to pump fuel before paying. Some stations have pay-at-the-pump facilities.\nUnited Kingdom.\nA large majority of stations allow customers to pay with a chip and pin payment card or pay in the shop. Many have a pay at the pump system, where customers can enter their PIN prior to refueling.\nUnited States.\nPre-payment is the norm in the US and customers may typically pay either at the pump or inside the gas station. Modern stations have pay-at-the-pump functions: in most cases credit, debit, ATM cards, fuel cards and fleet cards are accepted. Occasionally a station will have a pay-at-the-pump-only period per day, when attendants are not present, often at night, and some stations are pay-at-the-pump only 24 hours a day.\nTypes of service.\nFilling stations typically offer one of three types of service to their customers: full service, minimum service or self-service.\nAn attendant operates the pumps, often wipes the windshield, and sometimes checks the vehicle's oil level and tire pressure, then collects payment and perhaps a small tip.\nAn attendant operates the pumps. This is often required due to legislation that prohibits customers from operating the pumps.\nThe customer performs all required service. Signs informing the customer of filling procedures and cautions are displayed on each pump. Customers can still enter a store or go to a booth to give payment to a person.\nUsing cardlock (or pay-at-the-pump) system, these are completely unstaffed.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, self-service fuel filling is illegal, due to a federal law enacted in 2000. The law was introduced by Federal Deputy Aldo Rebelo, who claims it saved 300,000 fuel attendant jobs across the country.\nJapan.\nBefore 1998, filling stations in Japan were entirely full-service stations. Self-service stations were legalized in Japan in 1998 following the abolition of the Special Petroleum Law, which led to the deregulation of the petroleum industry in Japan. Under current safety regulations, while motorists are able to self-dispense fuel at self-service stations, generally identified in Japanese as , at least one fuel attendant must be on hand to keep watch over potential safety violations and to render assistance to motorists whenever necessary.\nSouth Korea.\nFilling stations in South Korea offer a variety of services, such as providing bottled water or tissues, and cleaning free of charge. But most have switched to self-service. Some large full-service stations have many services, such as tire pressure charging, automatic car washing, and self-cleaning. Some of them are free to gas customers who spend more than a certain amount.\nNorth America.\nIn the past, filling stations in the United States offered a choice between \"full service\" and \"self service\". Before 1970, full service was the norm, and self-service was rare. Today, few stations advertise or provide full service. Full service stations are more common in wealthy and upscale areas. The cost of full service is usually assessed as a fixed amount per US gallon.\nThe first self-service station in the United States was in Los Angeles, opened in 1947 by Frank Urich. In Canada, the first self-service station opened in Winnipeg, Manitoba, in 1949. It was operated by the independent company Henderson Thriftway Petroleum, owned by Bill Henderson.\nIn New Jersey, filling stations offer only full service (and mini service); attendants there are required to pump gasoline for customers. Customers, in fact, are prohibited by law from pumping their own gasoline. The only exception to this within New Jersey is at the filling station next to Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst in Wrightstown. New Jersey prohibited self-service in 1949, with the passage of \"Retail Gasoline Dispensing Safety Act,\" after lobbying by service station owners. That laws states that \"Because of the fire hazards directly associated with dispensing fuel, it is in the public interest that gasoline station operators have the control needed over that activity to ensure compliance with appropriate safety procedures, including turning off vehicle engines and refraining from smoking while fuel is dispensed.\" Proponents of the prohibition cite safety and jobs as reasons to keep the ban. Of note, the ban does not apply to the pumping of diesel fuel at filling stations (though individual filling stations may prohibit this); nor does it apply to the pumping of gasoline into boats or aircraft.\nOregon prohibited self-service in a 1951 statute prohibiting that listed 17 different justifications, including flammability, the risk of crime from customers leaving their vehicles, toxic fumes, and the jobs created by requiring mini service. In 1982 Oregon voters rejected a ballot measure sponsored by the service station owners, which would have legalized self-service. Oregon legislators passed a bill that was signed into law by the Governor in May 2017 to allow self-service for counties with a total population of 40,000 or less beginning in January 2018. Governor Tina Kotek passed a law allowing for it in 2023, but stations are still required to provide full-serve for customers who want it.\nThe constitutionality of the self-service bans has been disputed. The Oregon statute was brought into court in 1989 by ARCO, and the New Jersey statute was challenged in court in 1950 by a small independent service station, Rein Motors. Both challenges failed. Former New Jersey governor Jon Corzine sought to lift the ban on self-service for New Jersey. He asserted that it would be able to lower gas prices, but some New Jerseyans argued that it could cause drawbacks, especially unemployment.\nThe town of Huntington, New York has prohibited self-service stations since the early 1970s firstly to prevent theft and later due to safety concerns.\nThe towns of Arlington, Massachusetts and Weymouth, Massachusetts have also prohibited self-service stations since 1975 and 1977, respectively. \nContrary to popular belief, lit cigarettes are not capable of igniting gasoline. However, several states outlaw smoking at gas stations as the fire from the ignition source used to light the cigarette can ignite gasoline vapors. Most gas stations and many municipalities will also explicitly ban any smoking activity within certain distances of gasoline pumps.\nOther goods and services commonly available.\nMany filling stations provide toilet facilities for customer use, as well as squeegees and paper towels for customers to clean their vehicle's windows. Discount stations may not provide these amenities in some countries.\nStations usually have an air compressor, usually with a built-in or provided handheld tire-pressure gauge, to inflate tires and a hose to add water to vehicle radiators. Some air compressor machines are free of charge, while others charge a small fee to use (usually 50 cents to a dollar in North America). In some US states, such as California, state laws require that paying customers must be provided with free air compressor service and radiator water.\nIn some regions of America and Australia, many filling stations have a mechanic on duty, but this practice has died out in other parts of the world.\nMany filling stations have integrated convenience stores which sell food, beverages, and often cigarettes, lottery tickets, motor oil, and auto parts. Prices for these items tend to be higher than they would be at a supermarket or discount store.\nMany stations, particularly in the United States, have a fast food outlet inside. These are usually \"express\" versions with limited seating and limited menus, though some may be regular-sized and have spacious seating. Larger restaurants are common at truck stops and toll road service plazas.\nIn some US states, beer, wine, and liquor are sold at filling stations, though this practice varies according to state law (\"see Alcohol laws of the United States by state\"). Nevada also allows the operation of slot and video poker machines without time restrictions.\nVacuum cleaners, often coin-operated, are a common amenity to allow the cleaning of vehicle interiors, either by the customer or by an attendant.\nSome stations are equipped with car washes. Car washes are sometimes offered free of charge or at a discounted price with a certain amount of fuel purchased. Conversely, some car washes operate filling stations to supplement their businesses.\nFrom approximately 1920 to 1980, many service stations in the US provided free road maps affiliated with their parent oil companies to customers. This practice fell out of favor due to the 1970s energy crisis.\nFuel prices.\nEurope.\nIn European Union member states, gasoline prices are much higher than in North America due to higher fuel excise or taxation, although the base price is also higher than in the US. Occasionally, price rises trigger national protests. In the UK, a large-scale protest in August and September 2000, known as 'The Fuel Crisis', caused wide-scale havoc not only across the UK, but also in some other EU countries. The UK Government eventually backed down by indefinitely postponing a planned increase in fuel duty. This was partially reversed during December 2006 when then-Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown raised fuel duty by 1.25 pence per liter.\nSince 2007, gasoline prices in the UK rose by nearly 40 pence per liter, going from 97.3 pence per liter in 2007 to 136.8 pence per liter in 2012.\nIn much of Europe, including the UK, France and Germany, stations operated by large supermarket chains usually price fuel lower than stand-alone stations. In most of mainland Europe, sales tax is lower on diesel fuel than on gasoline, and diesel is accordingly the cheaper fuel: in the UK and Switzerland, diesel has no tax advantage and retails at a higher price by quantity than gasoline (offset by its higher energy yield).\nIn 2014, according to Eurostat, the mean EU28 price was \u20ac1.38 /L for euro-super 95 (gasoline), \u20ac1.26 /L for diesel.\nThe least expensive gasoline was in Estonia at \u20ac1.10 /L, and the most expensive at \u20ac1.57 /L in Italy.\nThe least expensive diesel was in Estonia at \u20ac1.14 /L, and the most expensive at \u20ac1.54 /L in the UK.\nThe least expensive LPG was in Belgium at \u20ac0.50 /L, and the most expensive at \u20ac0.83 /L in France.\nNorth America.\nNearly all filling stations in North America advertise their prices on large signs outside the stations. Some locations have laws requiring such signage.\nIn Canada and the United States, federal, state or provincial, and local sales taxes are usually included in the price, although tax details are often posted at the pump and some stations may provide details on sales receipts. Gasoline taxes are often ring-fenced (dedicated) to fund transportation projects such as the maintenance of existing roads and the construction of new ones.\nIndividual filling stations in the United States have little if any control over gasoline prices. The wholesale price of gasoline is determined according to area by oil companies which supply the gasoline, and their prices are largely determined by the world markets for oil. Individual stations are unlikely to sell gasoline at a loss, and the profit margin\u2014typically between 7 and 11 cents a US gallon (2\u20133 cents per liter)\u2014that they make from gasoline sales is limited by competitive pressures: a gas station which charges more than others will lose customers to them. Most stations try to compensate by selling higher-margin food products in their convenience stores.\nEven with oil market fluctuations, prices for gasoline in the United States are among the lowest in the industrialized world; this is principally due to lower taxes. While the sales price of gasoline in Europe is more than twice that in the United States, the price excluding taxes is nearly identical in the two areas. Some Canadians and Mexicans in communities close to the US border drive into the United States to purchase cheaper gasoline.\nDue to heavy fluctuations in price in the United States, some stations offer their customers the option to buy and store gasoline for future uses, such as the service provided by First Fuel Bank.\nIn order to save money, some consumers in Canada and the United States inform each other about low and high prices through the use of gasoline price websites. Such websites allow users to share prices advertised at filling stations with each other by posting them to a central server. Consumers then may check the prices listed in their geographic area in order to select the station with the lowest price available at the time. Some television and radio stations also compile pricing information via viewer and listener reports of pricing or reporter observations and present it as a regular segment of their newscasts, usually before or after traffic reports. These price observations must usually be made by reading the pricing signs outside stations, as many companies do not give their prices by telephone due to competitive concerns. It is a criminal offense to have written or verbal arrangements with competitors, suppliers or customers for:\nGas stations must never hold discussions with other competitors regarding pricing policies and methods, terms of sale, costs, allocation of markets or boycotts of our petroleum products.\nRest of the world.\nIn other energy-importing countries such as Japan, gasoline and petroleum product prices are higher than in the United States because of fuel transportation costs and taxes.\nOn the other hand, some of the major oil-producing countries such as the Gulf states, Iran, Iraq, and Venezuela provide subsidized fuel at well-below world market prices. This practice tends to encourage heavy consumption.\nHong Kong has some of the highest pump prices in the world, but most customers are given discounts as card members.\nSingapore, like Hong Kong, also has similarly high pump prices, which are largely based on a pricing strategy called Mean of Platts Singapore (MOPS). As Singapore does not have any oil reserves of its own, the city-state has instead built several off-shore refineries to refine oil imported mostly from Indonesian oil fields, as the latter country does not have enough refining capacity and capability of its own. Because neighbouring country Malaysia has cheaper pump prices than Singapore, cars registered in Singapore crossing over into Malaysia are legally required to have at least three-quarters of a tank of fuel since 1991 to prevent evading fuel duties, and when filling up in Malaysia, Singaporean-and Thai-registered hybrid and petrol-powered vehicles are legally restricted to only fill up on unsubsidised, premium-grade RON97-100 petrol, as RON95 petrol in Malaysia is partially subsidised by the Government of Malaysia for the benefit of lower-income Malaysian residents.\nIn Western Australia a program called FuelWatch requires most filling stations to notify their \"tomorrow prices\" by 2pm each day; prices are changed at 6am each morning, and must be held for 24 hours. Each afternoon, the prices for the next day are released to the public and the media, allowing consumers to decide when to fill up.\nService stations.\nA service station or \"servo\" is the terminology often used in Australia, along with petrol station, to describe any facility where motorists can refuel their cars.\nIn New Zealand a filling station is often referred to as a service station, petrol station or garage, even though it may not offer mechanical repairs or assistance with dispensing fuel. Levels of service available include full service, for which assistance in dispensing fuel is offered, as well as offers to check tire pressure or clean vehicle windscreens. That type of service is becoming uncommon in New Zealand, particularly Auckland. Further south of Auckland, many filling stations offer full service. There is also help service or assisted service, for which customers must request assistance before it is given, and self-service, for which no assistance is available.\nIn the US, a filling station that also offers services such as oil changes and mechanical repairs to automobiles is called a service station. Until the 1970s the vast majority of filling stations were service stations. These stations typically offered free air for inflating tires, as compressed air was already on hand to operate the repair garage's pneumatic tools. While a few filling stations with a service station remain, many in the 1980s and 1990s were converted to convenience stores while still selling fuel, while others continued to offer services but discontinued offering fuel.\nThis kind of business provided the name for the US comic strip \"Gasoline Alley\", where a number of the characters worked.\nIn the UK and Ireland, a 'service station' refers to much larger facilities, usually attached to motorways (see rest area) or major truck routes, which provide food outlets, large parking areas, and often other services such as hotels, arcade games, and shops in addition to 24-hour fuel supplies and a higher standard of restrooms. Fuel is typically more expensive from these outlets due to their premium locations. UK or Irish service stations do not usually repair automobiles.\nHighway service centre.\nThis arrangement occurs on many freeways or motorways including those that are tolled, and are generally referred to as rest areas ((UK), services (UK), travel plaza, rest stop, oasis (US), service area, rest and service area (RSA), resto, service plaza, lay-by, service centre). In the United Kingdom and Ireland these are called motorway service areas. In many cases, these centers might have a food court or restaurants. They provide drivers and passengers can rest, eat, or refuel without exiting onto secondary roads. \nOften, the state government maintains public rest areas directly connected to freeways, but does not rent out space to private businesses, as this is specifically prohibited by law via the Interstate Highway Act of 1956 which created the national Interstate Highway System, except sites on freeways built before January 1, 1960, and toll highways that are self-supporting but have Interstate designation, under a grandfather clause. As a result, such areas often provide only minimal services such as restrooms and vending machines.\nPrivate entrepreneurs develop additional facilities, such as truck stops or travel centers, restaurants, gas stations, and motels in clusters on private land adjacent to major interchanges. In the US, Pilot Flying J and TravelCenters of America are two of the most common full-service chains of truck stops. Because these facilities are not directly connected to the freeway, they usually have huge signs on poles high enough to be visible by motorists in time to exit from the freeway. Sometimes, the state also posts small official signs (normally blue) indicating what types of filling stations, restaurants, and hotels are available at an upcoming exit; businesses may add their logos to these signs for a fee.\nIn Canada, the province of Ontario has stops along two of its 400-series highways, the 401 and the 400, traditionally referred to as \"Service Centres\", but recently renamed \"ONroute\" as part of a full rebuild of most of the sites. Owned by the provincial government, but leased to private operator Host Kilmer Service Centres, they contain food courts, convenience stores, washrooms, and co-located gas and diesel bars with attached convenience stores. Food providers include Tim Hortons (at all sites), A&amp;W, Wendy's and Pizza Pizza. At most sites fuel is sold by Canadian Tire, with a few older Esso gas bars at earlier renovated locations.\nOctane.\nIn Australia, gasoline is unleaded, and available in 91, 95, 98 and 100 octane (names differ from brand to brand). Fuel additives for use in cars designed for leaded fuel are available at most filling stations.\nIn Canada, the most commonly found octane grades are 87 (regular), 89 (mid grade) and 91 (premium), using the same \"(R+M)/2 Method\" used in the US (see below).\nIn China, the most commonly found octane grade is RON 91 (regular), 93 (mid grade) and 97 (premium). Almost all of the fuel has been unleaded since 2000. In some premium filling stations in large cities, such as PetrolChina and Sinopec, RON 98 gas is sold for racing cars.\nIn Europe, gasoline is unleaded and available in 95 RON (\"Eurosuper\") and, in nearly all countries, 98 RON (\"Super Plus\") octanes; in some countries 91 RON octane gasoline is offered as well. In addition, 100 RON is offered in some countries in continental Europe (Shell markets this as \"V-Power Racing\"). Some stations offer 98 RON with lead substitute (often called Lead-Replacement Petrol, or LRP).\nIn New Zealand, gasoline is unleaded, and most commonly available in two grades: 91 RON (\"Regular\") and 95 RON (\"Premium\"). 98 RON is available at selected BP (\"Ultimate\") and Mobil (\"Synergy 8000\") service stations instead of the standard 95 RON. 96 RON was replaced by 95 RON, and subsequently abolished in 2006. Leaded fuel was abolished in 1996.\nIn the UK the most common gasoline grade (and lowest octane generally available) is 'Premium' 95 RON unleaded. 'Super' is widely available at 97 RON (for example \"Shell V-Power\", \"BP Ultimate\"). Leaded fuel is no longer available.\nIn the United States all motor vehicle gasoline is unleaded and is available in several grades with different octane rating; 87 (Regular), 89 (Mid-Grade), and 93 (Premium) are typical grades. At high altitudes in the Mountain States and the Black Hills of South Dakota, regular unleaded can be as low as 85 octane; this practice has become increasingly controversial, since it was instituted when most cars had carburetors instead of the fuel injection and electronic engine controls standard in recent decades.\nIn the US gasoline is described in terms of its \"pump octane\", which is the mean of their \"RON\" (Research Octane Number) and \"MON\" (Motor Octane Number). Labels on pumps in the US typically describe this as the \"(R+M)/2 Method\". Some nations describe fuels according to the traditional RON or MON ratings, so octane ratings cannot always be compared with the equivalent US rating by the \"(R+M)/2 method\".\nDifferences in gasoline pumps.\nIn Europe, New Zealand and Australia, the customer selects one of several colour-coded nozzles depending on the type of fuel required. The filler pipe of unleaded fuel is smaller than the one for fuels for engines designed to take leaded fuel. The tank filler opening has a corresponding diameter; this prevents inadvertently using leaded fuel in an engine not designed for it, which can damage a catalytic converter. \nIn most stations in Canada and the US, the pump has a single nozzle and the customer selects the desired octane grade by pushing a button. Some pumps require the customer to pick up the nozzle first, then lift a lever underneath it; others are designed so that lifting the nozzle automatically releases a switch. Some newer stations have separate nozzles for different types of fuel. Where diesel fuel is provided, it is usually dispensed from a separate nozzle even if the various grades of gasoline share the same nozzle.\nMotorists occasionally pump gasoline into a diesel car by accident. The converse is almost impossible because diesel pumps have a large nozzle with a diameter of which does not fit the filler, and the nozzles are protected by a lock mechanism or a liftable flap. Diesel fuel in a gasoline engine\u2014while creating large amounts of smoke\u2014does not normally cause permanent damage if it is drained once the mistake is realized. However even a liter of gasoline added to the tank of a modern diesel car can cause irreversible damage to the injection pump and other components through a lack of lubrication. In some cases, the car has to be scrapped because the cost of repairs exceeds its residual value. The issue is not clear-cut as older diesels using completely mechanical injection can tolerate some gasoline\u2014which has historically been used to \"thin\" diesel fuel in winter.\nLegislation.\nIn most countries, stations are subjected to guidelines and regulations which exist to minimize the potential of fires, and increase safety.\nIt is prohibited to use open flames on the forecourt of a filling station because of the risk of igniting gasoline vapor. In the United States, establishing fire codes and enforcing their compliance is the responsibility of state governments. Most localities ban smoking, open flames and running engines. Since the increased occurrence of static-related fires many stations have warnings about leaving the refueling point.\nCars can build up static charge by driving on dry road surfaces. However many tire compounds contain enough carbon black to provide an electrical ground which prevents charge build-up. Newer \"high mileage\" tires use more silica and can increase the buildup of static. A driver who does not discharge static by contacting a conductive part of the car will carry it to the insulated handle of the nozzle and the static potential will eventually be discharged when this purposely-grounded arrangement is put into contact with the metallic filler neck of the vehicle. Ordinarily, vapor concentrations in the area of this filling operation are below the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the product being dispensed, so the static discharge causes no problem. The problem with ungrounded gasoline cans results from a combination of vehicular static charge, the potential between the container and the vehicle, and the loose fit between the grounded nozzle and the gas can. This last condition causes a rich vapor concentration in the ullage (the unfilled volume) of the gas can, and a discharge from the can to the grounded hanging hardware (the nozzle, hose, swivels and break-a-ways) can thus occur at a most inopportune point. The Petroleum Equipment Institute has recorded incidents of static-related ignition at refueling sites since early 2000.\nAlthough urban legends persist that using a mobile phone while pumping gasoline can cause sparks or explosion, this has not been duplicated under any controlled condition. Nevertheless, mobile phone manufacturers and gas stations ask users to switch off their phones. One suggested origin of this myth is said to have been started by gas station companies because the cell phone signal would interfere with the fuel counter on some older model fuel pumps causing it to give a lower reading. In the \"MythBusters\" episode \"Cell Phone Destruction\", investigators concluded that explosions attributed to cell phones could be caused by static discharges from clothing instead and also observed that such incidents seem to involve women more often than men.\nThe US National Fire Protection Association does most of the research and code writing to address the potential for explosions of gasoline vapor. The customer fueling area, up to above the surface, normally does not have explosive concentrations of vapors, but may from time to time. Above this height, where most fuel filler necks are located, there is no expectation of an explosive concentration of gasoline vapor in normal operating conditions. Electrical equipment in the fueling area may be specially certified for use around gasoline vapors.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61261", "revid": "50960004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61261", "title": "Lotus Seven", "text": "The Lotus Seven is a sports car produced by the British manufacturer Lotus Cars (initially called Lotus Engineering) between 1957 and 1973. The Seven is an open-wheel car with two seats and an open top. It was designed by Lotus founder Colin Chapman and has been considered the embodiment of the Lotus philosophy of performance through low weight and simplicity. The original model was highly successful with more than 2,500 cars sold, due to its attraction as a road legal car that could be used for clubman racing.\nAfter Lotus ended production of the Seven in 1973, Caterham bought the rights and today Caterham makes both kits and fully assembled cars based on the original design known as the Caterham 7.\nThe Lotus Seven design has spawned a host of imitations on the kit car market, generally called \"Sevens\" or \"Sevenesque\" roadsters. \nHistory.\nSeries 1.\nThe Lotus Seven was launched in 1957 to replace the Mark VI as the entry-level Lotus model. The Seven name was left over from a model that Lotus abandoned, which would have been a Riley-engine single-seater that Lotus intended to enter into the Formula Two in 1952 or 1953. However, the car was completed on Chapman's chassis as a sports car by its backers and christened the Clairmonte Special.\nExternally similar to Chapman's earlier Lotus Mark VI, but with a different tubular frame similar to the Lotus Eleven, the Seven was powered by a Ford Sidevalve 1,172 cc straight-four engine. In addition to the Ford unit, both BMC series A and Coventry Climax FWA engines were available for fitment. Under the Purchase Tax system of the time cars supplied as a kit did not attract the tax surcharge that would apply if sold in assembled form. Tax rules specified assembly instructions could not be included. This situation remained until 1973 and a large proportion of Sevens sold in the United Kingdom were delivered in kit form as a result.\nThe Seven Series 1 was used both on the road and for club racing (750 motor club in the UK).\nSeries 2.\nThe Lotus Seven S2 followed in June 1960 and was supplemented by the Lotus Super Seven S2 from 1961. These were slightly more road-oriented than the Series 1, and received a somewhat simpler chassis. The Series 1's aluminium nosecone was changed to a fibreglass unit. Cycle fenders were originally standard, with clamshell units standard fitment on the 1500, Super Seven, and America or available as an option.\nWhile the 1172\u00a0cc Sidevalve unit remained available until 1962, the series 2 typically used Ford Kent engines of 1,340 or 1,499\u00a0cc from the Ford Consul Classic. These were also available with Cosworth modifications; the Cosworth 1,340 cc \"Super Seven\" delivered and the later \"Super Seven 1500\" . Some Series 2 Sevens built during 1968 (oftentimes referred to as \"Series &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442\") were fitted with the later crossflow Kent engine of 1,599 cc.\nThe series II had problems with its Standard Companion estate car rear axle and differential, unable to cope with the high power and cornering forces of the Seven. This was later solved on the Series III by installing a Ford Cortina rear end. Production of the Series 2 ended in August 1968, after 1310 examples had been built.\nSeries 3.\nThe Seven S3 was released in 1968. As for late Series 2s, the S3 typically received the 1,599\u00a0cc crossflow Kent engine. First shown at Earl's Court in 1969, the Super Seven Twin Cam SS used the Lotus Twin Cam engine. Only 13 examples were built. While only manufactured by Lotus for around two years, the Series 3 was the model later revived by Caterham after they ran out of Series 4 kits some time in the first half of the 1970s. In modified form, the design continues to be produced until today (2023).\nBetween 1970 and 1975, following a representation agreement, Lotus Argentina SA obtained the licence to manufacture the Lotus Seven in Argentina. This production reached approximately 51 units. These vehicles were not replicas but built under licence and branded as Lotuses.\nSeries 4.\nIn 1970, Lotus radically changed the shape of the car to create the slightly more conventional sized Series 4 (S4), with a squarer fibreglass shell replacing most of the aluminium bodywork. It also offered some luxuries as standard, such as an internal heater matrix. The S4 Seven could be supplied with 1298 or 1599 cc Kent engines or the twin cam.\nUntil now, most Sevens in the UK had been sold in kit form in order to avoid paying purchase tax. However, once the UK joined the EEC on 1 January 1973, the VAT system was adopted instead so the tax advantage of the kit-built Lotus Seven came to an end. Accordingly, in 1973, Lotus decided to shed fully its \"British tax system\"-inspired kit car image. As part of this plan, it sold the rights to the Seven to its only remaining agents Caterham Cars in England and Steel Brothers Limited in New Zealand.\nCaterham ran out of the Lotus Series 4 kits in the early 1970s. When this occurred and in accordance with their agreement with Lotus, Caterham introduced its own brand version of the Series 3. They have been manufacturing the car ever since as the Caterham Seven. Steel Brothers Limited in Christchurch, New Zealand, assembled Lotus Seven Series 4s until March 1979 when the last of the 95 kits provided by Lotus was used up. Steel Brothers had a much wider range of factory options than the UK models with carpet, centre console glove-box, radio, window-washer and hardtop. Sold largely to competition enthusiasts, the NZ cars also had engine modifications, close-ratio gears, and adjustable suspension as factory options. As such, they were very successful in local racing. With officially licensed production stopping in 1979, the last Lotus badged Seven, a Series 4, was therefore produced in New Zealand.\nSteel Brothers Limited attempted to make a wider, modernised version of the Series 4, the Lotus Super 907, using the twin cam Lotus 907 engine. In the spring of 1978 it was announced that this was to be sold in the United States - but the American importer had no funds and the project came to naught. The single finished Super 907 was moved from New Zealand to the United States in 2010 to undergo a full restoration.\nPerformance.\nRoad test.\nA car with a tuned Ford 1172 cc engine and close-ratio gearbox was tested by the British magazine \"The Motor\" in 1958. It was found to have a top speed of , could accelerate from 0- in 6.2 seconds and had a fuel consumption of . The test car cost \u00a31,157 including taxes of \u00a3386. They commented that car could be bought in component form and then it would have cost \u00a3399 for the parts from Lotus, \u00a3100 for the Ford engine and gearbox and \u00a327 for the BMC rear axle.\nTop speed.\nA Seven's top speed greatly depends upon the body configuration, engine power and gearing. Early models with low-powered engines had difficulty exceeding , although a race-prepared Seven was clocked at whilst driven by Brausch Niemann through a speed-trap at the 1962 Natal Grand Prix. In addition, clamshell style wings tend to create drag and generate lift at higher speeds. Cycle wings help alleviate this tendency, and low height Brookland aeroscreens or the lighter Perspex variants that can replace the windscreen help improve top end speed. Sevens do suffer from front end lift at high speed \u2013 the nose creates more lift than downforce at speeds over around , although retro fitted \"winglets\" may counter this.\nLow speed acceleration.\nNearly all Sevens, due to their extremely light weight (around 10cwt / 500\u00a0kg) have excellent acceleration, especially up to , depending on power. The original late 1950s Sevens could beat most contemporary saloon cars\u2014and by the early 1960s, with improved Ford-Cosworth engines could take on most high-performance sports cars with 0\u201360\u00a0mph time in the low 7 seconds.\nBraking.\nThe less powerful early models had drum brakes all around, in common with most road cars of the time. Later models had front disc brakes. Physics favours small cars in braking and Sevens have excellent stopping distances.\nHandling.\nThe highest part of the car is about three feet (900\u00a0mm) from the road and it has a cloth top and side curtains with plastic back and side windows. The supports for the top and the windshield frame are aluminium. The lower chassis tubes are five inches (127\u00a0mm) from the road, while the wet-sump, bell housing, and one chassis tube are lower, meaning the centre of gravity is very low.\nThe front/rear weight distribution is nearly equal and the lack of a boot and small petrol tank assure that it remains fairly constant. It is, however, more front-heavy than more modern high-performance cars.\nSuspension.\nIn the original Seven, the front lower A-arm (or \"wishbone\") of the double wishbone suspension is traditional, but for the purpose of reducing weight, the upper suspension integrated an anti-roll (anti-sway) bar into a horizontal suspension arm. This approach formed a pseudo-wishbone which was semi-independent in nature. This approach worked well with early cross-ply tyres, but with later radials, the configuration seriously affected its adjustability.\nFor the rear suspension, Lotus originally used a live axle (or solid axle). This approach was very cost-effective since most production saloon cars up to the 1980s used these components. A mixture of Ford, Standard Motor Company and Austin components was used. One disadvantage of live axles is higher unsprung weight, affecting handling and ride on rough surfaces.\nAerodynamics.\nIn general, cars with non-optimised aerodynamics tend to be free of adverse aerodynamic effects on handling, but the front wheel arches, of all but the Series I, cause lift at high speeds. Like the good straight-line performance, the car's nimble handling is limited in the speed range, and this is not usually important in a car intended for public roads.\nWhile the car's frontal area is small, the Lotus Seven has a drag coefficient (formula_1) among the highest of any known production car - ranging from 0.65 to 0.75, depending on the bodywork.\nAdditionally, the clamshell front wings develop lift. This is accentuated by the slight natural lift caused by rotating wheels. Consequently, Sevens have exhibited understeer at high speeds.\nSteering.\nThe rack and pinion steering provide a minimum of play and friction.\nFrame rigidity.\nIt is a stressed skin construction, in which the flat aluminium body panels, and especially the floor, stiffen and effectively triangulate the largely rectangular steel tubular frame structure. This gives a rigid frame with few tubes and very little bodyweight that does not contribute to the frame stiffness. The flat panels avoid difficulties in shaping aluminum sheet into smooth compound curves. On the downside, it does not allow attractive curves or streamlining.\nMechanical details.\nEngines.\nOriginally equipped with the Ford Sidevalve engine, the Series 2 received the new Ford Kent engine. The original \"Super Seven\" received versions of the Kent unit with Cosworth modifications. Later, the Kent engine was updated to the crossflow design; this 1.6-litre engine was the most commonly installed one in the Series 3 as well as Series 4. A limited number of earlier cars received Coventry Climax FWA engines, while the later cars were offered with the Lotus-Ford Twin Cam engine.\nFrame and body.\nThe Lotus Seven was designed with racing in mind, and lightness was of primary concern to Chapman. Like racing cars of the time, it was therefore built around a multi-tube space frame with high sides to allow a stiffer frame (longer lever arm). The Series II and later road versions had simpler frames than the more race-oriented Series I.\nA front-mounted engine driving the rear wheels (a similar layout to most cars of the day) and a very lightweight steel spaceframe was covered with stressed aluminium panel bodywork. The body panels were mainly flat to avoid the expense of more elaborate curved bodywork, and the simple cloth lined plastic doors were hinged from the windscreen. The nose-cone and wheel arches were originally aluminium parts, but these were replaced in the later S2 and S3 models with painted or self-coloured fibreglass.\nWeight.\nEarly Lotus Sevens weighed around 1,100\u00a0lb (10cwt/500\u00a0kg). Although the weight crept upward as production progressed, it remained remarkably low for a production car of over a litre displacement.\nSuspension.\nThe front was by \"A\" arms and coil springs with an anti-roll bar serving as the front half of the top A-arm. The rear had trailing arms, a triangular centre locating member, and a solid rear axle.\nLiterature.\nThe Lotus Seven has spawned many books, test reports, and articles, many of which are still in print.\nReplicas.\nBecause of the Seven's relatively simple design, over 160 companies have offered replicas or Seven-type cars over the years. Many have been challenged over the years by the UK rights-holder, Caterham. Such cars are often referred to as \"sevenesque\" or simply a \"seven\" or \"se7en\". Sometimes they are also called clubmans or \"locost\". Some examples are:\nAlso, see \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61262", "revid": "42168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61262", "title": "Ron Champion", "text": ""}
{"id": "61263", "revid": "50680856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61263", "title": "Rose\u2013Hulman Institute of Technology", "text": "Private university in Terre Haute, Indiana, US\nRose\u2013Hulman Institute of Technology (RHIT) is a private university in Terre Haute, Indiana, United States. It was founded in 1874 and houses twelve academic departments with over thirty undergraduate and graduate degree programs in science, engineering, technology, and engineering management, leading to bachelor's and master's degrees.\nHistory.\nFounding (1874\u20131917).\nFounder Chauncey Rose, along with nine friends, created the Terre Haute School of Industrial Science in 1874 to provide technical training after encountering difficulties in recruiting local engineers during construction of his railroads. Mr. Rose donated the land, at 13th and Locust St., and the majority of the funds needed to start the new school. A year later, the cornerstone of the new institution was laid and the name was changed to Rose Polytechnic Institute despite the objections of the president of the board of managers and chief benefactor, Mr. Rose. The original campus was a single building, with no dormitories or recreational facilities.\nThe first class of 48 students entered in 1883, chosen from 58 applicants. All students were male, and 37 came from Indiana. All but four chose to major in mechanical engineering, with civil engineering and chemistry the only other majors. Nearly half of the original students would eventually leave their studies before graduation for several reasons, including poor grades or conduct. The first president was Charles O. Thompson, who modeled the education of Rose Polytechnic after eastern institutions, making it the first private engineering college west of the Alleghenies.\nDuring the early years of the school, finance was a major concern. Many faculty and staff accepted pay cuts to stay at the institution.\nIn 1889 the school awarded what it considered to be the first chemical engineering degree in the country. In 1897 John B. Peddle was appointed professor of machine design, a post he held until 1933. In 1910 he published the \"Construction of Graphical Charts\", which was the first book in the English language treating the art of graphical representation.\nRelocation and war years (1917\u20131951).\nIn 1917, the school, having grown to more than 300 students, moved from 13th and Locust Street to a new site consisting of of farmland east of town, donated by the Hulman family of Terre Haute. The old location was used continuously by the Vigo County School District from 1922 to 2013; as of 2020 the Terre Haute Boys &amp; Girls Club occupies the site. The cornerstone of the new campus was laid in 1922. The new campus consisted of an academic building (now known as Moench Hall) and the institute's first dormitory, Deming Hall, both of which are still in use today.\nEarly life at Rose consisted of social fraternities, athletics, and the occasional \"high jinks\". A popular \"high jinks\" involved the sophomore class inviting the freshman class to a baseball game but were told to \"leave their pipes with the nurse\". The freshmen would produce the pipes at a specific time and a brawl would ensue.\nDuring World War I, Rose Polytechnic trained students in technical subjects such as vehicle maintenance, and created a Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) Engineer unit which later became the Wabash Battalion Army ROTC program. During World War II the ROTC unit was replaced with an Army Specialized Training Unit and students could enter and graduate after every quarter to support the war effort. This enrollment schedule continued through the post-war years until 1951.\n1960s\u20131970s.\nIn recognition of the Hulman family's significant contributions and continued financial support, in particular a $15 million addition to the endowment, Rose Polytechnic was renamed Rose\u2013Hulman Institute of Technology in 1971.\nDuring the 1960s and 1970s, growth accelerated under president John A. Logan. Five new residence halls, a new student union, library, and a student recreation center were all constructed between 1963 and 1976. Permission was sought and received to increase the student population to 1000.\nThe quarterly cryptology journal \"Cryptologia\" was founded and published at RHIT from 1977 to 1995, at which time it was moved to the United States Military Academy.\n1990s\u2013present.\nFor most of its history, Rose\u2013Hulman was a men's only institution with some cooperative arrangements with Saint Mary Of-The-Woods College women's school and Indiana State University. It voted to become coeducational in 1991, with the first full-time women students starting in 1995.\nIn the decade following 1995, Rose\u2013Hulman's growth was aided by a major fundraising campaign, \"Vision to be the Best\". Originally a $100 million campaign over ten years, it met its goal in half the time. The goal was extended to $200 million, and by the end of the campaign in June 2004, over $250 million had been raised. In 1997, many physical changes were made to the Rose\u2013Hulman campus. Using a gift from the F. W. Olin Foundation, an expansion of Olin Hall known as the Olin Advanced Learning Center opened. Additionally, The John T Myers Center for Technological Research opened, with space for research laboratories, presentation rooms, classrooms, and academic offices. Shook Field House was replaced by the $20 million Sports and Recreation Center, which the National Football League's Indianapolis Colts used for their summer training camp from 1999 to 2010. In 2002, Hatfield Hall, a theater and alumni center, was opened.\nAfter the 2004 retirement of institute president Samuel Hulbert, who had led the school since 1976, the college faced a leadership crisis. Soon after John J. Midgley arrived as the new president, rumors of conflict between Midgley and the administration started to circulate. Students, some wearing T-shirts proclaiming \"Hit the Road Jack\", held a rally calling for Midgley's resignation. Midgley resigned as president of the institute on June 11, 2005, less than a year into his presidency, after the faculty, staff, and Student Government Association approved votes of no confidence. During the succeeding academic year, Robert Bright, the chairman of the Board of Trustees, served as interim chief executive officer.\nIn 2006, Gerald Jakubowski, Vice President and Professor of Engineering at Arizona State University, became the 13th president of the institute, taking over July 1, 2006. He resigned in 2009, and the Board of Trustees elected Matt Branam to serve as interim president. He became president later that year. Branam died of a heart attack in April 2012, and the cabinet subsequently selected Robert A. Coons as the institute's interim president. In 2013, the Board of Trustees named James C. Conwell as the institute's 15th president, starting May 1, 2013.\nIn 2017, the school acquired from the former home of Mari Hulman George.\nIn 2018, Conwell resigned as president, and Senior Vice President Robert Coons was appointed to serve as acting president and then, in November 2018, as the university president. In the same year, the Hulman Memorial Student Union was renovated and renamed the Mussallem Union after the primary donors, the Mussallem Family. The Mussallem Union is centrally located on campus and provides student meeting spaces, dining areas, conference rooms, health services, bookstore, and administrative space.\nIn 2019, an expansion of the Branam Innovation Center (BIC), the Kremer Innovation Center (KIC) opened. The BIC and KIC provide rapid prototyping and manufacturing options to students, in addition to housing thermofluids and wet lab facilities, conference rooms, classrooms, and project team workshops.\nIn 2021, the New Academic Building was opened, with funding provided by a $15 million lead gift by an anonymous donor. The New Academic Building is home to the Engineering Design program, chemistry laboratory facilities, food science laboratory, breakout and study rooms, as well as a large atrium. Together with Moench Hall and the Myers Center, a new courtyard was opened. The New Academic building is the first building in the state of Indiana to apply for WELL recognition.\nCampus.\nMost of the university property is in the Terre Haute city limits, though parts extend outside of the city limits. The university as a whole is in Lost Creek Township.\nAcademics.\nThe curricula at RHIT concentrate on engineering and the natural sciences. The school's primary focus is undergraduate education, though there is a small graduate program for master's degree students. There are no doctoral programs. As of 2021, Rose\u2013Hulman has 189 faculty members, 99% of whom hold a PhD. The current student-to-faculty ratio is 11:1. Admission to the institute remains competitive due to its self-selecting admissions class and applicant sharing with Purdue, and other top universities. In 2022, 602 freshman students enrolled out of 3,353 accepted applicants.\nAccreditation.\nRose\u2013Hulman has been regionally accredited by the Higher Learning Commission since 1916, with the most recent reaffirmation of accreditation having occurred in the 2014\u20132015 accreditation year. The Biomedical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Civil Engineering, Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Engineering Design, Engineering Physics, Mechanical Engineering, Optical Engineering, and Software Engineering programs are accredited by The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET).\nIn addition to institutional membership in the American Society for Engineering Education, the institute is also a member of the Association of Independent Technological Universities, a group formed to further the interests of private engineering schools.\nRankings and reputation.\nAs of 2025, the institute has been ranked first among engineering colleges that do not offer a doctorate degree by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for 27 consecutive years. Each individual program assessed has also been ranked first since the magazine has published individual rankings. These programs are the Chemical, Civil, Computer, Electrical, Mechanical, and Biomedical Engineering programs (Biomedical Engineering programs have only received assessment in the 2015 rankings). Rose\u2013Hulman is ranked 24th nationally for Return on Investment for Students by PayScale's 2024 rankings.\nStudent life.\nThe student body tends to come mostly from the Midwestern United States, though, as the school has gained prominence, it has gradually attracted a more geographically and ethnically diverse applicant pool. 39% of students are from the state of Indiana with large numbers of students from the nearby states of Illinois, Ohio, Michigan and Minnesota.\nThe school has several competition teams that operate out of the Branam and Kremer Innovation Centers. These include Team Rose Motorsports, Grand Prix Engineering (Formula SAE), Human Powered Vehicle Challenge, Rose Rocketry, AIAA Design/Build/Fly, Chem-E-Car, MakerLab, Make It Happen, and various robotics competitions among many others.\nThere are eight social fraternities and three social sororities, some of which have their houses on campus. As of 2003, nearly 69% of the students were members of Greek social organizations.\nRose\u2013Hulman Ventures serves as a source of internships and job opportunities with startups and established companies of all sizes for Rose students and alumni. Rose\u2013Hulman Ventures was established in 1999 with a $30 million grant from the Lilly Endowment and received a $24.9 million follow-up grant in 2002.\nMedia.\nThe school's student-run newspaper is \"The Rose Thorn\".\nRose\u2013Hulman has an amateur radio club, the \"Rose Tech Radio Club\" (call sign W9NAA), that maintains a dedicated on-campus station.\nThe \"Rose\u2013Hulman Film Club\" produces student-directed short films.\nThe campus radio station was WMHD-FM 90.7 FM, \"The Monkey\". The station originally broadcast with a very low power transmitter and antenna located on campus, but later operated with an off-site transmitter at 1400 watts. The studio facilities for the station were in the basement of the BSB residence hall. The station was operated entirely by student volunteers, and all disc-jockeys choose their own format and playlists. In August 2014, the station was sold to Indiana State University.\nAthletics.\nThe team's sports teams are called the Rose\u2013Hulman Fightin' Engineers.\nPresidents.\nThe following persons have served as president of Rose\u2013Hulman Institute of Technology:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61264", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61264", "title": "Kit car", "text": "Automobile that the buyer assembles into a functioning car\nA kit car is an automobile available as a set of parts that a manufacturer sells and the buyer then assembles into a functioning car. Usually, many of the major mechanical systems such as the engine and transmission are sourced from donor vehicles or purchased new from other vendors. Kits vary in completeness, consisting of as little as a book of plans, or as much as a complete set with all components to assemble into a fully operational vehicle such as those from Caterham.\nRelated terms.\nA subset of the kit car, commonly referred to as a \"re-body\", is when a commercially manufactured vehicle has a new (often fiberglass) body put on the running chassis. Most times, the existing drive gear and interior are retained. These kits require less technical knowledge from the builder. Because the chassis and mechanical systems were designed, built, and tested by a major automotive manufacturer, a re-body can lead to a much higher degree of safety and reliability.\nThe definition of a kit car usually indicates that a manufacturer constructs multiple kits of the same vehicle, each of which it then sells to a third party to build. A kit car should not be confused with:\nHistory.\nKit cars have been around since the earliest days of the automobile. In England in 1896, Thomas Hyler-White developed a design for a car that could be assembled at home. Technical designs were published in a magazine called \"The English Mechanic\". In the US, the Lad's Car of 1912 could be bought for US$160 ($5,000 in 2023) fully assembled or US$140 ($4,400 in 2023) in kit form.\nIn 1949, Derek Buckler made the first UK kit car. His goal was to bring motor sports to a larger market by selling affordable car kits. This sparked an emergence of small kit car firms between 1949 and 1973. They were producing a wide range of designs and specifications. These early kits were targeted at amateur motor sports, some of which include trials, races, rallies, and sprints. Car production had increased considerably and with rustproofing in its infancy, many older vehicles were being sent to breaker yards as their bodywork was beyond economic repair. An industry grew up supplying new bodies and chassis to take the components from these cars and convert them into new vehicles, particularly into sports cars. Fiber-reinforced plastic was coming into general use and made limited-scale production of automobile body components much more economical. In the UK up to the mid-1970s, kit cars were sometimes normal production vehicles that were partially assembled. This avoided the imposition of a purchase tax, as the kits were assessed as components and not vehicles.\nDuring the 1970s, many kits had bodies styled as sports cars that were designed to bolt directly to VW Beetle chassis. This was popular as the old body could be easily separated from the chassis, leaving virtually all mechanical components attached to the chassis. A fiber-reinforced plastic body from the kit supplier would then be fitted. This made the Beetle one of the most popular \"donor\" vehicles. Examples of this conversion include the Bradley GT, Sterling, and Sebring which were made by the thousands. Many are still around today. Volkswagen-based dune buggies also appeared in relatively large numbers in the 1960s and 1970s, usually based on a shortened floor pan.\nIn the early 2000s, kit car manufacturers such as Factory Five Racing began incorporating robotic automation into their manufacturing process. A company by the name of Product-ion Technology Inc. collaborated with Factory Five Racing to create an automated panel trimming process. Factory Five Racing uses a gel-coated fiberglass reinforced plastic to build the body panels for each kit. These panels need to be trimmed to size and were originally cut by hand, which could take up to 7.5 hours to complete just four sets of panels. With the new robotic trimming system, the time has been reduced to 24 minutes. The robotic trimming systems have also increased accuracy and consistency, reducing the reject rate of new panels.\nCurrent kit cars are frequently replicas of well-known and often expensive classics. They are designed so that anyone with the right technical skills can build them at home to a standard where they can be driven on the public roads. These replicas are in general appearance like the original, but their bodies are often made of fiberglass mats soaked in polyester resin instead of the original sheet metal. Replicas of the AC Cobra and the Lotus Seven are particularly popular examples. The right to manufacture the Lotus 7 is owned by Caterham Cars, who bought the rights to the car from Lotus founder Colin Chapman in 1973. Caterham cars are component cars and are a continued development of Chapman's design. All other Lotus Seven-style cars are replica kit cars costing significantly less than the Caterham without the residual value. These replica kit cars enable enthusiasts to possess a vehicle closely resembling a vehicle that they may not be able to afford due to scarcity, and at the same time take advantage of modern technology. The Sterling Nova kit originally produced in the UK was the most popular VW-based kits being produced worldwide. It was licensed under several different names with an estimated 10,000 sold.\nA common concern about kit cars is that it appears to many to be technically impossible to assemble a car at home and license it for public roads, including meeting standards for the mandatory quality control (road worthiness test) that is required in most countries. For example, to obtain permission to use a kit car in Germany, every such vehicle with a speed over 6\u00a0km/h without a general operating license (ABE) or an EC type permission (EC-TG) has to undergo a technical inspection by an officially recognized expert. In the United Kingdom it is necessary to meet the requirements of the IVA (Individual vehicle Approval) regulations. In the United States SEMA has gone state by state to set up legal ways for states to register kit cars and speciality vehicles for inspection and plates.\nA survey of nearly 600 kit car owners in the US, the UK and Germany, carried out by Dr. Ingo St\u00fcben, showed that typically 100\u20131,500 hours are required to build a kit car, depending upon the model and the completeness of the kit. As the complexity of the kits offered continues to increase, build times have increased. Some accurate replica kits may take over 5,000 hours to complete.\nSeveral sports car producers such as Lotus, Marcos, and TVR started as kit car makers.\nKit car manufacturers.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand had a long history of small garages and vehicle enthusiasts modifying and creating sports and sports racing cars. In the early 1950s, with the advent of fibreglass bodied cars, a new opportunity arose for local companies associated with car enthusiasts to create car bodies. Among these early manufacturers was Weltex Plastics Limited of Christchurch, which imported a Microplas Mistral sports car mould and began making bodies and chassis in 1956. They were followed in 1958 by Frank Cantwell's Puma and Bruce Goldwater's Cougar. Also in New Zealand during this period, Ferris de Joux was constructing a variety of sports racers. De Joux is noted in particular for his Mini GT from the 1960s.\nRoss Baker's Heron Cars started in 1962 making racing cars and eventually began producing kit cars in 1980. Bill Ashton, formerly of Microplas and Weltex, joined with Ted George in the 1960s and made the Tiki. Three were known to have been made. Graham McRae with Steve Bond of Gemini Plastics imported a replica Le Mans M6B styled GT mould in 1968, The cars were made and sold by Dave Harrod and Steve Bond of Fibreglass Developments Ltd, Bunnythorpe as the Maram. McRae went on to make a Porsche Spyder replica in the 1990s.\nA number of new companies entered the market in the 1980s \u2013 Almac 1985, Alternative Cars (1984), Cheetah (1986), Chevron (1984), Countess Mouldings (1988), Fraser (1988), Leitch (1986), and Saker (1989). Some recent ones are Baettie (1997), which became Redline in 2001 and moved to the United Kingdom in 2007 as Beattie Racing Limited, and McGregor (2001).\nTwo companies who specialise in making replicas of various models to order are Classic Car Developments (1992) and Tempero.\nSlovakia.\nThe K1-Attack Kit car is produced by Slovakian company K1 Styling &amp; Tuning. Their cars are customizable and have come in many different variations since 2001. K1 offers engines produced by Honda, Toyota, etc. in the 130HP to 800HP range. Due to its light weight it achieves the same power output\u2013weight ratio as Lamborghini Gallardo, Audi R8, or Ferrari F430 even with a 280\u00a0hp engine. \nThe (cheapest) complete kit costs around $15,000, and is based on the Honda Accord 4/5G F20/F22 (2.0L\u20132.2L) engine. A complete kit with Honda Civic Type-R 9-10G K20C1 achieves 320HP (at request, the engine can be tuned to 400\u2013500HP). Many more engines, such as Honda K24, Toyota 3SGTE are available.\nCustomer projects have included engines such as the VW 1.9 TDI, VW 1.8T, (not specified) 2.0 Subaru engine, 2.5L V6 Ford, 3.0 V6 Jaguar, 3.0 I6 BMW, or 4.2L V8 from Audi R8.\nThough based in Slovakia, the company markets itself as producing Czecho-Slovakian products.\nSouth Africa.\nThe specialist car builder Hi-Tech Automotive does not venture to supply cars in kit form at all, but only builds fully-assembled \"turnkey-minus\" continuation series cars with chassis, bodywork and interior trim finished off, ready for engine installation. Almost all cars are exported, mostly to the United States as \"glider kits\".\nSweden.\nTechnically, kit cars are not allowed in Sweden, but provided that most of the components and material are sourced by the builder personally it is possible to register them as amateur built vehicles. Before the law requiring a mandatory crash test in 1970 there was a booming kit car industry in Sweden with most companies basing their kits on the VW Beetle chassis. By the time amateur-built vehicles were once again allowed in 1982, all kit car makers in Sweden were out of business.\nThe inspection (SVA equivalent) in Sweden is handled by the car builders' association SFRO who does two inspections: one when the car has reached the rolling chassis stage and the second when the car is finished. Amateur-built cars are currently limited to a power ratio of per 100\u00a0kg (182\u00a0hp/ton). Until 2003, the limit was per 100\u00a0kg, so for very light cars (like a Lotus 7 type car) it was a problem to find a suitable engine.\nUnited Kingdom.\nVehicle regulations in the UK allow the production of up to 200 vehicles a year without the extensive regulation and testing requirements applied to mass-market vehicles. This has led to an expanding industry of small producers capable of offering partial and complete kits, some for export, and finished vehicles for domestic use. \nThe Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA) regulate kit cars in the UK, which helps to ensure that vehicles used on the road are safe and suitable for the purpose. The current test for this is Individual Vehicle Approval (IVA), which has replaced Single Vehicle Approval (SVA). When SVA was first introduced in 1998, many believed this would kill off the kit car market, but in reality it has made the kit car market stronger, as the vehicles produced now have to meet a minimum standard. IVA was introduced in summer 2009 and it is too early to tell what impact this will have on the industry.\nA significant number of kit cars do not receive a 'Q' registration plate, which signifies a vehicle of unknown or mixed age. All kit cars are subject to a Vehicle Identity Check, VIC, by the DVLA to determine the registration mark a kit car is assigned. This will be either, a new, current year, registration; an 'age-related' registration; or a 'Q' plate. Once a kit car has been correctly registered, a V5C, or log book, will be assigned and then a kit car is treated in exactly the same way as a production car, from any larger manufacturer. A kit car must pass its MOT test and have a valid car tax, or have a valid Statutory Off-Road Notification (SORN) declaration. As part of the IVA, a kit car can sometimes be permitted to assume the age of a single, older car (the \"donor car\") if the major parts were taken from it in its construction. If the age identifier assigned to a kit car falls before 1980 the vehicle may be road taxed free of charge.\nAccording to figures given to \"Kit Car\" magazine, the most popular kit in the United Kingdom in 2005 was made by Robin Hood Sportscars, who sold 700 kits a year. The editor of \"Kit Car Magazine\" suggests in 2016 the MEV Exocet was the best selling kit car.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnited States.\nA glider kit is a term used in the United States for a kit of components used to restore or reconstruct a wrecked or dismantled vehicle. Glider kits include a chassis (frame), front axle, and body (cab). The kit may also contain other optional components. A motor vehicle constructed from a glider kit is titled as a new vehicle.\nMore common terms include \"partial-turnkey,\" \"turnkey-minus,\" and (though it technically refers to a vehicle without a body, rather than body without drivetrain) \"rolling chassis,\" or \"roller.\"\nThe world's leading producer of component kit cars is Factory Five Racing. It was founded in the United States in 1995. They use a panel trimming process to build a wide range of models. The body panels used on these cars are made from a gel-coated fiber-class reinforced plastic. \nExamples of US kit manufacturers and cars include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61266", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61266", "title": "Fred Rosenstock", "text": "Austrian-American bookseller and collector\nFred Asher Rosenstock (November 29, 1895 \u2013 February 15, 1986) was an Austrian-born American bookseller, book and art collector and publisher in Denver, Colorado from the 1920s until the mid-1980s.\nEarly life.\nFred Rosenstock was born Selig Usher Rosenstock in 1895 in Biala Potok in Galicia, then a province of Austria in the foothills of the Carpathian Mountains. His family emigrated to America in 1904. He grew up in Rochester, New York.\nCareer.\nDuring World War I, Rosenstock moved to Washington, D.C. and worked both as a civilian and later in the US Army as a stenographer. After the war he worked for a billboard company, but became ill. He was advised to move to a dry, desert climate such as California. He went west but never got past Denver.\nRosenstock had been interested in books from his youth, and by the time he was in Washington was a collector haunting the book shops and building a small collection. In Denver he continued collecting and in 1922 opened his first bookstore, the Denver Book Shop, an antiquarian book store. It was not a success. Later after marrying Frances Goodman, in 1928, he purchased an existing book store in a good location on 15th Street in Denver and renamed it the Bargain Book Store. He continued to collect and sell rare books but the main business of the Bargain Book Store was selling school textbooks. This line got the business through the Great Depression. The store burned in 1948 and was rebuilt.\nMeanwhile, Rosenstock continued his interest in rare books developing an interest in western history. By 1960, he began liquidating his general book business and in 1962 opened Fred A. Rosenstock Books on East Colfax Avenue in Denver specializing in western history. Fred had also developed an interest in western art and had collected many of the paintings and sculptures of Charles Marion Russell which he displayed in his bookstore.\nRosenstock became recognized as the leading bookseller in the field of western history and located and sold many books to the important western history collections, notably to the library at Brigham Young University and the Denver Public Library. He was also a publisher operating as the Old West Publishing Company, issuing about 30 significant books. By 1975, Rosenstock sold his extensive art collection and he closed his bookstore. In 1972, Rosenstock opened a gallery of western art, which he operated until having a stroke in 1984.\nPersonal life and death.\nRosenstock married Frances Goodman in 1926. They had a daughter, Marilyn Weiker, in 1936. Rosenstock's wife died in 1972. Rosenstock suffered a stroke in 1984 and died two years later in 1986, at the age of 90.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61267", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61267", "title": "Tamora Pierce", "text": "American writer\nTamora Pierce (born December 13, 1954) is an American writer of fantasy fiction for teenagers, known best for stories featuring young heroines. She made a name for herself with her first book series, \"The Song of the Lioness\" (1983\u20131988), which followed the main character Alanna through the trials and triumphs of training as a knight.\nPierce won the Margaret A. Edwards Award from the Young Adult Library Services Association (YALSA) of the American Library Association in 2013, citing her two quartets \"Song of the Lioness\" and \"Protector of the Small\" (1999\u20132002). The annual award recognizes one writer and a particular body of work for \"significant and lasting contribution to young adult literature\".\nPierce's books have been translated into twenty languages.\nEarly life and education.\nPierce was born in South Connellsville, Pennsylvania in Fayette County, on December 13, 1954 to Wayne and Mary Lou Pierce. Her mother wanted to name her \"Tamara\" but the nurse who filled out her birth certificate misspelled it as \"Tamora\". When she was five, her sister Kimberly (on whom she based Alanna) was born and a year later her second sister, Melanie, was born. From the time she was five until she was eight, she lived in Dunbar. In June 1963 she and her family moved to California. They first lived in San Mateo on El Camino Real and then moved to the other side of the San Francisco Peninsula, in Miramar. They lived in Miramar for half a year, in El Granada a full year, and then three years in Burlingame.\nShe began reading when she was very young and started writing when she was in the sixth grade. Her interest in fantasy and science fiction began when she was introduced to J. R. R. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\", and so she started to write the kind of books that she was reading. After her parents divorced, her mother moved her and her sisters back to Fayette County in 1969, where she spent two years at Albert Gallatin Senior High. When her family moved again, she spent her senior year at Uniontown Area Senior High School, acting, singing, and writing for the school paper. She is an alumna of the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia.\nCareer.\nWhile at the University of Pennsylvania, Pierce wrote the books that became \"The Song of the Lioness\" quartet. The first book of this quartet, \"\" was published by Atheneum Books in 1983.\nPierce lived with her husband Tim Liebe (Spouse-Creature) in New York City, with their four cats and multiple other pets, until they moved to Syracuse, New York.\nIn 2008, she donated her archive to the department of Rare Books and Special Collections at Northern Illinois University.\nPierce was also actively involved in moderating and discussing her novels on a message board called Sheroes Central from about 2001-2006, at which point it was acquired by a third party.\nWriting process.\nOn her homepage, Pierce states she gets most ideas from things she stumbles upon. Her concept of magic as a tapestry of threads comes from her experiences in crocheting, and in her world, all mages are somehow based on British naturalist David Attenborough after watching his nature documentaries. Fantasy novels and Arthurian legend were the base of the worlds she thought up as a girl, and later she added contemporary issues like youth crime and cholera outbreaks in Africa. In general, Pierce states: \"The best way to prepare to have ideas when you need them is to listen to and encourage your obsessions.\"\nPierce draws on elements of people and animals around her for inspiration. The character of Alanna is loosely based on Pierce's sister. Thayet's appearance is based on a friend of Pierce's. Beka's pigeon friends in \"Provost's Dog\" are all based on actual pigeons of Pierce's acquaintance.\nPierce first started writing to escape from the drama of her parents' divorce. She wrote fan fiction based on her favorite stories, imitating them closely. Pierce says she decided to write her stories about strong female characters because she noticed a lack of them in the books she read when she was young.\nMerchandise.\nIn November 2018, the first line of officially licensed merchandise was created in partnership with Dual Wield Studio: pins, apparel and accessories developed in collaboration with creators from the Tamora Pierce fanbase. The collection expanded in 2020 to include a rendition of the map of Tortall.\nAt the end of 2023, Dual Wield Studio announced a new collection celebrating the 40th anniversary of \"Alanna: The First Adventure.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61268", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61268", "title": "Greater London Council", "text": "English local administrative body (1965\u20131986)\nThe Greater London Council (GLC) was the top-tier local government administrative body for Greater London from 1965 to 1986. It replaced the earlier London County Council (LCC) which had covered a much smaller area. The GLC was dissolved in 1986 by the Local Government Act 1985 and its powers were devolved to the London boroughs and other entities. A new administrative body, known as the Greater London Authority (GLA), was established in 2000.\nBackground.\nIn 1957 a Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London had been set up under Sir Edwin Herbert to consider the local government arrangements in the London area.\nIt reported in 1960, recommending the creation of 52 new London boroughs as the basis for local government. It further recommended that the LCC be replaced by a weaker strategic authority, with responsibility for public transport, road schemes, housing development and regeneration. The Greater London Group, a research centre of academics within the London School of Economics, also had a significant effort on the commission's report and the eventual creation of the GLC.\nMost of the commission's recommendations were accepted, but the number of new boroughs was reduced to 32. Greater London covered the whole County of London and most of Middlesex, plus parts of Essex, Kent, and Surrey, a small part of Hertfordshire and the County Boroughs of Croydon (Surrey) and East and West Ham (both in Essex), all of which had been independent of county council control since 1889.\nSome areas on the boundaries of the area recommended by the Herbert Commission, fearing increased local taxation, fought successfully not to come under the new Greater London Council, notably the urban districts of Chigwell in Essex; and Sunbury-on-Thames, Staines and Potters Bar in Middlesex. Other areas recommended for inclusion that were never part of Greater London included Epsom and Ewell, Caterham and Warlingham, Esher, and Weybridge.\nThe first election for the new Greater London Council took place on 9 April 1964, and the old London County Council was abolished the following year.\nCreation.\nThe GLC was established on 1 April 1965 by the London Government Act 1963, which sought to create a new body covering more of London rather than just the inner part of the conurbation, additionally including and empowering newly created London boroughs within the overall administrative structure.\nWithin the new Greater London administrative area the council replaced Essex County Council, Hertfordshire County Council, Kent County Council, London County Council, Middlesex County Council and the councils of the county boroughs of Croydon, East Ham and West Ham.\nGLC councillors elected for Inner London electoral divisions (the former County of London) became \"ex officio\" members of the new Inner London Education Authority, which took over the LCC responsibility for education. By contrast in Outer London, which was the rest of Greater London, the 20 London borough councils each became a local education authority, akin to a county council or county borough in the rest of England.\nPowers.\nThe GLC was responsible for running strategic services such as the fire service, emergency planning, waste disposal and flood prevention. The GLC shared responsibility with the London boroughs for providing roads, housing, city planning and leisure services. It had a very limited role in direct service provision with most functions the responsibility of the London boroughs. The GLC did not take control of public transport from the London Transport Board until 1970 and lost control to London Regional Transport in 1984.\nUnder the 1963 Act, the GLC was required to produce a \"Greater London Development Plan\". The plan included in its wide-ranging remit: population changes, employment, housing, pollution, transport, roads, the central area, growth and development areas, urban open spaces and the urban landscape, public services and utilities and planning standards. The plan included the comprehensive redevelopment of Covent Garden and creating a central London motorway loop. The plan was subject to an Inquiry which lasted from July 1970 until May 1972. The campaign to save Covent Garden along with various opposition on other matters largely derailed the plan.\nAccording to one observer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nComposition and political control.\nEach of the six GLC elections was won by the leading national opposition party, with the party in government nationally coming second in the GLC elections.\nThe first GLC election was on 9 April 1964. Each of the new boroughs elected a number of representatives under the bloc vote system. Despite Conservative hopes, the first GLC consisted of 64 Labour and 36 Conservative councillors and Labour Group leader Bill Fiske became the first Leader of the council.\nAt the next election in 1967 the unpopularity of the national Labour government produced a massive Conservative victory with 82 seats, to Labour's 18. Desmond Plummer became the first Conservative leader of London-wide government in 33 years. The Conservatives retained control in 1970 with a reduced majority.\nIn 1972 the electoral system was reformed to introduce single-member constituencies for the election after the 1973 contest, and extend the term of office to four years. Labour fought the 1973 election on a strongly socialist platform and won with 58 seats to 32 for the Conservatives. The Liberals won two seats.\nThe GLC's hopes under the Labour administration of Reg Goodwin were badly affected by the oil crisis of 1974. Massive inflation, combined with the GLC's \u00a31.6\u00a0billion debt, led to heavy rate increases (200% in total before the next election in 1977) and unpopular budget cuts. Some months before the 1977 elections the Labour Group began to split. A left group, including Ken Livingstone, denounced the election manifesto of the party.\nThe Conservatives regained control in May 1977, winning 64 seats under their new Thatcherite leader Horace Cutler against a Labour total of just 28. Cutler headed a resolutely right-wing administration, cutting spending, selling council housing and deprioritising London Transport. In opposition the Labour Party continued to fractionalise: Goodwin resigned suddenly in 1980 and in the following leadership contest the little-regarded left-winger Ken Livingstone was only just beaten in an intensely tactical campaign by the moderate Andrew McIntosh. However, the Labour left were strong at constituency level and as the 1981 election approached they worked to ensure that their members were selected to stand and that their democratic socialist anti-austerity convictions shaped the manifesto.\nThe May 1981 election was presented as a clash of ideologies by the Conservatives \u2013 Thatcherism against a \"tax high, spend high\" Marxist Labour group, claiming that Andrew McIntosh would be deposed by Ken Livingstone after the election. McIntosh and Labour Party leader Michael Foot insisted this was untrue, and Labour won a very narrow victory with a majority of six. At a pre-arranged meeting of the new Councillors the day after the election, the Left faction won a complete victory over the less-organised Labour right. McIntosh lost with 20 votes to 30 for Ken Livingstone. Livingstone, dubbed \"Red Ken\" by some newspapers, managed to gain the guarded support of the Labour deputy leader Illtyd Harrington and the party Chief Whip and set about his new administration. Livingstone's deputy leader of the GLC from 1985 to 1986 was John McDonnell, future Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer under Jeremy Corbyn. Livingstone's Technology Director was Mike Cooley who established The Greater London Enterprise Board (GLEB).\nElections to the GLC.\nThe first election was held on 9 April 1964, a year before the creation of the council. Subsequent elections were held every three years for a three-year term in 1967, 1970 and 1973. The first three elections were for 100 councillors from 32 multi-member constituencies. This was revised to 92 councillors from single-member constituencies from the 1973 election. The electoral cycle was switched to four-yearly in 1976 and those elected in 1973 had their term extended by another year. Elections were held for a four-year term in 1977 and 1981. In 1984 the elections that were due to happen in 1985 were cancelled and those elected in 1981 had their term extended by another year. The results were as follows:\nAldermanic elections.\nIn addition to the councillors, there were aldermen elected by the council at the ratio of one alderman to every six councillors. Initially there were 100 councillors and sixteen aldermen elected by the council. The eight aldermen elected with the fewest votes in 1964 were for a three year term and other eight had a six year term. Eight aldermen were elected for a six year term in 1967 and 1970. In 1973, to coincide with the reduction in the number of councillors to 92, the number of aldermen was reduced to fifteen and seven aldermen were elected by the council that year. In 1976 the post of alderman was abolished, taking effect from the 1977 election. Aldermen elected in 1970 had their term extended to seven years and those elected 1973 had their term shortened to four years.\nNotable schemes.\nThe most notable and successful scheme of the GLC was the construction of the Thames Barrier that took place between 1974 and 1982 at a cost of \u00a3534 million. Some saw it as a GLC vanity project but over time people's opinions have changed: the barrier was used 35 times in the 1990s and was raised 75 times in the first decade of the 21st century, due to rising sea-levels.\nIn 1969, the GLC announced its plans for the London Ringways which were three motorways that were proposed to solve London's traffic problem once and for all. However, the scheme met with heavy opposition as it would have included the demolition of 30,000 homes. The Westway road scheme was opened in 1970 and hailed as a vision of the future. A review into the planned Ringways took place between 1970 and 1972. It concluded that construction should begin on the controversial Ringway One to relieve congestion in central London, but that the others needed a re-think. The \"Outer Ringway\" was given the go-ahead in 1973 and opened in 1986 as the M25 motorway. The remainder of the GLC's Ringway plans were finally killed off in the 1980s due to public opposition. This meant that the capital was left on a much more human scale than it might have been, but also meant that London was left with an eternally unsolved traffic problem.\nIn 1983, GLC considered investing \u00a3230,000 into Lucas rail-bus, which could run on roads and rail tracks. The original concept was developed by Lucas Aerospace workers in the 1970s. In 1980\u20131981, the workers' combine built a prototype out of a second-hand Bristol bus. The enthusiasm arose from the opportunity to cut costs on rail vehicle production by partially integrating bus parts. Two challenges had to be solved\u2014collision consequences with much heavier rail vehicles and supervision of the transition from road to rail.\nAfter World War II large areas of homes in London remained derelict after being bombed in the war and some housing that remained standing was often squalid and overcrowded. The GLC, with new housing powers, sought to resolve this but the results were mixed: efforts to relocate Londoners from the dilapidated inner-city areas to the suburbs or satellite towns were met with resistance from the residents of those areas. Notable successful housing developments that were built by the GLC include Balfron Tower which was completed in 1967 in Tower Hamlets and Trellick Tower which was completed in 1972 in North Kensington. Both of these buildings are now Grade II* listed.\nIn addition to the Thames Barrier, other notable successful GLC transport schemes which changed London included the opening of the Blackwall Tunnel second bore and the improvements to the Woolwich Ferry service.\nAbolition.\nKen Livingstone's high-spend socialist policies put the GLC into direct conflict with Margaret Thatcher\u2019s Conservative government. Livingstone soon became a thorn in the side of the sitting Conservative government. He antagonised Thatcher through a series of actions: these included posting a billboard of London's rising unemployment figures on the side of County Hall (directly opposite Parliament), as well as the Fares Fair policy of reducing Tube and bus fares using government subsidies, in which he was defeated in court by Bromley Council, and meeting Sinn F\u00e9in MP Gerry Adams at a time when Adams was banned from entering Great Britain due to his links with the Provisional IRA.\nBy 1983, the government argued for the abolition of the GLC, claiming that it was inefficient and unnecessary, and that its functions could be carried out more efficiently by the boroughs. The arguments for this case which were detailed in the White Paper \"Streamlining the cities\". Critics of this position argued that the GLC's abolition (as with that of the metropolitan county councils) was politically motivated, claiming that it had become a powerful vehicle for opposition to Margaret Thatcher's government. Livingstone and three other Labour councillors resigned in protest, and won back their seats easily in the September 1984 by-elections because the Conservatives refused to stand.\nThe Local Government Act 1985, which abolished the GLC, faced considerable opposition from many quarters but was narrowly passed in Parliament, setting the end of the council for 31 March 1986. It also cancelled the scheduled May 1985 elections. GLC assets were assigned to the London Residuary Body for disposal, including County Hall, which was sold to a Japanese entertainment company and now houses the London Aquarium and the London Dungeon, amongst other things.\nThe Inner London Education Authority (ILEA) continued in existence for a few years, and direct elections to it were held, but ILEA was finally also disbanded in 1990, with the Inner London boroughs assuming control over education as the outer boroughs had done on their creation in 1965.\nReplacement.\nMost of the powers of the GLC were devolved to the London boroughs. Some powers, such as the fire service, were taken over by joint boards made up of councillors appointed by the boroughs \u2013 see waste authorities in Greater London for an example. In total, around 100 organisations were responsible for service delivery in Greater London.\nTony Blair's Labour government was elected in 1997, and was committed to bringing back London-wide government. In 1998 a referendum was held on the establishment of a new London authority and elected mayor, which was approved by a two to one margin.\nThe new Greater London Authority (GLA) was established in 2000 and was effectively a scaled down version of the GLC. The GLA has a very different structure to the GLC, consisting of a directly elected Mayor of London and a London Assembly. The Mayor of London elections were won by the same Ken Livingstone, who began his victory speech with the words: \"As I was saying before I was so rudely interrupted 14 years ago ...\".\nIn February 2020, Labour's Tom Copley, supported by the Conservative's Tony Arbour, both members of the London Assembly, called for the GLC's coat of arms to be adopted by the GLA but this has not materialised. Since the abolition of the GLC in 1986 the London Fire Brigade has continued to use the GLC coat of arms.\nThe archives of the Greater London Council are held at London Metropolitan Archives.\nLeaders of the GLC.\nKen Livingstone resigned on 2 August 1984, triggering the 1984 Paddington by-election. He was re-elected on 20 September 1984. During this time Ken Livingstone was not a member and John Wilson (Labour, Newham North East) acted as leader of the council.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61270", "revid": "1693063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61270", "title": "Piophilidae", "text": "Family of flies\nThe Piophilidae are a family of \"true flies\", in the order Diptera. The so-called cheese flies are the best-known members, but most species of the Piophilidae are scavengers in animal products, carrion, and fungi. They may accordingly be important in forensic entomology and medical entomology. For a fly maggot, the larvae of many species have an unusually well-developed ability to leap when alarmed or when abandoning their larval food to pupate; they accordingly may be known as cheese skippers or other kinds of skippers according to their food source.\nOverview.\nThe most notorious member of the family is the cheese fly, \"Piophila casei\"; it is cosmopolitan, and a typical member of the family. It is a small species, about long. The fly's larvae infest cured meats, smoked or salted fish, cheeses, and carrion. The mature larva is about long and is sometimes called the cheese skipper because of its leaping ability - when disturbed, this tiny maggot can hop some 15\u00a0cm (6\u00a0in) into the air. Adults are also known as bacon flies and their larvae as bacon skippers, ham skippers, cheese maggots, cheese hoppers, etc. In the Mediterranean island of Sardinia, the larvae are intentionally introduced into pecorino cheese to produce the characteristic \"casu marzu\" (\"rotten cheese\" in Sardinian).\nThe adult cheese fly's body is black, blue-black, or bronze, with some yellow on the head, antennae, and legs. The wings are faintly iridescent and lie flat upon the fly's abdomen when at rest. At long, the fly is one-third to one-half as long as the common housefly.\nBehaviour patterns.\nLike the larvae of various fly families, including the family Tephritidae, the larvae of typical piophilids are notorious for jumping or \"skipping\", especially in their final instar. The larvae accomplish their jumps by bending over, grabbing onto the rears of their own bodies with their mouth hooks, and tensing their muscles in a manner that increases the pressure on their own blood and internal organs. When they release their grip, the internal pressure straightens out the tubular body, propelling the forequarters upwards, the rest of the body following. Jumping is performed most typically when the larva is alarmed by a disturbance, or when it is abandoning its feeding site in preparation for pupation.\nThe tiny piophilid species \"Protopiophila litigata\", commonly known as the antler fly, breeds on discarded antlers of moose and other deer. On discarded antlers, the males form complex, highly structured aggregations in which a great deal of territorial competition occurs. In prime areas of the antler, near oviposition sites (cracks in the antler surface), males spend much of their time battling rival males. Males spend their entire lives competing on the same antler (only leaving to spend the night in nearby vegetation), making it possible to mark flies individually and obtain longitudinal field data on these tiny insects. This unique ecology made it possible to document senescence in wild insects for the first time.\nThe waltzing fly, \"Prochyliza xanthostoma\", occurs in North America. It is one of the carrion-feeding piophilids and is remarkable for its sexual dimorphism and its patterns of behavioural adaptation and associated morphological adaptations. In particular, the antennae, forelegs, and heads of the males are adapted in unusual ways to their behaviour in combat and courtship. A male courts a female by dancing side-to-side, forequarters held high, displaying his elongated antennae and vibrating his elongated forelegs.\nMedical and forensic significance.\nIf swallowed (whether accidentally or otherwise), the larvae sometimes survive in the intestines and pass through the digestive system alive. Such behaviour is known as enteric or intestinal myiasis. In the gut, the larvae may cause serious lesions by attempting to bore through the intestinal walls, causing gastric ulcers or gastrointestinal perforation. Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, pain in the abdomen, and bloody diarrhea. Both living and dead larvae may pass in the stool. Some species also have been known to cause naso-oral and urogenital myiasis.\nIn forensic entomology, the presence of \"P. casei\" larvae may be useful in estimating the date of death for human remains because they do not take up residence in a corpse until three to six months after death. However, \"P. casei\" is not the only piophilid species to attack human corpses, so caution is appropriate in identification of the species found and in interpretation of their significance.\nDescription.\nPiophilidae are small flies, often dark in color and shiny. The wings are usually clear and unmarked, with the exception of the genera \"Mycetaulus\", \"Neottiophilum\", \"Pseudoseps\", and \"Thyreophora\", which have brown wing markings. Like all tephritoid flies, female piophilids have an extensible ovipositor.\nThe family differs from the similar looking family Sepsidae in several characters, particularly in having the costa broken at the end of the subcosta, the setulose mesonotum and the absence of a hair or fine bristle arising on the posterior edge of the posterior spiracle of the thorax.\nClassification.\nThe Piophilidae are a small family of less than 100 described species in 21 genera, mainly Holarctic in distribution, though some species are cosmopolitan. The nomenclature is volatile, with two subfamily names (Neottiophilinae and Thyreophorinae) in use recently, having been subsumed in the subfamily Piophilinae.\nThe genera of Piophilidae are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRecent works containing keys for identification of the Piophilidae include:\nA still useful older work is S\u00e9guy, E. (1934) http://. II. \"Muscidae acalypterae, Scatophagidae\". 28. Paris: Paul Lechevalier et fils \u2013 via .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61271", "revid": "24316210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61271", "title": "Auxiliary power unit", "text": "Alternative vehicle power source\nAn auxiliary power unit (APU) is a device on a vehicle that provides energy for functions other than propulsion. They are commonly found on large aircraft, naval ships and on some large land vehicles. Aircraft APUs generally produce 115\u00a0V AC voltage at 400\u00a0Hz (rather than 50/60\u00a0Hz in mains supply), to run the electrical systems of the aircraft; others can produce 28\u00a0V DC voltage. APUs can provide power through single or three-phase systems. A jet fuel starter (JFS) is a similar device to an APU but directly linked to the main engine and started by an onboard compressed air bottle.\nTransport aircraft.\nHistory.\nDuring World War I, the British Coastal class blimps, one of several types of airship operated by the Royal Navy, carried a ABC auxiliary engine. These powered a generator for the craft's radio transmitter and, in an emergency, could power an auxiliary air blower. One of the first military fixed-wing aircraft to use an APU was the British, World War 1, Supermarine Nighthawk, an anti-Zeppelin night fighter.\nDuring World War II, a number of large American military aircraft were fitted with APUs. These were typically known as \"putt\u2013putts\", even in official training documents. The putt-putt on the B-29 Superfortress bomber was fitted in the unpressurised section at the rear of the aircraft. Various models of four-stroke, Flat-twin or V-twin engines were used. The engine drove a \"P2\", DC generator, rated 28.5 Volts and 200 Amps (several of the same \"P2\" generators, driven by the main engines, were the B-29's DC power source in flight). The putt-putt provided power for starting the main engines and was used after take-off to a height of . The putt-putt was restarted when the B-29 was descending to land.\nSome models of the B-24 Liberator had a putt\u2013putt fitted at the front of the aircraft, inside the nose-wheel compartment. Some models of the Douglas C-47 Skytrain transport aircraft carried a putt-putt under the cockpit floor.\nAs mechanical \"startup\" APUs for jet engines.\nThe first German jet engines built during the Second World War used a mechanical APU starting system designed by the German engineer Norbert Riedel. It consisted of a two-stroke flat engine, which for the Junkers Jumo 004 design was hidden in the engine nose cone, essentially functioning as a pioneering example of an auxiliary power unit for starting a jet engine. A hole in the extreme nose of the cone contained a manual pull-handle which started the piston engine, which in turn rotated the compressor. Two spark plug access ports existed in the Jumo 004's nose cone to service the Riedel unit's cylinders in situ, for maintenance purposes. Two small \"premix\" tanks for the Riedel's petrol/oil fuel were fitted in the annular intake. The engine was considered an extreme short stroke (bore / stroke: 70\u00a0mm / 35\u00a0mm = 2:1) design so it could fit within the in the nose cone of jet engines like the Jumo 004. For reduction it had an integrated planetary gear. It was produced by Victoria in Nuremberg and served as a mechanical APU-style starter for all three German jet engine designs to have made it to at least the prototype stage before May 1945\u00a0\u2013 the Junkers Jumo 004, the BMW 003 (which uniquely appears to use an electric starter for the Riedel APU), and the prototypes (19 built) of the more advanced Heinkel HeS 011 engine, which mounted it just above the intake passage in the Heinkel-crafted sheetmetal of the engine nacelle nose.\nThe Boeing 727 in 1963 was the first jetliner to feature a gas turbine APU, allowing it to operate at smaller airports, independent from ground facilities. The APU can be identified on many modern airliners by an exhaust pipe at the aircraft's tail.\nSections.\nA typical gas-turbine APU for commercial transport aircraft comprises three main sections:\nPower section.\nThe power section is the gas-generator portion of the engine and produces all the shaft power for the APU. In this section of the engine, air and fuel are mixed, compressed and ignited to create hot and expanding gases. This gas is highly energetic and is used to spin the turbine, which in turn powers other sections of the engine, such as auxiliary gearboxes, pumps, electrical generators, and in the case of a turbo fan engine, the main fan.\nLoad compressor section.\nThe load compressor is generally a shaft-mounted compressor that provides pneumatic power for the aircraft, though some APUs extract bleed air from the power section compressor. There are two actuated devices to help control the flow of air: the inlet guide vanes that regulate airflow to the load compressor and the surge control valve that maintains stable or surge-free operation of the turbo machine.\nGearbox section.\nThe gearbox transfers power from the main shaft of the engine to an oil-cooled generator for electrical power. Within the gearbox, power is also transferred to engine accessories such as the fuel control unit, the lubrication module, and cooling fan. There is also a starter motor connected through the gear train to perform the starting function of the APU. Some APU designs use a combination starter/generator for APU starting and electrical power generation to reduce complexity.\nOn the Boeing 787, an aircraft which has greater reliance on its electrical systems, the APU delivers only electricity to the aircraft. The absence of a pneumatic system simplifies the design, but high demand for electricity requires heavier generators.\nOnboard solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) APUs are being researched.\nManufacturers.\nThe market of Auxiliary power units is dominated by Honeywell, followed by Pratt &amp; Whitney (a subsidiary of RTX Corporation), Motorsich and other manufacturers such as PBS Velk\u00e1 B\u00edte\u0161, Safran Power Units, Aerosila and Klimov. Local manufacturers include Bet Shemesh Engines and Hanwha Aerospace. The 2018 market share varied according to the application platforms:\nOn June 4, 2018, Boeing and Safran announced their 50\u201350 partnership to design, build and service APUs after regulatory and antitrust clearance in the second half of 2018.\nBoeing produced several hundred T50/T60 small turboshafts and their derivatives in the early 1960s. Safran produces helicopters and business jets APUs but stopped the large APUs since Labinal exited the APIC joint venture with Sundstrand in 1996.\nA journalist from the online news website \"FlightGlobal\", Stephen Trimble, has stated that Boeing and Safran's advances in the market for APUs pose a threat for the duopoly between Honeywell and Pratt &amp; Whitney. Honeywell has a 65% share of the mainliner APU market and is the sole supplier for the Airbus A350, the Boeing 777 and all single-aisles: the Boeing 737 MAX, Airbus A220 (formerly Bombardier CSeries), Comac C919, Irkut MC-21 and Airbus A320neo since Airbus eliminated the P&amp;WC APS3200 option. P&amp;WC claims the remaining 35% with the Airbus A380, Boeing 787 and Boeing 747-8.\nIt should take at least a decade for the Boeing/Safran JV to reach $100 million in service revenue. The 2017 market for production was worth $800 million (88% civil and 12% military), while the MRO market was worth $2.4 billion, spread equally between civil and military.\nSpacecraft.\nThe Space Shuttle APUs provided hydraulic pressure. The Space Shuttle had three redundant APUs, powered by hydrazine fuel. They were only powered up for ascent, re-entry, and landing. During ascent, the APUs provided hydraulic power for gimballing of the Shuttle's three engines and control of their large valves, and for movement of the control surfaces. During landing, they moved the control surfaces, lowered the wheels, and powered the brakes and nose-wheel steering. Landing could be accomplished with only one APU working. In the early years of the Shuttle there were problems with APU reliability, with malfunctions on three of the first nine Shuttle missions.\nArmored vehicles.\nAPUs are fitted to some tanks to provide electrical power without the high fuel consumption and large infrared signature of the main engine. As early as World War II, the American M4 Sherman had a small, piston-engine powered APU for charging the tank's batteries, a feature the Soviet-produced T-34 tank did not have.The United States Army Tank Automotive Research, Development and Engineering Center (TARDEC) developed a 100 kg auxiliary power unit (APU) for the M1 Abrams tank to replace a 230 kg battery. The new APU will also be more fuel-efficient than the tank's main engine.\nCommercial vehicles.\nA refrigerated or frozen food semi trailer or train car may be equipped with an independent APU and fuel tank to maintain low temperatures while in transit, without the need for an external transport-supplied power source.\nOn some older diesel engined-equipment, a small gasoline engine (often called a \"pony engine\") was used instead of an electric motor to start the main engine. The exhaust path of the pony engine was typically arranged so as to warm the intake manifold of the diesel, to ease starting in colder weather. These were primarily used on large pieces of construction equipment.\nFuel cells.\nIn recent years, truck and fuel cell manufacturers have teamed up to create, test and demonstrate a fuel cell APU that eliminates nearly all emissions and uses diesel fuel more efficiently. In 2008, a DOE sponsored partnership between Delphi Electronics and Peterbilt demonstrated that a fuel cell could provide power to the electronics and air conditioning of a Peterbilt Model 386 under simulated \"idling\" conditions for ten hours. Delphi has said the 5\u00a0kW system for Class 8 trucks will be released in 2012, at an $8000\u20139000 price tag that would be competitive with other \"midrange\" two-cylinder diesel APUs, should they be able to meet those deadlines and cost estimates.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61272", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61272", "title": "Acoustic", "text": "Acoustic may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61273", "revid": "49906617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61273", "title": "Supersonic speed", "text": "Speed that exceeds the speed of sound\nSupersonic speed is the speed of an object that exceeds the speed of sound (Mach\u00a01). For objects traveling in dry air of a temperature of 20\u00a0\u00b0C (68\u00a0\u00b0F) at sea level, this speed is approximately . Speeds greater than five times the speed of sound (Mach\u00a05) are often referred to as hypersonic. Flights during which only some parts of the air surrounding an object, such as the ends of rotor blades, reach supersonic speeds are called transonic. This occurs typically somewhere between Mach\u00a00.8 and Mach\u00a01.2.\nSounds are traveling vibrations in the form of pressure waves in an elastic medium. Objects move at supersonic speed when the objects move faster than the speed at which sound propagates through the medium. In gases, sound travels longitudinally at different speeds, mostly depending on the molecular mass and temperature of the gas, and pressure has little effect. Since air temperature and composition varies significantly with altitude, the speed of sound, and Mach numbers for a steadily moving object may change. In water at room temperature, supersonic speed means any speed greater than 1,440\u00a0m/s (4,724\u00a0ft/s). In solids, sound waves can be polarized longitudinally or transversely and have higher velocities.\nSupersonic fracture is crack formation faster than the speed of sound in a brittle material.\nEarly meaning.\nThe word supersonic comes from two Latin derived words; 1) \"super\": above and 2) \"sonus\": sound, which together mean above sound, or faster than sound.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the term \"supersonic\" was used as an adjective to describe sound whose frequency is above the range of normal human hearing. The modern term for this meaning is \"ultrasonic\", but the older meaning sometimes still lives on, as in the word superheterodyne\nSupersonic objects.\nThe tip of a bullwhip is generally seen as the first object designed to reach the speed of sound. This action results in its telltale \"crack\", which is actually just a sonic boom. The first human-made supersonic boom was likely caused by a piece of common cloth, leading to the whip's eventual development. It is the wave motion travelling through the bullwhip that makes it capable of achieving supersonic speeds. \nMost modern firearm bullets are supersonic, with rifle projectiles often travelling at speeds approaching and in some cases well exceeding Mach 3.\nMost spacecraft are supersonic at least during portions of their reentry, though the effects on the spacecraft are reduced by low air densities. During ascent, launch vehicles generally avoid going supersonic below 30\u00a0km (~98,400\u00a0feet) to reduce air drag.\nThe speed of sound decreases somewhat with altitude, due to lower temperatures found there (typically up to 25\u00a0km). At even higher altitudes the temperature starts increasing, with the corresponding increase in the speed of sound.\nWhen an inflated balloon is burst, the torn pieces of latex contract at supersonic speed, which contributes to the sharp and loud popping noise.\nSupersonic land vehicles.\nTo date, only one land vehicle has officially travelled at supersonic speed, the ThrustSSC. The vehicle, driven by Andy Green, holds the world land speed record, having achieved an average speed on its bi-directional run of in the Black Rock Desert on 15 October 1997.\nThe Bloodhound LSR project planned an attempt on the record in 2020 at Hakskeenpan in South Africa with a combination jet and hybrid rocket propelled car. The aim was to break the existing record, then make further attempts during which (the members of) the team hoped to reach speeds of up to . The effort was originally run by Richard Noble who was the leader of the ThrustSSC project, however following funding issues in 2018, the team was bought by Ian Warhurst and renamed Bloodhound LSR. Later the project was indefinitely delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the vehicle was put up for sale.\nSupersonic flight.\nMost modern fighter aircraft are supersonic aircraft. No modern-day passenger aircraft are capable of supersonic speed, but there have been supersonic passenger aircraft, namely Concorde and the Tupolev Tu-144. Both of these passenger aircraft and some modern fighters are also capable of supercruise, a condition of sustained supersonic flight without the use of an afterburner. Due to its ability to supercruise for several hours and the relatively high frequency of flight over several decades, Concorde spent more time flying supersonically than all other aircraft combined by a considerable margin. Since Concorde's final retirement flight on November 26, 2003, there are no supersonic passenger aircraft left in service, though the Boom Overture may reintroduce supersonic flight in the future once complete. Some large bombers, such as the Tupolev Tu-160 and Rockwell B-1 Lancer are also supersonic-capable.\nThe aerodynamics of supersonic aircraft is simpler than subsonic aerodynamics because the airsheets at different points along the plane often cannot affect each other. Supersonic jets and rocket vehicles require several times greater thrust to push through the extra aerodynamic drag experienced within the transonic region (around Mach 0.85\u20131.2). At these speeds aerospace engineers can gently guide air around the fuselage of the aircraft without producing new shock waves, but any change in cross area farther down the vehicle leads to shock waves along the body. Designers use the Supersonic area rule and the Whitcomb area rule to minimize sudden changes in size.\nHowever, in practical applications, a supersonic aircraft must operate stably in both subsonic and supersonic profiles, hence aerodynamic design is more complex.\nThe main key to having low supersonic drag is to properly shape the overall aircraft to be long and thin, and close to a \"perfect\" shape, the von Karman ogive or Sears-Haack body. This has led to almost every supersonic cruising aircraft looking very similar to every other, with a very long and slender fuselage and large delta wings, cf. SR-71, Concorde, etc. Although not ideal for passenger aircraft, this shaping is quite adaptable for bomber use.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61274", "revid": "10962546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61274", "title": "Unisys", "text": "American global information technology company\nUnisys Corporation is a technology company founded in 1986 and headquartered in Blue Bell, Pennsylvania. The company provides cloud, AI, digital workplace, logistics, and enterprise computing services.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nUnisys' history dates back to 1873 with E. Remington &amp; Sons and the introduction of the first commercially viable typewriter to use the QWERTY keyboard layout. Over a hundred years later, the company became known as Unisys in 1986 through the merger of mainframe corporations Sperry and Burroughs, with Burroughs buying Sperry for $4.8 billion. \nThe new company's name was chosen from over 31,000 submissions in an internal competition when Christian Machen submitted the word \"Unisys\", which was composed of parts of the words \"united\", \"information\", and \"systems\".\nThe merger was the largest in the computer industry at the time and made Unisys the second-largest computer company with annual revenue of $10.5 billion. W. Michael Blumenthal became CEO and Chairman.\n20th century.\nSoon after the merger, the market for proprietary mainframe-class systems, the mainstream product of Unisys and its competitors such as IBM, saw a decline that continues, at a slower rate, today. Unisys responded by making the strategic decision to shift into high-end servers, including 32-bit processor Windows Servers and information technology (IT) services, such as systems integration, outsourcing, and related technical services, while holding onto the profitable revenue stream from maintaining its installed base of proprietary mainframe hardware and applications.\nIn 1988, the company acquired Convergent Technologies, creators of Convergent Technologies Operating System (CTOS).\nIn 1990, Blumenthal resigned. James Unruh, formerly of Memorex and Honeywell, became the new CEO and Chairman after Blumenthal's departure and continued in both roles until 1997, when Larry Weinbach of Arthur Andersen became the new CEO.\n21st century.\nUnisys launched their business process consulting service in 2004. This service called Business Blueprints helped developers create high level models of their own software.\nJoseph McGrath served as CEO and President from January 2005, until September, 2008. On October 7, 2008, J. Edward Coleman replaced McGrath as CEO and Chairman. \nOn November 10, 2008, the company was removed from the S&amp;P 500 index when the market capitalization of the company had fallen below the S&amp;P 500 minimum of $4 billion.\nIn 2010, Unisys sold its Medicare processing Health Information Management service to Molina Healthcare for $135 million.\nOn October 6, 2014, after six years as CEO and chairman, Unisys announced that Coleman was stepping down effective December 1, 2014.\nIn December 2014, Unisys named Peter Altabef as its new president and CEO, replacing J. Edward Coleman. The company also announced that Paul Weaver, who was serving as the interim board chairman, would assume that position on a permanent basis as of January 1, 2015.\nIn February 2020, SAIC announced plans to acquire Unisys Federal, the company\u2019s federal defense contracting operation, for $1.2 billion. The company\u2019s federal customer list included over a dozen military and civilian agencies. As part of the acquisition, Unisys has a licensing agreement with SAIC to continue providing its software to federal clients.\nIn June 2020, Australia\u2019s Home Affairs\u2019 biometric identification system, built in part through partnership with Unisys, was launched.\nUnisys made several acquisitions in 2021. In June, the company announced the acquisition of Unify Square, which provides software and services which help enterprises manage collaboration and communication platforms like Zoom and Microsoft Teams. In November, Mobinergy, a mobile device management software company, was acquired; and in December, Unisys acquired CompuGain, an Amazon Web Services Advanced Consulting Partner.\nIn July 2021, Unisys partnered with Vodafone to help the company boost its IT services. The two launched \u201cVodafone Digital Factory,\u201d and Unisys helped Vodafone clients with technologies like AI, virtual, and augmented reality, and blockchain.\nIn May 2022, the company joined the Plug and Play Enterprise Tech program. This allowed Unisys to source and partner with technology startups to access and use early-stage emerging technology.\nOn April 1, 2025, Michael M. Thomson, the company\u2019s president and COO, assumed the position of CEO.\nProducts and services.\nUnisys offers a range of IT services, including:\nUnisys operates data centers around the world to support its service offerings.\nDigital Workplace Services (DWS).\nDigital workplace services deliver technologies focused on improving employee experience, collaboration, productivity, and end-to-end IT support. Unisys\u2019 DWS capabilities include:\nIn 2021, Unisys acquired Unify Square - a company that helped others manage collaboration and communications platforms - and Mobinenergy - a unified endpoint management expert. These companies now operate as part of Unisys\u2019 Digital Workplace Services business unit.\nCloud, Applications, and Infrastructure (CA &amp; I).\nUnisys\u2019 CA&amp;I segment provides: applications, cloud, cloud AI, cybersecurity, and data.\nIn 2020, California State University used Unisys\u2019 CloudForte and Managed Security Services to integrate its hybrid-cloud environment.\nAfter acquiring the company CompuGain, Unisys furthered its cloud capabilities, including hybrid cloud and cloud optimization, agile cloud migration, cloud-native capabilities, and data governance.\nCybersecurity.\nIn November 2020, Unisys updated its Stealth platform to include visualization and dashboard tools to make it easier for an organization to track security in real-time. The new version made it possible for cybersecurity teams to see relationships between all network endpoints, including multiple clouds and edge computing platforms.\nEnterprise Computing (ECS).\nEnterprise computing refers to information technology tools used to implement, configure, maintain, and operate enterprise systems.\nUnisys\u2019 ECS offerings include:\nUnisys was the first to develop a server architecture that supported four operating environments to run simultaneously on the same computer system in a single virtualized partition.\nIn 2013, Unisys won a $650 million Enterprise Computing Center Support contract to support the computer systems used by the Internal Revenue Service.\nPartnerships.\nUnisys\u2019 partnerships include:\nProjects.\nSome of Unisys\u2019 projects include:\nConsumerization of IT.\nA Unisys-sponsored study conducted by IDC revealed a gap between the activities and the expectations of the new \u201ciWorker\u201d generation and organizations\u2019 ability to support their needs. Results indicated that organizations still rely on outdated, standardized IT models, preventing them from benefitting from newer networked technologies.\nUnisys Innovation Program (UIP).\nUnisys Innovation Program is a contest for engineering students in India to develop career-ready skills by solving real-world problems with current technologies. It is open to all engineering students in computer science, information technology, and related fields. Students have the opportunity to be mentored by tech industry professionals in various fields. As of 2021, more than 55,000 students have participated. UIP was established in 2009 under the name Cloud 20/20.\nPeople and Culture.\nUnisys was named to Newsweek\u2019s Top 100 Global Most Loved Workplaces list 2024; America\u2019s Most Loved Workplaces list 2024; the 2023 Forbes America\u2019s Best Employers for Diversity list; the Fair360 Noteworthy Companies list; the 2023 and 2022 Forbes America\u2019s Best Employers for Women list; and is a multi-year DivHERsity award winner. \nUnisys earned a top score on the Disability Equality Index for five consecutive years (2020-2024). The company was recognized as a \u201cBest Place to Work for Disability Inclusion.\u201d The Disability Equality Index is a joint initiative of Disability:IN and the American Association of People with Disabilities. It is a \u201ccomprehensive benchmarking tool to measure disability workplace inclusion.\u201d\nIn November 2021, Unisys launched its UGrow program to help its employees grow internally. The program makes and offers different courses focused on skills needed by Unisys employees. Company employees also have access to Unisys University, which provides free certifications for over 100 different skills. Courses cover topics such as management, team leadership, communication, and culture. The courses are organized around Unisys\u2019 core business functions.\nCarbon Footprint Reduction.\nIn 2006, Unisys committed to reducing its carbon footprint by 75% by 2026. It achieved this five years early in 2021. A year later, the company announced a new goal of net zero carbon emissions by 2030. The company also participates in the Carbon Disclosure Project and UN Global Compact.\nControversies.\nIn 1987, Unisys was sued with Rockwell Shuttle Operations Company for $5.2 million by two former employees of the Unisys Corporation, one a subcontractor responsible for the computer programs for the space shuttle. The suit filed by Sylvia Robins, a former Unisys engineer, and Ria Solomon, who worked for Robins, charges that the two were forced from their jobs and harassed after complaining about safety violations and inflated costs.\nIn 1998, Unisys Corporation agreed to pay the government $2.25 million to settle allegations that it supplied refurbished, rather than new, computer materials to several federal agencies in violation of the terms of its contract. Unisys admitted to supplying re-worked or refurbished computer components to various civilian and military agencies in the early 1990s, when the contract required the company to provide new equipment. The market price for the refurbished material was less than the price for new material which the government paid.\nIn 1998, Unisys was found guilty of price inflation and government contract fraud, with the company settling to avoid further prosecution. Lockheed Martin and Unisys paid the government $3.15 million to settle allegations that Unisys inflated the prices of spare parts sold to the U.S. Department of Commerce for its NEXRAD Doppler Radar System, in violation of the False Claims Act, 31 U.S.C. \u00a7 3729, et seq.\nIn October 2005, \"The Washington Post\" reported that the company had allegedly overbilled on the $1-to-3-billion Transportation Security Administration contract for almost 171,000 hours of labor and overtime at up to the maximum rate of $131.13 per hour, including 24,983 hours not allowed by the contract. Unisys denied wrongdoing.\nIn 2007, Unisys was said to be under investigation by the FBI for allegedly failing to detect cybersecurity incidents related to the hacking of U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Unisys reported that it had not been notified by the FBI or the Committee on Homeland Security of an investigation. The company denied all charges and said it had documentation disproving the allegations.\nIn 2007, Unisys was found guilty of misrepresentation of retiree benefits. A federal judge in Pennsylvania ordered Unisys to reinstate within 60 days free lifetime retiree medical benefits to 12 former employees who were employed by a Unisys predecessor, the Burroughs Corporation.\nIn 2007, there was a trademark infringement case between Visible Systems Corporation and Unisys. The court determined that Visible Systems had a right to a trademark in the word VISIBLE and that Unisys had to \u201cpermanently enjoin\u201d from using the trademarks or service marks 3D VISIBLE ENTERPRISE, SD-VE, or VISIBLE to prevent customers from connecting Unisys with Visible Systems\u2019 products or services.\nIn 2010, Unisys Hungary terminated the local Workers' Union representative Gabor Pinter's employment contract with immediate effect for raising concerns about unpaid overtime. According to the 2012 verdict of the Labour Court of Budapest, Unisys acted illegally and was ordered to pay unpaid wages and benefits, legal costs, and three months' average salary as compensation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61275", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61275", "title": "Cathodoluminescence", "text": "Photon emission under the impact of an electron beam\nCathodoluminescence is an optical and electromagnetic phenomenon in which electrons impacting on a luminescent material such as a phosphor, cause the emission of photons which may have wavelengths in the visible spectrum. A familiar example is the generation of light by an electron beam scanning the phosphor-coated inner surface of the screen of a television that uses a cathode-ray tube. Cathodoluminescence is the inverse of the photoelectric effect, in which electron emission is induced by irradiation with photons.\nOrigin.\nLuminescence in a semiconductor results when an electron in the conduction band recombines with a hole in the valence band. The difference energy (band gap) of this transition can be emitted in form of a photon. The energy (color) of the photon, and the probability that a photon and not a phonon will be emitted, depends on the material, its purity, and the presence of defects. First, the electron has to be excited from the valence band into the conduction band. In cathodoluminescence, this occurs as the result of an impinging high energy electron beam onto a semiconductor. However, these primary electrons carry far too much energy to directly excite electrons. Instead, the inelastic scattering of the primary electrons in the crystal leads to the emission of secondary electrons, Auger electrons and X-rays, which in turn can scatter as well. Such a cascade of scattering events leads to up to 103 secondary electrons per incident electron. These secondary electrons can excite valence electrons into the conduction band when they have a kinetic energy about three times the band gap energy of the material formula_1. From there the electron recombines with a hole in the valence band and creates a photon. The excess energy is transferred to phonons and thus heats the lattice. One of the advantages of excitation with an electron beam is that the band gap energy of materials that are investigated is not limited by the energy of the incident light as in the case of photoluminescence. Therefore, in cathodoluminescence, the \"semiconductor\" examined can, in fact, be almost any non-metallic material. In terms of band structure, classical semiconductors, insulators, ceramics, gemstones, minerals, and glasses can be treated the same way.\nMicroscopy.\nIn geology, mineralogy, materials science and semiconductor engineering, a scanning electron microscope (SEM) fitted with a cathodoluminescence detector, or an optical cathodoluminescence microscope, may be used to examine internal structures of semiconductors, rocks, ceramics, glass, etc. in order to get information on the composition, growth and quality of the material.\nOptical cathodoluminescence microscope.\nA cathodoluminescence (CL) microscope combines a regular (light optical) microscope with a cathode-ray tube. It is designed to image the luminescence characteristics of polished thin sections of solids irradiated by an electron beam.\nUsing a cathodoluminescence microscope, structures within crystals or fabrics can be made visible which cannot be seen in normal light conditions. Thus, for example, valuable information on the growth of minerals can be obtained. CL-microscopy is used in geology, mineralogy and materials science for the investigation of rocks, minerals, volcanic ash, glass, ceramic, concrete, fly ash, etc.\nCL color and intensity are dependent on the characteristics of the sample and on the working conditions of the electron gun. Here, acceleration voltage and beam current of the electron beam are of major importance. Today, two types of CL microscopes are in use. One is working with a \"cold cathode\" generating an electron beam by a corona discharge tube, the other one produces a beam using a \"hot cathode\". Cold-cathode CL microscopes are the simplest and most economical type. Unlike other electron bombardment techniques like electron microscopy, cold cathodoluminescence microscopy provides positive ions along with the electrons which neutralize surface charge buildup and eliminate the need for conductive coatings to be applied to the specimens. The \"hot cathode\" type generates an electron beam by an electron gun with tungsten filament. The advantage of a hot cathode is the precisely controllable high beam intensity allowing to stimulate the emission of light even on weakly luminescing materials (e.g. quartz \u2013 see picture). To prevent charging of the sample, the surface must be coated with a conductive layer of gold or carbon. This is usually done by a sputter deposition device or a carbon coater.\nCathodoluminescence from a scanning electron microscope.\nIn scanning electron microscopes a focused beam of electrons impinges on a sample and induces it to emit light that is collected by an optical system, such as an elliptical mirror. From there, a fiber optic will transfer the light out of the microscope where it is separated into its component wavelengths by a monochromator and is then detected with a photomultiplier tube. By scanning the microscope's beam in an X-Y pattern and measuring the light emitted with the beam at each point, a map of the optical activity of the specimen can be obtained (cathodoluminescence imaging). Instead, by measuring the wavelength dependence for a fixed point or a certain area, the spectral characteristics can be recorded (cathodoluminescence spectroscopy). Furthermore, if the photomultiplier tube is replaced with a CCD camera, an entire spectrum can be measured at each point of a map (hyperspectral imaging). Moreover, the optical properties of an object can be correlated to structural properties observed with the electron microscope.\nThe primary advantages to the electron microscope based technique is its spatial resolution. In a scanning electron microscope, the attainable resolution is on the order of a few ten nanometers, while in a (scanning) transmission electron microscope (TEM), nanometer-sized features can be resolved. Additionally, it is possible to perform nanosecond- to picosecond-level time-resolved measurements if the electron beam can be \"chopped\" into nano- or pico-second pulses by a beam-blanker or with a pulsed electron source. These advanced techniques are useful for examining low-dimensional semiconductor structures, such a quantum wells or quantum dots.\nWhile an electron microscope with a cathodoluminescence detector provides high magnification, an optical cathodoluminescence microscope benefits from its ability to show actual visible color features directly through the eyepiece. More recently developed systems try to combine both an optical and an electron microscope to take advantage of both these techniques.\nExtended applications.\nAlthough direct bandgap semiconductors such as GaAs or GaN are most easily examined by these techniques, indirect semiconductors such as silicon also emit weak cathodoluminescence, and can be examined as well. In particular, the luminescence of dislocated silicon is different from intrinsic silicon, and can be used to map defects in integrated circuits.\nRecently, cathodoluminescence performed in electron microscopes is also being used to study surface plasmon resonances in metallic nanoparticles. Surface plasmons in metal nanoparticles can absorb and emit light, though the process is different from that in semiconductors. Similarly, cathodoluminescence has been exploited as a probe to map the local density of states of planar dielectric photonic crystals and nanostructured photonic materials.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61276", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61276", "title": "HP/PA", "text": ""}
{"id": "61277", "revid": "551300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61277", "title": "2002 Tour de France", "text": "Cycling race\nThe 2002 Tour de France was a multiple-stage bicycle race held from 6 to 28 July, and the 89th edition of the Tour de France. The event started in Luxembourg and ended in Paris. The Tour circled France counter-clockwise, visiting the Pyrenees before the Alps. It has no overall winner\u2014although American cyclist Lance Armstrong originally won the event, the United States Anti-Doping Agency announced in August 2012 that they had disqualified Armstrong from all his results since 1998, including his seven Tour de France wins from 1999 to 2005; the Union Cycliste Internationale confirmed the result.\nThe favourite was Armstrong, who was, at the time, the winner in the 1999, 2000 and 2001 races. The main opposition would probably come from the ONCE team with Joseba Beloki (3rd last year), Igor Gonz\u00e1lez de Galdeano (5th last year) and Marcos Serrano (9th last year), and from the Kelme riders \u00d3scar Sevilla (7th last year, 2nd in last year's Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a) and Santiago Botero (8th last year). Other riders to keep in account for a high place in the final rankings were Tyler Hamilton (2nd Giro 2002), Levi Leipheimer (3rd Vuelta 2001), Christophe Moreau (4th Tour 2000) and Armstrong's teammate Roberto Heras (4th Vuelta 2001). Important riders who were not present were Jan Ullrich (2nd last year, injury) and Gilberto Simoni (winner 2001 Giro).\nTeams.\nTeams qualified for the 2002 Tour de France by various methods. U.S. Postal Service was selected because it included the winner of the previous edition, Lance Armstrong. Rabobank was selected because it included the winner of the 2001 UCI Road World Cup, Erik Dekker. Alessio, Kelme\u2013Costa Blanca and iBanesto.com were selected because they won the team classifications in respectively the 2001 Giro d'Italia, 2001 Tour de France and 2001 Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a. A further seven teams qualified based on the UCI ranking in the highest UCI division at the end of 2001, after compensating for transfers. Five more teams were given wildcards by the organiser of the Tour, Amaury Sport Organisation. After the wildcards were given, it was announced that Saeco's main rider Gilberto Simoni had tested positive for cocaine on two occasions. In response, the wildcard for Saeco was withdrawn and given to Jean Delatour. In total, 21 teams participated, each with 9 cyclists, for a total of 189 cyclists.\nThe teams entering the race were:\nQualified teams\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInvited teams\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRoute and stages.\nIn the first week, the stages were mostly flat in the North of France. The last two weeks had mountain stages in the Pyrenees and Alps. The highest point of elevation in the race was at the summit of the Col du Galibier mountain pass on stage 16.\nRace overview.\nThe Prologue was won by Lance Armstrong with Laurent Jalabert and Raimondas Rum\u0161as coming in 2nd and 3rd respectively. Armstrong and his incredibly dominant US Postal team were not concerned with defending the Yellow Jersey in the early flat stages and it changed hands a few times. First it went to Rubens Bertogliati who wore it during Stage 2 and Stage 3, where Robbie McEwen defeated Erik Zabel in the sprint gaining enough time for the latter to wear the maillot jaune in Stage 4, which was a Team Time Trial. Team ONCE\u2013Eroski won the TTT and their rider Igor Gonz\u00e1lez de Galdeano took over the overall lead. At this point in the Tour all of the Top 10 overall riders were either members of team ONCE or US Postal Cycling Team, but with two more ITT's and the Mountain stages to come this meant nothing as far as the overall standings, although it did make clear the fact that these two teams were in command within the Peloton.\nThe ensuing flat stages were won by Jaan Kirsipuu, Erik Zabel, Bradley McGee and Karsten Kroon and by the end of Stage 8 places 1-7 were all riders for ONCE with Gonzalez leading his teammate Joseba Beloki by :04 for the overall lead as the next riders from other teams were Armstrong in 8th and Tyler Hamilton of team CSC in 9th.\nStage 9 was an Individual Time Trial won by Santiago Botero and perhaps surprisingly seven riders finished within one minute of the stage winner when it was assumed by pundits that very few riders would keep Armstrong (who finished 2nd) that close and nobody would beat him. Following the ITT Gonzalez was still in Yellow leading the GC with Armstrong in 2nd overall, Beloki in 3rd and because of their strong performances in the ITT Serhiy Gonchar and Botero moved into 4th and 5th place in the General Classification.\nStage 10 was a hilly stage with a sprint finish won by Patrice Halgand of team Jean Latour. In places 2-11 were J\u00e9r\u00f4me Pineau of team Bonjour, Stuart O'Grady of Credit Agricole, Ludo Dierckxsens of Lampre, Pedro Horrillo of Mapei, Andy Flickinger of AG2R, Nicolas Vogondy of FDJ, Nico Mattan of Cofidis, Constantino Zaballa of Kelme, Enrico Cassani of Domo and Unai Extebarria of Euskadel.\nSpanish team ONCE with Beloki, Gonzalez and Abraham Olano, and American team US Postal with Armstrong, a young Floyd Landis, Viatcheslav Ekimov and the dominant Spanish rider Roberto Heras, a former Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a champion, would have the battle for the 2002 Tour de France in the mountains.\nIn Stage 11 Laurent Jalabert lead the stage from kilometre 6 all the way until kilometre 155 when Armstrong caught and dropped him 3\u00a0km from the finish. US Postal controlled the pace of the Peloton for most of the race. Heras lead the way setting such a high pace that most of Armstrong's rivals were dropped before Armstrong even had to put in any work of his own, but when Armstrong finally did attack only his own teammate Heras and Beloki could stay with him, but before long Armstrong was on his own headed for the Yellow Jersey.\nIn Stage 12 Jalabert attacked early again with Isidro Nozal and Laurent Dufaux going with him. About halfway through the stage the chase-1 group was about 3:00 behind with Richard Virenque, Eddy Mazzoleni and Alexandre Botcharov while once again US Postal with George Hincapie at the front dictated the pursuit of the main field/peloton just over 4:00 behind Jalabert, who was once again caught less than 10\u00a0km from the finish after leading the race for most of the day.\nOnce again Heras fractured the group of the final ten elite riders left with only Armstrong and Beloki able to match his pace and once again when Armstrong launched his attack neither Heras or Beloki could go with him as they finished 2nd and 3rd to him 1:04 behind. Botero and Gonzalez were able to get within seven seconds of Heras and Beloki while Rumsas and Carlos Sastre finished about a minute and a half behind Armstrong.\nStage 13 was an intermediate stage and in the green jersey sprinters competition Erik Zabel and Robbie McEwen were only separated by one point. Laurent Jalabert's relentless attacks and combative riding was paying off as not only was he in the Polka Dot Jersey as King of the Mountains but he had also moved into a top 10 position in the overall standings. The stage was won by David Millar as the GC situation remained the same.\nArmstrong would only build on his lead as the race progressed and by the time the Tour crossed Mont Ventoux, the Alps and arrived in Paris Beloki was still 2nd more than 7:00 behind as Rumsas completed the podium with Colombian rider Botero in 4th and Gonzalez in 5th. White Jersey winner Ivan Basso would finish 11th overall and would become one of the only serious challengers to Lance Armstrong in the coming Tours.\nFollowing the USADA decision ten years later, which was confirmed by the UCI, Armstrong had this, and every result after 1998 vacated. It was also decided it was best for the sport and as an example to riders of future generations that the 2nd, 3rd and 4th place riders would not be moved up to 1st, 2nd and 3rd.\nDoping.\nSubsequent to Armstrong's statement to withdraw his fight against United States Anti-Doping Agency's (USADA) charges, on 24 August 2012, the USADA said it would ban Armstrong for life and stripped him of his record seven Tour de France titles. Later that day it was confirmed in a USADA statement that Armstrong was banned for life and would be disqualified from any and all competitive results obtained on and subsequent to 1 August 1998, including forfeiture of any medals, titles, winnings, finishes, points and prizes. On 22 October 2012, the Union Cycliste Internationale endorsed the USADA sanctions, and decided not to award victories to any other rider or upgrade other placings in any of the affected events.\nClassification leadership and minor prizes.\nThere were several classifications in the 2002 Tour de France. The most important was the general classification, calculated by adding each cyclist's finishing times on each stage. The cyclist with the least accumulated time was the race leader, identified by the yellow jersey; the winner of this classification is considered the winner of the Tour.\nAdditionally, there was a points classification, which awarded a green jersey. In the points classification, cyclists got points for finishing among the best in a stage finish, or in intermediate sprints. The cyclist with the most points lead the classification, and was identified with a green jersey.\nThere was also a mountains classification. The organisation had categorised some climbs as either \"hors cat\u00e9gorie\", first, second, third, or fourth-category; points for this classification were won by the first cyclists that reached the top of these climbs first, with more points available for the higher-categorised climbs. The cyclist with the most points lead the classification, and wore a white jersey with red polka dots.\nThe fourth individual classification was the young rider classification, which was marked by the white jersey. This was decided the same way as the general classification, but only riders under 26 years were eligible.\nFor the team classification, the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time.\nIn addition, there was a combativity award given after each mass-start stage to the cyclist considered most combative, who wore a red number bib the next stage. The decision was made by a jury composed of journalists who gave points. The cyclist with the most points from votes in all stages led the combativity classification. Laurent Jalabert won this classification, and was given overall the super-combativity award.\nThere were also two special awards each with a prize of \u20ac3000, the Souvenir Henri Desgrange, given in honour of Tour founder and first race director Henri Desgrange to the first rider to pass the summit of the Col du Galibier on stage 16, and the Souvenir Jacques Goddet, given in honour of the second director Jacques Goddet to the first rider to pass the summit of the Col d'Aubisque on stage 11. Santiago Botero won the Henri Desgrange and Laurent Jalabert won the Jacques Goddet.\nFinal standings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeneral classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoints classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMountains classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Column/styles.css\"/&gt;\nYoung rider classification.\n&lt;templatestyles src = \"Column/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61279", "revid": "35393771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61279", "title": "John Wayne Gacy", "text": "American serial killer (1942\u20131994)\nJohn Wayne Gacy (March 17, 1942\u00a0\u2013 May 10, 1994) was an American serial killer and sex offender who raped, tortured and murdered at least thirty-three young men and boys between 1972 and 1978 in Norwood Park Township, a suburb of Chicago, Illinois. He became known as the \"Killer Clown\" due to his public performances as a clown prior to the discovery of his crimes.\nGacy committed all of his known murders inside his ranch-style house. Typically, he would lure a victim to his home and dupe them into donning handcuffs on the pretext of demonstrating a magic trick. He would then rape and torture his captive before killing his victim by either asphyxiation or strangulation with a garrote. Twenty-six victims were buried in the crawl space of his home, and three were buried elsewhere on his property; four were discarded in the Des Plaines River.\nGacy had previously been convicted in 1968 of the sodomy of a teenage boy in Waterloo, Iowa, and was sentenced to ten years' imprisonment, but served eighteen months. He murdered his first victim in 1972, had murdered twice more by the end of 1975, and murdered at least thirty victims after his divorce from his second wife in 1976. The investigation into the disappearance of Des Plaines teenager Robert Piest led to Gacy's arrest on December 21, 1978.\nGacy's conviction for thirty-three murders (by one individual) then covered the most homicides in United States legal history. Gacy was sentenced to death on March 13, 1980. He was executed by lethal injection at Stateville Correctional Center on May 10, 1994.\nEarly life.\nChildhood.\nJohn Wayne Gacy was born at Edgewater Hospital in Chicago, Illinois, on March 17, 1942, the second of three children and only son of John Stanley Gacy and Marion Elaine Robison. His father was an auto repair machinist and World War I veteran, and his mother was a homemaker. Gacy was of Polish and Danish ancestry, and his family was Catholic.\nGacy was close to his mother and two sisters but had a difficult relationship with his alcoholic father, who was verbally and physically abusive to his family. The elder Gacy frequently belittled his son, calling him \"dumb and stupid\" and comparing him unfavorably with his sisters. One of Gacy's earliest childhood memories was of his father beating him at age four for accidentally disarranging car engine components. His mother tried to shield her son from his father's abuse, which resulted in accusations that he was a \"sissy\" and a \"mama's boy\" who would \"probably grow up queer\". In 1949, Gacy's father whipped him after he and another boy were caught sexually fondling a young girl. The same year, a family friend began to occasionally molest Gacy. Gacy never told his father, afraid that his father would blame him. Despite their challenging relationship, Gacy loved his father, but felt he was \"never good enough\" in his father's eyes.\nGacy was an overweight and unathletic child. Because of a heart condition, he was told to avoid sports. In the fourth grade, Gacy began to experience blackouts. He was hospitalized on occasion because of these episodes and also, in 1957, for a burst appendix. Gacy later estimated that between the ages of 14 and 18, he had spent almost a year in hospital; he attributed the decline of his grades to missing school. Gacy's medical condition was never conclusively diagnosed; his father suspected he was malingering. On one occasion, he openly accused his son of faking as he lay in a hospital bed.\nCareer origins.\nIn 1960, at age 18, Gacy became involved in politics, working as an assistant precinct captain for a local Democratic Party candidate. This led to more criticism from his father, who called him a \"patsy\". The same year, Gacy's father bought him a car. He kept the vehicle's title in his own name until Gacy had paid for it, which took several years. His father would confiscate the keys if Gacy did not do as he said. In April 1962, Gacy purchased an extra set of keys; in response, his father removed the distributor cap, keeping the component for three days. Hours after his father replaced the cap, Gacy left home and drove to Las Vegas, Nevada, with $136 to his name in the hope of residing with a cousin.\nGacy worked in the Las Vegas ambulance service before being transferred to Palm Mortuary. He worked as a mortuary attendant for three months, observing morticians embalming bodies and occasionally serving as a pallbearer. He slept on a cot behind the embalming room and later confessed that one evening, while alone, he clambered into the coffin of a teenage male, embracing and caressing the body before experiencing a sense of shock. This experience prompted Gacy to return home.\nShortly thereafter, Gacy enrolled at Northwestern Business College, despite having failed to complete high school. He graduated in 1963 and took a management trainee position with the Nunn-Bush Shoe Company. In 1964, the company transferred him to Springfield, Illinois, to work as a salesman, and eventually promoted him to department manager. In March of that year, he became engaged to Marlynn Myers, a co-worker.\nDuring their courtship, Gacy joined the local chapter of the Jaycees. That same year, he had his second homosexual experience. According to Gacy, a colleague in the Jaycees plied him with drinks and invited him to spend the evening on his sofa; the colleague then performed oral sex on him while he was drunk. By 1965, Gacy had risen to the position of vice-president of the Springfield Jaycees and was named the third-most outstanding Jaycee in Illinois.\nWaterloo, Iowa.\nKFC manager.\nGacy and Myers married in September 1964. Marlynn's father subsequently purchased three Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) restaurants in Waterloo, Iowa. The couple moved there so Gacy could manage the restaurants, with the understanding that they would move into Marlynn's parents' former home. The offer was lucrative: Gacy would receive $15,000 per year (the equivalent of about $152,600 as of 2025[ [update]]), plus a share of the restaurant's profits. Gacy opened a \"club\" in his basement where his employees could drink alcohol and play pool. Although Gacy employed teenagers of both sexes, he socialized only with the males. Gacy gave many of them alcohol before he made sexual advances; if they rebuffed him, he would claim his advances were jokes or a test of morals.\nGacy's wife gave birth to a son in February 1966 and a daughter in March 1967. Gacy later described this period of his life as \"perfect\"\u2014he had finally earned his father's approval. When Gacy's parents visited in July 1966, his father privately apologized for the abuse he had inflicted before happily saying, \"Son, I was wrong about you\", as he shook Gacy's hand.\nWaterloo Jaycees.\nIn Waterloo, Gacy joined the local Jaycees chapter, regularly offering extended hours to the organization in addition to the twelve- and fourteen-hour days he worked managing the restaurants. At meetings, Gacy often provided fried chicken and insisted on being called \"Colonel\". He and other Waterloo Jaycees were also deeply involved in drug abuse, pornography, prostitution and wife swapping. Although Gacy was considered ambitious and a braggart, the Jaycees held him in high regard for his fundraising work: in 1967 he was named \"outstanding vice-president\" of the Waterloo Jaycees and served on the board of directors.\nAssault of Donald Voorhees.\nIn August 1967, Gacy sexually assaulted 15-year-old Donald Voorhees Jr., the son of Donald Edwin Voorhees, a local politician and fellow Jaycee. Gacy lured Voorhees to his house with the promise of showing him heterosexual stag films regularly played at Jaycee events. Gacy plied Voorhees with alcohol, allowed him to watch a stag movie, then persuaded him to engage in mutual oral sex, adding, \"You have to have sex with a man before you start having sex with women.\" Over the following months, Gacy abused several other youths, including one whom he encouraged to have sex with his own wife before blackmailing him into performing oral sex on him. Gacy also tricked several teenagers into believing he was commissioned to conduct homosexual experiments for scientific research and paid them up to $50 each.\nIn March 1968, Voorhees told his father that Gacy had sexually assaulted him. Voorhees\u00a0Sr. immediately informed the police, who arrested Gacy and charged him with performing oral sodomy on Voorhees and the attempted assault of 16-year-old Edward Lynch. Gacy vehemently denied the charges and demanded to take a polygraph test. The results of these tests were \"indicative of deception\". Gacy publicly denied any wrongdoing and insisted the charges were politically motivated\u2014Voorhees Sr. had opposed Gacy's nomination for appointment as president of the Iowa Jaycees. Several fellow Jaycees found Gacy's story credible and rallied to his support. However, on May 10, 1968, Gacy was indicted on the sodomy charge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The most striking aspect of the test results is the patient's total denial of responsibility for everything that has happened to him. He can produce an \"alibi\" for everything. He presents himself as a victim of circumstances and blames other people who are out to get him... the patient attempts to assure a sympathetic response by depicting himself as being at the mercy of a hostile environment.\"\nSection of report detailing Gacy's 1968 psychiatric evaluation.\nOn August 30, Gacy promised one of his employees, 18-year-old Russell Schroeder, $300 if he physically assaulted Voorhees in an effort to discourage the boy from testifying in court. Schroeder lured Voorhees to an isolated park, sprayed Mace in his eyes, then beat him. Voorhees escaped and reported Schroeder's actions to police. Schroeder was arrested the next day; initially denying involvement, he soon confessed to assaulting Voorhees, indicating he had done so at Gacy's request. Police arrested Gacy and charged him with hiring Schroeder to assault and intimidate Voorhees.\nOn September 12, Gacy was ordered to undergo a psychiatric evaluation at the Psychiatric Hospital of the University of Iowa. Two doctors concluded he had an antisocial personality disorder (the clinical term for sociopathy or psychopathy), was unlikely to benefit from treatment, and that his behavior pattern was likely to bring him into repeated conflict with society. The doctors concluded Gacy was mentally competent to stand trial.\nConviction and imprisonment.\nOn November 7, 1968, Gacy pleaded guilty to one count of sodomy in relation to Voorhees, but not guilty to the charges related to other youths. He claimed Voorhees had offered himself to him and that he had acted out of curiosity. His story was not believed. Gacy was convicted of sodomy on December 3 and sentenced to ten years' imprisonment, to be served at the Anamosa State Penitentiary. That same day, Gacy's wife petitioned for divorce, requesting she be awarded the couple's home and property, sole custody of their two children, and alimony. The court ruled in her favor, and the divorce was finalized on September 18, 1969. Gacy never saw his first wife or children again.\nDuring his incarceration, Gacy rapidly acquired a reputation as a model prisoner. Within months of his arrival, he had risen to the position of head cook. He also joined the inmate Jaycee chapter and increased its membership from 50 to 650 men in less than eighteen months. Gacy secured an increase in the inmates' daily pay in the prison mess hall and supervised several projects to improve conditions for inmates, including the installation of a miniature golf course; he was presented with a distinguished service award for his efforts within the inmate Jaycee chapter in February 1970.\nIn June 1969, Gacy was denied parole. To prepare for a second scheduled parole hearing in May 1970, he completed sixteen high school courses, obtaining his diploma in November 1969. On Christmas Day 1969, Gacy's father died from cirrhosis. When informed of his father's death, Gacy collapsed to the floor, sobbing. His request for supervised compassionate leave to attend the funeral was denied.\nReturn to Chicago.\nGacy was granted parole with twelve months' probation on June 18, 1970, having served eighteen months of his ten-year sentence. Conditions of his probation included a nightly curfew and that Gacy relocate to Chicago to live with his mother. On his release, Gacy told friend and fellow Jaycee Clarence Lane\u2014who picked him up from the prison and had remained steadfast in his belief of Gacy's innocence\u2014that he would \"never go back to jail\" and that he intended to re-establish himself in Waterloo. However, within twenty-four hours, Gacy had relocated to Chicago. He arrived there by bus on June 19 and shortly thereafter obtained a job as a short-order cook.\nOn February 12, 1971, Gacy was charged with sexually assaulting a teenage boy who claimed that he had lured him into his car at Chicago's Greyhound bus terminal and driven him to his home, where he had attempted to force the boy into sex. The court dismissed this complaint when the boy failed to appear. On June 22, Gacy was arrested and charged with aggravated sexual battery and reckless conduct, in response to a complaint filed by a youth who claimed that Gacy had flashed a sheriff's badge, lured him into his car, and forced him to perform oral sex. These charges were dropped after the complainant attempted to blackmail Gacy. The Iowa Board of Parole did not learn of these incidents. Gacy's parole ended on October 18, 1971, and a month later the records of Gacy's criminal convictions in Iowa were sealed.\n8213 West Summerdale Avenue.\nWith financial assistance from his mother, Gacy bought a ranch-style house at 8213 West Summerdale Avenue in unincorporated Norwood Park Township, Illinois, part of metropolitan Chicago. He lived there until his arrest in December 1978 and, according to Gacy, committed all his murders there.\nGacy was active in his local community and helpful towards his neighbors; he willingly loaned his construction tools and plowed snow from neighborhood walks free of charge. From 1974 to 1978, he hosted themed annual summer parties. These events were attended by up to 400 people, including neighbors, politicians and business associates.\nSecond marriage and divorce.\nIn August 1971, shortly after Gacy and his mother moved into the house, he became engaged to Carole Hoff, whom he had briefly dated in high school. Hoff and her two young daughters from a previous marriage moved into the house soon after. They were married on July 1, 1972. Gacy's mother moved out of the house shortly before the wedding.\nBy 1975, Gacy had told his wife that he was bisexual. After the couple had sex on Mother's Day that year, he informed her this would be \"the last time\" they would do so. He began spending most evenings away from home, only to return in the early morning with the excuse he had been working late or conducting business meetings. Carole observed Gacy bringing teenage boys into his garage in the early hours and also found gay pornography and men's wallets and identification inside the house. When she confronted Gacy about these items, he informed her angrily that it was none of her business.\nIn October 1975, after a heated argument, Carole asked Gacy for a divorce. He agreed although, by mutual consent, she continued to live at his house until February 1976. On March 2, the Gacys' divorce\u2014decreed on the false grounds of Gacy's infidelity with women\u2014was finalized.\nPDM Contractors.\nIn 1971, Gacy established a part-time construction business, PDM Contractors (for \"Painting, Decorating, and Maintenance\"). With the approval of his probation officer, Gacy worked evenings on his construction contracts while working as a cook during the day. Initially, he undertook minor repair work, but later expanded to include projects such as interior design, remodeling, and landscaping. In mid-1973, Gacy quit his job as a cook so he could commit fully to his construction business.\nBy 1975, PDM was expanding rapidly and Gacy was working up to sixteen hours per day. In March 1977, he became a supervisor for PE Systems, a firm specializing in the remodeling of drugstores. Between PE Systems and PDM, Gacy worked on up to four projects simultaneously and frequently traveled to other states. By 1978, PDM's annual revenue was over $200,000.\nClown.\nThrough his membership in a local Moose Club, Gacy became aware of a \"Jolly Joker\" clown club, whose members regularly performed at fundraising events and parades in addition to voluntarily entertaining hospitalized children. In late 1975, Gacy joined the clown club and created his own characters \"Pogo the Clown\" and \"Patches the Clown\", devising his own makeup and costumes. He described Pogo as a \"happy clown\", whereas Patches was a \"more serious\" character.\nGacy seldom earned money for his performances and later said that acting as a clown allowed him to \"regress into childhood\". He performed as both Pogo and Patches at numerous local parties, political functions, charitable events, and children's hospitals. Gacy's voluntary public service as a clown throughout the years of his murders led to him being known as the \"Killer Clown\".\nEmployees.\nMuch of PDM's workforce consisted of high school students and young men. Gacy would often proposition his workers for sex, or insist on sexual favors in return for lending his vehicles, financial assistance or promotions. Gacy also claimed to own guns, once telling an employee, \"Do you know how easy it would be to get one of my guns and kill you\u2014and how easy it would be to get rid of the body?\"\nIn 1973, Gacy and a teenage employee traveled to Florida to view a property Gacy had purchased; while there, Gacy raped the employee in their hotel room. After returning to Chicago, this employee drove to Gacy's house and beat him in his front yard. Gacy told his wife he had been attacked for refusing to pay him for poor quality painting work.\nIn May 1975, Gacy hired 15-year-old Anthony Antonucci. Two months later, he went to Antonucci's home, knowing the youth had an injured foot. The two drank a bottle of wine, then watched a heterosexual stag film before Gacy wrestled Antonucci to the floor and cuffed his hands behind his back. One cuff was loose and Antonucci freed his arm while Gacy was out of the room. When Gacy returned, Antonucci\u2014a high school wrestler\u2014grappled with him, obtained the key, and cuffed Gacy's hands behind his back. Gacy threatened Antonucci, then calmed down and promised to leave if he was freed. Antonucci agreed and Gacy left. Antonucci continued working for PDM for nine months after this incident, and Gacy made no further attempts to assault him.\nOn July 26, 1976, Gacy picked up 18-year-old hitchhiker David Cram and offered him a job with PDM; he began work the same evening. On August 21, Cram moved into Gacy's house. The next day, Cram and Gacy had several drinks to celebrate his 19th birthday, with Gacy dressed as Pogo. Gacy tricked Cram into donning handcuffs, his wrists cuffed in front of his body rather than behind. He swung Cram around while holding the chain linking the cuffs, then said he intended to rape him. Cram kicked Gacy in the face and freed himself.\nA month later, Gacy appeared at Cram's bedroom door intending to rape him, saying, \"Dave, you really don't know who I am. Maybe it would be good if you give me what I want.\" Cram resisted, straddling Gacy, who left the bedroom, stating, \"You ain't no fun.\" Cram moved out on October 5 and left PDM (although he periodically worked for Gacy over the following two years). Shortly afterwards, another employee, 18-year-old Michael Rossi, moved in. Rossi had worked for PDM since May 23, 1976. He lived with Gacy until April 1977. Rossi sometimes assisted Gacy in clowning at grand openings of businesses: Gacy as Pogo and Rossi as Patches.\nPolitics.\nGacy entered local Democratic Party politics, initially offering use of his employees to clean party headquarters at no charge. He was rewarded with an invitation to serve on the Norwood Park Township street lighting committee, subsequently earning the title of precinct captain.\nIn 1975, Gacy was appointed director of Chicago's annual Polish Constitution Day Parade. Through his work with the parade, which he would supervise until 1978, Gacy met and was photographed with First Lady Rosalynn Carter wearing an \"S\" pin, indicating a person given special clearance. The event later became an embarrassment to the United States Secret Service.\nMurders.\nGacy murdered at least thirty-three young men and boys, twenty-six of whom he buried in the crawl space of his house. His victims included people he knew and random individuals lured from Chicago's Greyhound Bus station, Bughouse Square, or off the streets with the promise of a job with PDM, an offer of alcohol, drugs, or money for sex. Some victims were grabbed by force; others were conned into believing Gacy (who often carried a sheriff's badge and had red spotlights on his black Oldsmobile) was a policeman. Gacy usually lured a lone victim to his house, although on more than one occasion Gacy had what he called \"doubles\"\u2014two killed in the same evening.\nInside Gacy's home, his usual modus operandi was to ply a youth with drink, drugs, or generally gain his trust. He would then produce a pair of handcuffs to \"show a magic trick\", sometimes as part of a clowning routine. He typically cuffed his own hands behind his back, then surreptitiously released himself with a hidden key. He then offered to show his intended victim the trick. With his victim restrained, Gacy proceeded with rape and torture. He frequently began by sitting on or straddling his victim's chest before forcing the victim to fellate him. Gacy then inflicted acts of torture including burning with cigars, making his captive imitate a horse as he sat on their back and pulled on makeshift reins around their necks, and violation with foreign objects such as dildos and prescription bottles after he had sodomized his captive. Gacy frequently manacled his captives' ankles to a two-by-four with handcuffs attached at each end, an act inspired by the Houston Mass Murders. He also taunted many victims throughout their abuse, and was known to have partly drowned several in the bathtub before repeatedly reviving them.\nGacy typically murdered his victims by placing a rope tourniquet around their neck and progressively tightening it with a hammer handle. He referred to this as the \"rope trick\", frequently informing his victim, \"This is the last trick.\" Occasionally, the victim convulsed for an \"hour or two\" before dying, although several victims died by asphyxiation from cloth gags stuffed deep in their throats. Except for his two final victims, all were murdered between 3:00 and 6:00\u00a0a.m. Gacy usually stored the victims' corpses under his bed for up to twenty-four hours before burying them in the crawl space, where he periodically poured lime to hasten decomposition. Some were taken to his garage and embalmed prior to burial.\nMurder of Timothy McCoy.\nGacy's first known murder occurred on January 3, 1972. According to Gacy's later account, following a family party the previous evening, he drove to the Civic Center in the Loop in the early morning to view a display of ice sculptures. He then lured 16-year-old Timothy Jack McCoy from Chicago's Greyhound Bus Terminal into his car. McCoy was on his way to his father's home in Omaha, Nebraska, and informed Gacy his bus was not due until noon. Gacy took McCoy on a sightseeing tour of Chicago and then drove him to his home with the promise that he could spend the remainder of the night and be driven back to the station in time to catch his bus. Prior to McCoy's identification, he was known as the \"Greyhound Bus Boy\".\nGacy claimed he woke early the following morning to find McCoy standing in his bedroom doorway holding a kitchen knife. He jumped from his bed and McCoy raised both arms in a gesture of surrender, accidentally cutting Gacy's forearm. Gacy disarmed McCoy, banged his head against the bedroom wall, and kicked him against his wardrobe. McCoy kicked Gacy in the stomach, doubling him over. Gacy then grabbed McCoy, wrestled him to the floor and stabbed him repeatedly in the chest.\nAs McCoy lay dying, Gacy claimed he washed the knife in his bathroom, then went to his kitchen and saw the makings of breakfast on the table. McCoy had set the table for two; he had walked into Gacy's room to wake him while absentmindedly carrying the knife. Gacy buried McCoy in his crawl space and later covered his grave with a layer of concrete. In an interview several years after his arrest, Gacy said that immediately after killing McCoy, he felt \"totally drained\", yet noted that as he stabbed McCoy and listened to the \"gurgulations\" and gasping, he had experienced a mind-numbing orgasm. He added: \"That's when I realized that death was the ultimate thrill.\"\nSecond murder.\nGacy said he committed murder for the second time around January 1974. This victim remains unidentified. He was strangled and placed in Gacy's closet before burial. Gacy later stated that bodily fluids leaked from the victim's mouth and nose, staining his carpet. Because of this incident, Gacy regularly stuffed rags, the victim's own underwear, or a sock deep into the mouths of subsequent victims to prevent such a leakage.\nMurder of John Butkovich.\nOn July 31, 1975, John Butkovich, an 18-year-old PDM employee, disappeared. Butkovich's car was later found abandoned with his jacket and wallet inside and the keys in the ignition.\nThe day before his disappearance, Butkovich had confronted Gacy over outstanding back pay. Butkovich's father called Gacy, who claimed he was happy to help search for his son but was sorry Butkovich had \"run away\". When questioned by police, Gacy said Butkovich and two friends had arrived at his house demanding the overdue pay, but they had reached a compromise and all three had left. Over the following three years, Butkovich's parents called police more than 100 times, urging them to investigate Gacy further.\nGacy later admitted to encountering Butkovich exiting his car, waving to attract his attention. According to Gacy, Butkovich approached him, stating, \"I wanna talk to you.\" Gacy invited Butkovich into his car, then invited him back to his home, ostensibly to settle the issue of his overdue wages. At his home, Gacy offered Butkovich a drink, then conned him into allowing his wrists to be cuffed behind his back. Gacy later confessed to having \"sat on the kid's chest for a while\" before he strangled him. He stowed Butkovich's body in his garage, intending to bury the body later in the crawl space. When his wife and stepdaughters returned home earlier than expected, Gacy buried Butkovich under the concrete floor of the tool room extension of his garage in an empty space where he had intended to dig a drain tile.\nCruising years.\nIn addition to being the year his business expanded, Gacy freely admitted that 1975 was also when he began to increase the frequency of his excursions for sex with young males. He often referred to these jaunts as \"cruising\". Gacy committed most of his murders between 1976 and 1978, as he largely lived alone following his divorce.\nAlthough Gacy remained gregarious and civic-minded, several neighbors noticed behavioral changes after his 1976 divorce, including seeing him keeping company with young males, hearing his car arrive or depart in the early morning, or seeing lights in his home switch on and off in the early hours. One neighbor later recollected that, for several years, muffled high-pitched screaming, shouting, and crying had repeatedly awakened her and her son in the early morning. She identified the sounds as emanating from a house adjacent to theirs on West Summerdale Avenue.\n1976.\nOne month after his divorce was finalized, Gacy abducted and murdered 18-year-old Darrell Samson. He was last seen alive in Chicago on April 6, 1976. Gacy buried him under the dining room, with cloth lodged in his throat. On May 14, 15-year-old Randall Reffett disappeared shortly after returning home from a dental appointment. Hours after Reffett was last seen by his family, 14-year-old Samuel Stapleton vanished as he walked home from his sister's apartment. He and Reffett were close acquaintances; they were buried together in the crawl space, and investigators believe the two were murdered the same evening.\nOn June 3, Gacy killed 17-year-old Michael Bonnin, who disappeared while traveling from Chicago to Waukegan. Gacy strangled Bonnin with a ligature and buried him under the spare bedroom. Ten days later, Gacy murdered 16-year-old William Carroll and buried him in a common grave in the crawl space. Carroll seems to have been the first of four victims known to have been murdered between June 13 and August 6, 1976. Three were between 16 and 17 years old, and one unidentified victim appears to have been an adult.\nOn August 5, 16-year-old James Haakenson is last known to have phoned his family, possibly from Gacy's home. Haakenson died of suffocation. His body was buried in the crawl space beneath 17-year-old Rick Johnston, who was last seen alive on August 6.\nGacy is thought to have murdered two unidentified males between August and October 1976. On October 24, Gacy abducted and killed teenage friends Kenneth Parker and Michael Marino: the two were last seen on Clark Street in Chicago. Two days later, 19-year-old construction worker William Bundy disappeared after informing his family he was to attend a party. Bundy died of suffocation. Gacy buried the body beneath his master bedroom. Bundy had apparently worked for Gacy.\nBetween November and December 1976, Gacy murdered 21-year-old Francis Alexander. His last contact with his family was a phone call to his mother sometime in November. He was not reported missing as his family believed he had moved to California shortly thereafter. Alexander was buried beneath the room Gacy used as his office.\nIn December 1976, 17-year-old Gregory Godzik disappeared. His girlfriend last saw him outside her house. Godzik had worked for PDM for less than three weeks when he disappeared. He had informed his family that Gacy had had him \"dig trenches for some kind of (drain) tiles\" in his crawl space. Godzik's car was later found abandoned. His parents and older sister contacted Gacy about Godzik's disappearance. Gacy claimed that Godzik had expressed a wish to run away from home; he also claimed to have received an answering machine message from Godzik shortly after he had disappeared. When asked if he could play the message for Godzik's parents, Gacy said he had erased it.\n1977.\nOn January 20, 1977, Gacy lured 19-year-old John Szyc to his house on the pretext of buying his Plymouth Satellite. He later confessed to strangling Szyc in his spare bedroom, claiming Rossi was asleep in the house the following morning. Gacy later sold the car to Rossi for $300.\nTwo months later, on March 15, 20-year-old Jon Prestidge disappeared. Prestidge was last seen leaving a Near North Side restaurant. He was buried in the crawl space above the body of Francis Alexander. Shortly before his disappearance, Prestidge had mentioned he had obtained work with a local contractor. Gacy murdered one additional unidentified youth and buried him in the crawl space in the spring or early summer of 1977. On July 5, Gacy killed 19-year-old Matthew Bowman. Bowman's mother last saw him at a suburban train station; he had intended to travel to Harwood Heights for a court appointment.\nThe following month, Rossi was arrested for stealing gasoline while driving Szyc's car. The gas station attendant noted the license plate and police traced the car to Gacy's house. When questioned, Gacy told officers that Szyc had sold the car to him in February, saying he needed money to leave town. A check of the VIN confirmed the car had belonged to Szyc. The police did not pursue the matter further, although they did inform Szyc's mother that her son had sold his car.\nBy the end of 1977, Gacy had murdered six more young men between the ages of 16 and 21. The first of these was 18-year-old Robert Gilroy, the son of a Chicago police sergeant, last seen alive on September 15. Gilroy lived four blocks from Gacy's house. He was buried in the crawl space. On September 12, Gacy had flown to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to supervise a remodeling project, and did not return to Chicago until September 16. Because Gacy was in another state at the time Gilroy was last seen, this is cited to support Gacy's claim of assistance from one or more accomplices in several homicides. Ten days after Gilroy was last seen, 19-year-old former U.S. Marine John Mowery disappeared after leaving his mother's house. Gacy strangled Mowery and buried his body beneath the master bedroom.\nOn October 17, 21-year-old Russell Nelson disappeared; he was last seen outside a Chicago bar. Nelson was looking for contracting work. Gacy murdered and buried him beneath the guest bedroom. Less than four weeks later, Gacy murdered 16-year-old Robert Winch and buried him in the crawl space. Twenty-year-old Tommy Boling disappeared on November 18 after leaving a Chicago bar. On December 9, 19-year-old U.S. Marine David Talsma disappeared after telling his mother he was to attend a rock concert in Hammond, Indiana. Gacy strangled Talsma with a ligature and buried him in the crawl space, close to John Mowery.\nOn December 30, Gacy abducted 19-year-old college student Robert Donnelly from a Chicago bus stop at gunpoint. Gacy drove him to his home, where he raped, tortured, and repeatedly drowned Donnelly to unconsciousness in a bathtub as he made statements such as, \"Aren't we playing fun games tonight?\" Donnelly later testified at trial that he was in such pain that he asked Gacy to kill him. Gacy replied \"I'm getting 'round to it.\" After several hours, Gacy drove Donnelly to his workplace and released him, warning him that if he complained to police, they would not believe him.\n1978.\nDonnelly reported the assault, and police questioned Gacy on January 6, 1978. Gacy admitted to having had a \"slave-sex\" relationship with Donnelly, but insisted everything was consensual, adding that he \"didn't pay the kid\" the money he had promised him. The police believed him and filed no charges. The following month, Gacy killed 19-year-old William Kindred, who disappeared on February 16 after telling his fianc\u00e9e, who knew Gacy, that he was going to a bar. Kindred was the final victim buried in the crawl space.\nOn March 21, Gacy lured 26-year-old Jeffrey Rignall into his car. Gacy chloroformed him and drove him to his house, where his arms and head were restrained in a pillory device affixed to the ceiling and his feet locked into another device. He raped and tortured Rignall with instruments including lit candles and whips and repeatedly chloroformed him into unconsciousness. Gacy then dumped Rignall in Chicago's Lincoln Park, unconscious but alive.\nRignall managed to stagger to his girlfriend's apartment. Police were informed of the assault but did not investigate Gacy. Rignall was able to recall the Oldsmobile, the Kennedy Expressway and particular side streets. He and two friends staked out the Cumberland exit of the Expressway and, in April, Rignall saw the Oldsmobile, which he and his friends followed to 8213 West Summerdale. Gacy was arrested on July 15; he faced trial for assault and battery against Rignall.\nBy mid-1978, the crawl space had no room for further bodies. Gacy later confessed to police that he considered stowing bodies in his attic, but had been worried about complications arising from \"leakage\". Therefore, he chose to dispose of his victims off the I-55 bridge into the Des Plaines River. Gacy stated he had thrown five bodies into this river in 1978, one of which he believed had landed on a passing barge; only four were ever found.\nThe first known victim thrown from the bridge was 20-year-old Timothy O'Rourke. He was murdered in mid-June after leaving his apartment to purchase cigarettes. Shortly before his disappearance, O'Rourke had told his roommate a contractor on the Northwest Side had offered him a job. On November 4, Gacy killed 19-year-old Frank Landingin. He was last seen alive by his father walking along Foster Avenue; his naked body was found close to an inlet in the Des Plaines River by two duck hunters on November 12. On November 24, 20-year-old James Mazzara disappeared after Thanksgiving dinner with his family. Mazzara had informed his sister the day before that he was working in construction. He was last seen walking in the direction of Bughouse Square.\nMurder of Robert Piest.\nOn the afternoon of December 11, 1978, Gacy visited the Nisson Pharmacy in Des Plaines, to discuss a potential remodeling deal with the store owner, Phil Torf. While he was within earshot of 15-year-old part-time employee Robert Piest, Gacy mentioned his firm often hired teenage boys at a starting wage of $5 per hour\u2014almost double the pay Piest earned at the pharmacy.\nShortly after Gacy left, Piest's mother arrived at the store to drive her son home so the family could celebrate her birthday together. Piest asked his mother to wait, adding that \"some contractor wants to talk to me about a job\". He left the store at 9:00\u00a0p.m., promising to return shortly.\nPiest was murdered shortly after 10:00\u00a0p.m. at Gacy's home. Gacy later stated that at his house, he gave Piest a soft drink before asking whether there was anything he \"wouldn't do for the right price\", to which Piest replied that he did not mind working hard. In response, Gacy stated \"good money\" could be earned by hustling, although Piest was dismissive. Gacy then duped Piest into donning handcuffs. Gacy's subsequent statements regarding the events varied, although in one of his initial statements, he claimed Piest failed to resist as he removed the boy's trousers. He also stated that as he placed the rope around Piest's neck, the boy was \"crying, scared\". Gacy admitted to having received a phone call from a business acquaintance as Piest lay dying.\nInvestigation.\nWhen Piest failed to return, his family filed a missing person report with the Des Plaines police. Torf named Gacy as the contractor Piest had most likely left the store to talk to. Lieutenant Joseph Kozenczak, whose son attended Maine West High School like Piest, chose to investigate Gacy further. A check of Gacy's criminal background revealed that he had an outstanding battery charge in Chicago and had been imprisoned in Iowa for the sodomy of a 15-year-old boy.\nKozenczak and two Des Plaines police officers visited Gacy at his home the following evening. Gacy indicated he had asked one of the youths working at the pharmacy\u2014whom he believed to be Piest\u2014whether there were any remodeling materials behind the store. He was adamant, however, that he had not offered Piest a job, and had only returned to the pharmacy shortly after 8:00\u00a0p.m. as he had left his appointment book. Gacy promised to come to the station later that evening to make a statement, indicating he was unable to do so at that moment as his uncle had just died. When questioned as to how soon he could come to the police station, he responded, \"You guys are very rude. Don't you have any respect for the dead?\"\nAt 3:20\u00a0a.m., Gacy arrived at the police station covered in mud, claiming he had been involved in a car accident. On returning to the police station later that day, Gacy denied any involvement in Piest's disappearance and repeated that he had not offered him a job. Gacy reiterated that he had returned to the pharmacy in response to a phone call from Torf informing him he had left his appointment book at the store. Detectives had already spoken with Torf, who denied calling Gacy. At the request of detectives, Gacy prepared a written statement detailing his movements on December 11.\nFirst search warrant.\nSuspecting Gacy might be holding Piest at his home, Des Plaines police obtained a search warrant on December 13. This search revealed several suspicious items, including several police badges; a starting pistol; a syringe and hypodermic needle; handcuffs; books about homosexuality and pederasty; pornographic and stag films; capsules of amyl nitrite; a dildo; a two-by-four with two holes drilled into each end; bottles of Valium and atropine; several driver's licenses; a blue hooded parka; and underwear too small to fit Gacy. They also found a class ring engraved with the initials J.A.S. and a Nisson Pharmacy photo receipt in a trash can, alongside a section of nylon rope.\nSurveillance.\nThe Des Plaines police confiscated Gacy's Oldsmobile and other PDM work vehicles. Surveillance teams (consisting of officers Mike Albrecht and David Hachmeister, and Ronald Robinson and Robert Schultz) monitored Gacy as the investigation continued. The following day, investigators received a phone call from Michael Rossi, who informed the investigators of Gregory Godzik's disappearance and the fact that another PDM employee, Charles Hattula, had been found drowned in an Illinois river earlier that year.\nOn December 15, Des Plaines investigators obtained further details of Gacy's battery charge, learning Jeffrey Rignall had reported that Gacy had lured him into his car, then chloroformed, raped and tortured him before dumping him in Lincoln Park. In an interview with Gacy's former wife the same day, they learned of the disappearance of John Butkovich. The same day, the class ring was traced to a John Alan Szyc. An interview with Szyc's mother revealed that several items from her son's apartment were also missing, including a Motorola television.\nBy December 16, Gacy was becoming affable with the surveillance detectives, regularly inviting them to join him for meals in restaurants and occasionally for drinks in bars or at his home. He repeatedly denied involvement with Piest's disappearance and accused the officers of harassing him because of his political connections or his recreational drug use. Knowing these officers were unlikely to arrest him on anything trivial, he openly taunted them by flouting traffic laws and succeeded in losing his pursuers more than once. That afternoon, Cram consented to a police interview in which he revealed that, because of his poor timekeeping, Gacy had once given him a watch which he claimed to have obtained \"from a dead person\".\nInvestigators conducted a formal interview of Rossi on December 17. He informed them Gacy had sold him Szyc's vehicle, explaining that he had bought the car from Szyc because he needed money to move to California. A further examination of Gacy's Oldsmobile revealed a small cluster of fibers in the trunk, suspected to be human hair. That evening, three trained search dogs were used to determine whether Piest had been present in any of Gacy's vehicles. One laid on the passenger seat of Gacy's Oldsmobile in what the dog's handler informed investigators was a \"death reaction\", indicating Piest's body had been present.\nThat evening, Gacy invited detectives Albrecht and Hachmeister to a restaurant for a meal. Early on December 18, he invited them into another restaurant where, over breakfast, he discussed his business, his marriages and his clowning. During the conversation, Gacy remarked: \"You know... clowns can get away with murder.\"\nBy December 18, Gacy was beginning to display signs of strain from the constant surveillance: he was unshaven, looked tired and anxious and was drinking heavily. That afternoon, he drove to his lawyers' office to prepare a $750,000 civil suit against the Des Plaines police, demanding that they cease their surveillance. The same day, the Nisson Pharmacy photo receipt found in Gacy's kitchen was traced to 17-year-old Kimberly Byers, a colleague of Piest at Nisson Pharmacy. Byers stated that she had borrowed Piest's parka earlier in the evening and had placed the receipt in the pocket just before she returned the coat to Piest as he left the store.\nSecond search warrant.\nThe same evening, Rossi was interviewed a second time. This time he was more cooperative. He informed detectives that in the summer of 1977, at Gacy's behest, he had spread ten bags of lime in the crawl space of Gacy's house.\nOn December 19, investigators began compiling evidence for a second search warrant for Gacy's house. The same day, Gacy's lawyers filed the civil suit against the Des Plaines police. The hearing for the suit was scheduled for December 22. That afternoon, Gacy invited the surveillance detectives inside his house again. As Robinson distracted Gacy with conversation, Schultz walked into Gacy's bedroom in an unsuccessful attempt to write down the serial number of the Motorola television they suspected belonged to Szyc. While flushing Gacy's toilet, the officer noticed a rancid smell he suspected could be that of rotting corpses emanating from a heating duct. The officers who had searched Gacy's house previously had failed to notice this, as the house had been cold.\nInvestigators interviewed both Cram and Rossi on December 20. When questioned as to where he believed Gacy had concealed Piest's body, Rossi replied Gacy may have placed the body in the crawl space. Rossi agreed to submit to a polygraph test. He denied any involvement in Piest's disappearance or any knowledge of his whereabouts. He soon refused to continue the questioning, and Rossi's \"erratic and inconsistent\" responses while attached to the polygraph machine rendered Kozenczak \"unable to render a definite opinion\" as to his truthfulness. Rossi did, however, further discuss the trench digging he did in the crawl space and remarked on Gacy's insistence that he not deviate from where he was instructed to dig.\nCram informed investigators of Gacy's attempts to rape him in 1976. He stated that after he and Gacy had returned to his home after the December 13 search, Gacy had turned pale after seeing a clod of mud on his carpet and had immediately entered the crawl space to look for evidence of digging. When asked whether he had been to the crawl space, Cram replied he had once been asked by Gacy to spread lime down there and had also dug trenches, which Gacy had explained were for drainage pipes. Cram stated these trenches were wide, long and 2 feet deep\u2014the size of graves.\nConfession.\nOn the evening of December 20, Gacy drove to his lawyers' office in Park Ridge to attend a scheduled meeting, ostensibly to discuss the progress of his civil suit. Gacy appeared anxious and disheveled and immediately asked for an alcoholic drink. Sam Amirante fetched a bottle of Seagrams whiskey, and Gacy immediately drank two cupfuls. Amirante\u2014by this stage dubious of Gacy's claims of innocence\u2014then asked what he had to discuss with them, placing a copy of the \"Daily Herald\" on his desk and stating: \"You said you had something new to tell me! Something important!\" Gacy picked up the newspaper, pointed to the front-page article covering the disappearance of Piest and said, \"This boy is dead. He's dead. He's in a river.\"\nGacy then proceeded to give a rambling confession that ran into the early hours of the following morning. He began by stating he had \"been the judge... jury and executioner of many, many people\", and that he now wanted to be the same for himself. He stated he had murdered \"at least thirty\" victims, most of whom he had buried in his crawl space, and had disposed of five other bodies in the Des Plaines River. Gacy dismissed his victims as \"male prostitutes\", \"hustlers\" and \"liars\", adding he sometimes awoke to find \"dead, strangled kids\" with their hands cuffed behind their back. He had buried their bodies in his crawl space as he believed they were his property.\nAs a result of the alcohol he had consumed, Gacy fell asleep midway through his confession. Amirante immediately arranged a psychiatric appointment for Gacy that morning. On awakening several hours later, Gacy shook his head when informed by Amirante he had confessed to killing approximately thirty people, saying, \"Well, I can't think about this right now. I've got things to do.\" Ignoring his lawyers' advice regarding his scheduled appointment, Gacy left to attend to his business.\nGacy later recollected his memories of his final day of freedom as being \"hazy\", adding he knew his arrest was inevitable and that he intended to visit his friends and say his farewells. After leaving his lawyers' office, Gacy drove to a gas station where he handed a small bag of cannabis to the attendant, who immediately handed the bag to the surveillance officers, adding that Gacy had told him, \"The end is coming (for me). These guys are going to kill me.\" Gacy then drove to the home of a fellow contractor and friend, Ronald Rhode. Gacy hugged Rhode before bursting into tears and saying, \"I've been a bad boy. I killed thirty people, give or take a few.\" Gacy left Rhode and drove to Cram's home to meet with Cram and Rossi. The surveillance officers noted he was holding a rosary to his chin, praying while he drove along the expressway.\nAfter talking with Cram and Rossi, Gacy had Cram drive him to a scheduled legal meeting. Cram informed the surveillance officers that Gacy had told him and Rossi that he had confessed to over thirty murders with his lawyers the previous evening. Gacy then had Cram drive him to Maryhill Cemetery, where his father was buried.\nAs Gacy drove to various locations that morning, police outlined the formal draft of their second search warrant, specifically to search for Piest's body in the crawl space. On hearing from the surveillance detectives that, in light of his erratic behavior, Gacy might be about to commit suicide, police decided to arrest him on a charge of possession and distribution of cannabis in order to hold him in custody, as the formal request for a second search warrant was presented. At 4:30\u00a0p.m. on December 21, the eve of the hearing of Gacy's civil suit, a second search warrant was granted. After police informed Gacy of their intentions to search his crawl space for the body of Piest, Gacy denied the teenager was buried there, but confessed to having killed in self-defense a young man whose body was buried under his garage.\nArmed with the signed search warrant, police and evidence technicians drove to Gacy's home. They found Gacy had unplugged his sump pump, flooding the crawl space with water; they replaced the plug and waited for the water to drain. Evidence technician Daniel Genty then entered the crawl space, crawled to the southwest area and began digging. Within minutes, he uncovered putrefied flesh and a human arm bone. Genty shouted to the investigators that they could charge Gacy with murder, adding, \"I think this place is full of kids.\" A police photographer uncovered a patella in the northeast corner. The two then began digging in the southeast corner, uncovering two lower leg bones.\nThe victims were too decomposed to be Piest. As the body in the northeast corner was unearthed, a crime scene technician discovered the skull of a second victim alongside this body. Later excavations of the feet of this second victim revealed a further skull beneath the body. Because of this, technicians returned to the trench where the first body was unearthed, discovering the rib cage of a fourth victim, confirming the scale of the murders.\nArrest.\nAfter being informed that the police had found human remains in his crawl space and that he would now face murder charges, Gacy told officers he wanted to \"clear the air\". In the early morning hours of December 22, and in the presence of his lawyers, Gacy provided a formal statement in which he confessed to murdering approximately thirty young males\u2014all of whom he claimed had entered his house willingly. Some victims were referred to by name, but Gacy claimed not to know or remember most of the names. He claimed all were teenage male runaways or male prostitutes, the majority of whom he had buried in his crawl space. Gacy claimed to have dug only five of the graves in this location and had his employees (including Godzik) dig the remaining trenches so that he would \"have graves available\". When shown a driver's license issued to a Robert Hasten which had been found on his property, Gacy claimed not to know this individual but admitted that this license had been in the possession of one of his victims. He also confessed to having planned to further conceal the bodies beneath his property by covering the entire crawl space with concrete in January 1979.\nWhen questioned specifically about Piest, Gacy confessed to luring him to his house and strangling him on December 11. He also admitted to having slept alongside Piest's body that evening, before disposing of the corpse in the Des Plaines River in the early hours of December 13. On his way to the police station, he had been in a minor traffic accident after disposing of Piest. His vehicle had slid off an ice-covered road and had to be towed free.\nAccompanied by police, his lawyers, and his older sister, Gacy was driven to the I-55 bridge on December 23 to pinpoint the precise spot where he confessed to having thrown the body of Robert Piest and four other victims into the river. Gacy was then taken to his house and instructed to mark his garage floor with orange spray paint to show where he had buried the individual he had supposedly killed in self-defense, whom he named as John Butkovich. To assist officers in their search, Gacy drew a rough diagram of his basement to indicate where their bodies were buried. Twenty-six bodies were unearthed from Gacy's crawl space over the next week; three others were also unearthed elsewhere on his property. As the flooring and walls of the property were dismantled, additional evidence including identification cards and further deviant sex books were discovered.\nTrial.\nGacy was brought to trial on February 6, 1980, charged with 33 murders. He was tried within the Cook County Criminal Court Building before Judge Louis Garippo; the jury was selected from Rockford because of extensive press coverage in Cook County.\nAt the request of his defense counsel, Gacy spent over three hundred hours with doctors at the Menard Correctional Center in Chester in the year before his trial. He underwent a variety of psychological tests to determine whether he was mentally competent to stand trial. Gacy attempted to convince the doctors that he had multiple personality disorder. He claimed to have four personalities: the hard-working, civic-minded contractor, the clown, the active politician, and a policeman called Jack Hanley, whom he referred to as \"Bad Jack\". When Gacy had confessed to police, he claimed to be relaying the crimes of Jack, who detested homosexuality and viewed male prostitutes as \"weak, stupid and degraded scum\". His lawyers opted to have Gacy plead not guilty by reason of insanity.\nIn his opening statement, one of Gacy's defense attorneys, Robert Motta, remarked: \"The insanity defense has been looked [upon] as an escape; a defense of last resort. The defense of insanity is valid and it is the only defense that we could use here, because that is where the truth lies\u00a0... because if [Gacy] is normal, then our concept of normality is totally distorted.\" Presenting Gacy as a Jekyll-and-Hyde character, the defense produced several psychiatric experts who had examined Gacy; three testified they found him to be a paranoid schizophrenic with multiple personalities.\nThe prosecutors argued that Gacy was sane and in full control of his actions. They produced several witnesses to testify to his premeditation and the efforts he took to escape detection. Those doctors refuted the defense doctors' claims of multiple personalities and insanity. Cram and Rossi testified that Gacy had made them dig drainage trenches and spread bags of lime in his crawl space. Both said Gacy looked periodically into the crawl space to ensure they and other employees they supervised did not deviate from the precise locations he had marked.\nOn February 18, Robert Stein testified that all the bodies recovered from Gacy's property were \"markedly decomposed [and] putrefied, skeletalized remains\", and that of all the autopsies he performed, thirteen victims had died of asphyxiation, six of ligature strangulation, one of multiple stab wounds to the chest and ten in undetermined ways. When Gacy's defense team suggested that all 33 deaths were caused by accidental erotic asphyxia, Stein called this highly improbable.\nJeffrey Rignall testified for the defense on February 21. Rignall wept repeatedly while describing Gacy's torture of him in March 1978. During specific cross-examination relating to the torture, Rignall vomited and was excused from further testimony. On February 29, Donald Voorhees testified to his ordeal at Gacy's hands and his assault at Gacy's behest. Voorhees felt unable to testify but did briefly attempt to do so before being asked to step down. Robert Donnelly testified the week after Voorhees, recounting his ordeal at Gacy's hands in December 1977. Donnelly was visibly distressed as he recalled the abuse.\nDuring the fifth week of the trial, Gacy wrote a personal letter to Judge Garippo requesting a mistrial for reasons including that he did not approve of his lawyers' insanity plea; that his lawyers had not allowed him to take the witness stand (as he had wanted to do); that his defense had not called enough medical witnesses, and that the police were lying with regard to verbal statements he had allegedly made to detectives after his arrest and that, in any event, the statements were \"self-serving\" for use by the prosecution. Judge Garippo informed Gacy that both counsels had not been denied the opportunity or funds to summon expert witnesses to testify, and that, under the law, he had the choice whether he wished to testify, and was free to indicate as much to the judge.\nClosing arguments.\nOn March 11, final arguments by both prosecution and defense attorneys began. Prosecuting attorney Terry Sullivan outlined Gacy's history of abusing youths, the testimony of his efforts to avoid detection and describing his surviving victims\u2014Voorhees and Donnelly\u2014as \"living dead\". Referring to Gacy as the \"worst of all murderers\", Sullivan stated, \"John Gacy has accounted for more human devastation than many earthly catastrophes... I tremble when thinking about just how close he came to getting away with it all.\"\nAfter the state's four-hour closing, counsel Sam Amirante spoke for the defense. Amirante accused Sullivan of scarcely referring to the evidence in his own closing argument, and of arousing hatred against his client. He attempted to portray Gacy as \"driven by compulsions he was unable to control\", contending the State had not met their burden of proving Gacy sane beyond a reasonable doubt. Amirante then urged the jury to put aside any prejudice they held against his client and asked they deliver a verdict of not guilty by reason of insanity, adding that Gacy was a danger to both himself and to others, and that studying his psychology and behavior would be of benefit to science.\nOn the morning of March 12, William Kunkle continued to argue for the prosecution. Kunkle referred to the defense's contention of insanity as \"a sham\", arguing that the facts of the case demonstrated Gacy's ability to think logically and control his actions. Kunkle also referred to the testimony of one of the doctors who had examined Gacy in 1968 and had concluded he was an antisocial personality, stating that had the recommendations of this doctor been heeded, Gacy would not have been freed. At the close of his argument, Kunkle removed photos of Gacy's 22 identified victims from a display board and asked the jury not to show sympathy but to \"show justice\".\nThe jury deliberated for one hour and fifty minutes. Gacy was found guilty of 33 charges of murder; he was also found guilty of sexual assault and taking indecent liberties with a child, both in reference to Robert Piest. At the time, his conviction for 33 murders was the most for which any person in U.S. history had been convicted.\nIn the sentencing phase of the trial, the jury deliberated for more than two hours before sentencing Gacy to death for each murder committed after the Illinois statute on capital punishment came into effect in June 1977. His execution was set for June 2, 1980.\nDeath row.\nOn being sentenced, Gacy was transferred to the Menard Correctional Center, where he remained on death row for 14 years, repeatedly proclaiming, often via conflicting claims, his alleged innocence.\nIsolated in his prison cell, Gacy began to paint, with his artwork occasionally produced via commission. He drew inspiration from a wide range of sources for his artwork, depicting subjects as diverse as clowns (including himself as Pogo or Patches), Jesus, the Seven Dwarfs, skulls, his own home, Elvis Presley, and John Dillinger. Gacy's paintings have been displayed at exhibitions and sold at auction.\nBefore his trial, Gacy initiated contact with journalist Russ Ewing, to whom he granted numerous interviews between 1979 and 1981. Ewing later collaborated with author Tim Cahill to publish the book \"Buried Dreams\". The information Gacy divulged to Ewing regarding the circumstances of his first murder would prove instrumental in establishing the identity of his first victim.\nOn February 15, 1983, Henry Brisbon, a fellow death row inmate known as the I-57 killer, stabbed Gacy in the arm with a sharpened wire. He received treatment in the prison hospital.\nAfter his incarceration, Gacy read law books and filed voluminous motions and appeals, although he did not prevail in any. His appeals related to issues such as the validity of the first search warrant granted to the Des Plaines police on December 13, 1978, and his objection to his lawyers' insanity plea defense. Gacy contended that, although he had \"some knowledge\" of five of the murders (those of McCoy, Butkovich, Godzik, Szyc and Piest), the other 28 murders had been committed by employees who had keys to his house while he was away on business trips.\nIn mid-1984, the Supreme Court of Illinois upheld Gacy's conviction and ordered his execution by lethal injection on November 14. Gacy filed an appeal against this decision, which was denied by the Supreme Court of the United States on March 4, 1985. The following year, Gacy filed a further post-conviction petition, seeking a new trial. His then-defense lawyer, Richard Kling, argued that Gacy had been provided with ineffective legal counsel at his 1980 trial. This petition was dismissed on September 11, 1986.\nGacy appealed the 1985 decision that he be executed. The Illinois Supreme Court upheld his conviction on September 29, 1988, setting a new execution date of January 11, 1989. After the U.S. Supreme Court denied Gacy's final appeal in October 1993, the Illinois Supreme Court formally set an execution date for May 10, 1994.\nExecution.\nOn the morning of May 9, 1994, Gacy was transferred to Stateville Correctional Center to be executed. That afternoon, he was allowed a private picnic on the prison grounds with his family. For his last meal, Gacy ordered a bucket of KFC, french fries, a dozen fried shrimp, fresh strawberries and a Diet Coke. That evening, he received the last rites from a Catholic priest before being escorted to the Stateville execution chamber.\nIn the hours leading up to Gacy's execution, a crowd estimated at over 1,000 gathered outside the correctional center; a vocal majority were in favor of the execution, although a small number of anti-death penalty protesters were present. Some of those in favor of the execution wore T-shirts hearkening to Gacy's previous community services as a clown and bearing satirical slogans such as \"No tears for the clown\".\nAt 12:40\u00a0a.m., the procedure to administer the lethal injection began, although the chemicals used in the execution solidified unexpectedly, clogging the IV tube. The execution team replaced the clogged tube and the execution resumed. The entire procedure took 18 minutes. Anesthesiologists blamed the problem on the prison officials' inexperience at conducting an execution. This error apparently led to Illinois' adopting an alternative method of lethal injection. One prosecutor at Gacy's trial, William Kunkle, said, \"He got a much easier death than any of his victims.\"\nAccording to published reports, Gacy was a diagnosed psychopath who did not express any remorse for his crimes. His final statement to his lawyer before his execution was that killing him would not compensate for the loss of others, and that the state was murdering him. His final spoken words were reported to be \"Kiss my ass\", although prosecutor William Kunkle stated in 2020 that these words were spoken to a prison official, and were not part of any official statement prior to Gacy's execution.\nAfter Gacy's death was confirmed at 12:58\u00a0a.m. on May 10, 1994, his brain was removed. It is in the possession of Helen Morrison, a witness for the defense at Gacy's trial, who has interviewed Gacy and other serial killers in an attempt to isolate common personality traits of violent sociopaths. He was cremated, and the whereabouts of his ashes remain undisclosed.\nAmber alert.\nIn 1984, Sam Amirante authored procedures that were incorporated by the Illinois General Assembly into the Missing Child Recovery Act of 1984. At the time of the Gacy murders, Illinois police had to wait 72 hours before initiating a search for a missing child or adolescent. The Missing Child Recovery Act removed this waiting period. Other states subsequently adopted similar procedures. As a result, a national network aimed at locating missing children was gradually formed. This has since developed into the Child Abduction Emergency\u2014commonly known as an Amber alert.\nVictims.\nOnly 28 of Gacy's victims have been conclusively identified. The youngest were Samuel Stapleton and Michael Marino, both 14. The oldest were Francis Alexander and Russell Nelson, both 21.\nCrawl space.\nCook County medical examiner Robert Stein supervised the exhumations of the victims buried on Gacy's property. The crawl space was marked in sections and each body was given an identifying number. The first body recovered from the crawl space was assigned a marker denoting the victim as Body 1. He was identified as Jon Prestidge on January 6, 1979. No cause of death could be determined.\nJohn Butkovich was labelled as Body 2; he was among the first to be identified, on December 29, 1978. On December 23, investigators returned to unearth the three corpses which had been buried in the same trench as Body 1. Body 3 (John Szyc) was buried in the crawl space directly above Body 4 (Gregory Godzik); both were identified December 29, 1978. Body 5 was buried directly beneath Body 1; this victim was discovered below the surface of the soil, indicating he was the first to be buried in this common grave.\nThe search was postponed over Christmas. Four more bodies were unearthed on December 26. Body 6 (Samuel Stapleton, identified through dental records November 14, 1979) and Body 7 (Randall Reffett, identified through X-rays April 12, 1979) were buried in the same grave. Reffett was found in a fetal position with a cloth gag in his mouth, leading investigators to conclude he most likely died of asphyxiation. Body 8 (Matthew Bowman, identified January 29, 1979) was found with the tourniquet used to strangle him around his neck. Body 9 (Timothy McCoy, identified via dental records and a distinctive belt buckle in May 1986) was found beneath a layer of concrete and had several stab wounds to the ribs and sternum, suggesting he was Gacy's first victim.\nOn December 27, eight more bodies were discovered. Body 10, buried beneath the entrance to Gacy's home, remains unidentified; he is estimated to have been between 17 and 21 years old and between 5 ft 7 in and 5 ft 11 in (). Both Body 11 and Body 12 were found with ligatures around their necks and buried beside each other in the center of the crawl space; on September 11, 1979, they were identified as Robert Winch and Tommy Boling, respectively. Body 13 (still unidentified) was found beneath the spare bedroom; he is estimated to have been between 17 and 22 years old and between 5 ft 9 in and 6 ft 2 in (). Bodies 14 and 15 were recovered from a common grave; both were found with their head and upper torsos inside separate plastic bags. They were identified using dental records and radiology images as Michael Marino and Kenneth Parker on March 29, 1980 (too late to include among the victims identified before Gacy's trial). Body 16 (Russell Nelson, identified January 6, 1979) was found with a cloth rag lodged deep in his throat, causing him to die of suffocation. The seventeenth victim (identified as David Talsma using radiology images on November 16, 1979) was found with a ligature around his neck.\nThe following day, four more bodies were exhumed. Body 19 was buried directly beneath Gacy's master bedroom; Body 18 (Michael Bonnin, identified January 6, 1979) was located beneath the spare bedroom, and found with a ligature around the neck. Body 20 (John Mowery, identified through dental records January 27, 1979) was buried in the northwest corner of the crawl space.\nBy December 29, six more bodies were unearthed. Bodies 22, 23, 24, and 26 were buried in a common grave beneath Gacy's kitchen and laundry room, with Body 25 (Robert Gilroy, identified January 6, 1979) located beneath Gacy's bathroom. Body 26, still unidentified, was estimated to have been between 23 and 30 years old and approximately 5 ft 4 in () in height. Body 22 (identified using dental records as William Carroll on March 17, 1979) was found beneath Gacy's kitchen with cloth-like material lodged in his throat. Two socks were recovered from the pelvic region. He was buried directly beneath Body 21, recovered the previous day; this victim, who remains unidentified, is estimated to have been aged between 15 and 24 years old and approximately 5 ft 10 in () in height. The bones of victims 23 (identified as Rick Johnston January 1, 1979) and 24 were commingled; cloth was found inside the mouth of Bodies 24 and 26. Body 25 was found beneath Gacy's bathroom with cloth lodged in the throat. The final victim recovered from the crawl space (William Kindred, identified May 16, 1979) was also found beneath the bathroom, with cloth lodged deep in his throat.\nOperations were suspended due to the Chicago Blizzard of 1979, but resumed in March despite Gacy's insistence that all the buried victims had been found. On March 9, Body 28 was found wrapped in several plastic bags and buried beneath the patio in Gacy's backyard. Gacy's likely second murder victim and still unidentified, he stood approximately 5 ft 9 in () and is estimated to be aged between 14 and 18. On March 16, Body 29 (Darrell Samson, identified November 18, 1979) was found beneath the dining room.\nAll the victims discovered at Gacy's house were in an advanced state of decomposition. Dental records and X-ray charts helped Stein identify the remains. Twenty-three were identified via dental records and two via skeletal trauma. These identifications were supported with personal artifacts found in Gacy's home.\nThe head and upper torso of several bodies unearthed beneath Gacy's property had been placed in plastic bags. In some cases, bodies were found with foreign objects such as prescription bottles lodged in their pelvic region, the position of which indicated the items had been thrust into the victims' anus. Stein concluded 12 victims recovered from Gacy's property died of asphyxiation. Gacy's vacant house was demolished in April 1979.\nDes Plaines River.\nThe victim found downstream from the I-55 bridge on June 30 was not connected initially to Gacy. On January 9, 1979, this victim was identified using fingerprint records and a distinctive tattoo as Timothy O'Rourke. An autopsy was unable to rule out strangulation as the cause of death. This victim was numbered 31. Following Gacy's arrest, investigators discovered he was a further victim.\nFrank Landingin's cause of death was certified at autopsy as suffocation through his own underwear being lodged down his throat. His body was also identified via fingerprint records. A bond slip issued to Landingin the day before his death was found at Gacy's home; he was assigned victim number 32.\nOn December 28, one further body linked to Gacy was found from the I-55 bridge. This victim was identified two days later as James Mazzara, whom Gacy confessed to having murdered shortly after Thanksgiving. Mazzara had been strangled with a ligature.\nOn April 9, 1979, a man walking along a Grundy County towpath discovered a decomposed body tangled in roots on the edge of the Des Plaines River. The body was identified via dental records as being that of Robert Piest the same evening. An autopsy revealed that \"paper-like material\" had been shoved down his throat, causing him to suffocate.\nUnidentified victims.\nFive victims have never been identified. Based on Gacy's confession, the location of the victims buried in the crawl space, and forensic analysis, police determined the most likely dates for when his unidentified victims were killed.\nIn late 1979, forensic expert Betty Pat Gatliff used the skulls of the remaining unidentified victims to create facial reconstructions.\nRecent identification efforts.\nIn October 2011, Cook County sheriff Thomas Dart announced that investigators, having obtained DNA profiles from the unidentified victims, were to renew their efforts to identify them. At a press conference Sheriff Dart stated investigators were seeking DNA samples from across the United States related to any male missing between 1970 and 1979.\nTo date, the identification of three victims has been confirmed, numerous other missing youths have been ruled out as being victims of Gacy, and four unrelated cold cases dating between 1972 and 1979 have been solved. Updated facial reconstructions of Bodies 10 and 13 were released in 2018.\nIn November 2011, William Bundy was identified through DNA testing. Shortly after Gacy's arrest, Bundy's family had contacted his dentist in the hope of submitting his dental records for comparison with the unidentified bodies, but the records had been destroyed after his dentist had retired. In July 2017, 16-year-old James Haakenson was identified using DNA testing. Francis Wayne Alexander was identified via forensic genealogy in October 2021.\nIn 2012, the DNA of Gacy and other executed Illinois inmates was entered into a national DNA database in efforts to establish potential forensic links to further unsolved murders.\nPossible additional victims.\nAt the time of Gacy's arrest, he had claimed to investigators that the total number of murder victims could be as high as 45. However, only 33 victims were ever linked to Gacy. Investigators excavated the grounds of his property until they had exposed the substratum of clay beneath the foundations, finding 29 bodies.\nShortly after his arrest, Gacy informed investigators that after he had assaulted and then released Jeffrey Rignall in March 1978, he began to throw his murder victims into the Des Plaines River. He confessed to having disposed of five bodies in this manner; however, only four bodies recovered from the Des Plaines River were linked to him. When asked whether there were more victims, Gacy stated, \"That's for you guys to find out.\"\nDisputed DNA and dental tests conducted between 2012 and 2016 indicate that neither body found in the common grave in Gacy's crawl space and identified as those of Kenneth Parker and Michael Marino in 1980 was actually Marino. Marino's mother had always doubted her son's identification because the clothing found on Body 14 was inconsistent with what he had worn when she last saw him. DNA testing conducted on the exhumed body of Parker has proven that Marino's body had not been mistaken for his. In addition, the dental X-ray conducted on the victim identified as Michael Marino had revealed he had all of his second molars; a dental X-ray conducted on Marino in March 1976 revealed one molar had not erupted. The original identification of the body has been disputed because the exhumed body had neither an upper nor lower jaw bone. Nonetheless, the orthodontist who had identified Marino's remains has stated his conviction in the accuracy of his findings.\nOn May 23, 1978, 25-year-old Charles Antonio Hattula was found drowned in the Pecatonica River near Freeport, Illinois. He had been missing since May 13. Hattula was an employee of PDM and had been linked to the initial investigation of Gacy after Michael Rossi informed investigators of both Godzik's disappearance and Hattula's death. Moreover, Rossi had stated that Hattula was known to have conflicts with Gacy, and when he had \"failed to show up at work\", Gacy had informed him and several other employees that he had drowned. At the time of Hattula's death, no more bodies could be stored in Gacy's crawl space, which leaves a possibility he had disposed of Hattula's body in the Pecatonica River. However, Des Plaines authorities had contacted Freeport during their investigation into Gacy, and were told on December 27 that Hattula had fallen to his death from a bridge while attempting to free a stranded vehicle. Hattula's death has been officially ruled as asphyxia by drowning.\nRetired Chicago police officer Bill Dorsch stated he had reason to believe there might be more victims buried in the grounds of an apartment building on West Miami Avenue in Chicago, where Gacy had been the caretaker for several years. In 1975, Dorsch\u2014then a Chicago police officer\u2014observed Gacy (whom he knew on a casual basis) holding a shovel in the early morning. When Dorsch confronted him, Gacy said he was doing work that he was too busy to do during the day. Dorsch also said that several other residents of West Miami Avenue stated they had seen Gacy digging trenches at the property in the early to mid-1970s. Gacy was then still married to Carole Hoff. In March 2012, Cook County Sheriff's officials submitted a request to excavate the grounds of this property. The Cook County State's Attorney denied the request, citing a lack of probable cause, including the results of a 1998 search of the property. However, the sheriff's office noted that in 1998, a radar survey suggested fourteen areas of interest within the grounds, yet only two of these had been excavated; four of those remaining were described as being \"staggeringly suggestive\" of human skeletons. A second request to excavate the grounds was granted in January 2013, and a search of the property was conducted in the spring. Both FBI sniffer dogs and ground-penetrating radar equipment were used, but no human remains were found.\nPotential accomplices.\nOne of the first things Gacy told investigators after his arrest was that he had not acted alone in several of the murders: he asked whether \"my associates\" had been arrested. When questioned whether these associates had participated directly or indirectly in the killings, Gacy replied, \"Directly\". He later claimed Cram and Rossi were involved in several of the murders. Some defense attorneys and investigators researching the possibility Gacy had not acted alone in several of the murders have said there is \"overwhelming evidence Gacy worked with an accomplice\".\nIn the 1980s, Gacy informed FBI profiler Robert Ressler that \"two or three\" PDM employees had assisted in several murders. Ressler believed there were unexplained avenues to the case and that Gacy had killed more than 33 victims in multiple states. Gacy neither confirmed nor denied Ressler's suspicions. Jeffrey Rignall, who had been assaulted and tortured by Gacy in March 1978, was adamant that at one point during his ordeal, a young man with brown hair had watched and participated in his abuse.\nThree days before his arrest, two officers followed Gacy to a bar where he met two employees\u2014Michael Rossi and Ed Hefner. An anxious Gacy was observed walking with the two out of earshot of the officers to talk before returning closer. Gacy said to both young men: \"You'd better not let me down, you fuckers. You owe it to me.\" The officers then overheard sections of a hushed conversation between Gacy and the two during which Rossi asked Gacy, \"And what? Buried like the other five?\"\nIn interviews from death row, Gacy said that at the time of his arrest, three PDM employees were also considered suspects in the murders\u2014all of whom he said were in possession of keys to his house. In addition to Cram and Rossi, Gacy named his former employee Phillip Paske, who was an acquaintance of Cram and a close associate of John David Norman. In the late 1970s, Norman operated a nationwide sex trafficking ring based in Chicago known as the Delta Project with the help of Paske. At least two victims believed to have been murdered by Gacy (Kenneth Parker and Michael Marino) had last been seen alive close to where Norman lived. This led to speculation that Gacy had been connected to this trafficking ring.\nGacy claimed that he was not in Chicago when sixteen of the identified victims disappeared. In 2012, two Chicago lawyers said travel records show that he had been in another state at the time of three of the murders, implying he had one or more accomplices.\nInvestigators note that Robert Young, the traveling companion with whom victim Russell Nelson was visiting Chicago at the time of his disappearance, gave differing accounts of his disappearance. Young filed a missing person's report with Chicago police before unsuccessfully requesting money from Nelson's parents to finance a search. When Nelson's brothers arrived in Chicago to search for him, Young offered them a job with PDM. Young was never summoned to testify at Gacy's trial.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61280", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61280", "title": "Frank R. Stockton", "text": "American novelist\nFrank Richard Stockton (April 5, 1834 \u2013 April 20, 1902) was an American writer and humorist, best known today for a series of innovative children's fairy tales that were widely popular during the last decades of the 19th century.\nLife.\nStockton was born in Philadelphia in 1834, the son of a prominent Methodist minister who discouraged him from a writing career. He married Mary Ann Edwards Tuttle and moved to Burlington, New Jersey, where he produced his first literary work. The couple then moved to Nutley, New Jersey.\nFor years, he supported himself as a wood engraver until his father's death in 1860. In 1867, he moved back to Philadelphia to write for a newspaper founded by his brother. His first fairy tale was \"Ting-a-ling\", published that year in \"The Riverside Magazine\"; his first book collection appeared in 1870. He was also an editor for \"Hearth and Home\" magazine in the early 1870s. Around 1899, he moved to Charles Town, West Virginia.\nStockton died in Washington, D.C. on April 20, 1902 of a cerebral hemorrhage. He is buried at The Woodlands in Philadelphia.\nWritings.\nStockton avoided the didactic moralizing common to children's stories of the time. Instead, he humorously poked fun at greed, violence, abuse of power, and other human foibles, describing his fantastic characters' adventures in a charming, matter-of-fact way in stories such as \"The Griffin and the Minor Canon\" (1885) and \"The Bee-Man of Orn\" (1887). These two stories were republished in 1963 and 1964 in editions illustrated by Maurice Sendak. \"The Griffin and the Minor Canon\" won a Lewis Carroll Shelf Award in 1963.\nStockton's most famous short story was \"The Lady, or the Tiger?\" (1882), about a man sentenced to an unusual punishment for having a romance with a king's daughter. The man is taken to the public arena where he is faced with two doors, and he must choose which door will open. Behind one of them is a hungry tiger that will devour him; behind the other is a beautiful lady-in-waiting whom he will have to marry. The crowd waits anxiously for his decision, when he sees the princess among the spectators pointing him to the door on the right. The man starts to open the door\u2014and the story abruptly ends. Did the princess save her love by pointing to the door leading to the lady-in-waiting, or did she prefer to see her lover die rather than see him marry someone else? That quandary has made the story a staple in English classes in American schools, especially since Stockton was careful never to hint at what he thought the ending would be. He also wrote a sequel to the story called \"The Discourager of Hesitancy\".\nStockton's 1895 adventure novel \"The Adventures of Captain Horn\" was the third-best selling book in the United States in 1895. \"The Bee Man of Orn\" and several other tales were incorporated in \"The Bee Man of Orn\" (1887). Other stories included \"The Griffin and the Minor Canon\", \"Old Pipes and The Dryad\", \"The Queen's Museum\", \"Christmas Before Last\", \"Prince Hassak's March\", \"The Battle of the Third Cousins\", \"The Banished King\", and \"Philopena\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61281", "revid": "14984434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61281", "title": "Infiltration", "text": "Infiltration may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61282", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61282", "title": "Vadding", "text": ""}
{"id": "61283", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61283", "title": "Zine", "text": "Collection of self-published work reproduced by photocopying\nA zine ( ; short for magazine or fanzine) is a magazine that is a \"noncommercial often homemade or online publication usually devoted to specialized and often unconventional subject matter\". Zines are the product of either a single person or of a very small group, and are popularly photocopied into physical prints for circulation. A fanzine (blend of \"fan\" and \"magazine\") is a non-professional and non-official publication produced by enthusiasts of a particular cultural phenomenon (such as a literary or musical genre) for the pleasure of others who share their interest.\nZines are popularly defined within a circulation of 1,000 or fewer copies; in practice, however, many are produced in editions of fewer than 100. Among the various intentions for creation and publication are developing one's identity, sharing a niche skill or art, or developing a story, as opposed to seeking profit. Zines have served as a significant medium of communication in various subcultures, and frequently draw inspiration from a \"do-it-yourself\" philosophy that disregards the traditional conventions of professional design and publishing houses, proposing an alternative, confident, and \"self-aware\" contribution.\nHistorically, zines have provided community for socially isolated individuals or groups through the ability to express and pursue common ideas and subjects. For this reason, zines have cultural and academic value as tangible traces of marginal communities, many of which are otherwise little-documented. Zines present groups that have been dismissed with an opportunity to voice their opinion, both with other members of their own communities or with a larger audience. This has been reflected in the creation of zine archives and related programming in such mainstream institutions as the Tate museum and the British Library.\nWritten in a variety of formats from desktop-published text to comics, collages and stories, zines cover broad topics including fanfiction, politics, poetry, art &amp; design, ephemera, personal journals, social theory, intersectional feminism, single-topic obsession, or sexual content far enough outside the mainstream to be prohibitive of inclusion in more traditional media. Various subsets of zines include specific formats such as fanzines and perzines, and specific topics such as science-fiction fanzines or punk zines.\nHistory.\nOverview and origins.\nDissidents, under-represented, and marginalized groups have published their own opinions in leaflet and pamphlet form for as long as such technology has been available. The concept of zines can be traced to the amateur press movement of the late 19th and early 20th century. This intersects with Black literary magazines during the Harlem Renaissance, as well as the subculture of science fiction fandom in the 1930s. The popular graphic-style associated with zines is influenced artistically and politically by the subcultures of Dada, Fluxus, Surrealism, and Situationism.15\nMany trace zines' lineage from as far back as Thomas Paine's exceptionally popular 1776 pamphlet \"Common Sense\", Benjamin Franklin's \"Poor Richard's Almanack\", and \"The Dial\" (1840\u201344) by Margaret Fuller and Ralph Waldo Emerson.21514\n1920s.\n\"Little magazines\" during the Harlem Renaissance.\nIn the 1920s during the Harlem Renaissance, a group of Black creatives in Harlem began a literary magazine \"the better to express ourselves freely and independently \u2013 without interference from old heads, white or [black].\" This led to the creation of a \"little magazine\" entitled \"Fire!!.\" Only one issue of \"Fire!!\" was released, but this inspired the creation of other \"little magazines\" by Black authors. Contributions by Black writers, artists, and activists to the zine movement are often overlooked, in part \"because they had such short runs and were spearheaded by a single or small group of individuals.\"\n1930s\u20131960s and science fiction.\nDuring and after the Great Depression, editors of pulp science fiction magazines became increasingly frustrated with letters detailing the impossibilities of their science fiction stories. Over time they began to publish overly-scrutinizing letters, complete with their return addresses. Hugo Gernsback published the first science fiction magazine, \"Amazing Stories\" in 1926. In January 1927, Gernsback introduced a large letter column which printed reader's addresses, allowing them to write to each other; it was out of this mailing list that fans' own science-fiction fanzines began.\n\"The Comet\" is frequently cited as the first science-fiction fanzine. It was published in 1930 by the Chicago chapter of the Science Correspondence Club and edited by Raymond A. Palmer and Walter Dennis.\nThe term \"fanzine\" was coined in 1940 by Russ Chauvenet in his own fanzine, \"Detours\". Chauvenet argued it was \"the best short form of 'fan-magazine'.\" The term entered the Oxford English Dictionary as part of A Supplement to the OED, Volume I in 1972, and was incorporated into the OED Second Edition in 1989.\nIn fanzines, fans wrote not only about science fiction, but about fandom itself. Science fiction fanzines vary in content, including short stories, convention reports, and fanfiction. These were the earliest incarnations of the zine and influenced subsequent publications. \"Zinesters\" like Lisa Ben and Jim Kepner honed their talents in the science fiction fandom before tackling gay rights, creating zines such as \"Vice Versa\" and \"ONE\" that drew networking and distribution ideas from their science fiction roots. A number of leading science fiction and fantasy authors rose through the ranks of fandom, creating \"pro-zines\" such as Frederik Pohl and Isaac Asimov. The first version of Superman (a bald-headed villain) appeared in the third issue of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster's 1933 fanzine \"Science Fiction\".\n\"Star Trek\".\nThe first media fanzine was a \"Star Trek\" fan publication called \"Spockanalia\", published in September 1967 by members of the Lunarians. Some of the earliest examples of academic fandom were written on \"Star Trek\" zines, specifically K/S (Kirk/Spock) slash zines, which featured a gay relationship between the two. Author Joanna Russ wrote in her 1985 analysis of K/S zines that slash fandom at the time consisted of around 500 core fans and was 100% female. \n\"K/S not only speaks to my condition. It is written in Female. I don't mean that literally, of course. What I mean is that I can read it without translating it from the consensual, public world, which is sexist, and unconcerned with women per se, and managing to make it make sense to me and my condition.\"\nRuss observed that while science fiction fans looked down on \"Star Trek\" fans, \"Star Trek\" fans looked down on K/S writers. Kirk/Spock zines contained fanfiction, artwork, and poetry created by fans. Zines were then sent to fans on a mailing list or sold at conventions. Many had high production values and some were sold at convention auctions for hundreds of dollars.\n\"Janus\" and \"Aurora\".\n\"Janus\", later called \"Aurora\", was a science fiction feminist zine created by Janice Bogstad and Jeanne Gomoll in 1975. It contained short stories, essays, and film reviews. Among its contributors were authors such as Octavia Butler, Joanna Russ, Samuel R. Delany, and Suzette Hayden Elgin. \"Janus/Aurora\" was nominated for the Hugo Award for \"Best Fanzine\" in 1978, 1979, and 1980. \"Janus/Aurora\" was the most prominent science fiction feminist zine during its run, as well as one of the only zines that dealt with such content.\nComics.\nComics were mentioned and discussed as early as the late 1930s in the fanzines of science fiction fandom. They often included fan artwork based on existing characters as well as discussion of the history of comics. Through the 1960s, and 1970s, comic fanzines followed general formats, such as the industry news and information magazine (\"The Comic Reader\" was one example), interview, history and review-based fanzines, and the fanzines which basically represented independent comic book-format exercises.\nIn 1936, David Kyle published\" The Fantasy World\", possibly the first comics fanzine.\nMalcolm Willits and Jim Bradley started \"The Comic Collector's News\" in October 1947. In 1953, Bhob Stewart published \"The EC Fan Bulletin\", which launched EC fandom of imitative Entertaining Comic fanzines. Among the wave of EC fanzines that followed, the best-known was Ron Parker's \"Hoo-Hah!\" In 1960, Richard and Pat Lupoff launched their science fiction and comics fanzine Xero and in 1961, Jerry Bails' Alter Ego, devoted to costumed heroes, became a focal point for superhero comics fandom.\nHorror.\nCalvin T. Beck's \"Journal of Frankenstein\" (later \"Castle of Frankenstein\") and Gary Svehla's \"Gore Creatures\" were the first horror fanzines created as more serious alternatives to the popular Forrest J Ackerman 1958 magazine \"Famous Monsters of Filmland.\" \"Garden Ghouls Gazette\u2014\"a 1960s horror title under the editorship of Dave Keil, then Gary Collins\u2014was later headed by Frederick S. Clarke and in 1967 became the respected journal \"Cinefantastique.\" It later became a prozine under journalist-screenwriter Mark A. Altman and has continued as a webzine. Richard Klemensen's \"Little Shoppe of Horrors\", having a particular focus on \"Hammer Horrors\", began in 1972 and is still publishing as of 2017. The Baltimore-based \"Black Oracle\" (1969\u20131978) from writer-turned-John Waters repertory member George Stover was a diminutive zine that evolved into the larger-format \"Cinemacabre.\" Stover's \"Black Oracle\" partner Bill George published his own short-lived zine \"The Late Show\" (1974\u20131976; with co-editor Martin Falck), and later became editor of the \"Cinefantastique\" prozine spinoff \"Femme Fatales.\" In the mid-1970s, North Carolina teenager Sam Irvin published the horror/science-fiction fanzine \"Bizarre\" which included his original interviews with UK actors and filmmakers; Irvin would later become a producer-director in his own right. \"Japanese Fantasy Film Journal\" (JFFJ) (1968\u20131983) from Greg Shoemaker covered Toho's \"Godzilla\" and his Asian brethren. Japanese Giants (JG) appeared in 1974 and was published for 30 years. In 1993, \"G-FAN\" was published, and reached its 100th regularly published issue in Fall 2012. \"FXRH\" (Special effects by Ray Harryhausen) (1971\u20131976) was a specialized zine co-created by future Hollywood FX artist Ernest D. Farino.\nBoard games.\nBoard game-focused zines, especially those focused on the board game \"Diplomacy\", took off in the 1960s. These not only contained news and articles about the hobby, but also served as a common form for the organisation of play-by-mail games.\nRock and roll.\nSeveral fans active in science fiction and comics fandoms recognized a shared interest in rock music, leading to the birth of the rock fanzine. Paul Williams and Greg Shaw were two such science fiction fans turned rock zine editors. Williams' \"Crawdaddy!\" (1966) and Shaw's two California-based zines, \"Mojo Navigator\" \"Rock and Roll News\" (1966) and \"Who Put the Bomp\" (1970), are among the most popular early rock fanzines.\n\"Crawdaddy!\" (1966) quickly moved from its fanzine roots to become one of the first rock music \"prozines\" with paid advertisers and newsstand distribution. \"Bomp\" remained a fanzine, featuring many writers who would later become prominent music journalists, including Lester Bangs, Greil Marcus, Ken Barnes, Ed Ward, Dave Marsh, Mike Saunders and R. Meltzer as well as cover art by Jay Kinney and Bill Rotsler (both veterans of science fiction and Comics fandom). Other rock fanzines of this period include \"denim delinquent\" (1971) edited by Jymn Parrett, \"Flash\" (1972) edited by Mark Shipper, \"Eurock Magazine\" (1973\u20131993) edited by Archie Patterson and \"Bam Balam\" written and published by Brian Hogg in East Lothian, Scotland (1974).\nIn the 1980s, with the rise of stadium superstars, many rock fanzines emerged. At the peak of Bruce Springsteen's megastardom following the \"Born in the U.S.A.\" album and tour in the mid-1980s, there were no less than five Springsteen fanzines circulating at the same time in the UK alone, and many others elsewhere. Gary Desmond's \"Candy's Room\", coming from Liverpool, was the first in 1980. This was quickly followed by Dan French's \"Point Blank\", Dave Percival's \"The Fever\", Jeff Matthews' \"Rendezvous\", and Paul Limbrick's \"Jackson Cage\". In the US, \"Backstreets Magazine\" started in 1980 and continued publication for 43 years, ceasing in 2023.\n\"Cr\u00e8me Br\u00fbl\u00e9e\" documented post-rock genre and experimental music (1990s).\n1970s and punk.\nPunk zines emerged as part of the punk subculture in the late 1970s, along with the increasing accessibility to copy machines, publishing software, and home printing technologies. Punk became a genre for the working class because of the economic necessity to use creative DIY methods, which were echoed in both zine and Punk music creation. Zines became vital to the popularization and spread of punk spreading to countries outside the UK and America, such as Ireland, Indonesia, and more by 1977. Amateur, fan-created zines played an important role in spreading information about different scenes (city or regional-based subcultures) and bands (e.g. British fanzines like Mark Perry's \"Sniffin Glue\" and Shane MacGowan's \"Bondage\") in the pre-Internet era. They typically included reviews of shows and records, interviews with bands, letters, and ads for records and labels.\nThe punk subculture in the United Kingdom spearheaded a surge of interest in fanzines as a countercultural alternative to established print media. The first and still best known UK 'punk zine' was \"Sniffin' Glue\", produced by Deptford punk fan Mark Perry which ran for 12 photocopied issues; the first issue produced by Perry immediately following (and in response to) the London debut of the Ramones on 4 July 1976. Other UK fanzines included \"Blam!\", \"Bombsite\", \"Burnt Offering\", \"Chainsaw\", \"New Crimes\", \"Vague\", \"Jamming\", Artcore Fanzine, \"Love and Molotov Cocktails\", \"To Hell With Poverty\", \"New Youth\", \"Peroxide\", \"ENZK\", \"Juniper beri-beri\", \"No Cure\",\"Communication Blur\", \"Rox\", \"Grim Humour\", \"Spuno\", \"Cool Notes\" and \"Fumes\". By 1990, \"Maximum Rocknroll\" \"had become the de facto bible of the scene, presenting a \"passionate yet dogmatic view\" of what hardcore was supposed to be.\" \"HeartattaCk\" and \"Profane Existence\" took the DIY lifestyle to a religious level for emo and post-hardcore and crust punk culture. \"Slug and Lettuce\" started at the state college of PA and became an international 10,000 copy production \u2013 all for free. In Canada, the zine \"Standard Issue\" chronicles the Ottawa hardcore scene. The Bay Area zine \"Cometbus\" was first created at Berkeley by the zinester and musician Aaron Cometbus. \"Gearhead Nation\" was a monthly punk freesheet that lasted from the early 1990s to 1997 in Dublin, Ireland. Some hardcore punk zines became available online such as the e-zine chronicling the Australian hardcore scene, \"RestAssured.\" In Italy, \"Mazquerade\" ran from 1979 to 1981 and Raw Art Fanzine ran from 1995 to 2000.\nIn the US, \"Flipside\" and \"Slash\" were important punk zines for the Los Angeles scene, both debuting in 1977. In 1977 in Australia, Bruce Milne and Clinton Walker fused their respective punk zines \"Plastered Press\" and \"Suicide Alley\" to launch \"Pulp\"; Milne later went on to invent the cassette zine with \"Fast Forward\", in 1980. In the American Midwest, \"Touch and Go\" described the area's hardcore scene from 1979 to 1983. \"We Got Power\" described the LA scene from 1981 to 1984, and included show reviews and band interviews with groups including DOA, the Misfits, Black Flag, Suicidal Tendencies, and the Circle Jerks. \"My Rules\" was a photo zine that included photos of hardcore shows from across the US an in Effect, launched in 1988, described the New York City punk scene. Among later titles, \"Maximum RocknRoll\" is a major punk zine, with over 300 issues published. As a result, in part, of the popular and commercial resurgence of punk in the late 1980s, and after, with the growing popularity of such bands as Sonic Youth, Nirvana, Fugazi, Bikini Kill, Green Day and the Offspring, a number of other punk zines have appeared, such as \"Dagger\", \"Profane Existence\", \"Punk Planet\", \"Razorcake\", \"Slug and Lettuce\", \"Sobriquet\" and \"Tail Spins\". The early American punk zine \"Search and Destroy\" eventually became the influential fringe-cultural magazine \"Re/Search\".\n\"In the post-punk era several well-written fanzines emerged that cast an almost academic look at earlier, neglected musical forms, including Mike Stax' \"Ugly Things\", Billy Miller and Miriam Linna's \"Kicks\", Jake Austen's \"Roctober\", Kim Cooper's \"Scram\", P. Edwin Letcher's \"Garage &amp; Beat\", and the UK's \"Shindig!\" and Italy's \"Misty Lane\".\" Mark Wilkins, the promotion director for 1982 onwards US punk/thrash label Mystic Records, had over 450 US fanzines and 150 foreign fanzines he promoted to regularly. He and Mystic Records owner Doug Moody edited \"The Mystic News Newsletter\" which was published quarterly and went into every promo package to fanzines. Wilkins also published the highly successful Los Angeles punk humor zine \"Wild Times\" and when he ran out of funding for the zine syndicated some of the humorous material to over 100 US fanzines under the name of Mystic Mark.\n\"Factsheet Five\".\nDuring the 1980s and onwards, \"Factsheet Five\" (the name came from a short story by John Brunner), originally published by Mike Gunderloy and now defunct, catalogued and reviewed any zine or small press creation sent to it, along with their mailing addresses. In doing so, it formed a networking point for zine creators and readers (often the same people). The concept of \"zine\" as an art form distinct from \"fanzine\", and of the \"zinesters\" as member of their own subculture, had emerged. Zines of this era ranged from perzines of all varieties to those that covered an assortment of different and obscure topics. Genres reviewed by Factsheet Five included quirky, medley, fringe, music, punk, grrrlz, personal, science fiction, food, humour, spirituality, politics, queer, arts &amp; letters, comix.\n1990s, riot grrrl, and queer zines.\nThe riot grrrl movement emerged from the DIY Punk subculture in tandem with the American era of third-wave feminism, and used the consciousness-raising method of organizing and communication. As feminist documents, zines related to this follow a longer legacy of feminist and women's self-publication that includes scrapbooking, periodicals and health publications, allowing women to circulate ideas that would not otherwise be published. The American publication \"Bikini Kill\" (1990) introduced the Riot Grrrl Manifesto in their second issue as a way of establishing space. Zinesters Erika Reinstein and May Summer founded the Riot Grrrl Press to serve as a zine distribution network that would allow riot grrrls to \"express themselves and reach large audiences without having to rely on the mainstream press\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"BECAUSE we girls want to create mediums that speak to US. We are tired of boy band after boy band, boy zine after boy zine, boy punk after boy punk after boy . . .\nBECAUSE in every form of media I see us/myself slapped, decapitated, laughed at, trivialized, pushed, ignored, stereotyped, kicked, scorned, molested, silenced, invalidated, knifed, shot, choked, and killed ...\nBECAUSE every time we pick up a pen, or an instrument, or get anything done, we are creating the revolution. We ARE the revolution.\"\nErika Reinstein, Fantastic Fanzine No. 2\nWomen use this grassroots medium to discuss their personal lived experiences, and themes including body image, sexuality, gender norms, and violence to express anger, and reclaim/refigure femininity. Scholar and zinester Mimi Thi Nguyen notes that these norms unequally burdened riot grrrls of color with allowing white riot grrrls access to their personal experiences, an act which in itself was supposed to address systemic racism.\nBUST - \"The voice of the new world order\" was created by Debbie Stoller, Laurie Hanzel and Marcelle Karp in 1993 to propose an alternate to the popular mainstream magazines \"Cosmopolitan\" and \"Glamour\". Additional zines following this path are \"Shocking Pink\" (1981\u201382, 1987\u201392), \"Jigsaw\" (1988\u2013 ), \"Not Your Bitch\" 1989\u20131992 (Gypsy X, ed.) \"Bikini Kill\" (1990), \"Girl Germs\" (1990), \"Bamboo Girl\" (1995\u2013 ), \"BITCH Magazine\" (1996\u2013 ), \"Hip Mama\" (1997\u2013 ), \"Kitten Scratches\" (1999) and \"ROCKRGRL\" (1995\u20132005).\nIn the mid-1990s, zines were also published on the Internet as e-zines. Websites such as Gurl.com and ChickClick were created out of dissatisfaction of media available to women and parodied content found in mainstream teen and women's magazines. Both Gurl.com and ChickClick had a message board and free web hosting services, where users could also create and contribute their own content, which in turn created a reciprocal relationship where women could also be seen as creators rather than consumers.\nQueer communities were heavily involved in zine culture in the 1990s. Zines such as \"Fuzz Box\" and \"Gender Trash from Hell\" shared art and writing by queer authors, provided resources for gender expression, and promoted underground events and AIDS activism. Some of these zines been archived by projects such as the Queer Zine Archive Project and the Digital Transgender Archive.\nCommercialization.\nStarting in this decade, multinational companies started appropriating and commodifying zines and DIY culture. Their faux zines created a commercialized hipster lifestyle. By late in the decade, independent zinesters were accused of \"selling out\" to make a profit.\n2000s and the effect of the Internet.\nWith the rise of the Internet in the mid-1990s, zines initially faded from public awareness; this is possibly due to the ability of private web-pages to fulfill much the same role of personal expression. Indeed, many zines were transformed into Webzines, such as \"Boing Boing\" or \"monochrom\". E-zine creators were originally referred to as \"adopters\" because of their use of pre-made type and layouts, making the process less ambiguous. Since, social media, blogging and vlogging have adopted a similar do-it-yourself publication model.\nIn the UK \"Fracture\" and \"Reason To Believe\" were significant fanzines in the early 2000s, both ending in late 2003. \"Rancid News\" filled the gap left by these two zines for a short while. On its tenth issue \"Rancid News\" changed its name to \"Last Hours\" with 7 issues published under this title before going on hiatus. \"Last Hours\" still operates as a webzine though with more focus on the anti-authoritarian movement than its original title. \"Artcore Fanzine\" (established in 1986) continues to this day, recently publishing a number of 30-year anniversary issues.\nMira Bellwether's zine \"Fucking Trans Women\", published in 2010 online and 2013 in print, proved influential in the field of transgender sexuality, receiving both scholarly and popular-culture attention. It was described in \"Sexuality &amp; Culture\" as \"a comprehensive guide to trans women's sexuality\"965 and \"The Mary Sue\" as \"the gold standard in transfeminine sex and masturbation\".\nIn the early 2000s, zines with comics in them had a \"thriving\" fandom.\nDistribution and circulation.\nZines are sold, traded or given as gifts at symposiums, publishing fairs, record and book stores and concerts, via independent media outlets, zine 'distros', mail order or through direct correspondence with the author. They are also sold online on distro websites, Etsy shops, blogs, or social networking profiles and are available for download. While zines are generally self-published, there are a few independent publishers who specialize in art zines such as Nieves Books in Zurich, founded by Benjamin Sommerhalder, and Caf\u00e9 Royal Books founded by Craig Atkinson in 2005. In recent years a number of photocopied zines have risen to prominence or professional status and have found wide bookstore and online distribution. Notable among these are \"Giant Robot\", \"Dazed &amp; Confused\", \"Bust\", \"Bitch\", \"Cometbus\", \"Doris\", \"Brainscan\", The Miscreant, and \"Maximum RocknRoll\".\nThere are many catalogued and online based mail-order distros for zines. The longest running distribution operation is Microcosm Publishing in Portland, Oregon. Some other longstanding operations include Great Worm Express Distribution in Toronto, CornDog Publishing in Ipswich in the UK, Caf\u00e9 Royal Books in Southport in the UK, AK Press in Oakland, California, Missing Link Records in Melbourne and Wasted Ink Zine Distro in Phoenix, AZ. \nLibraries and archives.\nA number of major public and academic libraries as well as museums carry zines and other small press publications, often with a specific focus (e.g. women's studies) or those that are relevant to a local region.\nLibraries and institutions with notable zine collections include:\nThe Indie Photobook Library, an independent archive in the Washington, D.C., area, is a large collection of photo books and photo zines dating from 2008 to 2016 which the Beinecke Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library at Yale University acquired in 2016. In California, the Long Beach Public Library was the first public library in the state to start circulating zines for three weeks at a time in 2015. In 2017, the Los Angeles Public Library started to circulate zines publicly to its patrons as well. Both projects have been credited to librarian Ziba Zehdar, who has been an advocate in promoting public circulation of zines at libraries in California.\nIt has been suggested that the adoption of zine culture by powerful and prestigious institutions contradicts the function of zines as declarations of agency by marginalized groups.\nxZINECOREx is a metadata standard developed for cataloging zines. It is based on Dublin Core and the \"X's\" in its name are a reference to the straight edge music scene.\nZine fests, fairs, workshops, and clubs.\nThere has been a resurgence in the alternative publication culture beginning in the 2010s, in tandem with the influx of zine libraries and as a result of the digital age, which has sparked zine festivals across the globe. The San Francisco Zine Fest started in 2001 and features up to 200+ exhibitors, while the Los Angeles Zine Fest started in 2012 with only a handful of exhibitors, now hosting over 200 exhibitors. These are considered to be some of the biggest zine fests in the United States. Other big zine fests across the globe include, San Francisco Zine Fest, Brooklyn Zine Fest, Chicago Zine Fest, Feminist Zine Fest, Amsterdam Zine Jam, Black Zine Fair and Sticky Zine Fair. At each zine fest, the zinester can be their own independent distributor and publisher simply by standing behind a table to sell or barter their work. Over time, zinesters have added posters, stickers, buttons and patches to these events. In many libraries, schools and community centers around the world, zinesters hold meetings to create, share, and pass down the art of making zines.\nIn popular culture.\n\"Moxie\" (2021), a movie based on the novel of the same name, is about a 16-year old who starts a feminist zine to empower the young women at her high school. \"Our Hero\" (2000\u201302) and \"Rocket Power\" (1999\u20132004) were children's shows that featured zine-making.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61288", "revid": "51049542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61288", "title": "Colfax Avenue", "text": "Street in Denver, Colorado, United States\nColfax Avenue is the main street that runs east\u2013west through the Denver metropolitan area in Colorado. As U.S. Highway 40, it was one of two principal highways serving Denver before the Interstate Highway System was constructed. In the local street system, it lies 15 blocks north of the zero meridian (Ellsworth Avenue, one block south of 1st Avenue), and would thus otherwise be known as 15th Avenue. The street was named for former Vice President Schuyler Colfax. At just under in length, it is known as the \"longest continuous commercial street in the United States\".\nGeography.\nFrom west to east, Colfax Avenue starts at Heritage Road in Golden as U.S. Highway 40 and the I-70 Business Loop, and continues east through Lakewood and enters Denver at Sheridan Boulevard. U.S. Highway 287 joins Colfax just west of I-25, and follows Colfax east through Denver and Aurora. In downtown Denver, near the Colorado State Capitol, the designation changes from West Colfax Avenue to East Colfax Avenue at the intersection with Broadway. It continues as East Colfax Avenue for the remainder of the route. In eastern Aurora, Colfax Avenue and Picadilly Road meet, with the I-70 business loop and the two U.S. highways following the I-70 route eastward via a new I-70 Picadilly Road interchange, replacing the old I-70 Colfax intersection. Colfax continues eastward from Picadilly Road via Colfax I-70 frontage road to E-470. East Colfax Avenue with Colfax signage continues east passing through the complex E-470 I-70 interchange, appearing as a frontage road of I-70 on most maps. About one block east of E-470 a north turn continues Colfax eastward separating Colfax from East 14th Avenue. At an interchange (I-70 Exit 292), Colfax Avenue becomes State Highway 36 and continues east from Aurora through Bennett to end at Headlight Road in Strasburg.\nColfax Avenue cuts through Original Auraria, the city's historic core, and skirts the southern edge of downtown Denver. Because of the dense, mixed-use character of the development along Colfax Avenue, the Regional Transportation District bus route \"15 - East Colfax\" has the highest ridership in the RTD system. In 2006, the first Colorado Colfax Marathon was held, traversing the length of Colfax Avenue through the three cities.\nIt's become legend that, at some time in the 1970s, \"Playboy\" magazine called Colfax \"the longest, wickedest street in America\", due to the prevalence of drugs, sex work, violence and poverty, but attempts to source the actual quote have failed. Periodically, Colfax undergoes redevelopment by the municipalities along its course that bring in new housing, businesses and restaurants. Some say that these new developments detract from the character of Colfax, while others worry that they cause gentrification and bring increased traffic to the area.\nHistory.\nEast Colfax.\n1860\u20131890: Elite residential street.\nColfax's precursor, Grand Avenue, was established in along what was the southern boundary of central Denver. It was established as an east\u2013west running baseline street along with the north\u2013south running Broadway, to border new eastern and southern districts for the city. In 1868, Grand was renamed \"Colfax\" to honor U.S. House Speaker Schuyler Colfax who later became Ulysses Grant's Vice President. Colfax had visited Denver in 1865, and locals may have named the street after him to gain national support from the prominent Indiana congressman for Colorado's ongoing statehood initiative.\nDenver's population rapidly increased with the arrival of railroads, growing from 4,759 in 1870 to 106,713 in 1890. The area along Colfax developed unevenly: by the end of 1879, the area east of Broadway and north of Colfax was still mostly open prairie, but the area between Grant and Ogden Streets had become a prominent residential area. By 1887, residents and property owners along Colfax began pushing for better transportation options.\nA cable railway was built in 1886 to connect Grant and Colfax with downtown Denver. The system was eventually replaced with streetcars, which facilitated more efficient transportation and encouraged development away from the city center. The construction of the State Capitol building in 1886 also had a positive impact on the development of the corridor, and by 1890, the Colfax Avenue Railway Company had extended its line to Montclair.\n1890\u20131910: Conversion to denser housing.\nThe Panic of 1893 led to an economic depression in Denver, and many large houses along Colfax were converted into multi-family units. The once lavish and expensive homes along East Colfax and in Capitol Hill were no longer easy to maintain, and owners of the single-family mansions were forced to rent out rooms in their homes to temporary workers. As the economy recovered, apartment buildings were constructed, raising concerns among residents about the impact on property values and neighborhood quality. Three buildings still in existence from this early period are The Colonnade, Alta Court (formerly the Altamaha Apartment Building), and the Hamilton. The cultural and demographic shift, from single-family mansions toward boarding houses and rental property for the transient middle class, marked a shift in the demographics of East Colfax.\n1910\u20131940: Automobiles and commerce.\nThe development of East Colfax was significantly influenced by the automobile, with the number of cars increasing exponentially from the mid-1910s to the 1920s. Increasing traffic led to the corridor becoming more commercial and the street was paved sometime prior to 1920. It part of the transcontinental U.S. Route 40 in the mid-1920s. Various groups sought to make East Colfax the best road in the state, transforming it into the gateway to Denver for tourists visiting by automobile from the East. It remained the gateway to Denver until i-70 was built in the 1950s.\nDenver's 1925 zoning code designated most of East Colfax as commercial or business, and the city's 1929 Master Plan acknowledged its transformation from a residential street to a business artery. This change led to a boom in commercial building construction in the 1920s, with various structures being erected along the avenue. While construction declined during the Great Depression and World War II, some commercial buildings and apartments continued to be built.\n1940s\u2013present.\nEast Colfax and Capitol Hill remained a solid middle-class neighborhood until the next demographic change occurred. After World War II, the mentality of many urban dwellers shifted. Mortgage lenders preferred new construction and there was a massive \"white flight\" to the suburbs. Families and the established middle class left Capitol Hill in a mass diaspora, selling off the family home to a developer interested in putting up a high-rise in its place or leaving the home abandoned. The demographics of people left behind were an underclass of transients and renters.\nAlso, the zoning along East Colfax has been badly planned for 50 years. In the 1950s East Colfax was rezoned B4, and the planners encouraged separation of uses and dependence on the automobile. Property owners along East Colfax found it much more rewarding to tear down an existing historic building and put up a new building in its place, rather than renovating. Planners and building officials encouraged this, for this was a time when old was considered ugly and new buildings meant progress.\nIn addition the zoning code from the 1950s, a 2:1 floor-area ratio (FAR) was adopted for East Colfax. These ratios determine the square footage of the building in relation to the lot size. Builders in the 1950s who tore down historic buildings along East Colfax for the purpose of developing a brand-new property were required to abide by the car-friendly codes and provide for automobile use.\nAs the feasibility study, \"East Colfax Avenue: An Opportunity and a Model for Development Action\", claims about the streetscape of East Colfax, \"[East Colfax is designed to] encourage development of smaller parcels that lack frontage definition, have unevenly deep setback patterns and leave a large quantity of undeveloped space.\" This FAR almost single-handedly contributed to the architectural demise of East Colfax.\nPhil Goodstein, a Denver historian, analyzes the effect of the FAR in his book, \"The Ghosts of Denver: Capitol Hill\". \"Now the businesses were set back from the sidewalk with a parking lot between the store and the street. Every block, it seemed, became a parking lot while customers found it necessary to drive from one store to the next. Pedestrians had to dodge cars in the middle of the block... In light of this unpleasant walking atmosphere and Denver's increasing addiction to the automobile, the number of people on the street declined. With this, the neighborhood became less safe.\" It was a steady downward spiral with many factors leading to what East Colfax is today, including the lack of interest in historic buildings and the myopic visions of the 1950s planners.\nAnother monumental watershed moment in the history of East Colfax Avenue was the completion of Interstate 70. No longer did incoming tourists drive down the thoroughfare on their way into downtown. The tourist dollar was effectively wiped out as a revenue source for East Colfax after this decade. So began another downward spiral. With no tourists to spend money along East Colfax the businesses suffered, as did the demand to go to Capitol Hill.\nA factor in the increase in urban poor along Colfax has been linked to Denver Urban Renewal Authority's plans for urban renewal in Downtown Denver. In the now-discredited belief that tearing down historic buildings and replacing them with modern architecture and high-rises would benefit cities, DURA bulldozed the bulk of Larimer Street in downtown. The urban poor that had been housed in Larimer Street's single room occupancy buildings were now displaced to Colfax.\nWest Colfax.\nWest Colfax Avenue began as a trail blazed during the Colorado Gold Rush, being a well-traveled direct route to the gold fields in the mountains. Historic media and other sources confirm its existence at least as far back as the spring of 1859, and it immediately became a major thoroughfare of goods, people and transportation service to and from the Colorado mountains. Soon it took on its original name, South Golden Road, as the southern road from Denver to Golden.\nOriginally West Colfax was configured with two major differences than how it exists today. It did not proceed past today's intersection with Wide Acres Road, as originally Wide Acres and today's South Golden (or Old Golden) roads were the continuation of the thoroughfare into Golden. Also, the road's original route took it through the bed of present-day Sloan's Lake, then a convenient swale for road travel. Stagecoach driver Bill Turner, who drove the route for the Central Overland California and Pike's Peak Express, told the \"Colorado Transcript\" in 1909 how and when this changed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The reason I'm telling you about this is to explain what I know about Sloan's lake. The stage line was from Denver to Golden and Central City. The road was the southern route to Golden and we crossed the Platte river where Larimer street crosses it now, and the road went on out over the hill and into that wide sag, or swale, where Sloan's lake is now. The road was good right down through the middle of what would now be the bed of the lake. In June, 1861, when I went down into Kansas territory to keep a stage station, there wasn't any lake there. When I came back in the early part of 1863, less than two years later, there was the lake just as it is now, and it never has changed a bit that ever I could see. There was some talk years afterward about a man having dug a well there and it overflowed, forming the lake, but I was along there about as much as anybody and I never saw any well. However, it may have started from a well. All I know is that it came there in a good deal less than two year, to my certain knowledge. When I came back from the lower country, the road I used to travel was changed. The lake had covered up the old right of way.\nThe road for many years traveled over open prairie with various farms along the way. With the arrival of a tramway line running along West 13th Avenue, landowner William A. H. Loveland and others laid out the new city of Lakewood between Golden and Denver. The road, which soon became known as Colfax, became Lakewood's main thoroughfare. Schuyler Colfax himself had actually once traveled this portion of the road named after him, when he was traveling by stagecoach with presidential candidate Ulysses S. Grant during a campaign getaway in 1868. In the meantime of the late 19th Century, the eastern end of West Colfax became home to numerous Jewish people of the Denver area. In 1898, Dr. Charles David Spivak, a noted Russian immigrant, physician and genealogist, established the Jewish Consumptives Relief Society to treat tuberculosis victims on a campus in today's 6400 block of the road. This sanitorium treated victims of the White Plague who were too poor to pay or whose cases were too desperate to cure. The Golden Hill Cemetery was established at the western end of the road, divided into mainstream and the hill sections, the hill being the final resting place of victims who could not be cured. The hill section, as well as the JCRS campus, are now listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nAround 1914 West Colfax was paved with concrete and designated a state highway, and it continued evolving into a major commercial thoroughfare of the region. During Prohibition it began showing signs of more colorful notoriety when scofflaw roadhouses such as Twilight Gardens operated along the thoroughfare. In 1937 the Works Progress Administration completely paved and modernized the highway, and built a new western route which took it over the hill and across ranch land to the entrance of Mt. Vernon Canyon, its present route. Around this time Colfax was designated U.S. Highway 40. From there on, commercial development boomed, including numerous motels, automobile dealerships, restaurants and more. After World War II it was a classic neon-lined highway for natives and travelers of its era; among its landmarks was Davies Chuck Wagon Diner, brought there in 1957 by restaurateur rancher Lyman Davies. The diner is also listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In 1956, two shopping malls, Westland and the JCRS Center, were built along Colfax, introducing major department stores and groceries to the area. At its far west end, at the base of the mountains, the Magic Mountain theme park was built, among the first of its kind in the world. The theme park, like many of its era, collapsed, but was resurrected in the 1970s as Heritage Square.\nAfter the construction of nearby West 6th Avenue (U.S. Highway 6) and Interstate 70, West Colfax Avenue through Denver's West Colfax Neighborhood, Northeast Lakewood, and Edgewater slowly declined and gained the seedy crime reputation and reality of its eastern counterpart. Since the 1970s, West Colfax Avenue through west Denver, Northeast Lakewood, Edgewater has had a high reputation and population of Mexican Americans as well as other Latino immigrants. During the 1990s, Lakewood began what has become a series of urban renewal and beautification efforts along the thoroughfare, from streetscaping to encouraging new proliferation of neon lighting to capitalize on its colorful past. Westland was rebuilt, and the JCRS Center also modified, but not so far as to eliminate the highly popular Casa Bonita restaurant which joined it in 1974. On the west end, the Stevinson family, who had originally built automobile dealerships there in the 1960s, built the new Denver West Village shopping center in 1997. In 2002 the Colorado Mills shopping center was built and opened across Colfax from there, the largest commercial development yet built on Colfax.\nIn the late 1990s the entirety of Colfax Avenue was designated a Colorado Heritage Corridor by the state government.\nNotable Establishments.\nTheatres.\nColfax is a hub for live music and culture in Denver. A number of theaters actively operate on the street.\nOgden Theatre.\nThe Ogden Theatre is a concert venue that has been a significant part of the city's entertainment history since its founding as a silent-film theatre in 1917 by John Thompson and Henry Goodridge. It is one of the oldest still-operational theaters in Denver, and was designated a National Historical Place after its reopening in 1993 by current owner Doug Kauffman. The venue has hosted notable figures such as Sir Arthur Conan Doyle and Prince, and has also played a role in the success of local bands like The Lumineers. Designed by architect Harry W.J. Edbrooke in a Mediterranean style, the theater has not only been a concert venue but also a silent film and vaudeville theater, and later a motion picture theater.\nBluebird Theatre.\nBuilt in 1913 as the Thompson Theatre, the Bluebird Theatre was given its current name by theatre mogul Harry Huffman in 1921. Huffman hosted a successful War Bonds contest during WWII, but the theater faced challenges in the post-war years, eventually screening low-budget and adult films until its closure in 1987. In 1994, Chris Swank and Evan Dechtman purchased the Bluebird and renovated it into a live music venue with tiered levels and a bar, aided by federal funding. AEG assumed control of the property in 2006. The Bluebird Theater is known for an intimate atmosphere and contributing to the cultural heritage of Colfax Avenue. Designed by architect Harry W.J. Edbrooke, the two-story building features a light tan brick exterior with red terra cotta accents and a lighted marquee.\nEstablishments on the National Register of Historic Places.\nThese places along Colfax Avenue have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places:"}
{"id": "61289", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61289", "title": "Forensic entomology", "text": "Application of insect and other arthropod biology to forensics\nForensic entomology is a branch of applied entomology that uses insects and other arthropods as a basis for legal evidence. Insects may be found on cadavers or elsewhere around crime scenes in the interest of forensic science. Forensic entomology is also used in cases of neglect and abuse of a property, as well as subjects of a toxicology analysis to detect drugs and incidents of food contamination. Therefore, forensic entomology is divided into three subfields: medico-legal/medico-criminal entomology, urban, and stored-product.\nThe field revolves around studying the types of insects commonly found in and on the place of interest (such as cadavers), their life cycles, their presence in different environments, and how insect assemblages change with the progression of decomposition (the process of \"succession\"). Insect assemblages can help approximate a body's primary location, as some insects are unique to specific areas. In medico-criminal cases, the primary goal is often to determine the postmortem interval (PMI; time since death) to aid in death investigations.\nInsect succession patterns are identified based on the time a species spends in each developmental stage and the number of generations produced since the insect's introduction to a food source. By analyzing insect development alongside environmental data such as temperature, humidity, and vapor density, forensic entomologists can estimate the time since death, as flying insects are attracted to a body shortly after death. This field also provides clues about antemortem trauma and the displacement of a body after death.\nSubfields.\nUrban.\nUrban forensic entomology typically concerns pest infestations in buildings, gardens, or other urban environments, and may be the basis of litigation between private parties and service providers such as landlords or exterminators. For instance, urban forensic entomology can be used to evaluate the efficiency of pest control techniques such as pesticide treatments, ascertaining the size of an infestation, and identifying the responsible party in situations involving infestations in rental homes. Urban forensic entomology can also assist in determining liability when stored goods, like grains or packaged foods, are contaminated with insects, helping to identify the infestation's origin. These techniques may be used in stored products cases where they can help to determine the chain of custody, when all points of possible infestation onset are examined to determine who is at fault. Moreover, environmental management and public health depend heavily on urban forensic entomology; researchers can track the transmission of disease carried by insects by examining insect populations in urban settings. Forensic techniques can also guide conservation efforts by evaluating the environmental effects of urbanization on insect populations.\nStored-product.\nStored-product forensic entomology is often used in litigation over insect infestation or contamination of commercially distributed foods, including grains, flour, and packaged meals. Stored-product forensic entomologists may be asked to identify the species involved, evaluate the extent of an infestation, and pinpoint the infestation's source in a legal proceeding. They might also offer expert testimony about the circumstances that gave rise to the infestation and suggest safeguards to prevent similar risks in the future.\nIn general, forensic entomology of stored products adds both critical evidence to legal evaluation and contributes to overall food safety and quality assurances; forensic entomologists work to guarantee that food products are safe for consumption by identifying insect species and tracking their presence in stored goods. Additionally, this sector contributes to the general enhancement of food business practices by researching and developing novel techniques for pest management and product preservation.\nMedico-legal.\nMedico-legal forensic entomology involves the study of arthropods found at the scene of various incidents such as murder, suicide, rape, physical abuse, and the smuggling of contraband. This discipline provides the techniques to associate the victim(s), suspect(s), and scene together by identifying different arthropod species found in specific geographical locations. Forensic investigators can learn important details from insect activities, including the length of time passed since death (PMI), the presence of substances \u2015 medicative or toxic \u2015 in the body, and the movement or disturbance of the body following death. In murder investigations, forensic entomologists analyze the species of eggs which appear on the cadaver, their location on the body, and their development stage to determine the PMI and the location of death. The presence of specific insect species, which may be endemic (occurring only in certain places) or a well-defined phenology (active only at a certain season, or time of day). In association with other evidence, these can provide crucial links to times and locations where the criminal acts have occurred. Entomology can also aid when determining the time of an injury. One determining factor might be the observed species' preference of alimentation; when blowfly eggs laid on a hatch into the first larval instar (life stage), they require a liquid protein meal. Due to their minute size and fragility blowflies are unable to break through human skin themselves to attain this nutrition. Therefore, the female typically oviposits near a pre-existing wound or natural orifices to provide an accessible meal to her brood, such as blood, mucous, or other body fluids.\nAnother area covered by medico-legal forensic entomology is the relatively new field of entomotoxicology. This particular branch involves the testing of entomological specimens found at a scene for different drugs that may have possibly played a role in the death of the victim. The analytical perspective behind these methods relies upon the fact that the presence of drugs within the cadaver specifically affects the growth and morphology of the insects ingesting those toxins from the corpse. Due to these alterations, the presence of drugs can potentially lead to an erroneous PMI when basing it on the abnormal physical development of insects who have fed on them.\nMyiasis.\nMyiasis, the infestation of living vertebrate animals with certain species of dipteran larvae (ex: blowfly maggots), is a phenomenon that may be noted in cases of abandonment or neglect. This condition occurs when flies colonize a living human or animal, feeding on the organism's accessible living tissues, ingesting food or bodily fluids. In a forensic context, myasis can be confusing, as it may indicate the time of neglect or injury rather than PMI if the remains were colonized when alive. This highlights the importance of careful interpretation of all evidence in forensic investigation.\nHistory.\nHistorically, several accounts of applications have been for, and experimentation with, forensic entomology. Along with an initial case report in China from the 13th century, the primitive observation and correlation between arthropods and forensic contexts has been documented in Germany and France. This observation was conducted during a mass exhumation in the late 1880s by Hofmann and Reinhard. However, only in the last 30 years has forensic entomology been systematically explored as a feasible source for evidence in criminal investigations. Through documented experiments and focus on arthropods and death, the works of Sung Tzu, Francesco Redi, Bergeret d'Arbois, Jean Pierre M\u00e9gnin and the physiologist Hermann Reinhard form the foundations for today's modern forensic entomology. \nOver time, the study of forensic entomology evolved from an esoteric science reserved only for entomologists and forensic scientists. Early twentieth-century popular scientific literature began to pique a broader interest in entomology. The very popular ten-volume book series, Alfred Brehem's \"Thierleben\" (Life of Animals, 1876\u20131879) expounded on many zoological topics, including the biology of arthropods. The accessible writing style of French entomologist Jean-Henri Fabre was also instrumental to the popularization of entomology. His collection of writings \"Souvenirs Entomologique\", written during the last half of the 19th century, is especially useful because of the meticulous attention to detail to the observed insects' behaviors and life cycles.\nSong Ci.\nSong Ci (sometimes called Sung Tzu) was a Song dynasty-era (960\u20131279) judicial intendant and polymath writer who lived in China from 1188 to 1251 AD. He wrote a book titled \"Washing Away of Wrongs\"/\"Collected Cases of Injustice Rectified\" in 1247 AD, which was intended as a handbook for criminal investigators and coroners so that they may assess a crime scene effectively; it subsequently became the earliest recorded account of someone using forensic entomology for judicial means. Here he depicts several cases in which he took notes on how a person died and determining the probable cause. He also explains in detail how to examine a corpse before and after burial. The level of detail in his explanations of all his cases laid down the fundamentals for modern forensic entomologists. In one murder case dated 1235, a villager was stabbed to death and authorities determined that his wounds were inflicted by a sickle, a tool used for cutting rice at harvest time, a fact which led them to suspect a fellow peasant worker was involved. The local magistrate had the villagers assemble in the town square, where they would temporarily relinquish their sickles. Within minutes, a swarm of blow flies gathered around one sickle and no others, attracted to traces of blood unseen by the naked eye. It became apparent to all that the owner of that sickle was the culprit, the latter pleading for mercy as authorities detained him.\nFrancesco Redi.\nIn 1668, Italian physician Francesco Redi disproved the theory of spontaneous generation, which was the accepted theory of Redi's day; it claimed that maggots developed spontaneously (without any visible cause) from rotting meat. In an experiment, Redi used samples of rotting meat that were either fully exposed to the air, partially exposed to the air, or isolated from the air. Redi showed that both fully and partially exposed rotting meat bore maggots whereas rotting meat not exposed to air did not develop maggots; this discovery completely changed how people viewed the process of decomposition and prompted further investigations into insect life cycles and entomology in general.\nBergeret d'Arbois.\nDr. Louis Fran\u00e7ois Etienne Bergeret (1814\u20131893) was a French physician and was the first to apply forensic entomology to a case. In a case report published in 1855, he stated a general life cycle for insects and made many assumptions about their mating habits. Nevertheless, these assumptions led him to the first application of forensic entomology in an estimation of post-mortem interval (PMI). His report used forensic entomology as a tool to prove his hypothesis on how and when the person had died.\nHermann Reinhard.\nThe first systematic study in forensic entomology was conducted in 1881 by German doctor Hermann Reinhard. He exhumed many bodies and demonstrated that the development of many different insect species could be tied to buried bodies. Reinhard conducted his first study in Eastern Germany and collected many Phorid flies there. He concluded that the development of some, but not all species, of insects were associated directly with decaying flesh since there were 15-year-old beetles who had little direct contact with the bodies. Reinhard's works and studies were used extensively in further forensic entomology studies.\nJean Pierre M\u00e9gnin.\nFrench veterinarian and entomologist Jean Pierre M\u00e9gnin (1828\u20131905) published many articles and books on various subjects, including the books \"Faune des Tombeaux\" and \"La Faune des Cadavres\"(\"\"The Fauna of Tombs\" (1887)\" and \"\"The Fauna of Cadavers\" (1894)\", respectively), which are considered to be among the most important forensic entomology books in history. M\u00e9gnin made many great discoveries that helped shed new light on many of the general characteristics of decaying flora and fauna; the second book in particular contained revolutionary work on the theory of \"predictable waves\", the process of insect succession on corpses: he asserted that exposed corpses were subject to eight successional waves, whereas buried corpses were only subject to two waves. In one case, he was able to estimate how long an infant had been dead for (PMI) by counting the numbers of live and dead mites every 15 days, and comparing the data with his initial count. His study of the larval and adult forms of insect families found in cadavers sparked the interest of future entomologists and encouraged more research in the link between arthropods and the deceased, and thereby helped to establish the scientific discipline of forensic entomology. It was after the publication of M\u00e9gnin's work that the studies of forensic science and entomology became an established part of Western popular culture, which in turn inspired other Western scientists to continue and expand upon his research.\nPostmortem interval estimation.\nA crucial component of forensic entomology is the calculation of the postmortem interval (PMI), which mostly depends on the observation of the insect activity on a corpse. Using the life stages of insects discovered on or near a body, forensic entomologists can reasonably determine how long it has been since a person died.\nThe pace of insect colonization and development is influenced by a number of variables, including as temperature, humidity, the presence of other living things and others. The accumulated degree hour (ADH) approach, which determines the total amount of heat energy generated by a body since death, is one of the models and methodologies used by forensic entomologists to estimate the PMI.\nEven through PMI estimation based on insect evidence is typically accurate, it is crucial to take into account additional elements including body position, ambient circumstances and insect behavior that may have an impact on insect activity.\nFactors.\nMoisture levels.\nBoth the decomposition and insect activity on a corpse are significantly influenced by humidity. Elevated humidity can hasten the decomposition process by fostering microbial proliferation, which facilitates the breakdown of tissues. Additionally the odors and gases produced by this microbial activity draw insects to the body. These smells are particularly attractive to insects like blowflies and flesh flies, which may quickly populate a body in humid conditions.\nLow humidity, on the other hand, can impede the breakdown process. Mummification rather that breakdown may result from the body losing moisture more quickly in arid settings. Given that many insects need damp atmosphere to survive, this may discourage their activity. Nonetheless, some insects, like dermestid beetles, can survive in dry environments and can still be found on a body.\nThe existence of standing water next to a body can also affect the activity of insects. Aquatic insects, such as water beetles and some fly species, may be drawn to bodies near water sources. These insects can colonize the body and hasten its decomposition. Furthermore, because different insect species have distinct preference for habitats, the presence of water might influence the kinds of insects that inhabits the body.\nAll things considered, the rate and pattern of a corpse's decomposition and insect colonization are greatly influenced by its humidity. To estimate the postmortem period and reconstruct the circumstances around a death, forensic entomologists can benefit from an understanding of how humidity levels affect decomposition.\nSubmerged corpses.\nM. Lee Goff, a noted and well respected forensic entomologist, was assigned to a case involving the discovery of a decomposing body found on a boat half a mile from shore. Upon collection of the maggot mass, only one insect, \"Chrysomya megacephala\", was discovered. He concluded that the water barrier accounted for the scarcity of other flies. He also noted that flies will not attempt to trek across large bodies of water unless there is a substantially influential attractant.\nIn addition, the amount of time a maggot mass has been exposed to salt water can affect its development. From the cases Goff observed he found that if subjected for more than 30 minutes, there was a 24\u2011hour developmental delay. Not many more studies have been conducted and thus a specific amount of delay time is difficult to estimate.\nThe main focus of a study accomplished by Payne and King using fetal pigs, was the insect succession regarding carcass decomposition in an aquatic setting. Their results concluded that in the early floating stages of the cadaver, eggs were laid by blowflies. Moreover, by the bloating stage, most of the exposed flesh was absent and maggots migrated from the body. Many of the latter were present below the water line and fed on the carcass; with only their Spiracle (arthropods) protruding the surface.\nSun exposure.\n\"Because insects are cold-blooded animals, their rate of development is more or less dependent on ambient temperature.\"\nBodies exposed to large amounts of sunlight will heat up, giving the insects a warmer area to develop, reducing their development time.\nAn experiment conducted by Bernard Greenberg and John Charles Kunich with the use of rabbit carcasses to study accumulation of degree days found that with temperature ranging in the mid 70s to high 80s the amount of developmental time for maggots was significantly reduced.\nIn contrast, bodies found in shaded areas will be cooler, and insects will require longer growth periods. In addition, if temperatures reach extreme levels of cold, insects instinctively know to prolong their development time in order to hatch into a more accepting and viable climate in order to increase the chance of survival and reproduction.\nFurthermore, insect activity and colonization patterns can also be influenced by the length and intensity of solar exposure. Because the increasing temperature speeds up their development, insects are more likely to be active and colonize a body more quickly in places exposed to direct and extended sunlight. In comparison to shaded locations, this may result in a quicker succession of insect life and disintegration stages. On the other hand, because of the lower temperatures, shaded areas might have slower rates of insect activity and decomposition, which would delay the processes of insect colonization and decomposition.\nAir exposure.\nAir exposure can have a significant impact on insects and the determination of postmortem interval (PMI). Hanged bodies can be expected to show their own quantity and variety of flies. Also, the amount of time flies will stay on a hanged body will vary in comparison to one found on the ground. A hanged body is more exposed to air and thus will dry out faster, leaving less food source for the maggots.\nThe presence and behavior of insects on hanging bodies can vary. As the body begins to decompose, a compilation of fluids will leak to the ground. This area is where most of the expected fauna can be found. Also, it is more likely that rove beetles and other non-flying insects will be found here instead of directly on the body. Fly maggots, initially deposited on the body, may also be found below.\nGeography.\nAccording to Jean Pierre M\u00e9gnin's book \"La Faune des Cadavres\" there are eight distinct faunal successions attracted to a corpse. While most beetles and flies of forensic importance can be found worldwide, a portion of them are limited to a specific range of habitats. It is forensically important to know the geographical distribution of these insects in order to determine information such as post mortem interval or whether a body has been moved from its original place of death.\nCalliphoridae is arguably the most important family concerning forensic entomology given that they are the first to arrive on the corpse. The family can be found worldwide. \"Chrysomya rufifaces\", the hairy maggot blow fly, is a forensically important member of the family Calliphoridae and is widespread, however it is not prevalent in the Southern California, Arizona, New Mexico, Louisiana, Florida, or Illinois regions.\nFlesh flies fall under the family Sacrophagidae and generally arrive at a corpse following Calliphoridae. Unlike Calliphoridae, however, members of this family are able to fly in heavy rain. This key advantage enables them to occasionally reach a body before Calliphoridae, affecting the maggot mass that will be discovered. Flesh flies are globally distributed including habitats in the United States, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East.\nBeetles are representative of the order Coleoptera which accounts for the largest of the insect orders. Beetles are very adaptive and can be found in almost all environments with the exception of Antarctica and high mountainous regions. The most diverse beetle fauna can be found in the tropics. In addition, beetles are less submissive to temperatures. Thus, if a carcass has been found in cold temperatures, the beetle will be prevalent over Calliphoridae.\nWeather.\nVarious weather conditions in a given amount of time cause certain pests to invade human households. This is because the insects are in search of food, water, and shelter.\nDamp weather causes reproduction and growth enhancement in many insect types, especially when coupled with warm temperatures. Most pests concerned at this time are ants, spiders, crickets, cockroaches, ladybugs, yellowjackets, hornets, mice, and rats.\nWhen conditions are dry, the deprivation of moisture outside drives many pests inside searching for water. While the rainy weather increases the numbers of insects, this dry weather causes pest invasions to increase. The pests most commonly known during dry conditions are scorpions, ants, pillbugs, millipedes, crickets, and spiders. Extreme drought does kill many populations of insects, but also drives surviving insects to invade more often.\nCold temperatures outside will cause invasions beginning in the late summer months and early fall. Box elder bugs, cluster flies, ladybugs, and silverfish are noticed some of the most common insects to seek the warm indoors. In general, insects are poikilothermic animals; thus meaning their level of activity is substantially depended upon their surrounding environmental conditions. An increase in the temperature will result in an accelerated metabolism of the insect; hence resulting in an increased activity.\nArthropods in decomposition.\nThe activities of insects and other arthropods within a carcass are essential to decomposition; the breakdown of organic materials including human remains. Chemicals emitted during decomposition attract necrophagous insects, those that feed on dead creatures. These insects hasten the decomposition process by aiding in the breakdown of bodily tissues. Many species have been recorded on cadavers, and they are covered below.\nInsect succession.\nInsect succession, as utilized in forensic entomology, refers to the orderly progression of insect colonization and decomposition processes on a corpse over time. Their life cycle typically consists of four stages : eggs, larval, pupal, and adult. Each stage has unique eating behavior that changes as the organism breaks down. In forensic investigations, the presence and developmental phases of insects can provide important data for understanding environmental circumstances, body movement, and postmortem interval (PMI) estimation. In forensic entomology, insects play a crucial role as indicators, helping to identify key components of a death investigation due to their distinct ecological responsibilities and varied geographic distribution. Given that different insect species inhabit a body in a certain order, understanding insect succession is essential for predicting the postmortem interval (PMI). Typically, insect succession occurs in the following stages:\nInvertebrate types.\nScorpionflies.\nScorpionflies (order Mecoptera) were the first insects to arrive at a donated human cadaver observed (by the entomologist Natalie Lindgren) at the Southeast Texas Applied Forensic Science Facility near Huntsville, Texas, and remained on the corpse for one and a half days, outnumbering flies during that period. A great presence of scorpionflies may indicate shorter postmortem intervals.\nFlies.\nFlies from the order Diptera are very often found at a crime scene, because they are attracted to the odoriferous chemicals released by decomposing bodies, known as volatile organic compounds (VOCs). A dead body is a perfect ovipositional environment for flies, as the developing maggots will have an abundant and ready food source. Different types of flies can be found on dead bodies, the most significant of which are:\nBeetles.\nBeetles (Order Coleoptera) are generally found in later stages of decomposition. They play a role in breaking down the remaining soft tissue and are important in the final stages of decomposition. In drier conditions, the beetles can be replaced by moth flies (Psychodidae). Their life cycle normally consists of four stages : eggs, larval, pupal, and adult. Each stage has unique eating behavior that changes as the organism breaks down. In forensic investigations, the existence and developmental phases of insects can yield important data for understanding environmental circumstances, body movement, and PMI estimation. In forensic entomology, insects play a crucial function as indicators, helping to identify vital components of a death investigation due to their distinct ecological responsibilities and varied geographic distribution. Different types of beetles can be found on dead bodies the most significant include:\nMites.\nMany mites (Acari, which are arachnids) feed on corpses, with \"Macrocheles\" mites common in the early stages of decomposition, while Tyroglyphidae and Oribatid mites such as \"Rostrozetes\" feed on dry skin in the later stages of decomposition.\n\"Nicrophorus\" beetles (which are Silphids) often carry the mite \"Poecilochirus\" upon their bodies; these feed on fly eggs. If they arrive at the corpse before any fly eggs hatch into maggots, the first eggs are eaten and maggot development is delayed. This may lead to incorrect PMI estimates. \"Nicrophorus\" beetles find the ammonia excretions of blowfly maggots toxic, and the \"Poecilochirus\" mites, by keeping the maggot population low, allow \"Nicrophorus\" to occupy and dominate the corpse.\nMoths.\nMoths (order Lepidoptera) such as clothes-moths (Tineidae) \u2013 are closely related to butterflies. Most species of moth are nocturnal, but there are crepuscular and diurnal species. During their larval stages, clothes moths tend to feed on mammalian hair. They are amongst the final animals contributing to the decomposition of a corpse. This said, adult moths lay their legs on a carcass \"subsequently\" to fly larvae having had their presence on it.\nWasps, ants, and bees.\nWasps, ants, and bees (order Hymenoptera) are not necessarily necrophagous. While some feed on the body, some are also predatory, eating the insects feeding on the body. Parasitoids such as parasitoid wasps lay their eggs within the eggs or pupae of other insects, oftentimes only on those of specific host species, and eventually kills their host. A relevant type of parasitoid are the Pteromalidae, which oviposit only upon the pupae of muscoid flies. The wasp larvae will feed on the fly developing within the puparium, eventually killing it. Bees and wasps have been seen feeding on bodies during the early stages. This may cause problems for murder cases in which larval flies are used to estimate the PMI since eggs and larvae on the body may have been consumed prior to the arrival on scene of investigators.\nModern techniques.\nMany new techniques have been developed and are used in order to more accurately gather evidence, or reevaluate old information. The use of these newly developed techniques and evaluations have become relevant in litigation and appeals. Forensic entomology not only uses arthropod biology, but it pulls from other sciences, introducing fields like chemistry and genetics, exploiting their inherent synergy through the use of DNA in forensic entomology. In order to improve the precision and dependability of insect-based evidence analysis, forensic entomologists nowadays use a variety of cutting-edge technologies, such as stable isotope analysis and DNA analysis. These methods have broadened the field of forensic entomology by making it possible to identify insect species more precisely, pinpoint their geographic origins, and draw important conclusions about the circumstances surrounding a death. Some of the most important contemporary forensic entomology techniques are examined in this section along with how they are applied to criminal investigations.\nScanning electron microscopy.\nFly larvae and fly eggs are used to aid in the determination of a PMI. In order for the data to be useful the larvae and eggs must be identified down to a species level to get an accurate estimate for the PMI. There are many techniques currently being developed to differentiate between the various species of forensically important insects. A study in 2007 demonstrates a technique that can use scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to identify key morphological features of eggs and maggots. Some of the morphological differences that can help identify the different species are the presence/absence of anastomosis, the presence/absence of anterior and posterior spiracles, the cephalopharyngeal skeleton as well as the shape and length of the median area.\nThe SEM method provides an array of morphological features for use in identifying fly eggs; however, this method does have some disadvantages. The main disadvantage is that it requires expensive equipment and can take time to identify the species from which the egg originated, so it may not be useful in a field study or to quickly identify a particular egg.\nThe SEM method is effective provided there is ample time and the proper equipment and the particular fly eggs are plentiful. The ability to use these morphological differences gives forensic entomologists a powerful tool that can help with estimating a post mortem interval, along with other relevant information, such as whether the body has been disturbed post mortem.\nPotassium permanganate staining.\nWhen scanning electron microscopy is not available, a faster, lower cost technique is potassium permanganate staining. The collected eggs are rinsed with a normal saline solution and placed in a glass petri dish. The eggs are soaked in a 1% potassium permanganate solution for one minute and then dehydrated and mounted onto a slide for observation. These slides can be used with any light microscope with a calibrated eyepiece to compare various morphological features. The most important and useful features for identifying eggs are the size, length, and width of the plastron, as well as the morphology of the plastron in the area around the micropyle. The various measurements and observations when compared to standards for forensically important species are used to determine the species of the egg.\nDNA analysis.\nModern forensic entomology now relies heavily on DNA analysis as a fundamental tool for accurately identifying insect species and gaining important insights into their interactions with human remains. Using this method, DNA is extracted from insect specimens discovered at crime scenes and compared to databases containing known DNA sequences. Forensic entomologists can verify species identification, identify the existence of particular species linked to decomposition, and even establish a connection between insects and particular geographical areas through the examination of insect DNA.\nThe identification of insect stomach contents is one of the main uses of DNA analysis in forensic entomology. Investigators can ascertain the insect's most recent meal by sequencing the DNA contained in the gut of maggots or other insect larvae discovered on a body. When determining the postmortem interval (PMI) or locating possible sources of contamination or infection, this information might be extremely important.\nThe study of insect dispersal patterns and colonization behaviour has also been transformed by DNA research. Researchers can deduce patterns of travel and colonization by examining the genetic variety of insect populations. This can provide important insights into the origin of insect specimens found at crime scenes or the transportation of a body.\nIn general, DNA analysis has improved forensic entomology's accuracy and dependability significantly, allowing investigators to obtain previously unobtainable specific information from insect evidence.\nMitochondrial DNA.\nIn 2001, a method was devised by Jeffrey Wells and Felix Sperling to use mitochondrial DNA to differentiate between different species of the subfamily Chrysomyinae. This is particularly useful when working to determine the identity of specimens that do not have distinctive morphological characteristics at certain life stages.\nGene expression studies.\nAlthough physical characteristics and sizes at various instars have been used to estimate fly age, a more recent study has been conducted to determine the age of an egg based on the expression of particular genes. This is particularly useful in determining developmental stages that are not evidenced by change in size; such as the egg or pupa and where only a general time interval can be estimated based on the duration of the particular developmental stage. This is done by breaking the stages down into smaller units separated by predictable changed in gene expression. Three genes were measured in an experiment with \"Drosophila melanogaster\": bicoid (bcd), slalom (sll), and chitin synthase (cs). These three genes were used because they are likely to be in varied levels during different times of the egg development process. These genes all share a linear relationship in regards to age of the egg; that is, the older the egg is the more of the particular gene is expressed. However, all of the genes are expressed in varying amounts. Different genes on different loci would need to be selected for another fly species. The genes expressions are mapped in a control sample to formulate a developmental chart of the gene expression at certain time intervals. This chart can then be compared to the measured values of gene expression to accurately predict the age of an egg to within two hours with a high confidence level. Even though this technique can be used to estimate the age of an egg, the feasibility and legal acceptance of this must be considered for it to be a widely utilized forensic technique. One benefit of this would be that it is like other DNA-based techniques so most labs would be equipped to conduct similar experiments without requiring new capital investment. This style of age determination is in the process of being used to more accurately find the age of the instars and pupa; however, it is much more complicated, as there are more genes being expressed during these stages. The hope is that with this and other similar techniques a more accurate PMI can be obtained.\nMock crime scenes.\nA valuable tool that is becoming very common in the training of forensic entomologists is the use of mock crime scenes using pig carcasses. The pig carcass represents a human body and can be used to illustrate various environmental effects on both arthropod succession and the estimate of the post mortem interval. Pigs are the most frequently utilised model in an attempt to gather data regarding forensic experimental analysis. The latter is highly proportionate to human nature due to our overlapping characteristics with the mentioned species. These interrelated components include: subcutaneous fat stores, skin thickness, range of adult body mass, hair covering, and omnivorous diets.\nStable isotope analysis.\nA contemporary method that is being used more and more in forensic entomology to shed light on the ecology and life cycle of insects connected to human remains is stable isotope analysis. Using this technique, the stable isotopic composition of elements found in insect tissues, including carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, and oxygen, is measured. The environment in which the insect developed, including its diet and place of origin, is reflected in these isotopes.\nStable isotope analysis provides information on the travel of the body or the insect itself, and can be used in forensic investigations to assist identify the geographic origin of insects found on a body. Furthermore, features of the insect's diet, such as whether it consumed organic matter or human remains, can be inferred by stable isotope analysis. This information can be vital to comprehending the insect's function in the decomposition process.\nWhen using traditional methods to identify insect species or estimate age, this methodology has proven quite helpful. Stable isotope analysis contributes to more accurate and thorough forensic studies by improving the precision and depth of forensic entomological investigations by offering a distinct chemical signature that represents the insect's surroundings.\nInsect activity case study.\nA preliminary investigation of insect colonization and succession on remains in New Zealand revealed the following results on decay and insect colonization.\nOpen field habitat.\nThis environment had a daily average maximum temperature of and a daily minimum temperature of . The average rainfall for the first 3 weeks in this environment was 3.0\u00a0mm/day. Around days 17\u201345, the body began to start active decay. During this stage, the insect successions started with \"Calliphora stygia\", which lasted until day 27. The larvae of \"Chrysomya rufifacies\" were present between the day 13 and day 47. \"Hydrotaea rostrata\", larvae of \"Lucilia sericata\", family Psychodidae, and \"Sylvicola\" were found to be present relatively late in the body's decay.\nCoastal sand-dune habitat.\nThis environment had an average daily maximum temperature of and minimum of . The daily average rainfall was recorded as 1.4\u00a0mm/day for the first 3 weeks. The post-decay time interval, beginning at day six after death and ending around day 15 after death, is greatly reduced from the average post-decay time, due to the high average temperature of this environment. Insects obtained late in the post-active stage include the \"Calliphora quadrimaculata\", adult Sphaeroceridae, Psychodidae and Piophilidae (no larvae from this last family were obtained in recovery).\nNative bush habitat.\nThis environment had recorded daily average maximum and minimum temperatures were , respectively. The average rainfall in this habitat was recorded at 0.4\u00a0mm/day. After the bloat stage, which lasted until day seven after death, post-active decay began around day 14. In this habitat, the \"H. rostrata\", adult Phoridae, Sylvicola larvae and adult were the predominant species remaining on the body during the pre-skeletonization stages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61290", "revid": "30162703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61290", "title": "Galena (disambiguation)", "text": "Galena is a mineral and an important lead ore.\nGalena may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61291", "revid": "21341799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61291", "title": "Glendale", "text": "Glendale is the anglicised version of the Gaelic Gleann Dail, which means \"valley of fertile, low-lying arable land\".\nIt may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61292", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61292", "title": "Granby", "text": "Granby may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61293", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61293", "title": "Greensboro", "text": ""}
{"id": "61294", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61294", "title": "Harvey", "text": "Harvey, Harveys or Harvey's may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61295", "revid": "50787142", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61295", "title": "Hawthorne", "text": "Hawthorne often refers to the American writer Nathaniel Hawthorne.\nHawthorne may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nAustralia\nCanada\nUnited States\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61296", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61296", "title": "Ithaca (island)", "text": "Greek island\nIthaca ( ), also Ithaki ( ) or Ithaka ( \"Ith\u00e1k\u0113\" ), is a Greek island located in the Ionian Sea, off the northeast coast of Kefalonia and to the west of continental Greece.\nIthaca's main island has an area of and in 2021 had a population of 2,862. It is the second-smallest of the seven main Ionian Islands, after Paxi. Ithaca is a separate regional unit of the Ionian Islands region, and the only municipality of the regional unit. The capital is Vathy (or Vathi).\nModern Ithaca is generally identified with Homer's Ithaca, the home of Odysseus, whose delayed return to the island is the plot of the epic poem the \"Odyssey\"; however, many other attempts at identification have been made.\nAlternative names.\nThe island has been called by different names in various languages in the past:\nHistory.\nThe island has been inhabited since the 4th millennium BC. It may have been the capital of Cephalonia during the Mycenaean period and the capital-state of the small kingdom ruled by Odysseus. The Romans occupied the island in the 2nd century BC, and later it became part of the Byzantine Empire. The Normans ruled Ithaca in the 13th century, and after a short Turkish rule it fell into Venetian hands (Ionian Islands under Venetian rule).\nIthaca was subsequently occupied by France under the 1797 Treaty of Campo Formio. It was liberated by a joint Russo-Turkish force commanded by admirals Fyodor Ushakov and Kadir Bey in 1798 and subsequently became a part of the Septinsular Republic, which was originally established as a protectorate of the Russian Empire and Ottoman Empire. It became a French possession again in 1807, until it was taken over by the United Kingdom in 1809. Under the 1815 Treaty of Paris, Ithaca became a state of the United States of the Ionian Islands, a protectorate of the British Empire. In 1830, the local community requested to join with the rest of the newly restored nation-state of Greece. Under the 1864 Treaty of London, Ithaca, along with the remaining six Ionian islands, was ceded to Greece as a gesture of diplomatic friendship to Greece's new Anglophile king, George I. The United Kingdom kept its privileged use of the harbour at Corfu.\nFirst settlers.\nThe origins of the first people to inhabit the island, which occurred during the last years of the Neolithic period (4000\u20133000 BC), are not clear. The traces of buildings, walls and a road from this time period prove that life existed and continued to do so during the Early Helladic era (3000\u20132000 BC). In the years 2000\u20131500 BC some of the population migrated to part of the island. The buildings and walls that were excavated showed the lifestyle of this period had remained primitive.\nHellenistic era.\nDuring the ancient Hellenic prime (800\u2013180 BC), independent organized life continued in the northern and southern part of the island. In the southern part, in the area of Aetos, the town Alalcomenae was founded. From this period, many objects of important historical value have been found during excavations. Among these objects are coins imprinted with the name Ithaca and the image of Odysseus which suggest that the island was self-governed.\nMiddle Ages.\nAcross time, the island fell to various conquerors and experienced changed circumstances, meaning the population of the island kept changing through history. Although there is no definite numerical information until the Venetian period, it is believed that from the Mycenaean to the Byzantine period, the number of inhabitants was several thousand, who lived mainly in the northern part of Ithaca. During the Middle Ages, the population decreased due to the continuous invasions of pirates, forcing the people to establish settlements and live in the mountains. \nThe island, often referred to with the name 'Val di Compare', followed the fortunes of its bigger neighbor Cephalonia throughout the 12th and 13th centuries, when it formed part of the holdings of various Latin rulers. In 1185, when Cephalonia and Zakynthos were captured by Margaritone of Brindisi, it is most likely that Ithaca was among the territory he conquered. Later, Ithaca changed ownership together with Cephalonia, first to the Orsini family after Margaritone's death, and then to John of Gravina, prince of Achaia, who conquered them from the Orsini in 1324. From 1333 until 1357 the islands were transferred to Robert of Taranto, who in 1357, bestowed them upon Leonardo Tocco, a Neapolitan courtier. While Ithaca had until now merely followed the fate of Cephalonia, it is under the Tocco that more specific mentions of Ithaca begin to appear in the record. In the 15th century, there was one family, the Galati, with noble privileges and land interests on the island given by the Tocco family.\nOttoman and Venetian eras.\nIn 1479, Ottoman forces reached the islands and many of the people fled from the island out of fear of the new Turkish settlers. Those who remained hid in the mountains to avoid the pirates who controlled the channel between Cephalonia and Ithaca and the bays of the island. In the following five years, the Turks, Tocco and Venetians laid claim to the islands diplomatically. Possession of the islands was finally taken by the Ottoman Empire from 1484 to 1499. During this period, the Venetians had strengthened into a major power with an organized fleet. The Venetians pursued their interest in the Ionian Islands, and in 1499 a war between the Venetians and the Turks began. The allied fleets of the Venetians and the Spanish besieged Ithaca, and the other islands. The fleets prevailed, and from 1500 onwards the Venetians controlled the islands. According to a treaty of 1503, Ithaca, Cephalonia and Zakynthos would be ruled by the Venetians, and Lefkada by the Ottoman Empire. By then Ithaca was almost uninhabited, and the Venetians had to grant incentives to settlers from neighbouring islands and the mainland to repopulate it. 1504, the Venetians ordered official the repopulation of Ithaca with tax incentives to attract settlers from neighbouring islands. The Venetian authorities found the island was already being repopulated by members of the Galatis family, who laid claim to it as their property, having received rights over Ithaca under the Tocco regime. However, according to historians, the island received a great population revival in the period before and after the fall of Candia when numerous people from Crete arrived there as well as the noble Karavia family (Latin: Caravia), a branch of the ancient byzantine Kallergi family. This family and its followers inhabited settlements on the island, received fiefs from the Venetian Senate and indulged in a tremendously profitable maritime trade as well as piracy against the Ottomans. According to the French traveler Leake during the 18th century the families of Karavias, Petalas and the Dendrinos constituted the three main factions of the island, with the Karavias controlling its most productive part. During the next centuries the island remained under Venetian control. \nFrench era.\nA few years after the French Revolution, the Ionian area came under the rule of the First French Republic (1797\u20131798), and the island became the honorary capital of the French \"d\u00e9partement\" of Ithaque, comprising Cephalonia, Lefkada, and part of the mainland (the prefecture was at Argostoli on Kefalonia).\nThe population welcomed the French, who took care in the control of the administrative and judicial systems, but later the heavy taxation they demanded caused a feeling of indignation among the people. During this short historical period, the new ideas of system and social structure greatly influenced the inhabitants of the island. At the end of 1798, the French were succeeded by Russia and Turkey (1798\u20131807), which were allies at that time. Corfu became the capital of the Septinsular Republic, and the form of government was democratic, with a fourteen-member senate in which Ithaca had one representative.\nThe Ithacan fleet flourished when it was allowed to carry cargo up to the ports of the Black Sea. In 1807, according to the Treaties of Tilsit with Turkey, the Ionian Islands once again came under French rule (1807\u20131809 AD). The French quickly began preparing to face the British fleet, which had become very powerful, by building a fort in Vathy.\nBritish and modern eras.\nIn 1809 Great Britain mounted a blockade on the Ionian Islands as part of the war against Napoleon, and in September of that year they hoisted the British flag above the castle of Zakynthos. Cephalonia and Ithaca soon surrendered, and the British installed provisional governments. The Treaty of Paris (1815) recognised the United States of the Ionian Islands and decreed that it become a British protectorate. Colonel Charles Philippe de Bosset became provisional governor between 1810 and 1814.\nA few years later Greek nationalist groups started to form. Although their energy in the early years was directed to supporting their fellow Greek revolutionaries in the revolution against the Ottoman Empire, they switched their focus to \"enosis\" with Greece following their independence. The Party of Radicals (Greek: \u039a\u03cc\u03bc\u03bc\u03b1 \u03c4\u03c9\u03bd \u03a1\u03b9\u03b6\u03bf\u03c3\u03c0\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03ce\u03bd) founded in 1848 as a pro-enosis political party. In September 1848, there were skirmishes with the British garrison in Argostoli and Lixouri on Kefalonia, which led to a certain level relaxation in the enforcement of the protectorates laws, and freedom of the press as well. The island's populace did not hide their growing demands for enosis, and newspapers on the islands frequently published articles criticising British policies in the protectorate. On the 15th of August in 1849, another rebellion broke out, which was quashed by Henry George Ward, who proceeded to temporarily impose martial law.\nDuring the British protectorate period prominent citizens of Ithaki participated in the secret \"Philiki Etairia\" which was instrumental in organizing the Greek Revolution of 1821 against Turkish rule, and Greek fighters found refuge there. In addition, the participation of Ithacans during the siege of Messolongi and the naval battles against Ottoman ships on the Black Sea and the Danube was significant.\nIthaca was annexed to the Greek Kingdom with the rest of the Ionian islands in 1864.\nHome of Odysseus.\nSince antiquity, Ithaca has been identified as the home of the mythological hero Odysseus. In the \"Odyssey\" of Homer, Ithaca is described thus\n...dwell in clear-seen Ithaca, wherein is a mountain, Neriton, covered with waving forests, conspicuous from afar; and round it lie many isles hard by one another, Dulichium, and Same, and wooded Zacynthus. Ithaca itself lies close in to the mainland the furthest toward the gloom, but the others lie apart toward the Dawn and the sun\u2014a rugged isle, but a good nurse of young men\nIt has sometimes been argued that this description does not match the topography of modern Ithaca. Three features of the description have been seen as especially problematic. First, Ithaca is described as \"low-lying\" (), but Ithaca is mountainous. Second, the words \"farthest out to sea, towards the sunset\" () are usually interpreted to mean that Ithaca must be the island furthest to the west, but Kefalonia lies to the west of Ithaca. Lastly, it is unclear which modern islands correspond to Homer's Doulichion and Same.\nThe Greek geographer Strabo, writing in the 1st century AD, identified Homer's Ithaca with modern Ithaca. Following earlier commentators, he interpreted the word translated above as \"low-lying\" to mean \"close to the mainland\", and the phrase translated as \"farthest out to sea, towards the sunset\" as meaning \"farthest of all towards the north.\" Strabo identified Same as modern Kefalonia, and believed that Homer's Doulichion was one of the islands now known as the Echinades. Ithaca lies farther north than Kefalonia, Zacynthos, and the island that Strabo identified as Doulichion, consistent with the interpretation of Ithaca as being \"farthest of all towards the north.\"\nStrabo's explanation has not won universal acceptance. In the last few centuries, some scholars have argued that Homer's Ithaca was not modern Ithaca, but a different island. Perhaps the best known proposal is that of Wilhelm D\u00f6rpfeld, who believed that the nearby island of Lefkada was Homer's Ithaca, whereas Same was the present-day Ithaca.\nIt has also been suggested that Paliki, the western peninsula of Kefalonia, is Homer's Ithaca. It has been argued that in Homeric times Paliki was separated from Kefalonia by a sea channel since closed up by earthquake-induced rockfalls. However, no scientific review publications are available in support of this theory. Indeed, scholars have found that \"all the geological and geomorphological evidence refutes this hypothesis\".\nDespite any difficulties with Homer's description of the island, in classical and Roman times the island now called \"Ithaca\" was universally held to be the home of Odysseus; the Hellenistic identifications of Homeric sites, such as the identifications of Lipari as the island of Aeolus, are usually taken with a grain of salt, and attributed to the ancient tourist trade.\nThe island has been known as Ithaca from an early date, as coins and inscriptions show. Coins from Ithaca frequently portray Odysseus, and an inscription from the 3rd century BC refers to a local hero-shrine of Odysseus and games called the \"Odysseia\". The Archaeological site of \"School of Homer\" on modern Ithaca is the only place in the Lefkas\u2013Kefalonia\u2013Ithaca Triangle where Linear B inscriptions may have been found, near royal remains. In 2010, Greek archaeologists discovered the remains of an 8th-century BC palace in the area of Agios Athanasios, leading to reports that this might have been the site of Odysseus's palace.\nAnother archaeological feature on Ithaca is the so-called Polis Cave near Stavros in the north of the island. Heinrich Schliemann identified it as the cave that Odysseus visited on his return. Sylvia Benton, who carried out research in the cave in the 1930s, also interpreted her findings as an indication of a connection to Odysseus. However, as is now known, the site served as a place of worship for many centuries, from the beginning of the Bronze Age (Early Helladic) to the Roman period, without any clear connection to a possible life environment of Odysseus. Numerous votive offerings indicate that the nymphs in particular were the target of the ritual acts in the Polis cave.\nModern scholars generally accept the identification of modern Ithaca with Homeric Ithaca, and explain discrepancies between the \"Odyssey\"'s description and the actual topography as the product of lack of first-hand knowledge of the island, or as poetic licence.\nGeography.\nIthaca lies east of the northeast coast of Cephalonia, from which it is separated by the Strait of Ithaca. The regional unit covers an area of and has approximately of coastline. The main island stretches in the north-south direction, in length of and maximum width of . It consists of two parts, of about equal size, connected by the narrow isthmus of Aetos (Eagle), just wide. The two parts enclose the bay of Molos, whose southern branch is the harbor of Vathy, the capital and largest settlement of the island. The second largest village is Stavros in the northern part.\nLazaretto Islet (or \"Island of The Saviour\") guards the harbor. The church of The Saviour and the remains of an old gaol are located on the islet.\nThe capes in the island include Exogi, the westernmost, Melissa to the north, Mavronos, Agios Ilias, Schinous, Sarakiniko and Agios Ioannis, to the east, and Agiou Andreou, to the south. Bays include Afales Bay to the northwest, Frikes and Kioni Bays to the northeast, Molos Gulf to the east, and Ormos Gulf and Sarakiniko Bay to the southeast. The tallest mountain is Nirito in the northern part (806 m), followed by Merovigli (669 m) in the south.\nAdministration.\nThe island Ithaca is part of the regional unit Ithaca, which is part of the Ionian Islands region. The only municipality of this regional unit is Ithaca.\nIthaca is the only populated island in this municipality, which contains several other islets.\nCommunities and villages.\nAetos, Afales, Agios Ioannis, Agia Saranta, Anogi, Exogi, Frikes, Kalivia, Kathara, Kioni, Kolieri, Lachos, Lefki, Marmaka, Perachori, Piso Aetos, Platrithia, Rachi, Stavros, and Vathy.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61297", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61297", "title": "Jacksonville", "text": ""}
{"id": "61298", "revid": "202276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61298", "title": "Jamestown", "text": "Jamestown may refer to\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61300", "revid": "48904741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61300", "title": "Lakewood", "text": "Lakewood may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61301", "revid": "349678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61301", "title": "Laurel", "text": "Laurel may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61302", "revid": "19712069", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61302", "title": "Kent (band)", "text": "Swedish alternative rock band\nKent was a Swedish alternative rock band formed in Eskilstuna in 1990. With members Joakim Berg, Martin Sk\u00f6ld, Sami Sirvi\u00f6 and Markus Mustonen, the band had numerous radio hits throughout Sweden and Scandinavia and consecutive number-one studio albums on the Sweden top list (Sverigetopplistan) beginning with the release of \"Verkligen\" (1996) and led by the single \"Kr\u00e4m (s\u00e5 n\u00e4ra f\u00e5r ingen g\u00e5)\". With origins rooted in distorted rock, they found mainstream success through their alternative rock albums of the mid-1990s, 2000s and 2010s, the latter decades during which they adopted elements of synthpop. \nWith eleven number-one albums, five number-one singles, 22 Swedish Grammy Awards, and over three million record sales, Kent is considered the most popular rock/pop group within Sweden and throughout Scandinavia. \"Vapen &amp; ammunition\" (2002) topped the Swedish charts for eight weeks. Kent is often compared to bands like U2 and Coldplay.\nAs Kent's songs are primarily performed in Swedish, they are unfamiliar to most English-speaking audiences. Kent briefly attempted an international career with English versions of the albums \"Isola\" (1997) and \"Hagnesta Hill\" (1999) and an accompanying American tour for the former, but stopped after finding less success than they had in Scandinavia. Joakim Berg, the lead singer and lyricist, says \"there are two kinds of lyrics I write. One kind is based in places and the other is based in feelings. You move between those two whether you want to or not.\"\nOn 14 March 2016, the band announced that they would release their final album, titled \"D\u00e5 som nu f\u00f6r alltid,\" after 26 years of performing. The album was released on 20 May 2016. The band's announcement noted that the dissolution of the band is voluntary and is despite their continued success. In September, Kent began a months-long farewell tour that covered Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Denmark. The last concert was held at Tele2 Arena in Stockholm on 17 December 2016.\nKent reunited in March 2025 to play six concerts at Stockholm's 3Arena.\nHistory.\nFormation and first years (1990\u20131994).\nThe band \"Jones &amp; Giftet\" (Jones &amp; The Poison) was formed in 1990 with members Joakim \"Jocke\" Berg, Martin Sk\u00f6ld, Markus Mustonen, Sami Sirvi\u00f6 and Thomas Bergqvist (synthesizers). Berg and Sirvi\u00f6 started the band when Berg went to London and bought two guitars, one for each of them. Sk\u00f6ld, Bergqvist and Mustonen joined soon after. Their first gig was in Lindesberg in V\u00e4stmanland, and the second at \"Knegoffs\" in Eskilstuna. In 1991, Jones &amp; Giftet won the contest \"Cult 91\" at the \"Skylight\" in Eskilstuna.\nIn 1992 Martin Roos played with Jones &amp; Giftet for the first time, at \"Cult 92\". Soon thereafter he replaced Thomas Bergqvist. On 30 September 1992 Jones &amp; Giftet changed their name to \"Havs\u00e4nglar\" (Angelshark, lit. Sea angels). Gigs at the \"Spaghetti Companiet\", Hannas Krog and the Pet Sounds Bar followed.\nIn 1993, Martin Roos moved to Stockholm, and soon the rest of the band did the same. Jocke Berg's brother Adam Berg came up with \"Kent\" as the band's new name. Kent played in Stockholm at Tanto and Hyndans H\u00f6rna, and in Uppsala at Kalmar Nation.\nIn March 1994 Kent recorded a 10-track demo under very simple conditions in an 8-track studio at Nytorpsskolan near Bl\u00e5sut in Stockholm. They gave the demo to Peter Ejheden at Pet Sounds who was working as a booker for a club (Pet Sounds Bar). In the same chain of events where he got the tape, Ejheden quit Pet Sounds and started working at BMG. In April Per Lindholm, A&amp;R at RCA/BMG, heard the band for the first time and was immediately interested. On 26 June Kent's first record contract was signed. They went to Silence Studios in Koppom, V\u00e4rmland, to record their first album.\n\"Kent\" and \"Verkligen\" (1995\u20131996).\nIn March 1995, Kent released their first album, \"Kent\". The band's style at that time emphasized distortion, which is in contrast with their later albums. Their first single was \"N\u00e4r det bl\u00e5ser p\u00e5 m\u00e5nen\".\nOne year later, in March 1996, Kent released \"Verkligen\" (Really). Guitarist Martin Roos had left the band for his career at Kent's record company BMG; he later became the band's manager. The pre-release single \"Kr\u00e4m (s\u00e5 n\u00e4ra f\u00e5r ingen g\u00e5)\" immediately became a radio hit and gained Kent some serious fame in Sweden. Two more singles were issued, \"Gravitation\" and \"Halka\". Musically, the album was slower with less distortion and more emotion. After \"Verkligen\" was released, and before the band went on a long tour that summer, guitarist Harri M\u00e4nty joined as a permanent member.\n\"Isola\" (1997\u20131999).\nIn November 1997, Kent released \"Isola\". They had toured heavily with \"Verkligen\", which had gained them some reputation. The pre-release single from \"Isola\", \"Om du var h\u00e4r\" (If You Were Here), became a radio hit. Musically the album was quite different from \"Verkligen\", going further in the direction of slower, more thoughtful songs with more emotion. The last song on the album, the 7\u00a0minute, 47\u00a0second-long \"747\", with a characteristic keyboard riff and a long instrumental outro, became the band's closer for every show for the next six years. It was also released as a single, cut down to four minutes and with an added short chorus. The album reached number one in Sweden. Kent went on to tour through Scandinavia from November 1997 to February 1998. \nIn April 1998, Kent released an English version of \"Isola\", featuring an extra song only available on the English version, \"Velvet\". In May, the band started touring again, playing in Europe and Scandinavia. Singles were released in various territories for three of the album's songs, \"If You Were Here\", \"Things She Said\" and \"747\". In 1999, they did two US tours to promote the album. The first was in support of fellow Swedes The Cardigans, and the second was a double bill with American band Papa Vegas. The English version of \"Isola\" sold poorly.\n\"Hagnesta Hill\" and \"B-sidor 95-00\" (1999\u20132000).\nIn the summer of 1999, the band started working on a new album. In December 1999, Kent released \"Hagnesta Hill\", named after Hagnestahill, a part of Eskilstuna where the band had their first rehearsal space. The first single from the album, \"Musik non stop\", a disco-rock song, became a huge radio hit. The album was, for the most part, faster and less ballad-focused than Isola, and also mildly experimental with drum-machines and electronics. Two more singles were released, the industrial-esque \"En himmelsk drog\" (A Heavenly Drug) and the power-poppy \"Kevlarsj\u00e4l\" (Kevlar Soul).\nIn April 2000, an English version of \"Hagnesta Hill\" was released, in which two songs from the Swedish version were replaced with two new English tracks (\"Just Like Money\" and \"Quiet Heart\"). The album was also released in a limited digipack with one of the excluded songs, \"A Timekill to Die For\", included as a hidden bonus track. The album was accompanied by the release of the single \"Music Non Stop\"; the other omitted song, \"Insects\", was included as its b-side. A planned US release of the album was shelved, resulting in the circulation of \"cut-out\" promo copies. With no official album to promote, a US tour never materialized. In connection with the release of the English version of \"Hagnesta Hill\", Kent went on a European tour, finishing at the Roskilde Festival.\nSince their debut, Kent had recorded a large number of b-sides. Since most of them had long gone out of print, it was very hard to get them legally, so in November 2000, Kent released the two-CD collection \"B-sidor 95\u201300\" (B-Sides 95\u201300). It featured 21 b-sides and two new songs. A documentary was also shot the same year, \"S\u00e5 n\u00e4ra f\u00e5r ingen g\u00e5 \u2013 ett \u00e5r med Kent\" (\"No One Can Get This Close \u2013 a year with Kent\"), produced by Per Sinding-Larsen and Mathias Engstrand.\nWith heavy touring in Scandinavia and Europe in 2000, the band took a much-needed break.\n\"Vapen &amp; ammunition\" and the White Concert (2001\u20132003).\nIn an interview in 2001, Joakim Berg was asked if they would tour outside Scandinavia again: \"It's not too late yet. But the question is whether you have the energy to do all the marketing and all the crap that's required. I'm more interested in making great music than sitting on a tour bus for a year and a half.\"\nAfter a seven-month timeout, Kent started another full-length album during the summer of 2001. Later that year they reported that they had tried to make an album consisting almost entirely of singles. The first of those, \"Dom andra\" (The Others), released on 18 March 2002, became a huge hit on Swedish radio. When the album \"Vapen &amp; ammunition\" (\"Weapon(s) &amp; Ammunition\") came out, the next two singles \"K\u00e4rleken v\u00e4ntar\" (Love Awaits) and \"FF\" (from the double A-side \"FF / VinterNoll2\"), plus the album track \"P\u00e4rlor\" (Pearls) became huge radio hits, resulting in album sales over 600,000, more than twice as many as any other Kent album to date. The band received seven Swedish Grammy Awards in 2003.\nKent had not toured for several months when it was announced that they would only do one performance in Sweden in 2003, on 6 June, the Swedish national day, in Stockholm Stadium which holds 30,000. As the band told the crowd to dress in white, it was nicknamed \"The White Concert\". The band also played at the less known Parkfestivalen in Moss, Norway on 14 June 2003.\n\"Du &amp; jag d\u00f6den\" and \"The hj\u00e4rta &amp; sm\u00e4rta EP\" (2005\u20132006).\nAfter taking a one-year timeout, Kent returned to the studio to record their sixth studio album in 2004. Studio reports said it would be \"a very dark album\". The first single \"Max 500\" was released on 9 February 2005 and reached number one in Sweden and Norway. When the album \"Du &amp; jag d\u00f6den\" (You &amp; Me Death) was released in March, it was very well received and was considered by most fans to be one of their best albums. Two more singles were released, \"Palace &amp; Main\" and \"Den d\u00f6da vinkeln\" (The Dead Angle) \u2013 the last one stirring up some controversy among Kent fans because Kent did not release any b-sides along with it (but still the single has a shorter version of the song). The last track on the album, \"Mannen i den vita hatten (16 \u00e5r senare)\" (The Man in the White Hat (16 Years Later)) was very well received and is seen by many fans as Kent's best effort. It also became the song to replace \"747\" as the concert closer.\nIn May 2005, they embarked on \"Turn\u00e9 19\" (Tour 19), doing 12 shows in Sweden, one in Norway and one in Finland. The concerts took place in huge tents with a capacity of up to 18,000. This was the only tour that followed the release of \"Du &amp; jag d\u00f6den\". After \"Turn\u00e9 19\", Kent played once more at the Roskilde Festival.\nThere were rumours about Kent releasing an EP, as they had been spotted in studio and guitarist Sami had said, \"We might release an EP, but if we do it will only be digitally released.\" Just one month before the November 2005 release, \"The hj\u00e4rta &amp; sm\u00e4rta EP\" (The Heart &amp; Pain EP) was confirmed, as a CD as well as a digital release. It was well received and contained five tracks, \"Dom som f\u00f6rsvann\" (Those Who Disappeared) becoming the radio song and having a video recorded. The EP made No.\u00a01 in Sweden and remained on the charts for 33 weeks.\nDuring 2006, the band played only once in Sweden on the Hultsfred Festival and on two festivals in Norway, Rockfest Haugesund and Norwegian Wood Festival. They've also released the single \"N\u00e5lens \u00f6ga\" for Swedish Save the children.\n\"Tillbaka till samtiden\" and \"Box 1991\u20132008\" (2007\u20132008).\nIn November 2006, the band started recording their seventh studio album. On 10 January 2007, it was announced that guitarist Harri M\u00e4nty had decided to leave the band after ten years.\nOn 18 July 2007, the band announced the title and release date of their new album, \"Tillbaka till samtiden\" (Swedish for \"Back to the Present\"). Its official release was on 17 October 2007 but many stores began selling it five days in advance due to an internet leak of the album. The first single of the album was released on 17 September 2007 with the title \"Ingenting\" (Swedish for \"Nothing\"). The band played four songs at a private gig in Denmark where their new album premiered. The sound of the album has been described as more electro based rock. Due to the speed in which the tour's concerts were sold out, the band added seven extra concerts to their Scandinavian tour. Between November 2007 and March 2008, the band did 48 shows in total. Lead singer Joakim Berg has remarked that \"Tillbaka till samtiden\" contains some of his favourite material he has recorded. They were presented with Best Album and Best Group at the 2008 Swedish Grammy Awards. They went on to win a Rockbj\u00f6rnen Award for Best Swedish Album and a P3 Guld Award for Best Group.\nKent's 2008 summer tour began on 27 June and was a mix of music festivals and their own concerts. At a concert in Norrk\u00f6ping on 1 August 2008, Berg said: \"This is perhaps the best song that has ever been written in Swedish, it's called \"Mannen i den vita hatten\".\" Kent released the compilation \"Box 1991\u20132008\", featuring all their previous studio albums and previously unreleased material, in all Nordic countries on 29 October 2008.\nIn October 2008, their 2002 song \"VinterNoll2\" was included in \"Guitar Hero World Tour\", becoming the first and to date only Swedish-language song to be included in a \"Guitar Hero\" game.\nOn 23 December 2008, Kent released a new song, \"P\u00e5 drift?\". \"Kent wishes you all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year by offering a brand new song for free,\" the band writes on their website (kent.nu).\n\"R\u00f6d\" and \"En plats i solen\" (2009\u20132010).\nOn 4 October 2009, Kent announced their eighth studio album \"R\u00f6d\" and the first single \"T\u00f6ntarna\" was released on 5 October as digital download. \"R\u00f6d\" was released on 5 November 2009 and has an even greater touch of synthesizers than previous albums. On the release day of \"R\u00f6d\", Kent played in front of a hundred specially invited guests at The Bowery Hotel in New York. The setlist consisted of 6 tracks from the new album, and the whole thing was shown live on Aftonbladet's website.\nOn 2 November 2009, Kent auctioned off 100 limited physical copies of the song \"2000\" for charity. The song was also released as digital download. \"2000\" was used as the theme song for the Swedish TV-series \"Heml\u00f6sa\", covering the homeless problem in Stockholm.\nKent's R\u00f6d tour started in Stockholm on 25 February 2010, with four shows in Globe Arena Annexet during that week. They did 18 shows in total around the Nordic countries (Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland) for this tour. In May 2010, Sony Computer Entertainment Europe, in collaboration with Sony Music Sweden AB, released \"SingStar Kent\" on both the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation 3 games consoles, as part of the SingStar music video games.\nOn 14 June 2010, Kent announced their ninth studio album, \"En plats i solen\" (Swedish for \"A Place in the Sun\") due for release on 30 June, only seven months after the release of their previous studio album, \"R\u00f6d\". Berg has said about the recording of \"En plats i solen\": \"We had a kind of idea that we were going to record an album very quickly this time, we had already some demos ready. We wanted to go into the studio, record and mix the album and then distribute it directly.\" Unlike the two previous albums, which were produced with Danish producer Joshua, \"En plats i solen\" is produced with Swedish producer Stefan Boman who worked with the band on \"Du &amp; jag d\u00f6den\" (2005). The band also released the first single from the forthcoming album, featuring the two A-sides \"Gamla Ullevi\" and \"Skisser f\u00f6r sommaren\".\nKent embarked on a summer tour in Sweden, Norway, Finland and Denmark, starting at the Peace &amp; Love Festival in Sweden and finishing on 8 August at the Skanderborg Festival in Denmark. On 1 September 2010, the band won a Rockbj\u00f6rnen Award for Best Live Band.\n\"Jag \u00e4r inte r\u00e4dd f\u00f6r m\u00f6rkret\" and \"Tigerdrottningen\" (2012\u20132015).\nOn 22 June 2011, Kent signed a recording contract with Universal Music in Sweden, after sixteen years with BMG and later Sony Music. The band's manager, Martin Roos, said in a press release: \"After sixteen years with BMG/Sony Music it feels great with a new beginning, and Universal Music gave us the best offer.\" In April 2012, Kent released their tenth studio album, \"Jag \u00e4r inte r\u00e4dd f\u00f6r m\u00f6rkret\" (Swedish for \"I Am Not Afraid of the Dark\"). It was recorded in France. Three singles were released from the album, \"999\", \"Jag ser dig\" and \"T\u00e4nd p\u00e5\". \"Jag \u00e4r inte r\u00e4dd f\u00f6r m\u00f6rkret\" is piano-based.\nDuring the summer, Kent toured Scandinavia, first with a short spring tour at the end of May (24 May\u20132 June) and then at festivals and own concerts in Sweden, Norway, Finland and Denmark during June, July and August. During this summer tour they started their concerts with an old unreleased song named \"\u00d6gon\" from the early 1990s, with a new version of the song. The song was included in the 2008 compilation \"Box 1991\u20132008\", but only as a demo.\nIn December 2012, Kent announced on their Twitter account that they were to release a track on New Year's Day called \"Ingen kunde r\u00f6ra oss\".\nOn 29 November 2013, Kent went to Los Angeles and recorded their eleventh studio album, Berg said in an interview: \"We wanted to do this kind of Fleetwood Mac thing and go to LA and dream under the sun. Now the dollar is so low, in addition \u2013 all the big studios are empty, no one uses them anymore.\" The first single \"La Belle Epoque\" was released on 12 March 2014 and the album \"Tigerdrottningen\" was released on 30 April. The album features a lot of female backing vocals and duets. During the month of May Kent went on a small club tour in Norway, Sweden and Denmark. In the summer of 2014 Kent held their own festival called Kentfest in Gothenburg and Stockholm. They also played at festivals in Denmark and Norway.\nIn 2015, Kent played at three festivals in Scandinavia, Joakim Berg announced at the Br\u00e5valla festival that they were going to record a new album that fall. That year, Kent celebrated the 20th anniversary of their debut album, \"Kent\", by releasing the band's first 10 albums on vinyl.\n\"D\u00e5 som nu f\u00f6r alltid\" and the final tour (2016).\nIn February 2016, Kent was elected to Swedish Music Hall of Fame. On 13 March 2016, the band posted a cryptic video titled \"D\u00e5 Som Nu F\u00f6r Alltid\" on their YouTube channel where the video ends with the text \"Last album, last tour\". On 14 March, it was announced that \"D\u00e5 som nu f\u00f6r alltid\" (Swedish for \"Then as Now Forever\") would be their last album, and that they would make a final tour in the Nordic countries, with the last concert in Stockholm in December 2016. \"Egoist\" was announced as the album's first single, and it was released on 14 March. However, on 17 April 2016, Kent announced the track listing which omitted \"Egoist\". Instead, \"Vi \u00e4r inte l\u00e4ngre d\u00e4r\" was released as the album's first single on 3 May. The album \"D\u00e5 som nu f\u00f6r alltid\" was released on 20 May 2016. On 24 August, it was announced the compilation album \"Best of\" would be released on 16 September 2016, containing 20 previously released tracks and four new studio recordings. For \"D\u00e5 som nu f\u00f6r alltid\" the band won two Swedish Grammy Awards, Best Album and Best Rock.\nFrom the spring of 2015 until the band's very last concert, Per Sinding-Larsen followed Kent's last time together to record a documentary called \"Vi \u00e4r inte l\u00e4ngre d\u00e4r (Sista \u00e5ren med Kent)\", which was shown on SVT in two parts on the 26 and 27 December 2016. The documentary revealed, among other things, that Harri M\u00e4nty was fired from the band due to excessive partying and not that he left off his own accord as has been previously stated.\nPost-Kent activities (2017\u2013present).\nAfter 2016, Joakim Berg has written and produced songs with a number of different artists, such as Veronica Maggio, Ghost, Smith &amp; Thell and Lars Winnerb\u00e4ck. In May 2022, Berg released a solo album, \"Jag forts\u00e4tter gl\u00f6mma\". He has also worked with his former bandmate Martin Sk\u00f6ld after the dissolution of the band.\nIn April 2024, Berg said on a podcast that the band had discussed the possibility for a live reunion. On 18 October 2024, Kent announced three concerts in Stockholm's 3Arena in March 2025. Due to the tickets quickly selling out, three additional concerts were announced, which also all sold out. The six concerts took place on 21-23 March and 25-27 March 2025. A total of 239,953 people attended the concerts, giving Kent the audience record for a single artist in 3Arena. Berg emphasised onstage that Kent would not reunite again following these concerts.\nMusical style.\nKent have been grouped with various genres, including alternative rock, indie rock, pop rock, synth-pop, pop, and arena rock.\nKent has been referred to as Sweden's biggest rock band, but has always put pop melodies in focus. Kent's biggest change in musical style came with the band's seventh studio album \"Tillbaka till samtiden\", which marked a clear shift from alternative rock to synthpop/rock.\nBand members.\nMembers\nTouring musicians\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\nAwards and nominations.\nKent have won 22 Grammis awards (the Swedish equivalent of the Grammy Awards) and 12 Rockbj\u00f6rnen awards.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61304", "revid": "1907991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61304", "title": "Lawrence", "text": "Lawrence may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61305", "revid": "21082093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61305", "title": "Forensic palynology", "text": "Forensic application of the study of particulate matter\nForensic palynology is a subdiscipline of palynology (the study of pollen grains, spores, and other palynomorphs), that aims to prove or disprove a relationship among objects, people, and places that may pertain to both criminal and civil cases. Pollen can reveal where a person or object has been, because regions of the world, countries, and even different parts of a single garden will have a distinctive pollen assemblage. Pollen evidence can also reveal the season in which a particular object picked up the pollen. Recent research into forensic palynology has seen advancements in DNA barcoding from pollen, to the level of singular pollen molecules, allowing DNA profiles to be created from singular palynomorphs, streamlining the efficiency and accuracy of taxonomic identification.\nPalynology is the study of palynomorphs \u2013 microscopic structures of both animal and plant origin that are resistant to decay. This includes spermatophyte pollen, as well as spores (fungi, bryophytes, and ferns), dinoflagellates, and various other organic microorganisms \u2013 both living and fossilized. There are a variety of ways in which the study of these microscopic, walled particles can be applied to criminal forensics.\nIn areas such as New Zealand, where the demand for this field is high, forensic palynology has been used as evidence in many different case types that range anywhere from non-violent to extremely violent crimes. Pollen has been used to trace activity at mass graves in Bosnia, pinpoint the scene of a crime, and catch a burglar who brushed against a \"Hypericum\" bush during a crime. Because pollen has distinct morphology and is relatively indestructible, it is likely to adhere to a variety of surfaces often without notice and has even become a part of ongoing research into forensic bullet coatings.\nPresent status.\nForensic palynology is an evolving forensic science application mostly utilized in countries such as New Zealand, Australia, and the United Kingdom. It is relatively \"small, disparate, and fragmented\" compared to the other approaches, thus, there is no thorough guide to achieve the best practice in forensic palynology. Moreover, there is a limit in forensic palynologists as most skilled palynologists do not enter the forensic palynology field. As becoming a Forensic Palynologist requires rigorous training and education, one must attain a PhD with sufficient background in studies such as forensic science, botany, ecology, geography, and climatology. Most importantly they must receive training in the field of quaternary science. Recently however, there has been expansive research into areas that have yet to well documented, such as the study that did research on the effects that an arid climate had on pollen analytics that took place in southeast Spain. This study not only expanded the use of forensic palynology into new parts of the world that have not yet been introduced to this science, but also collected results that outline a proper method for pollen spectra collecting that is effective in arid conditions. Another recent study did research in Bolivia to study the pollen assemblage in high altitude soils, this study also created a forensic database for uses in non-seasonal soil. This database creation is allowing forensic palynology to be used in a more broad area now, as data for both high altitude pollen assemblage and non-seasonal soil data has been collected. Another recent advancement in forensic palynology is the massive expansion of the largest pollen database on the internet, PalDat. The University of Vienna and AGES worked to integrate over 2000 datasets consisting of detailed methods for pollen analysis including the use of high resolution light microscopy micrographs of hydrated pollen, and polarity ratios to determine the shape and aperture position of a pollen grain.\nDuties.\nIn terms of criminal investigation, forensic palynologist services are requested from cases such as forgery, rape, homicide, genocide, terrorism, drug dealing, assault, and robbery. It usually consist of a single individual who works with the polynomial case. Of course, the palynologist could still consult other professionals. Furthermore, the palynologist should be given significant information as there is only one person handling the analysis of the samples. Important duties to note is that they ensure that all paperwork is dated, signed, filed and archived in order to maintain good records. Forensic Palynologists usually visit the crime scene to survey the vegetation. For example, identify plants and their characteristics and qualities ( size, vigor...) and obtain plant samples to allow for analysis like ground sampling. Geography analysis including a survey of the topography, altitude, climate, and geology of the area is also required, as all of these factors influence the assemblage and composition of palynomorphs. Scrubbing, scraping, washing is essential for retrieval of palynomorphs from various materials. And utilize other methods like police photographers, cartographers, and botanists. It is vital for the Forensic Palynologist to visit the crime scene before the Crime Science Investigators (CSI) or Scenes of crime Officers (SOCOs) to avoid disturbance of environmental evidence and contamination.\nAdvantages.\nPollen and similar spores are generally less than 50 microns across, resulting in their easy and unnoticeable transportation.\nPollen grains have a variety of shapes, sizes, colors, structures, and numbers identification keys exist as a reference. Large-scale collections of pollen specimens that reside in museums and university herbaria also serve as a resource for forensic palynologists to identify and classify the samples they collect. There are also many online databases that consist of thousands of records and identification methods for palynomorphs that are accessible worldwide.\nA sample of pollen from a crime scene can help to identify a specific plant species that may have had contact with a victim, or point to evidence that does not ecologically belong in the area. A pollen assemblage is a sample of pollen with a variety of plant species represented. Identifying those species and their relative frequency can point to a specific area or time of year. This could aid in the determination of whether the scene where the pollen was found was the primary scene or secondary scene. Pollen is made in great numbers, by a large variety of plants, and it is designed to be dispersed (either via wind, insect, or another method) throughout the immediate environment. Pollen can also be found in soil, clothing, hair, drugs, stomach contents, ropes, and rock which are places where it would be difficult for the suspect to remove because of pollen's adhesion properties. In some cases, where the pollen of a plant is absent, fungi and fungal spores may be able to detect a plant's presence at the site. There have been cases where the presence of rarely reported fungi and fungal spores have helped identify information in forensic cases. Pollen has been found inside counterfeit pharmaceuticals that have been transported across the world, the presence of the pollen can be used to trace these illegal drugs back to their manufacturing region and even factory.\nDisadvantages.\nOne of the main disadvantages in this field is the lack of trained specialists. As of 2008, there are no academic centers or training facilities for the use of pollen in forensics in the U.S. This is crucial because of the expertise required to identify palynomorphs and to apply the data to geolocation information. Many things could go wrong and invalidate any samples collected, especially if the personnel handling them is not experienced. On the subject of experience, contamination is another major problem that can invalidate the use of a sample as evidence; therefore, it is important that samples are collected early on with collection sites identified depending on the case.\nLimited access to international databases can also prove to be an issue when it comes time for the analyst to identify pollen evidence to a specific family or genus of plants. Currently, a database from Austria called PalDat exists but there are no known databases to exist in North America. However, PalDat is internationally accessible and data from around the world has been published.\nAnother disadvantage is in the form of the lack of history and therefore acceptance in the forensic setting and the court of law. Forensic palynology is not used in many countries and the application and methodologies have not been reviewed extensively in the court as this methodology has only been around for 50 years and only in some countries. This means that forensic palynology evidence is rarely submitted due to lack of history in the courts, and lack of application in most countries.\nMethods.\nSample collection.\nBecause pollen can be easily picked up by anyone, it is important that pollen samples are collected as soon as possible to prevent contamination from outside sources. Samples then need to be prepared and placed on slides in order to fully be safe from contamination. The process of preparing the samples and identifying them is time-consuming. When collecting a sample, it should be paired with site surveys and photos of the scene to provide context for later uses. For example, if the pollen evidence is used in court, then the additional context would be useful.\nSample collection methods will vary depending on the case investigation and on the collector. Due to the lack of palynologists in the forensic field, other forensic scientists that are present may have to collect the samples. This raises issues in terms of the quality of the sample, since collection sites for the sample should be determined depending on the case. Discussion with the investigation team is necessary in order to establish the best sampling method.\nWhen collection sites have been determined, samples can be retrieved with clean instruments and placed into tightly sealed, sterile containers. Examples are \"sterile zip-lock plastic bags, or screw-top plastic (in preference to glass) containers.\" After each sample, instruments should be thoroughly cleaned or replaced to prevent contamination. In cases, where collection is by hand, gloves should be used and replaced after each sample. Samples should be labeled and sample history documentation should be maintained to keep track of the people who have had access to the sample.\nAnalysis.\nAnalyzing the samples, once the palynomorphs have been extracted, will allow for identification, which can then be used in a forensic case to relate a person or object to a crime scene, or even to determine whether the scene at which the pollen was found was the primary or the secondary scene.\nSamples are chemically processed with a mix of acids, sodium hydroxide, acetic anhydride with water washes in between. They are then neutralized, and the extracts are stained and mounted onto slides for microscopic examination. This helps in identification with the help of available reference collections to make comparisons on the pollen's characteristics. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) has been used traditionally since the 1970s for primary identification of palynomorphs, but is very time-consuming, tedious, and not ideal for routine analysis.\nCompared to the SEM, semi-automated pollen grain imaging techniques such as Transmitted Light Microscopy (TLM), Widefield fluorescent method, and Structured illumination (Apotome) were found to have a higher speed and accuracy when it came to the identification of pollen spores.\nDNA Barcoding is another method used to differentiate between pollen grains by comparing their DNA sequences. A pollen grain of 10 micrometers in length is required. Once the sample is collected and prepared, genetic markers are placed, then the DNA is isolated, and finally the DNA is sequenced, usually through high throughout sequencing (HTS). HTS is faster and less expensive than traditional methods for DNA barcoding.\nCase examples.\nAustria, 1959.\nOne of the earliest document cases in which pollen plays a key role took place in Austria. A man went missing, and was presumed murdered, but no body was found. The authorities had arrested a suspect, who had motive for the murder, but did not have a body or confession, and the case stalled. A search of the suspect's belongings yielded a pair of muddy boots. The mud was sampled and given to Wilhelm Klaus, at the University of Vienna's Paleobotany Department, for analysis. Dr. Klaus found modern pollen from a variety of species, including spruce, willow, and alder. He also found fossilized hickory pollen grains, from a species long extinct. There was only one area of the Danube River Valley that hosted those living plants, and had Miocene-aged rock deposits that would contain the fossilized species. When the suspect was presented with this information, he willingly confessed and lead authorities to the sites of both the murder and the body, both of which were inside the region indicated by Dr. Klaus.\nUnited States, 1970.\nThe first cases that involved forensic palynology in the United States was in 1970, where Honeybee pollination studies were issued. During this time honey pollen analysis began growing as the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) ensured beekeepers a higher world market price for their honey, subject to the condition that the honey was produced on USA soil. Thus, honey samples were sent for pollen analysis to confirm whether the honey was produced in the USA. Generally, most of the cases during this time involved lawsuits concerning beekeepers. For example, a Michigan beekeeper was suspected of importing beehives from the southeastern USA that weren't inspected for mites. This led to the USDA inspecting honey samples where it was concluded that they were imported from the Southeastern region of USA. Due to that the honey contained floral types common to the Southeastern region and not found in Michigan.\nUnited Kingdom, 1993.\nAn example concerning Forensic Palynology in the United Kingdom, which took place during 1993, handled by Patricia Wiltshire. It involved a murder case in which the body was laid on soil that preserved pollen. Wiltshire then found traces of walnut pollen in the soil and suspect's shoes, however, the walnut pollen found was unusual as there was no walnut site nearby. However, It was later discovered that a walnut tree was cut down thirty years before and the walnut pollen remained. the pollen was then analyzed and linked to the suspect in the crime scene. Thus, the walnut pollen provided a significant role solving the case.\nNew Zealand, 2005.\nAfter a home invasion, two burglars brushed past a \"Hypericum\" bush outside of the house. One of the burglars was brought in as a suspect, but all evidence was circumstantial, and the man did not confess. Analysis of his clothes revealed the \"Hypericum\" pollen. The presence of pollen is ubiquitous, but in this case, the pollen was clumped onto the clothing (rather than dusted) and did not seem to be simply the result of air dispersal. It was ultimately concluded that \"the clothes had so much \"Hypericum\" pollen on them that they had to have been in direct and intimate contact with a flowering bush.\"\nUnited States, 2015.\nA modern application of forensic palynology occurred in 2015, in the city of Boston, Massachusetts. A body of a young female child was discovered by law enforcement in the Boston Harbour, but no identifying features remained as the body was in the late stages of decomposition. Investigators submitted samples taken from the clothes of the victim, a blanket found with the body, as well as a small amount of recovered hair to the U.S. Customs and Border Protection directorate laboratory in Houston, Texas, for pollen analysis. The report from the submitted samples provided investigators with information they could use to identify the unknown victim.\nThe pollen assemblage created from the submitted samples indicated the victim was in the north-eastern United States before her death. The individual taxa of plant species observed in the assemblage also indicated that the victim lived in, or spent much of her time in, a developed, urban environment. The assemblage also captured pollen of the Lebanese cedar tree (Cedrus libani), native to the Eastern Mediterranean region of Europe. The species of cedar observed in the assemblage was thought by investigators to most likely be from an ornamental piece in a park or other conservation area. This is when the investigators discovered individuals of the Lebanese cedar tree in the Arnold Arboretum, a public park that is a part of Harvard University.\nInvestigators then asked around the neighborhoods surrounding the arboretum, and a tip led them to a resident who, after questioning, admitted that her boyfriend at the time had abused the child, which resulted in the child's death. The man who murdered the child was sentenced to serve a minimum of 20 years for second degree murder. The mother's involvement in the crime is not reported, though she served 2 years probation for accessory after a plea deal for providing information about her then boyfriend who had committed the act.\nArgentina, 2023.\nA man was reported missing to the local police in Buenos Aires, Argentina. The family reported a possible suspect due to the fact the missing person and the suspect had intense arguments not long before his disappearance. The police searched the suspect's house and found bloodstains on clothing items under the bed. They then took clothing items of the suspect for evidence analysis and soil samples from the garden of the suspect's house. 25 days later, the police found the missing person's body 1000 meters off a coastline. Forensic mycology and palynology was then applied to analyze the palynomorphs and fungal species, as soil samples from the location of the corpse were analyzed. Samples were first acquired by scarping the surface area and then filtration and acetolysis was conducted to isolate the pollen samples. The analysis of the suspect's clothing was then compared to the analysis of the corpse and the surrounding area. Results indicated that the corpse had a palynomorph composition of marine species, the quantity and exact species of which were all documented. The soil from the suspect's house had a continental palynomorph composition that was also fully documented and recorded. The suspect's bloodstained clothing had the same marine palynomorph composition as the body and the surrounding area. Soil samples in the suspect's car and under the soles of the suspect's shoes also contained the same palynomorph composition as the coastline area where the body was found. Along with other forensic evidence, the suspect was found guilty and the use of forensic palynology was used to help close this case."}
{"id": "61309", "revid": "43720392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61309", "title": "Mosaic", "text": "Image made from small colored tiles\nA mosaic () is a pattern or image made of small regular or irregular pieces of colored stone, glass or ceramic, held in place by plaster/mortar, and covering a surface. Mosaics are often used as floor and wall decoration, and were particularly popular in the Ancient Roman world.\nMosaic today includes not just murals and pavements, but also artwork, hobby crafts, and industrial and construction forms.\nMosaics have a long history, starting in Mesopotamia in the 3rd millennium BC. Pebble mosaics were made in Tiryns in Mycenean Greece; mosaics with patterns and pictures became widespread in classical times, both in Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome. Early Christian basilicas from the 4th century onwards were decorated with wall and ceiling mosaics. Mosaic art flourished in the Byzantine Empire from the 6th to the 15th centuries; that tradition was adopted by the Norman Kingdom of Sicily in the 12th century, by the eastern-influenced Republic of Venice, and among the Rus. Mosaic fell out of fashion in the Renaissance, though artists like Raphael continued to practice the old technique. Roman and Byzantine influence led Jewish artists to decorate 5th and 6th century synagogues in the Middle East with floor mosaics.\nFigurative mosaic, but mostly without human figures, was widely used on religious buildings and palaces in early Islamic art, including Islam's first great religious building, the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, and the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus. Such mosaics went out of fashion in the Islamic world after the 8th century, except for geometrical patterns in techniques such as zellij, which remain popular in many areas.\nModern mosaics are made by artists and craftspeople around the world. Many materials other than traditional stone, ceramic tesserae, enameled and stained glass may be employed, including shells, beads, charms, chains, gears, coins, and pieces of costume jewelry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMosaic materials.\nTraditional mosaics are made of small cubes of roughly square pieces of stone or hand made glass enamel of different colours, known as tesserae. Some of the earliest mosaics were made of natural pebbles, originally used to reinforce floors.\nMosaic skinning (covering objects with mosaic glass) is done with thin enameled glass and opaque stained glass. Modern mosaic art is made from any material in any size ranging from carved stone, bottle caps, and found objects.\nHistory.\nThe earliest known examples of mosaics made of different materials were found at a temple building in Abra, Mesopotamia, and are dated to the second half of 3rd millennium BC. They consist of pieces of colored stones, shells and ivory. Excavations at Susa and Chogha Zanbil show evidence of the first glazed tiles, dating from around 1500 BC. However, mosaic patterns were not used until the times of Sassanid Empire and Roman influence.\nGreek and Roman.\nBronze Age pebble mosaics have been found at Tiryns; mosaics of the 4th century BC are found in the Macedonian palace-city of Aegae, and the 4th-century BC mosaic of The Beauty of Durr\u00ebs discovered in Durr\u00ebs, Albania in 1916, is an early figural example; the Greek figural style was mostly formed in the 3rd century BC. Mythological subjects, or scenes of hunting or other pursuits of the wealthy, were popular as the centrepieces of a larger geometric design, with strongly emphasized borders.\nPliny the Elder mentions the artist Sosus of Pergamon by name, describing his mosaics of the food left on a floor after a feast and of a group of doves drinking from a bowl.\nBoth of these themes were widely copied.\nGreek figural mosaics could have been copied or adapted paintings, a far more prestigious artform, and the style was enthusiastically adopted by the Romans so that large floor mosaics enriched the floors of Hellenistic villas and Roman dwellings from Britain to Dura-Europos.\nMost recorded names of Roman mosaic workers are Greek, suggesting they dominated high quality work across the empire; no doubt most ordinary craftsmen were slaves. Splendid mosaic floors are found in Roman villas across North Africa, in places such as Carthage, and can still be seen in the extensive collection in Bardo Museum in Tunis, Tunisia.\nThere were two main techniques in Greco-Roman mosaic: \"opus vermiculatum\" used tiny \"tesserae\", typically cubes of 4 millimeters or less, and was produced in workshops in relatively small panels which were transported to the site glued to some temporary support. The tiny \"tesserae\" allowed very fine detail, and an approach to the illusionism of painting. Often small panels called \"emblemata\" were inserted into walls or as the highlights of larger floor-mosaics in coarser work. The normal technique was \"opus tessellatum\", using larger tesserae, which was laid on site. There was a distinct native Italian style using black on a white background, which was no doubt cheaper than fully coloured work.\nIn Rome, Nero and his architects used mosaics to cover some surfaces of walls and ceilings in the \"Domus Aurea\", built 64 AD, and wall mosaics are also found at Pompeii and neighbouring sites. However it seems that it was not until the Christian era that figural wall mosaics became a major form of artistic expression. The Roman church of Santa Costanza, which served as a mausoleum for one or more of the Imperial family, has both religious mosaic and decorative secular ceiling mosaics on a round vault, which probably represent the style of contemporary palace decoration.\nThe mosaics of the Villa Romana del Casale near Piazza Armerina in Sicily are the largest collection of late Roman mosaics \"in situ\" in the world, and are protected as a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The large \"villa rustica\", which was probably owned by Emperor Maximian, was built largely in the early 4th century. The mosaics were covered and protected for 700 years by a landslide that occurred in the 12th Century. The most important pieces are the \"Circus Scene\", the 64m long \"Great Hunting Scene\", the \"Little Hunt\", the \"Labours of Hercules\" and the famous \"Bikini Girls\", showing women undertaking a range of sporting activities in garments that resemble 20th Century bikinis. The peristyle, the imperial apartments and the thermae were also decorated with ornamental and mythological mosaics. Other important examples of Roman mosaic art in Sicily were unearthed on the Piazza Vittoria in Palermo where two houses were discovered. The most important scenes there depicted are an Orpheus mosaic, \"Alexander the Great's Hunt\" and the \"Four Seasons\".\nIn 1913 the Zliten mosaic, a Roman mosaic famous for its many scenes from gladiatorial contests, hunting and everyday life, was discovered in the Libyan town of Zliten. In 2000 archaeologists working in Leptis Magna, Libya, uncovered a 30\u00a0ft length of five colorful mosaics created during the 1st or 2nd century AD. The mosaics show a warrior in combat with a deer, four young men wrestling a wild bull to the ground, and a gladiator resting in a state of fatigue, staring at his slain opponent. The mosaics decorated the walls of a cold plunge pool in a bath house within a Roman villa. The gladiator mosaic is noted by scholars as one of the finest examples of mosaic art ever seen \u2013 a \"masterpiece comparable in quality with the Alexander Mosaic in Pompeii.\"\nA specific genre of Roman mosaic was called \"asaroton\" (Greek for \"unswept floor\"). It depicted in \"trompe-l'\u0153il\" style the feast leftovers on the floors of wealthy houses.\nZoroastrian Persia.\nTilework had been known there for about two thousand years when cultural exchange between Sassanid Empire and Romans influenced Persian artists to create mosaic patterns. Shapur I decorated his palace with tile compositions depicting dancers, musicians, courtesans, etc. This was the only significant example of figurative Persian mosaic, which became prohibited after Arab conquest and arrival of Islam.\nChristian mosaics.\nEarly Christian art.\nWith the building of Christian basilicas in the late 4th century, wall and ceiling mosaics were adopted for Christian uses. The earliest examples of Christian basilicas have not survived, but the mosaics of Santa Constanza and Santa Pudenziana, both from the 4th century, still exist. The winemaking putti in the ambulatory of Santa Constanza still follow the classical tradition in that they represent the feast of Bacchus, which symbolizes transformation or change, and are thus appropriate for a mausoleum, the original function of this building. In another great Constantinian basilica, the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem the original mosaic floor with typical Roman geometric motifs is partially preserved. The so-called Tomb of the Julii, near the crypt beneath St Peter's Basilica, is a 4th-century vaulted tomb with wall and ceiling mosaics that are given Christian interpretations. The Rotunda of Galerius in Thessaloniki, converted into a Christian church during the course of the 4th century, was embellished with very high artistic quality mosaics. Only fragments survive of the original decoration, especially a band depicting saints with hands raised in prayer, in front of complex architectural fantasies.\nIn the following century Ravenna, the capital of the Western Roman Empire, became the center of late Roman mosaic art (see details in Ravenna section). Milan also served as the capital of the western empire in the 4th century. In the St Aquilinus Chapel of the Basilica of San Lorenzo, mosaics executed in the late 4th and early 5th centuries depict Christ with the Apostles and the Abduction of Elijah; these mosaics are outstanding for their bright colors, naturalism and adherence to the classical canons of order and proportion. The surviving apse mosaic of the Basilica of Sant'Ambrogio, which shows Christ enthroned between Saint Gervasius and Saint Protasius and angels before a golden background date back to the 5th and to the 8th century, although it was restored many times later. The baptistery of the basilica, which was demolished in the 15th century, had a vault covered with gold-leaf tesserae, large quantities of which were found when the site was excavated. In the small shrine of San Vittore in ciel d'oro, now a chapel of Sant'Ambrogio, every surface is covered with mosaics from the second half of the 5th century. Saint Victor is depicted in the center of the golden dome, while figures of saints are shown on the walls before a blue background. The low spandrels give space for the symbols of the four Evangelists.\nAlbingaunum was the main Roman port of Liguria. The octagonal baptistery of the town was decorated in the 5th century with high quality blue and white mosaics representing the Apostles. The surviving remains are somewhat fragmented. Massilia remained a thriving port and a Christian spiritual center in Southern Gaul where favourable societal and economic conditions ensured the survival of mosaic art in the 5th and 6th centuries. The large baptistery, once the grandest building of its kind in Western Europe, had a geometric floor mosaic which is only known from 19th century descriptions. Other parts of the episcopal complex were also decorated with mosaics as new finds, that were unearthed in the 2000s, attest. The funerary basilica of Saint Victor, built in a quarry outside the walls, was decorated with mosaics but only a small fragment with blue and green scrolls survived on the intrados of an arch (the basilica was later buried under a medieval abbey).\nA mosaic pavement depicting humans, animals and plants from the original 4th-century cathedral of Aquileia has survived in the later medieval church. This mosaic adopts pagan motifs such as the Nilotic scene, but behind the traditional naturalistic content is Christian symbolism such as the ichthys. The 6th-century early Christian basilicas of Sant' Eufemia and Santa Maria delle Grazie in Grado also have mosaic floors.\nRavenna.\nIn the 5th-century Ravenna, the capital of the Western Roman Empire, became the center of late Roman mosaic art. The Mausoleum of Galla Placidia was decorated with mosaics of high artistic quality in 425\u2013430. The vaults of the small, cross-shaped structure are clad with mosaics on blue background. The central motif above the crossing is a golden cross in the middle of the starry sky. Another great building established by Galla Placidia was the church of San Giovanni Evangelista. She erected it in fulfillment of a vow that she made having escaped from a deadly storm in 425 on the sea voyage from Constantinople to Ravenna. The mosaics depicted the storm, portraits of members of the western and eastern imperial family and the bishop of Ravenna, Peter Chrysologus. They are known only from Renaissance sources because almost all were destroyed in 1747.\nOstrogoths kept alive the tradition in the 6th century, as the mosaics of the Arian Baptistry, Baptistry of Neon, Archbishop's Chapel, and the earlier phase mosaics in the Basilica of San Vitale and Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo testify.\nAfter 539, Ravenna was reconquered by the Romans in the form of the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine Empire) and became the seat of the Exarchate of Ravenna. The greatest development of Christian mosaics unfolded in the second half of the 6th century. Outstanding examples of Byzantine mosaic art are the later phase mosaics in the Basilica of San Vitale and Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo. The mosaic depicting Emperor Saint Justinian I and Empress Theodora in the Basilica of San Vitale were executed shortly after the Byzantine conquest. The mosaics of the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe were made around 549. The anti-Arian theme is obvious in the apse mosaic of San Michele in Affricisco, executed in 545\u2013547 (largely destroyed; the remains in Berlin).\nThe last example of Byzantine mosaics in Ravenna was commissioned by bishop Reparatus between 673 and 679 in the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare in Classe. The mosaic panel in the apse showing the bishop with Emperor Constantine IV is obviously an imitation of the Justinian panel in San Vitale.\nButrint.\nThe mosaic pavement of the Vrina Plain basilica of Butrint, Albania appear to pre-date that of the Baptistery by almost a generation, dating to the last quarter of the 5th or the first years of the 6th century. The mosaic displays a variety of motifs including sea-creatures, birds, terrestrial beasts, fruits, flowers, trees and abstracts \u2013 designed to depict a terrestrial paradise of God's creation. Superimposed on this scheme are two large tablets, tabulae ansatae, carrying inscriptions. A variety of fish, a crab, a lobster, shrimps, mushrooms, flowers, a stag and two cruciform designs surround the smaller of the two inscriptions, which reads: In fulfilment of the vow (prayer) of those whose names God knows. This anonymous dedicatory inscription is a public demonstration of the benefactors' humility and an acknowledgement of God's omniscience.\nThe abundant variety of natural life depicted in the Butrint mosaics celebrates the richness of God's creation; some elements also have specific connotations. The kantharos vase and vine refer to the eucharist, the symbol of the sacrifice of Christ leading to salvation. Peacocks are symbols of paradise and resurrection; shown eating or drinking from the vase they indicate the route to eternal life. Deer or stags were commonly used as images of the faithful aspiring to Christ: \"As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God.\" Water-birds and fish and other sea-creatures can indicate baptism as well as the members of the Church who are christened.\nLate Antique and Early Medieval Rome.\nChristian mosaic art also flourished in Rome, gradually declining as conditions became more difficult in the Early Middle Ages. 5th century mosaics can be found over the triumphal arch and in the nave of the basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore. The 27 surviving panels of the nave are the most important mosaic cycle in Rome of this period. Two other important 5th century mosaics are lost but we know them from 17th-century drawings. In the apse mosaic of Sant'Agata dei Goti (462\u2013472, destroyed in 1589) Christ was seated on a globe with the twelve Apostles flanking him, six on either side. At Sant'Andrea in Catabarbara (468\u2013483, destroyed in 1686) Christ appeared in the center, flanked on either side by three Apostles. Four streams flowed from the little mountain supporting Christ. The original 5th-century apse mosaic of the Santa Sabina was replaced by a very similar fresco by Taddeo Zuccari in 1559. The composition probably remained unchanged: Christ flanked by male and female saints, seated on a hill while lambs drinking from a stream at its feet. All three mosaics had a similar iconography.\n6th-century pieces are rare in Rome but the mosaics inside the triumphal arch of the basilica of San Lorenzo fuori le mura belong to this era. The \"Chapel of Ss. Primo e Feliciano\" in Santo Stefano Rotondo has very interesting and rare mosaics from the 7th century. This chapel was built by Pope Theodore I as a family burial place.\nIn the 7th\u20139th centuries Rome fell under the influence of Byzantine art, noticeable on the mosaics of Santa Prassede, Santa Maria in Domnica, Sant'Agnese fuori le Mura, Santa Cecilia in Trastevere, Santi Nereo e Achilleo and the San Venanzio chapel of San Giovanni in Laterano. The great dining hall of Pope Leo III in the Lateran Palace was also decorated with mosaics. They were all destroyed later except for one example, the so-called Triclinio Leoniano of which a copy was made in the 18th century. Another great work of Pope Leo, the apse mosaic of Santa Susanna, depicted Christ with the Pope and Charlemagne on one side, and SS. Susanna and Felicity on the other. It was plastered over during a renovation in 1585. Pope Paschal I (817\u2013824) embellished the church of Santo Stefano del Cacco with an apsidal mosaic which depicted the pope with a model of the church (destroyed in 1607).\nThe fragment of an 8th-century mosaic, the Epiphany is one of the very rare remaining pieces of the medieval decoration of Old St. Peter's Basilica, demolished in the late 16th century. The precious fragment is kept in the sacristy of Santa Maria in Cosmedin. It proves the high artistic quality of the destroyed St. Peter's mosaics.\nByzantine mosaics.\nMosaics were more central to Byzantine culture than to that of Western Europe. Byzantine church interiors were generally covered with golden mosaics. Mosaic art flourished in the Byzantine Empire from the 6th to the 15th centuries. The majority of Byzantine mosaics were destroyed without trace during wars and conquests, but the surviving remains still form a fine collection.\nThe great buildings of Emperor Justinian like the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople, the Nea Church in Jerusalem and the rebuilt Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem were certainly embellished with mosaics but none of these survived.\nImportant fragments survived from the mosaic floor of the Great Palace of Constantinople which was commissioned during Justinian's reign. The figures, animals, plants all are entirely classical but they are scattered before a plain background. The portrait of a moustached man, probably a Gothic chieftain, is considered the most important surviving mosaic of the Justinianian age. The so-called \"small sekreton\" of the palace was built during Justin II's reign around 565\u2013577. Some fragments survive from the mosaics of this vaulted room. The vine scroll motifs are very similar to those in the Santa Constanza and they still closely follow the Classical tradition. There are remains of floral decoration in the Church of the Acheiropoietos in Thessaloniki (5th\u20136th centuries).\nIn the 6th century, Ravenna, the capital of Byzantine Italy, became the center of mosaic making. Istria also boasts some important examples from this era. The Euphrasian Basilica in Parentium was built in the middle of the 6th century and decorated with mosaics depicting the Theotokos flanked by angels and saints.\nFragments remain from the mosaics of the Church of Santa Maria Formosa in Pola. These pieces were made during the 6th century by artists from Constantinople. Their pure Byzantine style is different from the contemporary Ravennate mosaics.\nVery few early Byzantine mosaics survived the Iconoclastic destruction of the 8th century. Among the rare examples are the 6th-century \"Christ in majesty\" (or \"Ezekiel's Vision\") mosaic in the apse of the Church of Hosios David in Thessaloniki that was hidden behind mortar during those dangerous times. Nine mosaic panels in the Hagios Demetrios Church, which were made between 634 and 730, also escaped destruction. Unusually almost all represent Saint Demetrius of Thessaloniki, often with suppliants before him. This iconoclasm was almost certainly because of nearby Muslims' beliefs.\nIn the Iconoclastic era, figural mosaics were also condemned as idolatry. The Iconoclastic churches were embellished with plain gold mosaics with only one great cross in the apse like the Hagia Irene in Constantinople (after 740). There were similar crosses in the apses of the Hagia Sophia Church in Thessaloniki and in the Church of the Dormition in Nicaea. The crosses were substituted with the image of the Theotokos in both churches after the victory of the Iconodules (787\u2013797 and in 8th\u20139th centuries respectively, the Dormition church was totally destroyed in 1922).\nA similar Theotokos image flanked by two archangels were made for the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople in 867. The dedication inscription says: \"The images which the impostors had cast down here pious emperors have again set up.\" In the 870s the so-called \"large sekreton\" of the Great Palace of Constantinople was decorated with the images of the four great iconodule patriarchs.\nThe post-Iconoclastic era was the heyday of Byzantine art with the most beautiful mosaics executed. The mosaics of the Macedonian Renaissance (867\u20131056) carefully mingled traditionalism with innovation. Constantinopolitan mosaics of this age followed the decoration scheme first used in Emperor Basil I's Nea Ekklesia. Not only this prototype was later totally destroyed but each surviving composition is battered so it is necessary to move from church to church to reconstruct the system.\nAn interesting set of Macedonian-era mosaics make up the decoration of the Hosios Loukas Monastery. In the narthex there is the Crucifixion, the Pantokrator and the Anastasis above the doors, while in the church the Theotokos (apse), Pentecost, scenes from Christ's life and ermit St Loukas (all executed before 1048). The scenes are treated with a minimum of detail and the panels are dominated with the gold setting.\nThe Nea Moni Monastery on Chios was established by Constantine Monomachos in 1043\u20131056. The exceptional mosaic decoration of the dome showing probably the nine orders of the angels was destroyed in 1822 but other panels survived (Theotokos with raised hands, four evangelists with seraphim, scenes from Christ's life and an interesting Anastasis where King Salomon bears resemblance to Constantine Monomachos). In comparison with Osios Loukas Nea Moni mosaics contain more figures, detail, landscape and setting.\nAnother great undertaking by Constantine Monomachos was the restoration of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem between 1042 and 1048. Nothing survived of the mosaics which covered the walls and the dome of the edifice but the Russian abbot Daniel, who visited Jerusalem in 1106\u20131107 left a description: \"Lively mosaics of the holy prophets are under the ceiling, over the tribune. The altar is surmounted by a mosaic image of Christ. In the main altar one can see the mosaic of the Exaltation of Adam. In the apse the Ascension of Christ. The Annunciation occupies the two pillars next to the altar.\"\nThe Daphni Monastery houses the best preserved complex of mosaics from the early Comnenan period (ca. 1100) when the austere and hieratic manner typical for the Macedonian epoch and represented by the awesome Christ Pantocrator image inside the dome, was metamorphosing into a more intimate and delicate style, of which \"The Angel before St Joachim\" \u2014 with its pastoral backdrop, harmonious gestures and pensive lyricism \u2013 is considered a superb example.\nThe 9th- and 10th-century mosaics of the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople are truly classical Byzantine artworks. The north and south tympana beneath the dome was decorated with figures of prophets, saints and patriarchs. Above the principal door from the narthex we can see an \"Emperor kneeling before Christ\" (late 9th or early 10th century). Above the door from the southwest vestibule to the narthex another mosaic shows the \"Theotokos with Justinian and Constantine\". Justinian I is offering the model of the church to Mary while Constantine is holding a model of the city in his hand. Both emperors are beardless \u2013 this is an example for conscious archaization as contemporary Byzantine rulers were bearded. A mosaic panel on the gallery shows \"Christ with Constantine Monomachos and Empress Zoe\" (1042\u20131055). The emperor gives a bulging money sack to Christ as a donation for the church.\nThe dome of the Hagia Sophia Church in Thessaloniki is decorated with an \"Ascension\" mosaic (c. 885). The composition resembles the great baptistries in Ravenna, with apostles standing between palms and Christ in the middle. The scheme is somewhat unusual as the standard post-Iconoclastic formula for domes contained only the image of the Pantokrator.\nThere are very few existing mosaics from the Komnenian period but this paucity must be due to accidents of survival and gives a misleading impression. The only surviving 12th-century mosaic work in Constantinople is a panel in Hagia Sophia depicting Emperor John II and Empress Eirene with the Theotokos (1122\u201334). The empress with her long braided hair and rosy cheeks is especially capturing. It must be a lifelike portrayal because Eirene was really a redhead as her original Hungarian name, \"Piroska\" shows. The adjacent portrait of Emperor Alexios I Komnenos on a pier (from 1122) is similarly personal. The imperial mausoleum of the Komnenos dynasty, the Pantokrator Monastery was certainly decorated with great mosaics but these were later destroyed. The lack of Komnenian mosaics outside the capital is even more apparent. There is only a \"Communion of the Apostles\" in the apse of the cathedral of Serres.\nA striking technical innovation of the Komnenian period was the production of very precious, miniature mosaic icons. In these icons the small tesserae (with sides of 1\u00a0mm or less) were set on wax or resin on a wooden panel. These products of extraordinary craftmanship were intended for private devotion. The Louvre Transfiguration is a very fine example from the late 12th century. The miniature mosaic of Christ in the Museo Nazionale at Florence illustrates the more gentle, humanistic conception of Christ which appeared in the 12th century.\nThe sack of Constantinople in 1204 caused the decline of mosaic art for the next five decades. After the reconquest of the city by Michael VIII Palaiologos in 1261 the Hagia Sophia was restored and a beautiful new \"Deesis\" was made on the south gallery. This huge mosaic panel with figures two and a half times lifesize is really overwhelming due to its grand scale and superlative craftsmanship. The Hagia Sophia \"Deesis\" is probably the most famous Byzantine mosaic in Constantinople.\nThe Pammakaristos Monastery was restored by Michael Glabas, an imperial official, in the late 13th century. Only the mosaic decoration of the small burial chapel (parekklesion) of Glabas survived. This domed chapel was built by his widow, Martha around 1304\u201308. In the miniature dome the traditional Pantokrator can be seen with twelve prophets beneath. Unusually the apse is decorated with a \"Deesis\", probably due to the funerary function of the chapel.\nThe Church of the Holy Apostles in Thessaloniki was built in 1310\u201314. Although some vandal systematically removed the gold tesserae of the background it can be seen that the Pantokrator and the prophets in the dome follow the traditional Byzantine pattern. Many details are similar to the Pammakaristos mosaics so it is supposed that the same team of mosaicists worked in both buildings. Another building with a related mosaic decoration is the Theotokos Paregoritissa Church in Arta. The church was established by the Despot of Epirus in 1294\u201396. In the dome is the traditional stern Pantokrator, with prophets and cherubim below.\nThe greatest mosaic work of the Palaeologan renaissance in art is the decoration of the Chora Church in Constantinople. Although the mosaics of the naos have not survived except three panels, the decoration of the exonarthex and the esonarthex constitute the most important full-scale mosaic cycle in Constantinople after the Hagia Sophia. They were executed around 1320 by the command of Theodore Metochites. The esonarthex has two fluted domes, specially created to provide the ideal setting for the mosaic images of the ancestors of Christ. The southern one is called the Dome of the Pantokrator while the northern one is the Dome of the Theotokos. The most important panel of the esonarthex depicts Theodore Metochites wearing a huge turban, offering the model of the church to Christ. The walls of both narthexes are decorated with mosaic cycles from the life of the Virgin and the life of Christ. These panels show the influence of the Italian trecento on Byzantine art especially the more natural settings, landscapes, figures.\nThe last Byzantine mosaic work was created for the Hagia Sophia, Constantinople in the middle of the 14th century. The great eastern arch of the cathedral collapsed in 1346, bringing down the third of the main dome. By 1355 not only the big Pantokrator image was restored but new mosaics were set on the eastern arch depicting the Theotokos, the Baptist and Emperor John V Palaiologos (discovered only in 1989).\nIn addition to the large-scale monuments several miniature mosaic icons of outstanding quality was produced for the Palaiologos court and nobles. The loveliest examples from the 14th century are \"Annunciation\" in the Victoria and Albert Museum and a mosaic diptych in the Cathedral Treasury of Florence representing the \"Twelve Feasts of the Church\".\nIn the troubled years of the 15th century the fatally weakened empire could not afford luxurious mosaics. Churches were decorated with wall-paintings in this era and after the Turkish conquest.\nRome in the High Middle Ages.\nThe last great period of Roman mosaic art was the 12th\u201313th century when Rome developed its own distinctive artistic style, free from the strict rules of eastern tradition and with a more realistic portrayal of figures in the space. Well-known works of this period are the floral mosaics of the Basilica di San Clemente, the fa\u00e7ade of Santa Maria in Trastevere and San Paolo fuori le Mura. The beautiful apse mosaic of Santa Maria in Trastevere (1140) depicts Christ and Mary sitting next to each other on the heavenly throne, the first example of this iconographic scheme. A similar mosaic, the Coronation of the Virgin, decorates the apse of Santa Maria Maggiore. It is a work of Jacopo Torriti from 1295. The mosaics of Torriti and Jacopo da Camerino in the apse of San Giovanni in Laterano from 1288 to 1294 were thoroughly restored in 1884. The apse mosaic of San Crisogono is attributed to Pietro Cavallini, the greatest Roman painter of the 13th century. Six scenes from the life of Mary in Santa Maria in Trastevere were also executed by Cavallini in 1290. These mosaics are praised for their realistic portrayal and attempts at perspective. There is an interesting mosaic medallion from 1210 above the gate of the church of San Tommaso in Formis showing Christ enthroned between a white and a black slave. The church belonged to the Order of the Trinitarians which was devoted to ransoming Christian slaves.\nThe great \"Navicella\" mosaic (1305\u20131313) in the atrium of the Old St. Peter's is attributed to Giotto di Bondone. The giant mosaic, commissioned by Cardinal Jacopo Stefaneschi, was originally situated on the eastern porch of the old basilica and occupied the whole wall above the entrance arcade facing the courtyard. It depicted St. Peter walking on the waters. This extraordinary work was mainly destroyed during the construction of the new St. Peter's in the 17th century. Navicella means \"little ship\" referring to the large boat which dominated the scene, and whose sail, filled by the storm, loomed over the horizon. Such a natural representation of a seascape was known only from ancient works of art.\nSicily.\nThe heyday of mosaic making in Sicily was the age of the independent Norman kingdom in the 12th century. The Norman kings adopted the Byzantine tradition of mosaic decoration to enhance the somewhat dubious legality of their rule. Greek masters working in Sicily developed their own style, that shows the influence of Western European and Islamic artistic tendencies. Best examples of Sicilian mosaic art are the Cappella Palatina of Roger II, the Martorana church in Palermo and the cathedrals of Cefal\u00f9 and Monreale.\nThe Cappella Palatina clearly shows evidence for blending the eastern and western styles. The dome (1142\u201342) and the eastern end of the church (1143\u20131154) were decorated with typical Byzantine mosaics i.e. Pantokrator, angels, scenes from the life of Christ. Even the inscriptions are written in Greek. The narrative scenes of the nave (Old Testament, life of Sts Peter and Paul) are resembling to the mosaics of the Old St. Peter's and St. Paul's Basilica in Rome (Latin inscriptions, 1154\u201366).\nThe Martorana church (decorated around 1143) looked originally even more Byzantine although important parts were later demolished. The dome mosaic is similar to that of the Cappella Palatina, with Christ enthroned in the middle and four bowed, elongated angels. The Greek inscriptions, decorative patterns, and evangelists in the squinches are obviously executed by the same Greek masters who worked on the Cappella Palatina. The mosaic depicting Roger II of Sicily, dressed in Byzantine imperial robes and receiving the crown by Christ, was originally in the demolished narthex together with another panel, the Theotokos with Georgios of Antiochia, the founder of the church.\nIn Cefal\u00f9 (1148) only the high, French Gothic presbytery was covered with mosaics: the Pantokrator on the semidome of the apse and cherubim on the vault. On the walls are Latin and Greek saints, with Greek inscriptions.\nThe Monreale mosaics constitute the largest decoration of this kind in Italy, covering 0,75 hectares with at least 100 million glass and stone tesserae. This huge work was executed between 1176 and 1186 by the order of King William II of Sicily. The iconography of the mosaics in the presbytery is similar to Cefalu while the pictures in the nave are almost the same as the narrative scenes in the Cappella Palatina. The Martorana mosaic of Roger II blessed by Christ was repeated with the figure of King William II instead of his predecessor. Another panel shows the king offering the model of the cathedral to the Theotokos.\nThe Cathedral of Palermo, rebuilt by Archbishop Walter in the same time (1172\u201385), was also decorated with mosaics but none of these survived except the 12th-century image of \"Madonna del Tocco\" above the western portal.\nThe cathedral of Messina, consecrated in 1197, was also decorated with a great mosaic cycle, originally on par with Cefal\u00f9 and Monreale, but heavily damaged and restored many times later. In the left apse of the same cathedral 14th-century mosaics survived, representing the Madonna and Child between Saints Agata and Lucy, the Archangels Gabriel and Michael and Queens Eleonora and Elisabetta.\nSouthern Italy was also part of the Norman kingdom but great mosaics did not survive in this area except the fine mosaic pavement of the Otranto Cathedral from 1166, with mosaics tied into a tree of life, mostly still preserved. The scenes depict biblical characters, warrior kings, medieval beasts, allegories of the months and working activity. Only fragments survived from the original mosaic decoration of Amalfi's Norman Cathedral. The mosaic ambos in the churches of Ravello prove that mosaic art was widespread in Southern Italy during the 11th\u201313th centuries.\nThe palaces of the Norman kings were decorated with mosaics depicting animals and landscapes. The secular mosaics are seemingly more Eastern in character than the great religious cycles and show a strong Persian influence. The most notable examples are the \"Sala di Ruggero\" in the Palazzo dei Normanni, Palermo and the \"Sala della Fontana\" in the Zisa summer palace, both from the 12th century.\nVenice.\nIn parts of Italy, which were under eastern artistic influences, like Sicily and Venice, mosaic making never went out of fashion in the Middle Ages. The whole interior of the St Mark's Basilica in Venice is clad with elaborate, golden mosaics. The oldest scenes were executed by Greek masters in the late 11th century but the majority of the mosaics are works of local artists from the 12th\u201313th centuries. The decoration of the church was finished only in the 16th century. One hundred and ten scenes of mosaics in the atrium of St Mark's were based directly on the miniatures of the Cotton Genesis, a Byzantine manuscript that was brought to Venice after the sack of Constantinople (1204). The mosaics were executed in the 1220s.\nOther important Venetian mosaics can be found in the Cathedral of Santa Maria Assunta in Torcello from the 12th century, and in the Basilical of Santi Maria e Donato in Murano with a restored apse mosaic from the 12th century and a beautiful mosaic pavement (1140). The apse of the San Cipriano Church in Murano was decorated with an impressive golden mosaic from the early 13th century showing Christ enthroned with Mary, St John and the two patron saints, Cipriano and Cipriana. When the church was demolished in the 19th century, the mosaic was bought by Frederick William IV of Prussia. It was reassembled in the Friedenskirche of Potsdam in the 1840s.\nTrieste was also an important center of mosaic art. The mosaics in the apse of the Cathedral of San Giusto were laid by master craftsmen from Veneto in the 12th\u201313th centuries.\nMedieval Italy.\nThe monastery of Grottaferrata founded by Greek Basilian monks and consecrated by the Pope in 1024 was decorated with Italo-Byzantine mosaics, some of which survived in the narthex and the interior. The mosaics on the triumphal chancel arch portray the Twelve Apostles sitting beside an empty throne, evoking Christ's ascent to Heaven. It is a Byzantine work of the 12th century. There is a beautiful 11th-century Deesis above the main portal.\nThe Abbot of Monte Cassino, Desiderius sent envoys to Constantinople some time after 1066 to hire expert Byzantine mosaicists for the decoration of the rebuilt abbey church. According to chronicler Leo of Ostia the Greek artists decorated the apse, the arch and the vestibule of the basilica. Their work was admired by contemporaries but was totally destroyed in later centuries except two fragments depicting greyhounds (now in the Monte Cassino Museum). \"The abbot in his wisdom decided that great number of young monks in the monastery should be thoroughly initiated in these arts\" \u2013 says the chronicler about the role of the Greeks in the revival of mosaic art in medieval Italy.\nIn Florence a magnificiant mosaic of the Last Judgement decorates the dome of the Baptistery. The earliest mosaics, works of art of many unknown Venetian craftsmen (including probably Cimabue), date from 1225. The covering of the ceiling was probably not completed until the 14th century.\nThe impressive mosaic of Christ in Majesty, flanked by the Virgin Mary and St. John the Evangelist in the apse of the cathedral of Pisa was designed by Cimabue in 1302. It evokes the Monreale mosaics in style. It survived the great fire of 1595 which destroyed most of the medieval interior decoration.\nSometimes not only church interiors but fa\u00e7ades were also decorated with mosaics in Italy like in the case of the St Mark's Basilica in Venice (mainly from the 17th\u201319th centuries, but the oldest one from 1270 to 1275, \"The burial of St Mark in the first basilica\"), the Cathedral of Orvieto (golden Gothic mosaics from the 14th century, many times redone) and the Basilica di San Frediano in Lucca (huge, striking golden mosaic representing the Ascension of Christ with the apostles below, designed by Berlinghiero Berlinghieri in the 13th century). The Cathedral of Spoleto is also decorated on the upper fa\u00e7ade with a huge mosaic portraying the \"Blessing Christ\" (signed by one Solsternus from 1207).\nWestern and Central Europe.\nBeyond the Alps the first important example of mosaic art was the decoration of the Palatine Chapel in Aachen, commissioned by Charlemagne. It was completely destroyed in a fire in 1650. A rare example of surviving Carolingian mosaics is the apse semi-dome decoration of the oratory of Germigny-des-Pr\u00e9s built in 805\u2013806 by Theodulf, bishop of Orl\u00e9ans, a leading figure of the Carolingian Renaissance. This unique work of art, rediscovered only in the 19th century, had no followers.\nOnly scant remains prove that mosaics were still used in the Early Middle Ages. The Abbey of Saint-Martial in Limoges, originally an important place of pilgrimage, was totally demolished during the French Revolution except its crypt which was rediscovered in the 1960s. A mosaic panel was unearthed which was dated to the 9th century. It somewhat incongruously uses cubes of gilded glass and deep green marble, probably taken from antique pavements. This could also be the case with the early 9th century mosaic found under the Basilica of Saint-Quentin in Picardy, where antique motifs are copied but using only simple colors. The mosaics in the Cathedral of Saint-Jean at Lyon have been dated to the 11th century because they employ the same non-antique simple colors. More fragments were found on the site of Saint-Croix at Poitiers which might be from the 6th or 9th century.\nLater fresco replaced the more labor-intensive technique of mosaic in Western-Europe, although mosaics were sometimes used as decoration on medieval cathedrals. The Royal Basilica of the Hungarian kings in Sz\u00e9kesfeh\u00e9rv\u00e1r (Alba Regia) had a mosaic decoration in the apse. It was probably a work of Venetian or Ravennese craftsmen, executed in the first decades of the 11th century. The mosaic was almost totally destroyed together with the basilica in the 17th century. The Golden Gate of the St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague got its name from the golden 14th-century mosaic of the Last Judgement above the portal. It was executed by Venetian craftsmen.\nThe Crusaders in the Holy Land also adopted mosaic decoration under local Byzantine influence. During their 12th-century reconstruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem they complemented the existing Byzantine mosaics with new ones. Almost nothing of them survived except the \"Ascension of Christ\" in the Latin Chapel (now confusingly surrounded by many 20th-century mosaics). More substantial fragments were preserved from the 12th-century mosaic decoration of the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem. The mosaics in the nave are arranged in five horizontal bands with the figures of the ancestors of Christ, Councils of the Church and angels. In the apses the Annunciation, the Nativity, Adoration of the Magi and Dormition of the Blessed Virgin can be seen. The program of redecoration of the church was completed in 1169 as a unique collaboration of the Byzantine emperor, the king of Jerusalem and the Latin Church.\nIn 2003, the remains of a mosaic pavement were discovered under the ruins of the Bizere Monastery near the River Mure\u015f in present-day Romania. The panels depict real or fantastic animal, floral, solar and geometric representations. Some archeologists supposed that it was the floor of an Orthodox church, built some time between the 10th and 11th century. Other experts claim that it was part of the later Catholic monastery on the site because it shows the signs of strong Italianate influence. The monastery was situated at that time in the territory of the Kingdom of Hungary.\nRenaissance and Baroque.\nAlthough mosaics went out of fashion and were substituted by frescoes, some of the great Renaissance artists also worked with the old technique. Raphael's \"Creation of the World\" in the dome of the Chigi Chapel in Santa Maria del Popolo is a notable example that was executed by a Venetian craftsman, Luigi di Pace.\nDuring the papacy of Clement VIII (1592\u20131605), the Congregazione della Reverenda Fabbrica di San Pietro was established, providing an independent organisation charged with completing the decorations in the newly built St. Peter's Basilica. Instead of frescoes the cavernous Basilica was mainly decorated with mosaics. Among the explanations are:\nThe mosaics of St. Peter's often show lively Baroque compositions based on designs or canvases from like Ciro Ferri, Guido Reni, Domenichino, Carlo Maratta, and many others. Raphael is represented by a mosaic replica of this last painting, the Transfiguration. Many different artists contributed to the 17th- and 18th-century mosaics in St. Peter's, including Giovanni Battista Calandra, Fabio Cristofari (died 1689), and Pietro Paolo Cristofari (died 1743). Works of the Fabbrica were often used as papal gifts.\nThe Christian East.\nThe eastern provinces of the Eastern Roman and later the Byzantine Empires inherited a strong artistic tradition from Late Antiquity. Similar to Italy and Constantinople, churches and important secular buildings in the region of Syria and Egypt were decorated with elaborate mosaic panels between the 5th and 8th centuries. The great majority of these works of art were later destroyed, but archeological excavations unearthed many surviving examples.\nThe single most important piece of Byzantine Christian mosaic art in the East is the Madaba Map, made between 542 and 570 as the floor of the church of Saint George at Madaba, Jordan. It was rediscovered in 1894. The Madaba Map is the oldest surviving cartographic depiction of the Holy Land. It depicts an area from Lebanon in the north to the Nile Delta in the south, and from the Mediterranean Sea in the west to the Eastern Desert. The largest and most detailed element of the topographic depiction is Jerusalem, at the center of the map. The map is enriched with many naturalistic features, like animals, fishing boats, bridges and palm trees.\nOne of the earliest examples of Byzantine mosaic art in the region can be found on Mount Nebo, an important place of pilgrimage in the Byzantine era where Moses died. Among the many 6th-century mosaics in the church complex (discovered after 1933) the most interesting one is located in the baptistery. The intact floor mosaic covers an area of 9\u00a0\u00d7\u00a03 m and was laid down in 530. It depicts hunting and pastoral scenes with rich Middle Eastern flora and fauna.\nThe Church of Sts. Lot and Procopius was founded in 567 in Nebo village under Mount Nebo (now Khirbet Mukhayyat). Its floor mosaic depicts everyday activities like grape harvest. Another two spectacular mosaics were discovered in the ruined Church of Preacher John nearby. One of the mosaics was placed above the other one which was completely covered and unknown until the modern restoration. The figures on the older mosaic have thus escaped the iconoclasts.\nThe town of Madaba remained an important center of mosaic making during the 5th\u20138th centuries. In the Church of the Apostles the middle of the main panel Thalassa, goddess of the sea, can be seen surrounded by fishes and other sea creatures. Native Middle Eastern birds, mammals, plants and fruits were also added.\nImportant Justinian era mosaics decorated the Saint Catherine's Monastery on Mount Sinai in Egypt. Generally wall mosaics have not survived in the region because of the destruction of buildings but the St. Catherine's Monastery is exceptional. On the upper wall Moses is shown in two panels on a landscape background. In the apse we can see the Transfiguration of Jesus on a golden background. The apse is surrounded with bands containing medallions of apostles and prophets, and two contemporary figure, \"Abbot Longinos\" and \"John the Deacon\". The mosaic was probably created in 565/6.\nJerusalem with its many holy places probably had the highest concentration of mosaic-covered churches but very few of them survived the subsequent waves of destructions. The present remains do not do justice to the original richness of the city. The most important is the so-called \"Armenian Mosaic\" which was discovered in 1894 on the Street of the Prophets near Damascus Gate. It depicts a vine with many branches and grape clusters, which springs from a vase. Populating the vine's branches are peacocks, ducks, storks, pigeons, an eagle, a partridge, and a parrot in a cage. The inscription reads: \"For the memory and salvation of all those Armenians whose name the Lord knows.\" Beneath a corner of the mosaic is a small, natural cave which contained human bones dating to the 5th or 6th centuries. The symbolism of the mosaic and the presence of the burial cave indicates that the room was used as a mortuary chapel.\nAn exceptionally well preserved, carpet-like mosaic floor was uncovered in 1949 in Bethany, the early Byzantine church of the Lazarium which was built between 333 and 390. Because of its purely geometrical pattern, the church floor is to be grouped with other mosaics of the time in Palestine and neighboring areas, especially the Constantinian mosaics in the central nave at Bethlehem. A second church was built above the older one during the 6th century with another more simple geometric mosaic floor.\nThe monastic communities of the Judean Desert also decorated their monasteries with mosaic floors. The Monastery of Martyrius was founded in the end of the 5th century and it was re-discovered in 1982\u201385. The most important work of art here is the intact geometric mosaic floor of the refectory although the severely damaged church floor was similarly rich. The mosaics in the church of the nearby Monastery of Euthymius are of later date (discovered in 1930). They were laid down in the Umayyad era, after a devastating earthquake in 659. Two six pointed stars and a red chalice are the most important surviving features.\nMosaic art also flourished in Christian Petra where three Byzantine churches were discovered. The most important one was uncovered in 1990. It is known that the walls were also covered with golden glass mosaics but only the floor panels survived as usual. The mosaic of the seasons in the southern aisle is from this first building period from the middle of the 5th century. In the first half of the 6th century the mosaics of the northern aisle and the eastern end of the southern aisle were installed. They depict native as well as exotic or mythological animals, and personifications of the Seasons, Ocean, Earth and Wisdom.\nThe Arab conquest of the Middle East in the 7th century did not break off the art of mosaic making. Arabs learned and accepted the craft as their own and carried on the classical tradition. During the Umayyad era Christianity retained its importance, churches were built and repaired and some of the most important mosaics of the Christian East were made during the 8th century when the region was under Islamic rule.\nThe mosaics of the Church of St Stephen in ancient Kastron Mefaa (now Umm ar-Rasas) were made in 785 (discovered after 1986). The perfectly preserved mosaic floor is the largest one in Jordan. On the central panel hunting and fishing scenes are depicted while another panel illustrates the most important cities of the region. The frame of the mosaic is especially decorative. Six mosaic masters signed the work: Staurachios from Esbus, Euremios, Elias, Constantinus, Germanus and Abdela. It overlays another, damaged, mosaic floor of the earlier (587) \"Church of Bishop Sergius.\" Another four churches were excavated nearby with traces of mosaic decoration.\nThe last great mosaics in Madaba were made in 767 in the Church of the Virgin Mary (discovered in 1887). It is a masterpiece of the geometric style with a Greek inscription in the central medallion.\nWith the fall of the Umayyad dynasty in 750 the Middle East went through deep cultural changes. No great mosaics were made after the end of the 8th century and the majority of churches gradually fell into disrepair and were eventually destroyed. The tradition of mosaic making died out among the Christians and also in the Islamic community.\nOrthodox countries.\nThe craft has also been popular in early medieval Rus, inherited as part of the Byzantine tradition. Yaroslav, the Grand Prince of the Kievan Rus' built a large cathedral in his capital, Kyiv. The model of the church was the Hagia Sophia in Constantinople, and it was also called Saint Sophia Cathedral. It was built mainly by Byzantine master craftsmen, sent by Constantine Monomachos, between 1037 and 1046. Naturally the more important surfaces in the interior were decorated with golden mosaics. In the dome we can see the traditional stern Pantokrator supported by angels. Between the 12 windows of the drum were apostles and the four evangelists on the pendentives. The apse is dominated by an orant Theotokos with a Deesis in three medallions above. Below is a Communion of the Apostles.\nPrince Sviatopolk II built St. Michael's Golden-Domed Monastery in Kyiv in 1108. The mosaics of the church are undoubtedly works of Byzantine artists. Although the church was destroyed by Soviet authorities, majority of the panels were preserved. Small parts of ornamental mosaic decoration from the 12th century survived in the Saint Sophia Cathedral in Novgorod but this church was largely decorated with frescoes.\nUsing mosaics and frescoes in the same building was a unique practice in Ukraine. Harmony was achieved by using the same dominant colors in mosaic and fresco. Both Saint Sophia Cathedral and Saint Michael's Golden-Domed Monastery in Kyiv use this technique. Mosaics stopped being used for church decoration as early as the 12th century in the eastern Slavic countries. Later Russian churches were decorated with frescoes, similarly then orthodox churches in the Balkan.\nThe apse mosaic of the Gelati Monastery is a rare example of mosaic use in Georgia. Began by king David IV and completed by his son Demetrius I of Georgia, the fragmentary panel depicts Theotokos flanked by two archangels. The use of mosaic in Gelati attests to some Byzantine influence in the country and was a demonstration of the imperial ambition of the Bagrationids. The mosaic covered church could compete in magnificence with the churches of Constantinople. Gelati is one of few mosaic creations which survived in Georgia but fragments prove that the early churches of Pitsunda and Tsromi were also decorated with mosaic as well as other, lesser known sites. The destroyed 6th century mosaic floors in the Pitsunda Cathedral have been inspired by Roman prototypes. In Tsromi the tesserae are still visible on the walls of the 7th-century church but only faint lines hint at the original scheme. Its central figure was Christ standing and displaying a scroll with Georgian text.\nJewish mosaics.\nUnder Roman and Byzantine influence the Jews also decorated their synagogues with classical floor mosaics. Many interesting examples were discovered in Galilee and the Judean Desert.\nThe remains of a 6th-century synagogue have been uncovered in Sepphoris, which was an important centre of Jewish culture between the 3rd\u20137th centuries and a multicultural town inhabited by Jews, Christians and pagans. The mosaic reflects an interesting fusion of Jewish and pagan beliefs. In the center of the floor the zodiac wheel was depicted. Helios sits in the middle, in his sun chariot, and each zodiac is matched with a Jewish month. Along the sides of the mosaic are strips depicting Biblical scenes, such as the binding of Isaac, as well as traditional rituals, including a burnt sacrifice and the offering of fruits and grains.\nAnother zodiac mosaic decorated the floor of the Beit Alfa synagogue which was built during the reign of Justin I (518\u201327). It is regarded one of the most important mosaics discovered in Israel. Each of its three panels depicts a scene \u2013 the Holy Ark, the zodiac, and the story of the sacrifice of Isaac. In the center of the zodiac is Helios, the sun god, in his chariot. The four women in the corners of the mosaic represent the four seasons.\nA third superbly preserved zodiac mosaic was discovered in the Severus synagogue in the ancient resort town of Hammat Tiberias. In the center of the 4th-century mosaic the Sun god, Helios sits in his chariot holding the celestial sphere and a whip. Nine of the 12 signs of the zodiac survived intact. Another panel shows the Ark of Covenant and Jewish cultic objects used in the Temple at Jerusalem.\nIn 1936, a synagogue was excavated in Jericho which was named Shalom Al Yisrael Synagogue after an inscription on its mosaic floor (\"Peace on Israel\"). It appears to have been in use from the 5th to 8th centuries and contained a big mosaic on the floor with drawings of the Ark of the Covenant, the Menorah, a Shofar and a Lulav. Nearby in Naaran, there is another synagogue (discovered in 1918) from the 6th century that also has a mosaic floor.\nThe synagogue in Eshtemoa (As-Samu) was built around the 4th century. The mosaic floor is decorated with only floral and geometric patterns. The synagogue in Khirbet Susiya (excavated in 1971\u201372, founded in the end of the 4th century) has three mosaic panels, the eastern one depicting a Torah shrine, two menorahs, a lulav and an etrog with columns, deer and rams. The central panel is geometric while the western one is seriously damaged but it has been suggested that it depicted Daniel in the lion's den. The Roman synagogue in Ein Gedi was remodeled in the Byzantine era and a more elaborate mosaic floor was laid down above the older white panels. The usual geometric design was enriched with birds in the center. It includes the names of the signs of the zodiac and important figures from the Jewish past but not their images suggesting that it served a rather conservative community.\nThe ban on figurative depiction was not taken so seriously by the Jews living in Byzantine Gaza. In 1966 remains of a synagogue were found in the ancient harbour area. Its mosaic floor depicts King David as Orpheus, identified by his name in Hebrew letters. Near him were lion cubs, a giraffe and a snake listening to him playing a lyre. A further portion of the floor was divided by medallions formed by vine leaves, each of which contains an animal: a lioness suckling her cub, a giraffe, peacocks, panthers, bears, a zebra and so on. The floor was paved in 508/509. It is very similar to that of the synagogue at Maon (Menois) and the Christian church at Shellal, suggesting that the same artist most probably worked at all three places.\nThe House of Leontius in Bet She'an (excavated in 1964\u201372) is a rare example of a synagogue which was part of an inn. It was built in the Byzantine period. The colorful mosaic floor of the synagogue room had an outer stripe decorated with flowers and birds, around medallions with animals, created by vine trellises emerging from an amphora. The central medallion enclosed a menorah (candelabrum) beneath the word shalom (peace).\nA 5th-century building in Huldah may be a Samaritan synagogue. Its mosaic floor contains typical Jewish symbols (menorah, lulav, etrog) but the inscriptions are Greek. Another Samaritan synagogue with a mosaic floor was located in Bet She'an (excavated in 1960). The floor had only decorative motifs and an aedicule (shrine) with cultic symbols. The ban on human or animal images was more strictly observed by the Samaritans than their Jewish neighbours in the same town (see above). The mosaic was laid by the same masters who made the floor of the Beit Alfa synagogue. One of the inscriptions was written in Samaritan script.\nIn 2003, a synagogue of the 5th or 6th century was uncovered in the coastal Ionian town of Saranda, Albania. It had exceptional mosaics depicting items associated with Jewish holidays, including a menorah, ram's horn, and lemon tree. Mosaics in the basilica of the synagogue show the facade of what resembles a Torah, animals, trees, and other biblical symbols. The structure measures 20 by 24 m. and was probably last used in the 6th century as a church.\nArabic mosaics.\nIn South Arabia two mosaic works were excavated in a Qatabanian from the late 3rd century, those two plates formed geometric and grapevines formation reflecting the traditions of that culture. In the Ghassanid era religious mosaic art flourished in their territory, so far five churches with mosaic were recorded from that era, two built by Ghassanid rulers and the other three by the Christian Arab community who wrote their names and dedications.\nIslamic architecture used mosaic technique to decorate religious buildings and palaces after the Muslim conquests. During the Umayyad Dynasty mosaic making remained a flourishing art form in Islamic culture and it is continued in the art of zellige and azulejo in various parts of the Arab world, although tile was to become the main Islamic form of wall decoration.\nThe first great religious building of Islam, the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, which was built between 688 and 692, was decorated with glass mosaics both inside and outside, by craftsmen of the Byzantine tradition. Only parts of the original interior decoration survive. The rich floral motifs follow Byzantine traditions, and are \"Islamic only in the sense that the vocabulary is syncretic and does not include representation of men or animals.\"\nThe most important early Islamic mosaic work is the decoration of the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus, then capital of the Muslim Caliphate. The mosque was built between 706 and 715. The mosaics of the inner courtyard depict Paradise with beautiful trees, flowers and small hill towns and villages in the background. The mosaics include no human figures, which makes them different from the otherwise similar contemporary Byzantine works. The biggest continuous section survives under the western arcade of the courtyard, called the \"Barada Panel\" after the river Barada. It is thought that the mosque used to have the largest gold mosaic in the world, at over 4 m2. In 1893 a fire damaged the mosque extensively, and many mosaics were lost, although some have been restored since.\nThe mosaics of the Umayyad Mosque gave inspiration to later Damascene mosaic works. The Dome of the Treasury, which stands in the mosque courtyard, is covered with fine mosaics, probably dating from 13th- or 14th-century restoration work. The style of them are strikingly similar to the Barada Panel. The mausoleum of Sultan Baibars, Madrassa Zahiriyah, which was built after 1277, is also decorated with a band of golden floral and architectural mosaics, running around inside the main prayer hall.\nNon-religious Umayyad mosaic works were mainly floor panels which decorated the palaces of the caliphs and other high-ranking officials. They were closely modeled after the mosaics of the Roman country villas, once common in the Eastern Mediterranean. The most superb example can be found in the bath house of Hisham's Palace, Palestine which was made around 744. The main panel depicts a large tree and underneath it a lion attacking a deer (right side) and two deer peacefully grazing (left side). The panel probably represents good and bad governance. Mosaics with classical geometric motifs survived in the bath area of the 8th-century Umayyad palace complex in Anjar, Lebanon. The luxurious desert residence of Al-Walid II in Qasr al-Hallabat (in present-day Jordan) was also decorated with floor mosaics that show a high level of technical skill. The best preserved panel at Hallabat is divided by a Tree of Life flanked by \"good\" animals on one side and \"bad\" animals on the other. Among the Hallabat representations are vine scrolls, grapes, pomegranates, oryx, wolves, hares, a leopard, pairs of partridges, fish, bulls, ostriches, rabbits, rams, goats, lions and a snake. At Qastal, near Amman, excavations in 2000 uncovered the earliest known Umayyad mosaics in present-day Jordan, dating probably from the caliphate of Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan (685\u2013705). They cover much of the floor of a finely decorated building that probably served as the palace of a local governor. The Qastal mosaics depict geometrical patterns, trees, animals, fruits and rosettes. Except for the open courtyard, entrance and staircases, the floors of the entire palace were covered in mosaics.\nSome of the best examples of later Islamic mosaics were produced in Moorish Spain. The golden mosaics in the mihrab and the central dome of the Great Mosque in Corduba have a decidedly Byzantine character. They were made between 965 and 970 by local craftsmen, supervised by a master mosaicist from Constantinople, who was sent by the Byzantine Emperor to the Umayyad Caliph of Spain. The decoration is composed of colorful floral arabesques and wide bands of Arab calligraphy. The mosaics were purported to evoke the glamour of the Great Mosque in Damascus, which was lost for the Umayyad family.\nMosaics generally went out of fashion in the Islamic world after the 8th century, although Umayyad-style mosaics can be found in later periods for example in the Mamluk-period Zahiriyya Library (est. in 1277) in Damascus and the Qalawun complex (est. in 1285) in Cairo. Similar effects of mosaics were achieved by the use of painted tilework, either geometric with small tiles, sometimes called mosaic, like the zillij of North Africa, or larger tiles painted with parts of a large decorative scheme (Qashani) in Persia, Turkey and further east. \nModern mosaics.\nNoted 19th-century mosaics include those by Edward Burne-Jones at St Pauls within the Walls in Rome. Another modern mosaic of note is the world's largest mosaic installation located at the Cathedral Basilica of St. Louis, located in St. Louis, Missouri. A modern example of mosaic is the Museum of Natural History station of the New York City Subway (there are many such works of art scattered throughout the New York City subway system, though many IND stations are usually designed with bland mosaics). Another example of mosaics in ordinary surroundings is the use of locally themed mosaics in some restrooms in the rest areas along some Texas interstate highways.\nSome modern mosaics are the work of \"modernisme\" style architects Antoni Gaud\u00ed and Josep Maria Jujol, for example the mosaics in the Park G\u00fcell in Barcelona. Today, among the leading figures of the mosaic world are Elaine M. Goodwin (UK), Felice Nittolo (Italy), Brit Hammer (Netherlands), Dugald MacInnes (Scotland), Heather Hancock (USA), Kelley Knickerbocker (USA), Aida Valencia (Mexico), Emma Biggs (UK), Helen Nock (UK), Marcelo de Melo (Brazil), Sonia King (USA) and Saimir Strati (Albania).\nIn lamps.\nTurkish mosaic lamps have intricate patterns created from small pieces of coloured glass arranged in geometric and floral designs, within a metal or ceramic frame, lit from inside. The Tiffany lamp style, using metal frameworks, is similar, but uses large pieces, approaching closer to stained glass.\nAs a popular craft.\nMosaics have developed into a popular craft and art, and are not limited to professionals. Today's artisans and crafters work with stone, ceramics, smalti, shells, art glass, mirror, beads, and even odd items like doll parts, pearls, or photographs. While ancient mosaics tended to be architectural, modern mosaics are found covering everything from park benches and flowerpots to guitars and bicycles. Items can be as small as an earring or as large as a house.\nTrencad\u00eds or pique assiette (a French term \u2013 \"stolen from plate\") is a mosaic made from pieces of broken pottery, china, glass, buttons, figurines, or jewelry which are cemented onto a base to create a new surface. Almost any form can be used as a base, and any combination of pieces can be applied, restricted only by the individual creator's imagination.\nIn street art.\nIn styles that owe as much to videogame pixel art and pop culture as to traditional mosaic, street art has seen a novel reinvention and expansion of mosaic artwork. The most prominent artist working with mosaics in street art is the French Invader. He has done almost all his work in two very distinct mosaic styles, the first of which are small \"traditional\" tile mosaics of 8 bit video game character, installed in cities across the globe, and the second of which are a style he refers to as \"Rubikcubism\", which uses a kind of dual layer mosaic via grids of scrambled Rubik's Cubes. Although he is the most prominent, other street and urban artists do work in Mosaic styles as well.\nCal\u00e7ada Portuguesa.\nPortuguese pavement (in Portuguese, \"Cal\u00e7ada Portuguesa\") is a kind of two-tone stone mosaic paving created in Portugal, and common throughout the Lusosphere. Most commonly taking the form of geometric patterns from the simple to the complex, it also is used to create complex pictorial mosaics in styles ranging from iconography to classicism and even modern design. In Portuguese-speaking countries, many cities have a large amount of their sidewalks and even, though far more occasionally, streets done in this mosaic form. Lisbon in particular maintains almost all walkways in this style.\nDespite its prevalence and popularity throughout Portugal and its former colonies, and its relation to older art and architectural styles like Azulejo, Portuguese and Spanish painted tilework, it is a relatively young mosaic artform, its first definitive appearance in a modernly recognizable form being in the mid-1800s. Among the most commonly used stones in this style are basalt and limestone.\nTerminology.\nMosaic is an art form which uses small pieces of materials placed together to create a unified whole. The materials commonly used are marble or other stone, glass, pottery, mirror or foil-backed glass, or shells.\nThe word \"mosaic\" is from the Italian \"mosaico\" deriving from the Latin \"mosaicus\" and ultimately from the Greek \"mouseios\" meaning \"belonging to the Muses\", hence artistic. Each piece of material is a \"tessera\" (plural: \"tesserae\"). The space in between where the grout goes is an interstice. Andamento is the word used to describe the movement and flow of tesserae. The 'opus', the Latin for 'work', is the way in which the pieces are cut and placed.\nCommon techniques include:\nThree techniques.\nThere are three main methods: the direct method, the indirect method and the double indirect method.\nDirect method.\nThe direct method of mosaic construction involves directly placing (gluing) the individual tesserae onto the supporting surface. This method is well suited to surfaces that have a three-dimensional quality, such as vases. This was used for the historic European wall and ceiling mosaics, following underdrawings of the main outlines on the wall below, which are often revealed again when the mosaic falls away.\nThe direct method suits small projects that are transportable. Another advantage of the direct method is that the resulting mosaic is progressively visible, allowing for any adjustments to tile color or placement.\nThe disadvantage of the direct method is that the artist must work directly at the chosen surface, which is often not practical for long periods of time, especially for large-scale projects. Also, it is difficult to control the evenness of the finished surface. This is of particular importance when creating a functional surface such as a floor or a table top.\nA modern version of the direct method, sometimes called \"double direct,\" is to work directly onto fiberglass mesh. The mosaic can then be constructed with the design visible on the surface and transported to its final location. Large work can be done in this way, with the mosaic being cut up for shipping and then reassembled for installation. It enables the artist to work in comfort in a studio rather than at the site of installation.\nIndirect method.\nThe indirect method of applying tesserae is often used for very large projects, projects with repetitive elements or for areas needing site specific shapes. Tesserae are applied face-down to a backing paper using a water-soluble adhesive. Once the mosaic is completed in the studio it is transferred in sections to the site and cemented, paper facing outwards. Once fixed the paper is dampened and removed. This method is most useful for extremely large projects as it gives the maker time to rework areas, allows the cementing of the tesserae to the backing panel to be carried out quickly in one operation and helps ensure that the front surfaces of the mosaic tiles and mosaic pieces are flat and in the same plane on the front, even when using tiles and pieces of differing thicknesses. Mosaic murals, benches and tabletops are some of the items usually made using the indirect method, as it results in a smoother and more even surface.\nMathematics.\nThe best way to arrange variously shaped tiles on a surface leads to the mathematical field of tessellation.\nThe artist M. C. Escher was influenced by Moorish mosaics to begin his investigations into tessellation. \nDigital imaging.\nA photomosaic is a picture made up of various other pictures (pioneered by Joseph Francis), in which each \"pixel\" is another picture, when examined closely. This form has been adopted in many modern media and digital image searches.\nA tile mosaic is a digital image made up of individual tiles, arranged in a non-overlapping fashion, e.g. to make a static image on a shower room or bathing pool floor, by breaking the image down into square pixels formed from ceramic tiles (a typical size is , as for example, on the floor of the University of Toronto pool, though sometimes larger tiles such as are used). These digital images are coarse in resolution and often simply express text, such as the depth of the pool in various places, but some such digital images are used to show a sunset or other beach theme.\nRecent developments in digital image processing have led to the ability to design physical tile mosaics using computer aided design (CAD) software. The software typically takes as inputs a source bitmap and a palette of colored tiles. The software makes a best-fit match of the tiles to the source image. In order to place tiles in the manner of opus vermiculatum the first step is to find edges of visually important objects in the image. A Python implementation of a complete pixel image to mosaic vector image algorithm is available.\nRobotic manufacturing.\nWith high cost of labor in developed countries, production automation has become increasingly popular. Rather than being assembled by hand, mosaics designed using computer aided design (CAD) software can be assembled by a robot. Production can be greater than 10 times faster with higher accuracy. But these \"computer\" mosaics have a different look than hand-made \"artisanal\" mosaics. With robotic production, colored tiles are loaded into buffers, and then the robot picks and places tiles individually according to a command file from the design software.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61311", "revid": "26110720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61311", "title": "Stirling", "text": "Stirling (; ; ) is a city in central Scotland, northeast of Glasgow and north-west of Edinburgh. The city is surrounded by rich farmland and had a royal citadel, the medieval old town with its merchants and tradesmen, the Old Bridge and the port are all linked in to its history. Situated on the River Forth, Stirling is the administrative centre for the Stirling council area, and is traditionally the county town and historic county of Stirlingshire. Stirling's key position as the lowest bridging point of the River Forth before it broadens towards the Firth of Forth made it a focal point for travel north or south. It has been said that \"Stirling, like a huge brooch clasps Highlands and Lowlands together\". The city's status as \"Gateway to the Highlands\" also historically lent it great strategic importance\u2014the credo \"he who holds Stirling, holds Scotland\" is sometimes attributed to Robert the Bruce.\nWhen Stirling was temporarily under Anglo-Saxon sway, according to a 9th-century legend, it was attacked by Danish invaders. The sound of a wolf roused a sentry, however, who alerted his garrison, which forced a Viking retreat. This led to the wolf being adopted as a symbol of the town as is shown on the 1511 Stirling Jug. The area is today known as Wolfcraig. Even today the wolf appears with a goshawk on the council's coat of arms along with the recently chosen motto: \"Steadfast as the Rock\".\nOnce the capital of Scotland, Stirling is visually dominated by Stirling Castle. Stirling also has a medieval parish church, the Church of the Holy Rude, where, on 29 July 1567, the infant James VI was anointed King of Scots by Adam Bothwell, the Bishop of Orkney, with the service concluding after a sermon by John Knox. The poet King was educated by George Buchanan and grew up in Stirling. He was later also crowned King of England and Ireland on 25 July 1603, bringing closer the countries of the United Kingdom. Modern Stirling is a centre for local government, higher education, tourism, retail, and industry. The mid-2012 census estimate for the population of the city is 36,440; the wider Stirling council area has a population of about 93,750.\nOne of the principal royal strongholds of the Kingdom of Scotland, Stirling was created a royal burgh by David I between 1124 and 1127. In 2002, as part of the Golden Jubilee celebrations, Stirling was granted city status. In the run up to 2024, it was decided to celebrate Stirling's 900th anniversary at the earliest point it could have happened, the coronation of DavidI. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName(s) and toponymy.\nStirling's name appears as \"Strivelin(g)\" in early sources, later becoming \"Stirveling\" and finally \"Stirling\". Its meaning, and even its language of origin, are a matter of debate. In 1930, J. B. Johnston's \"Place-Names of Scotland\" suggested a Brittonic origin, and the name was thought likely to be Brittonic by most commentators thereafter.7 However, in a comprehensive survey of the evidence in 2017, Thomas Owen Clancy showed that a Brittonic etymology is unlikely, and derived the name from Gaelic \"srib-linn\", meaning \"pool in the river\".\nA geographical survey of Britain in the eighth-century \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" by Bede also mentions a place called \"urbs Giudi\" (\"the town of \"Giudi\"\"). Although its location is not certain, a 2023 study found that \"Stirling is the location of \"urbs Giudi\" favoured by most scholars\", and itself supported this identification.3 This name is thought to be Celtic. The ninth-century \"Historia Brittonum\" mentions a similar-looking battle-site called \"urbs Iudeu\", which many scholars have assumed was the same as Bede's \"urbs Giudi\", but this identification is uncertain.7\u20139\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nA stone cist, found in Coneypark Nursery in 1879, is Stirling's oldest catalogued artefact. Bones from the cist were radiocarbon dated and found to be over four millennia old, originating within the date range 2152 to 2021 BC. Nicknamed Torbrex Tam, the man, whose bones were discovered by workmen, died while still in his twenties. Other Bronze Age finds near the city come from the area around Cambusbarron. It had been thought that the Randolphfield standing stones were more than 3000 years old but recent radiocarbon dating suggests they may date from the time of Bruce. \nThe earliest known structures in Stirling are now destroyed but comprised two Neolithic Cursus in Bannockburn. To the south of Stirling is Gillies Hill which contains a series of prehistoric fortifications. Two structures are known: what is currently called Wallstale Dun on the southern end of Touchadam Craig, and Gillies Hill fort on the northwest end of the craig. Both structures were built by Iron Age peoples and Gillies Hill is c 2500 years old while the Wallstale structure is later and is related in form to brochs, these appear to coincide with the Roman period and there are around 40 or so in the wider area. South of the city, the King's Park prehistoric carvings (cup and ring marks) can still be found, these date to c 3000 BC. \nRoman and early Medieval.\nIts other notable geographic feature is its proximity to the lowest crossing point of the River Forth. Control of the bridge brought military advantage in times of unrest and excise duty, or pontage dues, in peacetime. Unsurprisingly excise men were installed in a covered booth in the centre of the bridge to collect tax from any entering the royal burgh with goods. Stirling remained the river's lowest reliable crossing point (that is, without a weather-dependent ferry or seasonal ford) until the construction of the Alloa Swing Bridge between Throsk and Alloa in 1885.\nThe city has two Latin mottoes, which appeared on the earliest burgh seal of which an impression of 1296 is on record. The first alludes to the story as recorded by Boece who relates that in 855 Scotland was invaded by two Northumbrian princes, Osbrecht and Ella. They united their forces with the Cumbrian Britons in order to defeat the Scots. Having secured Stirling castle, they built the first stone bridge over the Forth.\nOn the top they reportedly raised a crucifix with the inscription: \"Anglos, a Scotis separat, crux ista remotis; Arma hic stant Bruti; stant Scoti hac sub cruce tuti.\" Bellenden translated this loosely as \"I am free marche, as passengers may ken, To Scottis, to Britonis, and to Inglismen.\" It may be the stone cross was a tripoint for the three kingdom's borders or marches; the cross functioning both as a dividing territorial marker, and as a uniting witness stone like in the Bible story in Joshua 22. \"Angles and Scots here demarked, By this cross kept apart. Brits and Scots armed stand near, By this cross stand safe here.\" This would make the cross on the centre of the first stone bridge the Heart of Scotland.\nThe Stirling seal has only the second part, in a slightly different form:\nHic Armis Bruti Scoti Stant Hic Cruce Tuti \n(\"Brits and Scots armed and near, by this cross stand safe here.\")\nThe Latin is apparently not first rate, as it has four syllables in \"cruce tuti\". However, the meaning seems to be that the Lowland Strathclyde Britons on the southern shore and the Highland Pictish Scots on the northern shore stand protected from each other by their common Christianity.\nA more modern translation suggests that rather than Briton, bruit might be better read as brute, i.e. brute Scots, implying a non-Scots identity was retained in Stirling for some time after inclusion into the land controlled by the King of Scots.\nThe second motto is:\nContinet Hoc in Se Nemus et Castrum Strivelinse \n(\"Contained within this seal pressed down, the wood an' castle o' Stirlin' town.\")\nIt has been claimed that the \"Bridge\" seal was regarded as the Burgh seal proper, the \"Castle\" seal being simply a reverse, used when the seal was affixed by a lace to a charter. This agrees with a description in an official publication (which spells Bruti with only one letter t). Clearer images are available with different lettering. Sibbald conflated the two mottos into a single rhyme; he gave no indication that he was aware of Boece's work.\nStirling was first declared a royal burgh by King David in the 12th century, with later charters reaffirmed by subsequent monarchs. A ferry, and later bridge, on the River Forth at Stirling brought wealth and strategic influence, as did its tidal port at Riverside. As Stirling's economy grew, a Royal Park was established as a landscape setting to the north of the castle in the 12th century. The short-lived New Park was established in the later 13th century and contains a cockshot wood (Coxet Hill), likely to have been used as a base in the Battle of Bannockburn. Major battles during the Wars of Scottish Independence took place at the Stirling Old Bridge in 1297 and at the nearby village of Bannockburn in 1314 involving Andrew Moray and William Wallace, and Robert the Bruce respectively. After the Battle of Stirling Bridge, Moray and Wallace wrote to Hanseatic League leaders in L\u00fcbeck and Hamburg to encourage trade between Scottish and German ports. There were also several Sieges of Stirling Castle in the conflict, notably in 1304.\nLate Medieval and early Modern.\nAnother important historical site in the area is the ruins of Cambuskenneth Abbey, the resting place of King James III of Scotland and his queen, Margaret of Denmark. The king died at the Battle of Sauchieburn by forces nominally led by his son and successor James IV. During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, the Battle of Stirling also took place in the centre of Stirling on 12 September 1648. The fortifications continued to play a strategic military role during the 18th-century Jacobite risings. In 1715, the Earl of Mar failed to take control of the castle. In January 1746, the army of Bonnie Prince Charlie seized control of the town but failed to take the Castle. On their consequent retreat northwards, they blew up the church of St. Ninians where they had been storing munitions; only the tower survived and can be seen to this day. The castle and the church are shown on Blaeu's map of 1654 which was derived from Pont's earlier map.Standing near the castle, the Church of the Holy Rude is one of the town's most historically important buildings. Founded in 1129 it is the second oldest building in the city after Stirling castle. It was rebuilt in the 15th-century after Stirling suffered a catastrophic fire in 1405, and is reputed to be the only surviving church in the United Kingdom apart from Westminster Abbey to have held a coronation. The death of James V led to the Rough Wooing, a period where Henry VIII of England attempted to marry the infant Mary Queen of Scots to his son. Stirling responded by constructing a burgh wall to the south of town, which is among the best preserved in Scotland. Recent archaeological research has identified two new bastions or positions of strength on the wall and Stirling's last surviving medieval gate. On 29 July 1567 the infant son of Mary, Queen of Scots, was anointed James VI of Scotland in the church. James' bride, Anne of Denmark was crowned in the church at Holyrood Palace in Edinburgh. The Holy Rude congregation still meet and some 19th century parish records survive. Musket shot marks that may come from Cromwell's troops during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms are clearly visible on the tower and apse of the church. There are also musket scars on a gravestone in the cemetery indicating the troop movement to the castle.\nEconomically, the city's port supported foreign trade, historically doing significant trade in the Low Countries, particularly with Bruges in Belgium and Veere in the Netherlands. In the 16th century there were so many Scots in Danzig in Prussia that they had their own church congregation and trade is mentioned with that city in Stirling Council's minutes of 1560. Around John Cowane's time there is an account which states there were about 30,000 Scots families living in Poland although that was possibly an exaggeration. Trade with the Baltic also took place such as a timber trade with Norway.\nAfter the Jacobite threat had faded but before the railways were established, the Highland cattle drovers would use the Auld Brig on their way to market at Falkirk or Stenhousemuir. Three times a year, tens of thousands of cattle, sheep and ponies were moved together to the trysts in the south with some drovers going as far as Carlisle or even London's Smithfield. There is a record of a four-mile long tailback (of livestock) developing from St. Ninians to Bridge of Allan after a St. Ninians tollman had a dispute.\nVictorian and Modern.\nIn the early 19th century an \"exceedingly low\" cost steamboat service used to run between Stirling and Newhaven or Granton. The coming of the railways in 1848 started the decline of the river traffic, not least because the Alloa Swing Bridge downstream restricted access for shipping. The railways did provide opportunity too with one Riverside company selling their reaping machines as far afield as Syria and Australia. Similarly, in 1861, a company making baby carriages was set up. These prams were exported to Canada, South America, India and South Africa.\nThe Princes Street drill hall was completed in 1908 and the Municipal Buildings, which formed the headquarters of Stirling Burgh Council for much of the 20th century, were completed in 1918.\nAfter the blockades of the World Wars there was some increase in the use of the port including a tea trade with India. However, with normal shipping lanes open, the growth of the railways including The Forth Rail Bridge, left the harbour uneconomical and by the mid 20th century the port had ceased to operate.\nGovernance.\nIn terms of local government, the city of Stirling is a part of the wider Stirling Council area, which is based at Old Viewforth and governs on matters of local administration as set out by the Local Government etc (Scotland) Act 1994. \nFor the purposes of the Scottish Parliament, the city of Stirling forms part of the Stirling constituency of the Scottish Parliament constituency. The Stirling Scottish Parliament (or \"Holyrood\") constituency created in 1999 is one of nine within the Mid Scotland and Fife electoral region. Each constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) by the first past the post system of election, and the region elects seven additional members to produce a form of proportional representation. The constituency's Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) is Evelyn Tweed of the Scottish National Party (SNP).\nIn terms of national government, the city of Stirling forms part of the county constituency of Stirling and Strathallan, electing one Member of Parliament (MP) to the House of Commons of the parliament of the United Kingdom by first past the post system. Chris Kane of the Labour Party has been the MP for Stirling and Strathallan since the 2024 general election, when the seat was first contested - prior to this, Stirling was part of the constituency of Stirling.\nHistorical voting records can be found in online databases.\nGeography.\nStirling is renowned as the \"Gateway to the Highlands\" and is generally regarded as occupying a strategic position at the point where the flatter, largely undulating Scottish Lowlands meet the rugged slopes of the Highlands along the Highland Boundary Fault. The starkness of this contrast is evidenced by the many hills and mountains of the lower Highlands such as Ben Vorlich and Ben Ledi which can be seen to the northwest of the city. On the other hand, the Carse of Stirling, stretching to the west and east of the city, is one of the flattest and most agriculturally productive expanses of land in the whole of Scotland.\nThe land surrounding Stirling has been most affected by glacial erosion and deposition. The city itself has grown up around its castle which stands atop an ancient quartz-dolerite sill, known as the Stirling Sill, a major defensive position which was at the lowest crossing point on the River Forth. Stirling stands on the Forth at the point where the river widens and becomes tidal. To the east of the city the Ochil Hills dominate the skyline with the highest peak in the range being Ben Cleuch, although Dumyat is more noticeable from Stirling. The Ochils meet the flat carse (floodplain) of the River Forth to the east of the distinctive geographical feature of Abbey Craig, a crag and tail hill upon which stands the 220\u00a0ft (67 m) high National Wallace Monument.\nAreas of Stirling.\nTop of the Town consists of Broad Street, Castle Wynd, Ballengeich Pass, Lower Castle Hill Road, Darnley Street, Baker Street (formerly Baxters St), St John Street and St Mary's Wynd. These streets all lead up to Stirling Castle and are the favourite haunt of tourists who stop off at the Old Town Jail, Mar's Wark, Argyll's Lodging and the castle. Ballengeich Pass leads to the graveyard at Ballengeich and the Castle Wynd winds past the old graveyard. The Top of the Town from Broad Street upwards is renowned for its cobblestoned roads, and cars can be heard rattling over the cobblestones on the way down. Craft shops and tourist-focused shops are evident on the way up and once at the top, panoramic views are available across Stirling and beyond.\nAll areas\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical place names for Stirling town in 1858\u201361 were compiled by O.S. map makers.\nClimate.\nLike most of the United Kingdom, Stirling has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\") with mild summers and cool, wet winters. Stirling has some of the warmest summers in all of Scotland, being relatively far away from the cooling effects of the North Sea and the Firth of Clyde.\nDemography.\nThe population of the settlement of Stirling in the 2022 Census was 49,928, which is very similar to the figure for the settlement in 2011 of 49,950. In 2022, the Stirling council area had a population of 92,600, reflecting a 2.6% increase from the 2011 census. Of the population in 2022, 51.9% of the population were female, while 48.1% were male. The age distribution in Stirling showed that 16.7% of the population was under 15 years old, which is slightly higher than Scotland's average of 15%. Additionally, Stirling had a larger proportion of residents of pensionable age, with 20.41% of the population being 65 or older, compared to the Scottish average of 20.1%.\nHistorical records also exist both in book form and in online databases.\nCulture.\nWalking the Marches is a custom probably started in the 12th century. The only way the town's boundaries could be protected was to walk round inspecting them annually. The walk was followed by a dinner. This was traditionally done by the Birlaw men made up from members of the Seven Trades, the Guildry and Council. In 2014 the tradition was revived after an official abeyance of several years. It now takes place on the last Saturday in May and is open for all to take part in.\nThere are about sixteen libraries and two mobile libraries in Stirling. The Smith Art Gallery and Museum is now free to tourists and residents alike. Shearer's 1895 Penny Guide to Stirling and Neighbourhood used to list it under \"How to spend a few hours on a wet day\".\nThe Macrobert Arts Centre has a variety of exhibitions and performances. There are many events at the Stirling Tolbooth and at The Albert Halls.\nStirling has hosted the National M\u00f2d several times: in 1909, 1961, 1971 and 1987.\nReligion.\nThere are currently about 20 churches in the city.\nThese include:\nChurch of Scotland\nRoman Catholic\nOther churches\nIslam\nEconomy.\nWith Stirling's development as a market town and its location as the focus of transport and communications in the region, it has developed a substantial retail sector serving a wide range of surrounding communities as well as the city itself. Primarily centred on the city centre, there are a large number of chain stores in and adjacent to the Thistles shopping centre. This has been augmented by out-of-town developments such as the Springkerse Retail Park on the city bypass to the east of Stirling.\nThe Forthside regeneration project on the site of the former port area and the former Ministry of Defence site, adjacent to Stirling Railway Station, is linked to the railway station via Forthside Bridge. The development comprises retail, residential and commercial elements, including a conference centre, hotel and Vue multiplex cinema, expanding the city centre area and linking it to the River Forth, which had been cut off from the city centre area since the construction of the A9 bypass under the railway station in the 1960s.\nIn the service sector, financial and insurance services as well as tourism are the biggest employers. The financial services and insurance company Scottish Amicable Life Assurance, later part of Prudential and M&amp;G, established a large base at Craigforth on the outskirts of Stirling in the 1970s.\nIn terms of tourism, the presence of such historical monuments as Stirling Castle and the Wallace Monument and other nearby attractions like Blair Drummond Safari Park has bolstered Stirling's position as a significant tourist destination in Scotland.\nThe University of Stirling and Stirling Council are two of the biggest employers in the area. Knowledge related industries, research and development as well as life sciences have clustered around the university in the Stirling University Innovation Park, close to its main campus.\nMauchline ware started producing wooden snuff-boxes in 1790 in Mauchline, Ayrshire. They were produced of the wood from the trees from the Castle craig. Today they are highly collectible.\nStirling is home to national construction companies Ogilvie Group, chaired by Duncan Ogilvie, who was listed in the \"Sunday Times Rich List\" as being worth \u00a332 million in 2009.\nA Bank of Scotland survey in 2009 found that workers in Stirling had the highest average earnings of \u00a3716 a week.\nTransport.\nThe City of Stirling is home to a large number of commuters but has fewer commuting to work in other areas, than travel into the city. About half of Scotland's population live within an hour's travel time of Stirling.\nLocal bus services to districts within the city are almost completely provided by buses operated by McGill's Scotland East. The surrounding towns, like Bridge of Allan, Alloa, Falkirk and Glasgow via Cumbernauld have services from the bus station.\nCoaches to many Scottish towns and cities also run regularly.\nThere are also railway links from Stirling railway station, including inter-city rail services to Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh Waverley, Inverness, Glasgow Queen Street, and London King's Cross. Services to Alloa, Bridge of Allan, Falkirk and Dunblane also run. Stirling Council provides some approximate journey times. Working lines include the Highland Main Line, the Edinburgh\u2013Dunblane line and the Croy Line. The station formerly provided direct railway services to Callander and Oban, and to Loch Lomond, over very scenic lines, and a fast service to Dunfermline.\nCities with motorway links to Stirling include Glasgow, via the M80 motorway past Cumbernauld, and Edinburgh, via the M9 motorway past Falkirk. To the north, the M9 provides access to Dunblane with easy links to Perth and further beyond the Central Belt.\nStirling has no airport, but there are international airports at Glasgow and Edinburgh which can be reached within an hour. Light aircraft can be chartered at Cumbernauld Airport.\nStirling used to have steamboats which carried hundreds of passengers a day. There is currently no working port at Stirling but there are plans to develop the river and the harbour which might include links with towns on the Firth of Forth. Since the Forth is tidal at Stirling, development of pontoon style landing stages could potentially allow river taxis and tourist boats to operate during the summer.\nMedia.\nLocal radio stations are community based radio stations: CastleSound and Air3 Radio, which is a student-run station that broadcasts from the University of Stirling.\nThe Stirling News and Stirling Observer are the local newspapers in the city.\nSports and recreation.\nStirling is home to professional league teams in football, rugby and cricket. The first Stirling Scottish Marathon was held on 21 May 2017. The National Curling Academy is located in Stirling Sports Village. It was opened in 2017 by Eve Muirhead. They use facilities linked to The Peak. It was hoped this would increase the chances of British medals at events like the Winter Olympics and Paralympics.\nThe senior football team, Stirling Albion, play in the Scottish League Two at their home ground at Forthbank Stadium. In July 2010, the Stirling Albion Supporters' Trust successfully took over the running of the club buying out the long-serving chairman, Peter McKenzie, after 14 months of campaigning. This made Stirling Albion the first fully owned community club in the history of British football, after previous attempts made by Manchester United, Liverpool and Rangers. Stirling University L.F.C. are the premier women's football team. They play in the Scottish Women's Premier League. Their home ground is The Gannochy Sports Centre at University of Stirling. Scotland international footballers Billy Bremner, John Colquhoun, Duncan Ferguson, female footballer Frankie Brown and brothers Gary and Steven Caldwell were born in Stirling. So were rugby internationals Kenny Logan, Ally Hogg and Alison McGrandles, jockey Willie Carson, and cricketer Dougie Brown.\nStirling County currently play in rugby's Scottish Premiership Division One. Stirling Knights Basketball Team are based at the Peak at Forthbank beside Forthbank Stadium. The athletics team Central Athletic Club are based at the University of Stirling. The Stirling Wanderers Hockey Club moved to a brand new (international standard) pitch at Forthbank for season 2008\u201309.\nNext to this pitch there is also the ground of Stirling County Cricket Club, whose pavilion captured an architectural award in June 2009, three years after its opening.\nThe University of Stirling is a major centre of sports training and education in Scotland. It was designated as Scotland's University for Sporting Excellence by the Scottish Government in 2008. The headquarters of the Scottish Institute of Sport is a purpose-built facility on the campus which opened in 2002. Also at the university is the Scottish National Swimming Academy, where Rio 2016, Olympic silver medalists and students at the university, Duncan Scott and Robbie Renwick trained. Commonwealth gold medalist Ross Murdoch, who also competed at Rio 2016, is a student at the university. The Gannochy National Tennis centre, which is seen as a tennis centre of excellence, was where Andy Murray and his brother Jamie Murray honed their skills as juniors. Gordon Reid, wheel chair Olympic gold medalist in 2016, was a tennis scholar at the university. The university men's and women's golf teams are consistently ranked among the best in Europe.\nThe university has a dedicated sports studies department, which is within the Faculty of Health Science and Sport, and is ranked amongst the best in the United Kingdom for its provision of sports facilities, with the maximum 5-star award, shared by 16 other universities in the UK. The University of Stirling also currently hosts the Scottish men's lacrosse champions. Stirling and its surrounding area has a number of 9- and 18-hole golf courses, the largest of which is the Stirling Golf Course, located in the Kings Park area of the city. The Peak, a new Sports Village, was opened in April 2009 to cater for a range of sporting activities.\nIn June 2014, Stirling became the home of Scottish cricket after an agreement between Stirling County Cricket Club, Cricket Scotland and Stirling Council. It is hoped that the redevelopment of the ground will start at end 2014 with the intention being to upgrade it to international match standards. Scotland will play the majority of their home international games at the ground, starting with the World T20 qualifiers in the summer of 2015. The development will see a new pavilion and indoor training facility built at New Williamfield, the home of Stirling County Cricket Club, with Cricket Scotland relocating its headquarters from the National Cricket Academy at Ravelston, Edinburgh.\nEducation.\nThe University of Stirling opened in 1967 on a greenfield site outside the town. In 2025 the university had 18,500 students globally, of whom over 11,000 are undergraduates and over 6,000 are postgraduates. There are over 140 nationalities represented on the university campus, with more than 30% of students being international. It has grown into a major research centre, with a large Innovation Park located immediately adjacent to the main university campus. Innovation Park has grown since its initiation in 1993, and is now home to 40 companies engaging in various forms of research and development. In January 2008 it was announced that students from Singapore would be able to gain degrees in retail from the University of Stirling in a tie-up with the country's Nanyang Polytechnic (NYP). Stirling is also home to part of the wider Forth Valley College which was formed on 1 August 2005 from the merger of Falkirk, Stirling and Clackmannan colleges.\nThere are four main high schools in Stirling itself \u2013 Stirling High School, with a school roll of 964 pupils, Wallace High School with 958 pupils, St Modan's High School with 912 pupils, and Bannockburn High School in Broomridge with 752 pupils. All the city's secondary school premises have been redeveloped as a result of a Public-private partnership scheme. Stirling also has a Gaelic-medium unit situated in the city's Riverside Primary School which teaches pupils from across Stirling and Clackmannanshire through the medium of Scottish Gaelic. Queen Victoria School, an agency of the Ministry of Defence, is in Dunblane, near Stirling.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Stirling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61313", "revid": "1273229374", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61313", "title": "Unu (disambiguation)", "text": "unu was a Romanian art magazine published from 1928 to 1935.\nUNU or Unu may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61316", "revid": "12336988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61316", "title": "Galois theory", "text": "Mathematical connection between field theory and group theory\nIn mathematics, Galois theory, originally introduced by \u00c9variste Galois, provides a connection between field theory and group theory. This connection, the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, allows reducing certain problems in field theory to group theory, which makes them simpler and easier to understand.\nGalois introduced the subject for studying roots of polynomials. This allowed him to characterize the polynomial equations that are solvable by radicals in terms of properties of the permutation group of their roots\u2014an equation is by definition \"solvable by radicals\" if its roots may be expressed by a formula involving only integers, nth roots, and the four basic arithmetic operations. This widely generalizes the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem, which asserts that a general polynomial of degree at least five cannot be solved by radicals. \nGalois theory has been used to solve classic problems including showing that two problems of antiquity cannot be solved as they were stated (doubling the cube and trisecting the angle), and characterizing the regular polygons that are constructible (this characterization was previously given by Gauss but without the proof that the list of constructible polygons was complete; all known proofs that this characterization is complete require Galois theory).\nGalois' work was published by Joseph Liouville fourteen years after his death. The theory took longer to become popular among mathematicians and to be well understood.\nGalois theory has been generalized to Galois connections and Grothendieck's Galois theory.\nApplication to classical problems.\nThe birth and development of Galois theory was caused by the following question, which was one of the main open mathematical questions until the beginning of 19th century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Does there exist a formula for the roots of a fifth (or higher) degree polynomial equation in terms of the coefficients of the polynomial, using only the usual algebraic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) and application of radicals (square roots, cube roots, etc)?\nThe Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem provides a counterexample proving that there are polynomial equations for which such a formula cannot exist. Galois' theory provides a much more complete answer to this question, by explaining why it \"is\" possible to solve some equations, including all those of degree four or lower, in the above manner, and why it is not possible for most equations of degree five or higher. Furthermore, it provides a means of determining whether a particular equation can be solved that is both conceptually clear and easily expressed as an algorithm.\nGalois' theory also gives a clear insight into questions concerning problems in compass and straightedge construction. It gives an elegant characterization of the ratios of lengths that can be constructed with this method. Using this, it becomes relatively easy to answer such classical problems of geometry as\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nGalois' theory originated in the study of symmetric functions \u2013 the coefficients of a monic polynomial are (up to sign) the elementary symmetric polynomials in the roots. For instance, (\"x\" \u2013 \"a\")(\"x\" \u2013 \"b\") = \"x\"2 \u2013 (\"a\" + \"b\")\"x\" + \"ab\", where 1, \"a\" + \"b\" and \"ab\" are the elementary polynomials of degree 0, 1 and 2 in two variables.\nThis was first formalized by the 16th-century French mathematician Fran\u00e7ois Vi\u00e8te, in Vi\u00e8te's formulas, for the case of positive real roots. In the opinion of the 18th-century British mathematician Charles Hutton, the expression of coefficients of a polynomial in terms of the roots (not only for positive roots) was first understood by the 17th-century French mathematician Albert Girard; Hutton writes:\n...[Girard was] the first person who understood the general doctrine of the formation of the coefficients of the powers from the sum of the roots and their products. He was the first who discovered the rules for summing the powers of the roots of any equation.\nIn this vein, the discriminant is a symmetric function in the roots that reflects properties of the roots \u2013 it is zero if and only if the polynomial has a multiple root, and for quadratic and cubic polynomials it is positive if and only if all roots are real and distinct, and negative if and only if there is a pair of distinct complex conjugate roots. See for details.\nThe cubic was first partly solved by the 15\u201316th-century Italian mathematician Scipione del Ferro, who did not however publish his results; this method, though, only solved one type of cubic equation. This solution was then rediscovered independently in 1535 by Niccol\u00f2 Fontana Tartaglia, who shared it with Gerolamo Cardano, asking him to not publish it. Cardano then extended this to numerous other cases, using similar arguments; see more details at Cardano's method. After the discovery of del Ferro's work, he felt that Tartaglia's method was no longer secret, and thus he published his solution in his 1545 \"Ars Magna.\" His student Lodovico Ferrari solved the quartic polynomial; his solution was also included in \"Ars Magna.\" In this book, however, Cardano did not provide a \"general formula\" for the solution of a cubic equation, as he had neither complex numbers at his disposal, nor the algebraic notation to be able to describe a general cubic equation. With the benefit of modern notation and complex numbers, the formulae in this book do work in the general case, but Cardano did not know this. It was Rafael Bombelli who managed to understand how to work with complex numbers in order to solve all forms of cubic equation.\nA further step was the 1770 paper \"R\u00e9flexions sur la r\u00e9solution alg\u00e9brique des \u00e9quations\" by the French-Italian mathematician Joseph Louis Lagrange, in his method of Lagrange resolvents, where he analyzed Cardano's and Ferrari's solution of cubics and quartics by considering them in terms of \"permutations\" of the roots, which yielded an auxiliary polynomial of lower degree, providing a unified understanding of the solutions and laying the groundwork for group theory and Galois' theory. Crucially, however, he did not consider \"composition\" of permutations. Lagrange's method did not extend to quintic equations or higher, because the resolvent had higher degree.\nThe quintic was almost proven to have no general solutions by radicals by Paolo Ruffini in 1799, whose key insight was to use permutation \"groups\", not just a single permutation. His solution contained a gap, which Cauchy considered minor, though this was not patched until the work of the Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel, who published a proof in 1824, thus establishing the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem.\nWhile Ruffini and Abel established that the \"general\" quintic could not be solved, some \"particular\" quintics can be solved, such as \"x\"5 - 1 \n 0, and the precise criterion by which a \"given\" quintic or higher polynomial could be determined to be solvable or not was given by \u00c9variste Galois, who showed that whether a polynomial was solvable or not was equivalent to whether or not the permutation group of its roots \u2013 in modern terms, its Galois group \u2013 had a certain structure \u2013 in modern terms, whether or not it was a solvable group. This group was always solvable for polynomials of degree four or less, but not always so for polynomials of degree five and greater, which explains why there is no general solution in higher degrees.\nGalois' writings.\nIn 1830 Galois (at the age of 18) submitted to the French Academy of Sciences a memoir on his theory of solvability by radicals; Galois' paper was ultimately rejected in 1831 as being too sketchy and for giving a condition in terms of the roots of the equation instead of its coefficients. Galois then died in a duel in 1832, and his paper, \"M\u00e9moire sur les conditions de r\u00e9solubilit\u00e9 des \u00e9quations par radicaux\", remained unpublished until 1846 when it was published by Joseph Liouville accompanied by some of his own explanations. Prior to this publication, Liouville announced Galois' result to the Academy of Sciences in a speech he gave on 4 July 1843. According to Allan Clark, Galois's characterization \"dramatically supersedes the work of Abel and Ruffini.\"\nAftermath.\nGalois' theory was notoriously difficult for his contemporaries to understand, especially to the level where they could expand on it. For example, in his 1846 commentary, Liouville completely missed the group-theoretic core of Galois' method. Joseph Alfred Serret who attended some of Liouville's talks, included Galois' theory in his 1866 (third edition) of his textbook \"Cours d'alg\u00e8bre sup\u00e9rieure\". Serret's pupil, Camille Jordan, had an even better understanding reflected in his 1870 book \"Trait\u00e9 des substitutions et des \u00e9quations alg\u00e9briques\". Outside France, Galois' theory remained more obscure for a longer period. In Britain, Cayley failed to grasp its depth and popular British algebra textbooks did not even mention Galois' theory until well after the turn of the century. In Germany, Kronecker's writings focused more on Abel's result. Dedekind wrote little about Galois' theory, but lectured on it at G\u00f6ttingen in 1858, showing a very good understanding. Eugen Netto's books of the 1880s, based on Jordan's \"Trait\u00e9\", made Galois theory accessible to a wider German and American audience as did Heinrich Martin Weber's 1895 algebra textbook.\nPermutation group approach.\nGiven a polynomial, it may be that some of the roots are connected by various algebraic equations. For example, it may be that for two of the roots, say \"A\" and \"B\", that \"A\"2 + 5\"B\"3 = 7. The central idea of Galois' theory is to consider permutations (or rearrangements) of the roots such that \"any\" algebraic equation satisfied by the roots is \"still satisfied\" after the roots have been permuted. Originally, the theory had been developed for algebraic equations whose coefficients are rational numbers. It extends naturally to equations with coefficients in any field, but this will not be considered in the simple examples below.\nThese permutations together form a permutation group, also called the Galois group of the polynomial, which is explicitly described in the following examples.\nQuadratic equation.\nConsider the quadratic equation\nformula_1\nBy using the quadratic formula, we find that the two roots are\nformula_2\nExamples of algebraic equations satisfied by \"A\" and \"B\" include\nformula_3\nand\nformula_4\nIf we exchange \"A\" and \"B\" in either of the last two equations we obtain another true statement. For example, the equation \"A\" + \"B\" \n 4 becomes \"B\" + \"A\" \n 4. It is more generally true that this holds for \"every\" possible algebraic relation between \"A\" and \"B\" such that all coefficients are rational; that is, in any such relation, swapping \"A\" and \"B\" yields another true relation. This results from the theory of symmetric polynomials, which, in this case, may be replaced by formula manipulations involving the binomial theorem.\nOne might object that \"A\" and \"B\" are related by the algebraic equation \"A\" \u2212 \"B\" \u2212 2\u221a3 \n 0, which does not remain true when \"A\" and \"B\" are exchanged. However, this relation is not considered here, because it has the coefficient which is not rational.\nWe conclude that the Galois group of the polynomial \"x\"2 \u2212 4\"x\" + 1 consists of two permutations: the identity permutation which leaves \"A\" and \"B\" untouched, and the transposition permutation which exchanges \"A\" and \"B\". As all groups with two elements are isomorphic, this Galois group is isomorphic to the multiplicative group {1, \u22121}.\nA similar discussion applies to any quadratic polynomial \"ax\"2 + \"bx\" + \"c\", where \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" are rational numbers.\n (\"x\" \u2212 2)2, or \"x\"2 \u2212 3\"x\" + 2 \n (\"x\" \u2212 2)(\"x\" \u2212 1), then the Galois group is trivial; that is, it contains only the identity permutation. In this example, if \"A\" \n 2 and \"B\" \n 1 then \"A\" \u2212 \"B\" \n 1 is no longer true when \"A\" and \"B\" are swapped.\nQuartic equation.\nConsider the polynomial\nformula_5\nCompleting the square in an unusual way, it can also be written as\nformula_6\nBy applying the quadratic formula to each factor, one sees that the four roots are \nformula_7\nAmong the 24 possible permutations of these four roots, four are particularly simple, those consisting in the sign change of 0, 1, or 2 square roots. They form a group that is isomorphic to the Klein four-group. \nGalois theory implies that, since the polynomial is irreducible, the Galois group has at least four elements. For proving that the Galois group consists of these four permutations, it suffices thus to show that every element of the Galois group is determined by the image of A, which can be shown as follows.\nThe members of the Galois group must preserve any algebraic equation with rational coefficients involving \"A\", \"B\", \"C\" and \"D\".\nAmong these equations, we have:\nformula_8\nIt follows that, if \"\u03c6\" is a permutation that belongs to the Galois group, we must have:\nformula_9\nThis implies that the permutation is well defined by the image of \"A\", and that the Galois group has 4 elements, which are:\n(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\", \"D\") \u2192 (\"A\", \"B\", \"C\", \"D\")(identity)\n(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\", \"D\") \u2192 (\"B\", \"A\", \"D\", \"C\")(change of sign of formula_10)\n(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\", \"D\") \u2192 (\"C\", \"D\", \"A\", \"B\")(change of sign of formula_11)\n(\"A\", \"B\", \"C\", \"D\") \u2192 (\"D\", \"C\", \"B\", \"A\")(change of sign of both square roots)\nThis implies that the Galois group is isomorphic to the Klein four-group.\nModern approach by field theory.\nIn the modern approach, one starts with a field extension \"L\"/\"K\" (read \"\"L\" over \"K\"\"), and examines the group of automorphisms of \"L\" that fix \"K\". See the article on Galois groups for further explanation and examples.\nThe connection between the two approaches is as follows. The coefficients of the polynomial in question should be chosen from the base field \"K\". The top field \"L\" should be the field obtained by adjoining the roots of the polynomial in question to the base field \"K\". Any permutation of the roots which respects algebraic equations as described above gives rise to an automorphism of \"L\"/\"K\", and vice versa.\nIn the first example above, we were studying the extension Q(\u221a3)/Q, where Q is the field of rational numbers, and Q(\u221a3) is the field obtained from Q by adjoining . In the second example, we were studying the extension Q(\"A\",\"B\",\"C\",\"D\")/Q.\nThere are several advantages to the modern approach over the permutation group approach.\nSolvable groups and solution by radicals.\nThe notion of a solvable group in group theory allows one to determine whether a polynomial is solvable in radicals, depending on whether its Galois group has the property of solvability. In essence, each field extension \"L\"/\"K\" corresponds to a factor group in a composition series of the Galois group. If a factor group in the composition series is cyclic of order \"n\", and if in the corresponding field extension \"L\"/\"K\" the field \"K\" already contains a primitive \"n\"th root of unity, then it is a radical extension and the elements of \"L\" can then be expressed using the \"n\"th root of some element of \"K\".\nIf all the factor groups in its composition series are cyclic, the Galois group is called \"solvable\", and all of the elements of the corresponding field can be found by repeatedly taking roots, products, and sums of elements from the base field (usually Q).\nOne of the great triumphs of Galois Theory was the proof that for every \"n\" &gt; 4, there exist polynomials of degree \"n\" which are not solvable by radicals (this was proven independently, using a similar method, by Niels Henrik Abel a few years before, and is the Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem), and a systematic way for testing whether a specific polynomial is solvable by radicals. The Abel\u2013Ruffini theorem results from the fact that for \"n\" &gt; 4 the symmetric group \"S\"\"n\" contains a simple, noncyclic, normal subgroup, namely the alternating group \"A\"\"n\".\nA non-solvable quintic example.\nVan der Waerden cites the polynomial \"f\"(\"x\") \n \"x\"5 \u2212 \"x\" \u2212 1. \nBy the rational root theorem, this has no rational zeroes. \nNeither does it have linear factors modulo 2 or 3.\nThe Galois group of \"f\"(\"x\") modulo 2 is cyclic of order 6, because \"f\"(\"x\") modulo 2 factors into polynomials of orders 2 and 3, (\"x\"2 + \"x\" + 1)(\"x\"3 + \"x\"2 + 1).\n\"f\"(\"x\") modulo 3 has no linear or quadratic factor, and hence is irreducible. Thus its modulo 3 Galois group contains an element of order 5.\nIt is known that a Galois group modulo a prime is isomorphic to a subgroup of the Galois group over the rationals. A permutation group on 5 objects with elements of orders 6 and 5 must be the symmetric group \"S\"5, which is therefore the Galois group of \"f\"(\"x\"). \nThis is one of the simplest examples of a non-solvable quintic polynomial. According to Serge Lang, Emil Artin was fond of this example.\nInverse Galois problem.\nThe \"inverse Galois problem\" is to find a field extension with a given Galois group.\nAs long as one does not also specify the ground field, the problem is not very difficult, and all finite groups do occur as Galois groups.\nFor showing this, one may proceed as follows. Choose a field \"K\" and a finite group \"G\". Cayley's theorem says that \"G\" is (up to isomorphism) a subgroup of the symmetric group \"S\" on the elements of \"G\". Choose indeterminates {\"x\"\"\u03b1\"}, one for each element \"\u03b1\" of \"G\", and adjoin them to \"K\" to get the field \"F\" \n \"K\"({\"x\"\"\u03b1\"}). Contained within \"F\" is the field \"L\" of symmetric rational functions in the {\"x\"\"\u03b1\"}. The Galois group of \"F\"/\"L\" is \"S\", by a basic result of Emil Artin. \"G\" acts on \"F\" by restriction of action of \"S\". If the fixed field of this action is \"M\", then, by the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, the Galois group of \"F\"/\"M\" is \"G\".\nOn the other hand, it is an open problem whether every finite group is the Galois group of a field extension of the field Q of the rational numbers. Igor Shafarevich proved that every solvable finite group is the Galois group of some extension of Q. Various people have solved the inverse Galois problem for selected non-Abelian simple groups. Existence of solutions has been shown for all but possibly one (Mathieu group \"M\"23) of the 26 sporadic simple groups. There is even a polynomial with integral coefficients whose Galois group is the Monster group.\nInseparable extensions.\nIn the form mentioned above, including in particular the fundamental theorem of Galois theory, the theory only considers Galois extensions, which are in particular separable. General field extensions can be split into a separable, followed by a purely inseparable field extension. For a purely inseparable extension \"F\" / \"K\", there is a Galois theory where the Galois group is replaced by the vector space of derivations, formula_12, i.e., \"K\"-linear endomorphisms of \"F\" satisfying the Leibniz rule. In this correspondence, an intermediate field \"E\" is assigned formula_13. Conversely, a subspace formula_14 satisfying appropriate further conditions is mapped to formula_15. Under the assumption formula_16, showed that this establishes a one-to-one correspondence. The condition imposed by Jacobson has been removed by , by giving a correspondence using notions of derived algebraic geometry.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61317", "revid": "50956436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61317", "title": "Shannara", "text": "Series of books by Terry Brooks\nShannara is a series of high fantasy novels written by Terry Brooks, beginning with \"The Sword of Shannara\" in 1977 and concluding with \"The Last Druid\" which was released in October 2020; there is also a prequel, \"First King of Shannara\". The series blends magic and primitive technology and is set in the Four Lands, which are identified as Earth long after civilization was destroyed in a chemical and nuclear holocaust called the Great Wars. By the time of the prequel \"First King of Shannara\", the world had reverted to a pre-industrial state and magic had re-emerged to supplement science.\nIn March 2025, Brooks announced his semi-retirement and that Delilah S. Dawson would be taking on the authorship of his \"Shannara\" legendarium going forward.\nSetting.\nThe Shannara series is set in a post-apocalyptic world called the Four Lands. This world is a futuristic version of our own, and not a secondary world. The \"Genesis of Shannara\" trilogy reveals the Four Lands to be located in the modern Pacific Northwest region of the United States and Canada. Much of the landscape has been changed by a future nuclear holocaust called The Great Wars, but some landmarks remain. For example, the Columbia River still exists.\nEach land is named after the compass point it faces: the Northland, the Southland, the Eastland, and the Westland, and is the primary home of different peoples. The Westland is the homeland primarily of the elves, while the Northland is mostly inhabited by trolls and the Eastland is the home mostly of dwarves and gnomes. The Southland is primarily the homeland of humans.\nNovels.\n\"Word &amp; Void\".\nThe Word &amp; Void series (also called The Word and The Void) focuses on John Ross and Nest Freemark, forced acquaintances who use magic given to them from the Word to prevent mankind from being overcome by the demonic forces of the Void. The trilogy consists of \"Running with the Demon\", \"A Knight of the Word\", and \"Angel Fire East\" and is predominantly set in 1990's and early 2000's Illinois. It follows Nest Freemark, a girl with magical abilities who has no known relationship to any \"Shannara\" character. Before the publication of \"Armageddon's Children\" it was unclear whether this trilogy existed within the \"Shannara\" universe. It has since been revealed as the \"ultimate prequel\" to the \"Shannara\" novels.\n\"The Genesis of Shannara\".\n\"The Genesis of Shannara\" series consists of \"Armageddon's Children\", \"The Elves of Cintra\" and \"The Gypsy Morph\". They cover events during The Great Wars, which are alluded to often in the \"Shannara\" series.\n\"Legends of Shannara\".\nThe \"Legends of Shannara\" series consists of \"Bearers of the Black Staff \"and\" The Measure of the Magic\".\n\"First King of Shannara\".\nThis is the prequel to the \"Original Shannara Trilogy.\"\n\"The Sword of Shannara\".\nAlso published as the \"Original Shannara Trilogy\" by Del Rey Books, these were the first three published Shannara novels (\"The Sword of Shannara\", \"The Elfstones of Shannara\", and \"The Wishsong of Shannara\")\n\"The Heritage of Shannara\".\nThe next four books consist of \"The Scions of Shannara\", \"The Druid of Shannara\", \"The Elf Queen of Shannara\" and\" The Talismans of Shannara\". These books are known as \"The Heritage of Shannara\", are set 300 years after \"The Original Shannara Trilogy\".\n\"The Voyage of the Jerle Shannara\".\n\"The Voyage of the Jerle Shannara\" trilogy consists of the books \"Ilse Witch\", \"Antrax\", and \"Morgawr\". It is set 130 years after the Heritage of Shannara.\n\"High Druid of Shannara\".\nThe \"High Druid of Shannara\" trilogy includes the novels \"Jarka Ruus\", \"Tanequil\", and \"Straken\". It is set 20 years after the Voyage of the Jerle Shannara.\n\"The Dark Legacy of Shannara\".\nThis trilogy is set 100 to 120 years after the events in \"Straken\", consists of \"Wards of Faerie\", published August 21, 2012, \"Bloodfire Quest\", published March 12, 2013, and \"Witch Wraith\", published July 17, 2013.\n\"The Defenders of Shannara\".\nSet 100 years after the events in \"The Dark Legacy of Shannara\" trilogy. The three novels are loosely connected, stand-alone novels, described as the setup for the conclusion of the entire Shannara saga. The trilogy consists of \"The High Druid's Blade\" (published July 15, 2014), \"The Darkling Child\" (published June 9, 2015), and \"The Sorcerer's Daughter\" (published May 24, 2016).\n\"The Fall of Shannara\".\n\"The Fall of Shannara\" is a four-book series, set over 200 years after \"The Sorcerer's Daughter\", that concludes the overall story arc of the Shannara universe. It is described as the chronological end, but not necessarily the last stories to be published. It begins with \"The Black Elfstone\", which was published on June 13, 2017. The second book, \"The Skaar Invasion\", was published on June 18, 2018. The third book, \"The Stiehl Assassin\", was published in June 2019. The fourth and final book, \"The Last Druid\", was released on October 20, 2020.\nTelevision and film rights.\nIn 2007, Warner Bros. optioned the film rights to the Shannara universe for producer Dan Farah, but the rights deal expired in 2010 and all rights reverted to Terry Brooks.\nFarah Films partnered with Sonar Entertainment to acquire TV rights to the Shannara universe in 2012. In December, 2013 it was announced an epic TV series based on the books was being produced for MTV. The series is produced by Dan Farah, Jon Favreau, and \"Smallville\" showrunners Miles Millar and Al Gough, and Jonathan Liebesman. During the Shannara Chronicles panel at San Diego Comic Con in July 2015, a teaser trailer was revealed, giving audiences a first look at the sets and characters. A television version of the trailer was shown during the 2015 MTV Music Awards. The series premiered January 5, 2016. Season 2 began airing on Spike in October 2017.\nOn January 16, 2018, it was announced that the series had been cancelled after two seasons. Producers later announced that the series is being shopped to other networks. The series was later considered officially concluded.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61321", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61321", "title": "The Universal Declaration of Human Rights", "text": ""}
{"id": "61322", "revid": "1071745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61322", "title": "Alcibiades", "text": "Athenian general and statesman (c. 450\u2013404 BC)\nAlcibiades (; ; c.450\u2013404 BC) was an Athenian statesman and general. The last of the Alcmaeonidae, he played a major role in the second half of the Peloponnesian War as a strategic advisor, military commander, and politician, but subsequently fell from prominence.\nDuring the course of the Peloponnesian War, Alcibiades changed his political allegiance several times. In his native Athens in the early 410s BC, he advocated an aggressive foreign policy and was a prominent proponent of the Sicilian Expedition. After his political enemies brought charges of sacrilege against him, he fled to Sparta, where he served as a strategic adviser, proposing or supervising several major campaigns against Athens. However, Alcibiades made powerful enemies in Sparta too, and defected to Persia. There he served as an adviser to the satrap Tissaphernes until Athenian political allies brought about his recall. He served as an Athenian general (strategos) for several years, but enemies eventually succeeded in exiling him a second time. He took refuge in Persian territory and was eventually assassinated, reportedly at the instigation of Sparta.\nScholars have argued that had the Sicilian expedition been under Alcibiades's command instead of that of Nicias, the expedition might not have met its eventual disastrous fate. In the years when he served Sparta, Alcibiades played a significant role in Athens's undoing; the capture of Decelea and the revolts of several critical Athenian subjects occurred either at his suggestion or under his supervision. Once restored to his native city, however, he played a crucial role in a string of Athenian victories that eventually brought Sparta to seek a peace with Athens. He favored unconventional tactics, frequently winning cities over by treachery or negotiation rather than by siege.\nAlcibiades's military and political talents frequently proved valuable to whichever state currently held his allegiance, but his propensity for making powerful enemies ensured that he never remained in one place for long; by the end of the war that he had helped to rekindle in the early 410s, his days of political relevance were a bygone memory. He is remembered in art and literature as a student of Socrates.\nEarly years.\nAlcibiades was born in Athens. The family of his father, Cleinias, had old connections with the Spartan aristocracy through a relationship of \"xenia\", and the name \"Alcibiades\" was of Spartan origin. Alcibiades's mother was Deinomache, the daughter of Megacles, head of the powerful Alcmaeonid family, and could trace her family back to Eurysaces and the Telamonian Ajax. Alcibiades thereby, through his mother, belonged to the powerful and controversial family of the Alcmaeonidae; the renowned Pericles and his brother Ariphron were Deinomache's cousins, as her father and their mother were siblings. His paternal grandfather, also named Alcibiades, was a friend of Cleisthenes, the famous constitutional reformer of the late sixth century BC. After the death of Cleinias at the Battle of Coronea (447 BC), Pericles and Ariphron became his guardians.\nAccording to Plutarch, Alcibiades had several famous teachers, including Socrates, and was well trained in the art of rhetoric. He was noted, however, for his unruly behavior, which was mentioned by ancient Greek and Latin writers on several occasions. It was believed that Socrates took Alcibiades as a student because he believed he could change Alcibiades from his vain ways. Xenophon attempted to clear Socrates's name at trial by relaying information that Alcibiades was always corrupt and that Socrates merely failed in attempting to teach him morality.\nAlcibiades took part in the Battle of Potidaea in 432 BC, where Socrates was said to have saved his life. Alcibiades later returned the favour by rescuing Socrates at the Battle of Delium in 424 BC. Alcibiades had a particularly close relationship with Socrates, whom he admired and respected. Plutarch and Plato describe Alcibiades as Socrates's beloved, the former stating that Alcibiades \"feared and reverenced Socrates alone, and despised the rest of his lovers\".\nAlcibiades was married to Hipparete, the daughter of Hipponicus, a wealthy Athenian. His bride brought with her a large dowry, which significantly increased Alcibiades's already substantial family fortune. According to Plutarch, Hipparete loved her husband but attempted to divorce him because he consorted with courtesans, but he prevented her from appearing at court. He seized her in court and carried her home again through the crowded Agora. She lived with him until her death, which came soon after, and gave birth to two children, a son named Alcibiades the Younger and a daughter. Alcibiades was famed throughout his life for his physical attractiveness, of which he was inordinately vain.\nPolitical career until 412 BC.\nRise to prominence.\nAlcibiades first rose to prominence when he began advocating aggressive Athenian action after the signing of the Peace of Nicias. That treaty, an uneasy truce between Sparta and Athens signed midway through the Peloponnesian War, came at the end of seven years of fighting during which neither side had gained a decisive advantage. Historians Arnold W. Gomme and Raphael Sealey believe, and Thucydides reports, that Alcibiades was offended that the Spartans had negotiated that treaty through Nicias and Laches, overlooking him on account of his youth.\nDisputes over the interpretation of the treaty led the Spartans to dispatch ambassadors to Athens with full powers to arrange all unsettled matters. The Athenians initially received these ambassadors well, but Alcibiades met with them in secret before they were to speak to the ecclesia (the Athenian Assembly) and told them that the Assembly was haughty and had great ambitions. He urged them to renounce their diplomatic authority to represent Sparta, and instead allow him to assist them through his influence in Athenian politics. The representatives agreed and, impressed with Alcibiades, they alienated themselves from Nicias, who genuinely wanted to reach an agreement with the Spartans. The next day, during the Assembly, Alcibiades asked them what powers Sparta had granted them to negotiate and they replied, as agreed, that they had not come with full and independent powers. This was in direct contradiction to what they had said the day before, and Alcibiades seized on this opportunity to denounce their character, cast suspicion on their aims, and destroy their credibility. This ploy increased Alcibiades's standing while embarrassing Nicias, and Alcibiades was subsequently appointed general. He took advantage of his increasing power to orchestrate the creation of an alliance between Argos, Mantinea, Elis, and other states in the Peloponnese, threatening Sparta's dominance in the region. According to Gomme, \"it was a grandiose scheme for an Athenian general at the head of a mainly Peloponnesian army to march through the Peloponnese cocking a snook at Sparta when her reputation was at its lowest\". This alliance, however, would ultimately be defeated at the Battle of Mantinea.\nSomewhere in the years 416\u2013415 BC, a complex struggle took place between Hyperbolos on one side and Nicias and Alcibiades on the other. Hyperbolos tried to bring about the ostracism of one of this pair, but Nicias and Alcibiades combined their influence to induce the people to expel Hyperbolos instead. This incident reveals that Nicias and Alcibiades each commanded a personal following, whose votes were determined by the wishes of the leaders.\nAlcibiades was not one of the generals involved in the capture of Melos in 416\u2013415 BC, but Plutarch describes him as a supporter of the decree by which the grown men of Melos were killed and the women and children enslaved. An oration urging Alcibiades's ostracism, \"Against Alcibiades\" (historically attributed to the orator Andocides but not in fact by him), alleges that Alcibiades had a child by one of these enslaved women.\nSicilian Expedition.\nIn 415 BC, delegates from the Sicilian city of Segesta () arrived at Athens to plead for the support of the Athenians in their war against Selinus. During the debates on the undertaking, Nicias was vehemently opposed to Athenian intervention, explaining that the campaign would be very costly and attacking the character and motives of Alcibiades, who had emerged as a major supporter of the expedition. On the other hand, Alcibiades argued that a campaign in this new theatre would bring riches to the city and expand the empire, just as the Persian Wars had. In his speech Alcibiades predicted (over-optimistically, in the opinion of most historians) that the Athenians would be able to recruit allies in the region and impose their rule on Syracuse, the most powerful city of Sicily. In spite of Alcibiades's enthusiastic advocacy for the plan, it was Nicias, not he, who turned a modest undertaking into a massive campaign and made the conquest of Sicily seem possible and safe. It was at his suggestion that the size of the fleet was significantly increased from 60 ships to \"140 galleys, 5,100 men at arms, and about 1300 archers, slingers, and light armed men\". Philosopher Leo Strauss underscores that the Sicilian expedition surpassed everything undertaken by Pericles. Almost certainly Nicias's intention was to shock the assembly with his high estimate of the forces required, but, instead of dissuading his fellow citizens, his analysis made them all the more eager. Against his wishes Nicias was appointed general along with Alcibiades and Lamachus, all three of whom were given full powers to do whatever was in the best interests of Athens while in Sicily.\nOne night during preparations for the expedition, the hermai, heads of the god Hermes on a plinth with a phallus, were mutilated throughout Athens. This was a religious scandal, resulted in a charge of \"asebeia\" (impiety) against Alcibiades, and was seen as a bad omen for the mission. Plutarch explains that Androcles, a political leader, used false witnesses who accused Alcibiades and his friends of mutilating the statues, and of profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries. Later his opponents, chief among them being Androcles and Thessalus, Cimon's son, enlisted orators to argue that Alcibiades should set sail as planned and stand trial on his return from the campaign. Alcibiades was suspicious of their intentions, and asked to be allowed to stand trial immediately, under penalty of death, in order to clear his name. This request was denied, and the fleet set sail soon after, with the charges unresolved.\nAs Alcibiades had suspected, his absence emboldened his enemies, and they began to accuse him of other sacrilegious actions and comments and even alleged that these actions were connected with a plot against the democracy. According to Thucydides, the Athenians were always in fear and took everything suspiciously. When the fleet arrived in Catania, it found the state trireme \"Salaminia\" waiting to bring Alcibiades and the others indicted for mutilating the hermai or profaning the Eleusinian Mysteries back to Athens to stand trial. Alcibiades told the heralds that he would follow them back to Athens in his ship, but in Thurii he escaped with his crew; in Athens he was convicted \"in absentia\" and condemned to death. His property was confiscated and a reward of one talent was promised to whoever succeeded in killing any who had fled. Meanwhile, the Athenian force in Sicily, after a few early victories, moved against Messina, where the generals expected their secret allies within the city to betray it to them. Alcibiades, however, foreseeing that he would be outlawed, gave information to the friends of the Syracusans in Messina, who succeeded in preventing the admission of the Athenians. With the death of Lamachus in battle some time later, command of the Sicilian Expedition fell into the hands of Nicias, admired by Thucydides (however a modern scholar has judged him to be an inadequate military leader).\nDefection to Sparta.\nAfter his disappearance at Thurii, Alcibiades quickly contacted the Spartans, \"promising to render them aid and service greater than all the harm he had previously done them as an enemy\" if they would offer him sanctuary. The Spartans granted this request and received him among them. Because of this defection, the Athenians condemned him to death \"in absentia\" and confiscated his property. In the debate at Sparta over whether to send a force to relieve Syracuse, Alcibiades spoke and instilled fear of Athenian ambition into the Spartan ephors by informing them that the Athenians hoped to conquer Sicily, Italy, and even Carthage. Historian Donald Kagan believes that Alcibiades knowingly exaggerated the plans of the Athenians to convince the Spartans of the benefit they stood to gain from his help. Kagan asserts that Alcibiades had not yet acquired his \"legendary\" reputation, and the Spartans saw him as \"a defeated and hunted man\" whose policies \"produced strategic failures\" and brought \"no decisive result\". If accurate, this assessment underscores one of Alcibiades's greatest talents, his highly persuasive oratory. After making the threat seem imminent, Alcibiades advised the Spartans to send troops and most importantly, a Spartan commander to discipline and aid the Syracusans.\nAlcibiades served as a military adviser to Sparta and helped the Spartans secure several crucial successes. He advised them to build a permanent fort at Decelea, just over from Athens and within sight of the city. By doing this, the Spartans cut the Athenians off entirely from their homes and crops and the silver mines of Sunium. This was part of Alcibiades's plan to renew the war with Athens in Attica. The move was devastating to Athens and forced the citizens to live within the long walls of the city year round, making them entirely dependent on their seaborne trade for food. Seeing Athens thus beleaguered on a second front, members of the Delian League began to contemplate revolt. In the wake of Athens's disastrous defeat in Sicily, Alcibiades sailed to Ionia with a Spartan fleet and succeeded in persuading several critical cities to revolt.\nIn spite of these valuable contributions to the Spartan cause, around this time Alcibiades fell out of favor with the government of king Agis II. Leotychides, the son born by Agis's wife Timaea, Queen of Sparta (or Queen Timonassa), shortly after this, was believed by many to be Alcibiades's son. An alternate account asserts that Alcibiades took advantage of King Agis's absence with the Spartan army in Attica and seduced his wife.\nAlcibiades's influence was further reduced after the retirement of Endius, the ephor who was on good terms with him. It is alleged that Astyochus, a Spartan admiral, was sent orders to kill him, but Alcibiades received warning of this order and defected to the Persian satrap Tissaphernes, who had been supporting the Peloponnesian forces financially in 412 BC.\nDefection to Achaemenid Empire in Asia Minor.\nOn his arrival in the local Persian court, Alcibiades won the trust of the powerful satrap and made several policy suggestions which were well received. According to Thucydides, Alcibiades immediately began to do all he could with Tissaphernes to injure the Peloponnesian cause. At his urging, the satrap reduced the payments he was making to the Peloponnesian fleet and began delivering them irregularly. Alcibiades next advised Tissaphernes to bribe the generals of the cities to gain valuable intelligence on their activities. Lastly, and most importantly, he told the satrap to be in no hurry to bring the Persian fleet into the conflict, as the longer the war dragged out the more exhausted the combatants would become. This would allow the Persians to more easily conquer the region in the aftermath of the fighting. Alcibiades tried to convince the satrap that it was in Persia's interest to wear both Athens and Sparta out at first, \"and after docking the Athenian power as much as he could, forthwith to rid the country of the Peloponnesians\".\nAlthough Alcibiades's advice benefited the Persians, it was merely a means to an end; Thucydides tells us that his real motive was to use his alleged influence with the Persians to effect his restoration to Athens. Alcibiades was one of several Greek aristocrats who took refuge in the Achaemenid Empire following reversals at home, other famous ones being Themistocles, Demaratos or Gongylos. According to Thucydides (Thuc.8.47), Alcibiades also advised the Achaemenid king (Darius II), and therefore he may have traveled to Susa or Babylonia to encounter him.\nRecall to Athens.\nNegotiations with the Athenian oligarchs.\nAlcibiades seemed to assume that the \"radical democracy\" would never agree to his recall to Athens. He exchanged messages with the Athenian leaders at Samos and suggested that if they could install an oligarchy friendly to him he would return to Athens and bring with him Persian money and possibly the Persian fleet of 147 triremes. Alcibiades set about winning over the most influential military officers, and achieved his goal by offering them a threefold plan: the Athenian constitution was to be changed, the recall of Alcibiades was to be voted, and Alcibiades was to win over Tissaphernes and the King of Persia to the Athenian side. Most of the officers in the Athenian fleet accepted the plan and welcomed the prospect of a narrower constitution, which would allow them a greater part in determining policy. According to Thucydides, only one of the Athenian generals at Samos, Phrynichus, opposed the plan and argued that Alcibiades cared no more for the proposed oligarchy than for the traditional democracy. The involvement in the plot of another general, Thrasybulus, remains unclear.\nThese officers of the Athenian fleet formed a group of conspirators, but were met with opposition from the majority of the soldiers and sailors; these were eventually calmed down \"by the advantageous prospect of the pay from the king\". The members of the group assembled and prepared to send Pisander, one of their number, on an embassy to Athens to treat for the restoration of Alcibiades and the abolition of democracy in the city, and thus to make Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians.\nPhrynichus, fearing that Alcibiades if restored would avenge himself upon him for his opposition, sent a secret letter to the Spartan Admiral, Astyochus, to tell him that Alcibiades was ruining their cause by making Tissaphernes the friend of the Athenians, and containing an express revelation of the rest of the intrigue. Astyochus went up to Alcibiades and Tissaphernes at Magnesia and communicated to them Phrynichus's letter. Alcibiades responded in kind, sending to the authorities at Samos a letter against Phrynichus, stating what he had done, and requiring that he should be put to death. Phrynichus in desperation wrote again to Astyochus, offering him a chance to destroy the Athenian fleet at Samos. This also Astyochus revealed to Alcibiades who informed the officers at Samos that they had been betrayed by Phrynichus. Alcibiades however gained no credit, because Phrynichus had anticipated Alcibiades's letter and, before the accusations could arrive, told the army that he had received information of an enemy plan to attack the camp and that they should fortify Samos as quickly as possible.\nDespite these events, Pisander and the other envoys of the conspirators arrived at Athens and made a speech before the people. Pisander won the argument, putting Alcibiades and his promises at the center. The Ecclesia deposed Phrynichus and elected Pisander and ten other envoys to negotiate with Tissaphernes and Alcibiades.\nAt this point, Alcibiades's scheme encountered a great obstacle. Tissaphernes would not make an agreement on any terms, wanting to follow his policy of neutrality. As Kagan points out, Tissaphernes was a prudent leader and had recognized the advantages of wearing each side out without direct Persian involvement. Alcibiades realized this and, by presenting the Athenians with stiffer and stiffer demands on Tissaphernes's behalf, attempted to convince them that he had persuaded Tissaphernes to support them, but that they had not conceded enough to him. Although the envoys were angered at the audacity of the Persian demands, they nevertheless departed with the impression that Alcibiades could have brought about an agreement among the powers if he had chosen to do so. This fiasco at the court of Tissaphernes, however, put an end to the negotiations between the conspirators and Alcibiades. The group was convinced that Alcibiades could not deliver his side of the bargain without demanding exorbitantly high concessions of them and they accordingly abandoned their plans to restore him to Athens.\nReinstatement as an Athenian general.\nIn spite of the failure of the negotiations, the conspirators succeeded in overthrowing the democracy and imposing the oligarchic government of the Four Hundred, among the leaders of which were Phrynichus and Pisander. At Samos, however, a similar coup instigated by the conspirators did not go forward so smoothly. Samian democrats learned of the conspiracy and notified four prominent Athenians: the generals Leon and Diomedon, the trierarch Thrasybulus, and Thrasyllus, at that time a hoplite in the ranks. With the support of these men and the Athenian soldiers in general, the Samian democrats were able to defeat the 300 Samian oligarchs who attempted to seize power there. Further, the Athenian troops at Samos formed themselves into a political assembly, deposed their generals, and elected new ones, including Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus. The army, stating that they had not revolted from the city but that the city had revolted from them, resolved to stand by the democracy while continuing to prosecute the war against Sparta.\nAfter a time, Thrasybulus persuaded the assembled troops to vote Alcibiades's recall, a policy that he had supported since before the coup. Then he sailed to retrieve Alcibiades and returned with him to Samos. The aim of this policy was to win away Persian support from the Spartans, as it was still believed that Alcibiades had great influence with Tissaphernes. Plutarch claims that the army sent for Alcibiades so as to use his help in putting down the tyrants in Athens. Kagan argues that this reinstatement was a disappointment to Alcibiades, who had hoped for a glorious return to Athens itself but found himself only restored to the rebellious fleet, where the immunity from prosecution he had been granted \"protected him for the time being but not from a reckoning in the future\"; furthermore, the recall, which Alcibiades had hoped to bring about through his own prestige and perceived influence, was achieved through the patronage of Thrasybulus.\nIn his first speech to the assembled troops, Alcibiades complained bitterly about the circumstances of his exile, but most of the speech was boasting of his influence with Tissaphernes. The primary motives of his speech were to make the oligarchs at Athens fear him and to increase his credit with the army at Samos. Upon hearing his speech the troops immediately elected him general alongside Thrasybulus and the others. He roused them so much that they proposed to sail at once for Piraeus and attack the oligarchs in Athens. It was primarily Alcibiades, along with Thrasybulus, who calmed the people and showed them the folly of this proposal, which would have sparked civil war and would have led to the immediate defeat of Athens. Shortly after Alcibiades's reinstatement as an Athenian general, the government of the Four Hundred was overthrown and replaced by a broader oligarchy, which would eventually give way to democracy.\nPresently Alcibiades sailed to Tissaphernes with a detachment of ships. According to Plutarch, the supposed purpose of this mission was to stop the Persian fleet from coming to the aid of the Peloponnesians. Thucydides is in agreement with Plutarch that the Persian fleet was at Aspendus and that Alcibiades told the troops he would bring the fleet to their side or prevent it from coming at all, but Thucydides further speculates that the real reason was to flaunt his new position to Tissaphernes and try to gain some real influence over him. According to the historian, Alcibiades had long known that Tissaphernes never meant to bring the fleet at all.\nBattles of Abydos and Cyzicus.\nAlcibiades was recalled by the \"intermediate regime\" of The Five Thousand, the government which succeeded the Four Hundred in 411, but it is most likely that he waited until 407 BC to actually return to the city. Plutarch tells us that, although his recall had already been passed on motion of Critias, a political ally of his, Alcibiades was resolved to come back with glory. While this was certainly his goal, it was again a means to an end, that end being to avoid prosecution upon his return to Athens.\nThe next significant part he would play in the war would occur at the Battle of Abydos. Alcibiades had remained behind at Samos with a small force while Thrasybulus and Thrasyllus led the greater part of the fleet to the Hellespont. During this period, Alcibiades succeeded in raising money from Caria and the neighboring area, with which he was able to pay the rowers and gain their favor. After the Athenian victory at Cynossema, both fleets summoned all their ships from around the Aegean to join them for what might be a decisive next engagement. While Alcibiades was still en route, the Athenians fought off the arrival of the Rhodian admiral Dorieus who appeared with 14 ships and was forced into Rhoeteium. The Spartans sailed to assist him and the two fleets clashed at Abydos, where the Peloponnesians had set up their main naval base. The battle was evenly matched, and raged for a long time, but the balance tipped towards the Athenians when Alcibiades sailed into the Hellespont with eighteen triremes. The Persian satrap Pharnabazus, who had replaced Tissaphernes as the sponsor of the Peloponnesian fleet, moved his land army to the shore to defend the ships and sailors who had beached their ships. Only the support of the Persian land army and the coming of night saved the Peloponnesian fleet from complete destruction.\nShortly after the battle, Tissaphernes had arrived in the Hellespont and Alcibiades left the fleet at Sestos to meet him, bringing gifts and hoping once again to try to win over the Persian governor. Evidently Alcibiades had gravely misjudged his standing with the satrap, and he was arrested on arrival. Within a month he would escape with another Athenian, Mantitheos, and resume command. It was now obvious, however, that he had no influence with the Persians; from now on his authority would depend on what he actually could accomplish rather than on what he promised to do.\nAfter an interlude of several months in which the Peloponnesians constructed new ships and the Athenians besieged cities and raised money throughout the Aegean, the next major sea battle took place the spring of 410 BC at Cyzicus. Alcibiades had been forced to flee from Sestos to Cardia to protect his small fleet from the rebuilt Peloponnesian navy, but as soon as the Athenian fleet was reunited there its commanders led it to Cyzicus, where the Athenians had intelligence indicating that Pharnabazus and Mindarus, the Peloponnesian fleet commander, were together plotting their next move. Concealed by storm and darkness, the combined Athenian force reached the vicinity without being spotted by the Peloponnesians. Here the Athenians devised a plot to draw the enemy into battle. According to Diodorus Siculus, Alcibiades advanced with a small squadron in order to draw the Spartans out to battle, and, after he successfully deceived Mindarus with this ploy, the squadrons of Thrasybulus and Theramenes came to join him, cutting off the Spartans' retreat.\nThe Spartan fleet suffered losses in the flight and reached the shore with the Athenians in close pursuit. Alcibiades's troops, leading the Athenian pursuit, landed and attempted to pull the Spartan ships back out to sea. The Peloponnesians fought to prevent their ships from being towed away, and Pharnabazus's troops came up to support them. Thrasybulus landed his own force to temporarily relieve pressure on Alcibiades, and meanwhile ordered Theramenes to join up with Athenian land forces nearby and bring them to reinforce the sailors and marines on the beach. The Spartans and Persians, overwhelmed by the arrival of multiple forces from several directions, were defeated and driven off, and the Athenians captured all the Spartan ships which were not destroyed. A letter dispatched to Sparta by Hippocrates, vice-admiral under Mindarus, was intercepted and taken to Athens; it ran as follows: \"The ships are lost. Mindarus is dead. The men are starving. We know not what to do\". A short time later Sparta petitioned for peace, but their appeals were ultimately rejected by the Athenians.\nFurther military successes.\nAfter their victory, Alcibiades and Thrasybulus began the siege of Chalcedon in 409 BC with about 190 ships. Although unable to attain a decisive victory or induce the city to surrender, Alcibiades was able to win a small tactical land battle outside of the city gates and Theramenes concluded an agreement with the Chalcedonians. Afterwards they concluded a temporary alliance with Pharnabazus which secured some much needed immediate cash for the army, but despite this Alcibiades was still forced to depart in search for more booty to pay the soldiers and oarsmen of the fleet.\nIn pursuit of these funds he traveled to the Thracian Chersonese and attacked Selymbria. He plotted with a pro-Athenian party within the city and offered the Selymbrians reasonable terms, imposing strict discipline on his men to see that they were observed. He did the Selymbrians's city no injury whatsoever, but merely took a sum of money from it, set a garrison there and left. Epigraphical evidence indicates the Selymbrians surrendered hostages until the treaty was ratified in Athens. His performance is judged as skillful by historians, since it saved time, resources, and lives and still fully achieved his goal.\nFrom here Alcibiades joined in the siege of Byzantium along with Theramenes and Thrasyllus. A portion of the citizens of the city, demoralized and hungry, decided to surrender the city to Alcibiades for similar terms as the Selymbrians had received. On the designated night the defenders left their posts, and the Athenians attacked the Peloponnesian garrison in the city and their boats in the harbor. The portion of the citizenry that remained loyal to the Peloponnesians fought so savagely that Alcibiades issued a statement in the midst of the fighting which guaranteed their safety and this persuaded the remaining citizens to turn against the Peloponnesian garrison, which was nearly totally destroyed.\nReturn to Athens, dismissal, and death.\nReturn to Athens.\nIt was in the aftermath of these successes that Alcibiades resolved to finally return to Athens in the spring of 407 BC. Even in the wake of his recent victories, Alcibiades was exceedingly careful in his return, mindful of the changes in government, the charges still technically hanging over him, and the great injury he had done to Athens. Thus Alcibiades, rather than going straight home, first went to Samos to pick up 20 ships and proceeded with them to the Ceramic Gulf where he collected 100 talents. He finally sailed to Gytheion to make inquiries, partly about the reported preparations of the Spartans there, and partly about the feelings in Athens regarding his return. His inquiries assured him that the city was kindly disposed towards him and that his closest friends urged him to return.\nTherefore, he finally sailed into Piraeus where the crowd had gathered, desiring to see the famous Alcibiades. He entered the harbor full of fear until he saw his cousin and others of his friends and acquaintances, who invited him to land. Upon arriving on shore he was greeted with a hero's welcome. Nevertheless, some saw an evil omen in the fact that he had returned to Athens on the very day when the ceremony of the Plynteria (the feast where the old statue of Athena would get cleansed) was being celebrated. This was regarded as the unluckiest day of the year to undertake anything of importance. His enemies took note of this and kept it in mind for a future occasion.\nAll the criminal proceedings against him were canceled and the charges of blasphemy were officially withdrawn. Alcibiades was able to assert his piety and to raise Athenian morale by leading the solemn procession to Eleusis (for the celebration of the Eleusinian Mysteries) by land for the first time since the Spartans had occupied Decelea. The procession had been replaced by a sea voyage, but this year Alcibiades used a detachment of soldiers to escort the traditional procession. His property was restored and the ecclesia elected him supreme commander of land and sea (strategos autokrator).\nDefeat at Notium.\nIn 406 BC Alcibiades set out from Athens with 1,500 hoplites and a hundred ships. He failed to take Andros and then he went on to Samos. Later he moved to Notium, closer to the enemy at Ephesus. Meanwhile, Tissaphernes had been replaced by Cyrus the Younger (son of Darius II of Persia) who decided to financially support the Peloponnesians. This new revenue started to attract Athenian deserters to the Spartan navy. Additionally the Spartans had replaced Mindarus with Lysander, a very capable admiral. These factors caused the rapid growth of the Peloponnesian fleet at the expense of the Athenian. In search of funds and needing to force another decisive battle, Alcibiades left Notium and sailed to help Thrasybulus in the siege of Phocaea. Alcibiades was aware the Spartan fleet was nearby, so he left nearly eighty ships to watch them under the command of his personal helmsman Antiochus, who was given express orders not to attack. Antiochus disobeyed this single order and endeavored to draw Lysander into a fight by imitating the tactics used at Cyzicus. The situation at Notium, however, was radically different from that at Cyzicus; the Athenians possessed no element of surprise, and Lysander had been well informed about their fleet by deserters. Antiochus's ship was sunk, and he was killed by a sudden Spartan attack; the remaining ships of the decoy force were then chased headlong back toward Notium, where the main Athenian force was caught unprepared by the sudden arrival of the whole Spartan fleet. In the ensuing fighting, Lysander gained an entire victory. Alcibiades soon returned and desperately tried to undo the defeat at Notium by scoring another victory, but Lysander could not be compelled to attack the fleet again.\nResponsibility for the defeat ultimately fell on Alcibiades, and his enemies used the opportunity to attack him and have him removed from command, although some modern scholars believe that Alcibiades was unfairly blamed for Antiochus's mistake. Diodorus reports that, in addition to his mistake at Notium, Alcibiades was discharged on account of false accusations brought against him by his enemies. According to historian Antony Andrewes, the extravagant hopes that his successes of the previous summer had created were a decisive element in his downfall. Consequently, Alcibiades condemned himself to exile. Never again returning to Athens, he sailed north to the castles in the Thracian Chersonese, which he had secured during his time in the Hellespont. The implications of the defeat were severe for Athens. Although the defeat had been minor, it occasioned the removal of not only Alcibiades but also his allies such as Thrasybulus, Theramenes, and Critias. These were likely the most capable commanders Athens had at the time, and their removal would help lead to the Athenian surrender only two years later, after their complete defeat at Aegospotami.\nDeath.\nWith one exception, Alcibiades's role in the war ended with his command. Prior to the Battle of Aegospotami, in the last attested fact of his career, Alcibiades recognized that the Athenians were anchored in a tactically disadvantageous spot and advised them to move to Sestus where they could benefit from a harbor and a city. Diodorus, however, does not mention this advice, arguing instead that Alcibiades offered the generals Thracian aid in exchange for a share in the command. In any case, the generals of the Athenians, \"considering that in case of defeat the blame would attach to them and that in case of success all men would attribute it to Alcibiades\", asked him to leave and not come near the camp ever again. Days later the fleet would be annihilated by Lysander.\nAfter the Battle of Aegospotami, Alcibiades crossed the Hellespont and took refuge in Hellespontine Phrygia, with the object of securing the aid of the Achaemenid King Artaxerxes against Sparta. Alcibiades was one of several Greek aristocrats who took refuge in the Achaemenid Empire following reversals at home, other famous ones being Themistocles, Hippias, Demaratos and Gongylos. For the most part, they were generously welcomed by the Achaemenid kings, and received land grants to support them, and ruled in various cities of Asia Minor.\nMuch about the circumstances of Alcibiades's death is uncertain, as there are conflicting accounts. According to the oldest of these, the Spartans and specifically Lysander were responsible. Though many of his details cannot be independently corroborated, Plutarch's version is that Lysander sent an envoy to Pharnabazus who then dispatched his brother to Phrygia where Alcibiades was living with his mistress, Timandra.\nIn 404 BC, as he was about to set out for the Persian court, his residence was surrounded and set on fire. Seeing no chance of escape he rushed out on his assassins, dagger in hand, and was killed by a shower of arrows. According to Aristotle, the site of Alcibiades's death was Elaphus, a mountain in Phrygia.\nAssessments.\nPolitical career.\nIn ancient Greece, Alcibiades was a polarizing figure. According to Thucydides, Alcibiades, being \"exceedingly ambitious\", proposed the expedition in Sicily in order \"to gain in wealth and reputation by means of his successes\". Alcibiades is not held responsible by Thucydides for the destruction of Athens, since \"his habits gave offence to every one, and caused the Athenians to commit affairs to other hands, and thus before long to ruin the city\". Plutarch regards him as \"the least scrupulous and most entirely careless of human beings\". On the other hand, Diodorus argues that he was \"in spirit brilliant and intent upon great enterprises\". Sharon Press of Brown University points out that Xenophon emphasizes Alcibiades's service to the state, rather than the harm he was charged with causing it. Demosthenes defends Alcibiades's achievements, saying that he had taken arms in the cause of democracy, displaying his patriotism, not by gifts of money or by speeches, but by personal service. For Demosthenes and other orators, Alcibiades epitomized the figure of the great man during the glorious days of the Athenian democracy and became a rhetorical symbol. One of Isocrates's speeches, delivered by Alcibiades the Younger, argues that the statesman deserved the Athenians' gratitude for the service he had given them. Lysias, on the other hand, argued in one of his orations that the Athenians should regard Alcibiades as an enemy because of the general tenor of his life, as \"he repays with injury the open assistance of any of his friends\". In the \"Constitution of the Athenians\", Aristotle does not include Alcibiades in the list of the best Athenian politicians, but in \"Posterior Analytics\" he argues that traits of a proud man like Alcibiades are \"equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonor\". Alcibiades excited in his contemporaries a fear for the safety of the political order. Therefore, Andocides said of him that \"instead of holding that he ought himself to conform with the laws of the state, he expects you to conform with his own way of life\". Central to the depiction of the Athenian statesman is Cornelius Nepos's famous phrase that Alcibiades \"surpassed all the Athenians in grandeur and magnificence of living\".\nEven today, Alcibiades divides scholars. For Malcolm F. McGregor, former head of the Department of Classics in the University of British Columbia, Alcibiades was rather a shrewd gambler than a mere opportunist. Evangelos P. Fotiadis, a prominent Greek philologist, asserts that Alcibiades was \"a first class diplomat\" and had \"huge skills\". Nevertheless, his spiritual powers were not counterbalanced with his magnificent mind and he had the hard luck to lead a people susceptible to demagoguery. K. Paparrigopoulos, a major modern Greek historian, underlines his \"spiritual virtues\" and compares him with Themistocles, but he then asserts that all these gifts created a \"traitor, an audacious and impious man\". Walter Ellis believes that his actions were outrageous, but they were performed with panache. For his part, David Gribble argues that Alcibiades's actions against his city were misunderstood and believes that \"the tension which led to Alcibiades's split with the city was between purely personal and civic values\". Russell Meiggs, a British ancient historian, asserts that the Athenian statesman was absolutely unscrupulous despite his great charm and brilliant abilities. According to Meiggs his actions were dictated by selfish motives and his feud with Cleon and his successors undermined Athens. The same scholar underscores the fact that \"his example of restless and undisciplined ambition strengthened the charge brought against Socrates\". Even more critically, Athanasios G. Platias and Constantinos Koliopoulos, professors of strategic studies and international politics, state that Alcibiades's own arguments \"should be sufficient to do away with the notion that Alcibiades was a great statesman, as some people still believe\". Writing from a different perspective, psychologist Anna C. Salter cites Alcibiades as exhibiting \"all the classic features of psychopathy.\" A similar assessment is made by Hervey Cleckley at the end of chapter 5 in his \"The Mask of Sanity\".\nMilitary achievements.\nDespite his critical comments, Thucydides admits in a short digression that \"publicly his conduct of the war was as good as could be desired\". Diodorus and Demosthenes regard him as a great general. According to Fotiadis, Alcibiades was an invincible general and, wherever he went, victory followed him; had he led the army in Sicily, the Athenians would have avoided disaster and, had his countrymen followed his advice at Aegospotami, Lysander would have lost and Athens would have ruled Greece. On the other hand, Paparrigopoulos believes that the Sicilian Expedition, prompted by Alcibiades, was a strategic mistake. In agreement with Paparrigopoulos, Platias and Koliopoulos underscore the fact that the Sicilian expedition was a strategic blunder of the first magnitude, resulting from a \"frivolous attitude and an unbelievable underestimation of the enemy\". For his part, Angelos Vlachos, a Greek Academician, underlines the constant interest of Athens for Sicily from the beginning of the war. According to Vlachos, the expedition had nothing of the extravagant or adventurous and constituted a rational strategic decision based on traditional Athenian aspirations. Vlachos asserts that Alcibiades had already conceived a broader plan: the conquest of the whole West. He intended to conquer Carthage and Libya, then to attack Italy and, after winning these, to seize Italy and Peloponnesus. The initial decision of the ecclesia provided however for a reasonable military force, which later became unreasonably large and costly because of Nicias's demands. Kagan criticizes Alcibiades for failing to recognize that the large size of the Athenian expedition undermined the diplomatic scheme on which his strategy rested.\nKagan believes that while Alcibiades was a commander of considerable ability, he was no military genius, and his confidence and ambitions went far beyond his skills. He thus was capable of important errors and serious miscalculations. Kagan argues that at Notium, Alcibiades committed a serious error in leaving the fleet in the hands of an inexperienced officer, and that most of the credit for the brilliant victory at Cyzicus must be assigned to Thrasybulus. In this judgement, Kagan agrees with Cornelius Nepos, who said that the Athenians' extravagant opinion of Alcibiades's abilities and valor was his chief misfortune.\nPress argues that \"though Alcibiades can be considered a good general on the basis of his performance in the Hellespont, he would not be considered so on the basis of his performance in Sicily\", but \"the strengths of Alcibiades's performance as a general outweigh his faults\".\nSkill in oratory.\nPlutarch asserts that \"Alcibiades was a most able speaker in addition to his other gifts\", while Theophrastus argues that Alcibiades was the most capable of discovering and understanding what was required in a given case. Nevertheless, he would often stumble in the midst of his speech, but then he would resume and proceed with all the caution in the world. Even the lisp he had, which was noticed by Aristophanes, made his talk persuasive and full of charm. Eupolis says that he was \"prince of talkers, but in speaking most incapable\"; which is to say, more eloquent in his private discourses than when orating before the ecclesia. For his part, Demosthenes underscores the fact that Alcibiades was regarded as \"the ablest speaker of the day\". Paparrigopoulos does not accept Demosthenes's opinion, but acknowledges that the Athenian statesman could sufficiently support his case. Kagan acknowledges his rhetorical power, whilst Thomas Habinek, professor of classics at the University of Southern California, believes that the orator Alcibiades seemed to be whatever his audience needed on any given occasion. According to Habinek, in the field of oratory, the people responded to Alcibiades's affection with affection of their own. Therefore, the orator was \"the institution of the city talking to\u2014and loving\u2014itself\". According to Aristophanes, Athens \"yearns for him, and hates him too, but wants him back\".\nReferences in popular culture.\nAntique depictions.\nAlcibiades has not been spared by ancient comedy, and stories attest to an epic confrontation between Alcibiades and Eupolis resembling that between Aristophanes and Cleon. He also appears as a character in several Socratic dialogues (\"Symposium\", \"Protagoras\", \"Alcibiades I\" and \"II\", where he is depicted as a lover and student of Socrates, as well as the eponymous dialogues by Aeschines Socraticus and Antisthenes). Purportedly based on his own personal experience, Antisthenes described Alcibiades's extraordinary physical strength, courage, and beauty, saying, \"If Achilles did not look like this, he was not really handsome.\" In his trial, Socrates rebuts the attempt to hold him guilty for the crimes of his former students, including Alcibiades. Hence, he declares in \"Apology\": \"I have never been anyone's teacher\".\nPostclassical depictions.\nAlcibiades has been depicted regularly in art, both in Medieval and Renaissance works, and in several significant works of modern literature as well. He is a major character in Shakespeare and Thomas Middleton's tragicomic play \"Timon of Athens\", speaking no less than 7% of total lines and appearing in five scenes at the beginning, middle, and ending of the play. He has been the main character in historical novels of authors like Anna Bowman Dodd, Gertrude Atherton, Mary Renault, Rosemary Sutcliff, Daniel Chavarria, Steven Pressfield, Peter Green, and Ilja Leonard Pfeijffer.\nModern depictions.\nAlcibiades is also involved in the plot of the video game \"Assassin's Creed Odyssey\", under the name Alkibiades.\nAlcibiades's military prowess was cited by the eponymous character in \"Patton\", within a scene in which Allied generals discuss possible plans for their forthcoming invasion of Sicily in 1943 during a lavish dinner hosted by U.S. Lieutenant general George S. Patton Jr.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61323", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61323", "title": "The Love Parade", "text": "1929 film by Ernst Lubitsch\nThe Love Parade is a 1929 American pre-Code musical comedy film, directed by Ernst Lubitsch and starring Maurice Chevalier and Jeanette MacDonald, involving the marital difficulties of Queen Louise of Sylvania (MacDonald) and her consort, Count Alfred Renard (Chevalier). Despite his love for Louise and his promise to be an obedient husband, Count Alfred finds his role as a figurehead unbearable. The supporting cast features Lupino Lane, Lillian Roth and Eugene Pallette.\nThe film was directed by Lubitsch from a screenplay by Guy Bolton and Ernest Vajda adapted from the French play \"Le Prince Consort\", written by Jules Chancel and Leon Xanrof. The play had previously been adapted for Broadway in 1905 by William Boosey and Cosmo Gordon Lennox.\n\"The Love Parade\" is notable for being both the film debut of Jeanette MacDonald and the first \"talkie\" film made by Ernst Lubitsch. The picture was also released in a French-language version called \"Parade d'amour\". Chevalier had thought that he would never be capable of acting as a Royal courtier, and had to be persuaded by Lubitsch. This huge box-office hit appeared just after the Wall Street crash, and did much to save the fortunes of Paramount.\nPlot.\nCount Alfred (Maurice Chevalier), military attach\u00e9 to the Sylvanian Embassy in Paris, is ordered back to Sylvania to report to Queen Louise for a reprimand following a string of scandals, including an affair with the ambassador's wife. In the meantime Queen Louise (Jeanette MacDonald), ruler of Sylvania in her own right, is royally fed-up with her subjects' preoccupation with whom she will marry (particularly since they would only be a prince consort)\nIntrigued rather than offended by Count Alfred's dossier, Queen Louise invites him to dinner when she tries to find a suitable \"punishment\" for him. Their romance progresses to the point of marriage when, despite his qualms, for love of Louise Alfred agrees to obey the Queen. However, he soon chafes at the standards of living as a consort, which mainly consist of little to do (where even trying to make suggestions to affairs of state) that forces him to take action.\nProduction.\nAlthough \"The Love Parade\" was Lubitsch's first sound film, he already displayed a mastery of the technical requirements of the day. In one scene, two couples sing the same song alternately. To do this with the available technology, Lubitsch had two sets built, with an off-camera orchestra between them, and directed both scenes simultaneously. This enabled him to cut back and forth from one scene to the other in editing, something unheard of at the time.\nMusic.\nAll songs are by Victor Schertzinger (music) and Clifford Grey (lyrics):\nReception.\nThe film made a reported \u00a3125,000 in Britain.\nAwards and honors.\n\"The Love Parade\" was nominated for six Academy Awards:\n1929\u20131930 Academy Awards\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61324", "revid": "1297969295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61324", "title": "Alice Adams (novel)", "text": "1921 novel by Booth Tarkington\nAlice Adams is a 1921 novel by Booth Tarkington that received the 1922 Pulitzer Prize for the Novel. It was adapted as a film in 1923 by Rowland V. Lee and more famously in 1935 by George Stevens. The narrative centers on the character of a young woman (the eponymous Alice Adams) who aspires to climb the social ladder and win the affections of a wealthy young man named Arthur Russell. The story is set in a lower-middle-class household in an unnamed town in the Midwest shortly after World War I.\nPlot.\nThe novel begins with Virgil Adams confined to bed with an unnamed illness. There is tension between Virgil and his wife over how he should go about recovering, and she pressures him not to return to work for J.A. Lamb once he is well. Alice, their daughter, attempts to keep peace in the family, with mixed results, and she walks to her friend Mildred Palmer's house to see what Mildred will wear to a dance that evening.\nAfter Alice's return, she spends the day preparing for the dance and goes to pick violets for a bouquet because she cannot afford to buy flowers for herself. Her brother Walter initially refuses to accompany her to the dance, but because Alice cannot go without an escort, Mrs. Adams prevails upon Walter into renting a Tin Lizzie to drive Alice to the dance.\nWalter's attitude towards the upper class is one of obvious disdain. He would rather spend his time gambling with the African-American servants in the cloakroom than be in the ballroom at the dance. Alice forces him to dance with her at first because it will be a grave embarrassment for her to stand alone, but Walter eventually abandons her. Alice tries to give the impression that she is not standing by herself, and she then dances with Frank Dowling, whose attentions she does not welcome, and Arthur Russell, a rich newcomer to town who is rumored to be engaged to Mildred and whom she believes to have danced with her out of pity and at Mildred's request. She leaves the dance and is horribly embarrassed after Arthur discovers Walter gambling with the servants.\nThe next day, Alice goes into town on an errand for her father and passes Frincke's Business College on the way with a shudder since she sees it as a place that drags promising young ladies down to \"hideous obscurity.\" On the walk back home, she encounters Arthur Russell, who shows an obvious interest in her. As she assumes that he is all but spoken for, she does not know how to handle the conversation. She warns him not to believe the things girls like Mildred will say about her, and she tells a number of lies to obscure her family's humble economic status.\nArthur returns several days later, and his courtship of Alice continues. All seems well between them until he mentions a dance being thrown by the young Miss Henrietta Lamb. Arthur wants to escort Alice to the dance, and she lies to cover up that she was not invited. Mrs. Adams uses Alice's distress to finally goad Virgil into setting up a glue factory, which she has long insisted would be the family's ticket to success. It is eventually revealed that the glue recipe was developed by Virgil and another man under the direction and in the employ of J.A. Lamb, who, over the years, declined to take up its production despite repeated prodding from Virgil. Although he is initially reluctant to \"steal\" from Mr. Lamb, Virgil finally persuades himself that his improvements to the recipe over the years has made it his.\nAs Arthur continues his secret courtship of Alice (he never talks about her or tells anyone where he spends his evenings), Alice continues spinning a web of lies to preserve the image of herself and her family that she has invented. That becomes especially difficult when she and Arthur encounter Walter in a bad part of town when he is walking with a young woman, who gives the appearance of being a prostitute. At home, Walter is confronted by his father, who demands Walter quit Lamb's to help in setting up the glue factory. Walter refuses to help his father without a $300 cash advance, which Virgil cannot afford.\nVirgil arranges to resign from Lamb's employ without speaking to him face to face because he fears the old man's reaction, and he puts the glue factory into operation. Meanwhile, Alice works frantically to convince Arthur that the things other people will say about her are not true, and she continues to press the point even when Arthur insists that no one has spoken about her behind her back and that nothing anyone else could say would change his opinion of her. Mrs. Adams decides to arrange a dinner so that Arthur can meet the family and sets about planning an elaborate meal and hiring servants for the day so that Arthur will be impressed.\nWalter again demands cash from his father (the amount has now risen to $350) without explaining why he needs it, and he again is rebuffed. While the events occur at the Adams house, Arthur finally overhears things about Alice, and her family, that strike a chord, including the fact that Virgil Adams has \"stolen\" from J.A. Lamb in setting up a factory with Lamb's secret recipe for glue.\nThe dinner is a total disaster since the day is unbearably hot, the food is far too heavy, and the hired servants are surly and difficult to manage. That is capped by Virgil's unwittingly acting like his lower-middle-class self, not the well-to-do businessman that his wife and daughter wish him to act like. Arthur, still reeling from what he heard about the Adamses earlier in the day, is stiff and uneasy throughout the evening, and Alice feels increasingly uncomfortable. By the end of the night, it is apparent to her that he will not come courting again, and she bids him farewell. That night, word reaches the family that Walter has skipped town and leaves behind him a massive debt to J.A. Lamb, which will have to be paid to keep Walter out of jail.\nThe following morning, Virgil arrives at work to see that Lamb is opening his own glue factory on such a huge scale that Adams will not be able to compete, and he never will make enough money to either pay his son's debts or pay off the family's mortgage.\nVirgil confronts Lamb about the situation, works himself into such a state that he collapses, and returns to the same sickbed where he was at the beginning of the book. Lamb takes pity on the man and arranges to buy the Adams glue factory for a price sufficient to pay off Walter's debts and the family's mortgage. The Adams family takes in boarders to help keep the family afloat economically, and Alice heads downtown to Frincke's Business College to train herself in employable skills so that she can support the family. She encounters Arthur on the road and is pleased that their conversation is both polite and brief. She calmly accepts that there is no possibility of renewing the romance between them.\nAdaptations.\nThe plot of the 1935 film (a remake of the silent movie based on the novel, which was filmed in 1923) revolves around a social-climbing girl (Katharine Hepburn) and her mother (Ann Shoemaker); it has minor changes from the novel and a different ending. It was written by Dorothy Yost, Mortimer Offner and Jane Murfin. The film was directed by George Stevens.\nThe movie was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture http://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61325", "revid": "48969406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61325", "title": "Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen", "text": "German experimental physicist (1845\u20131923)\nWilhelm Conrad R\u00f6ntgen ( ; ; 27 March 1845 \u2013\u00a010 February 1923), sometimes transliterated as Roentgen, was a German experimental physicist who produced and detected electromagnetic radiation in a wavelength range known as X-rays. For this discovery, he became the first recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1901.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nWilhelm Conrad R\u00f6ntgen was born on 27 March 1845 in Lennep (now part of Remscheid), Prussia, the only child of Friedrich Conrad R\u00f6ntgen, a merchant and cloth manufacturer, and Charlotte Constanze Frowein. In 1848, he moved with his parents to the Netherlands, where his mother's family lived, rendering him stateless.\nIn 1862, R\u00f6ntgen enrolled at Utrecht Technical School, where he followed courses for almost two years. In 1865, he was unfairly expelled from the Technical School when he was falsely accused of drawing a caricature of one of the teachers, which was actually drawn by someone else.\nWithout a high school diploma, R\u00f6ntgen could only attend university in the Netherlands as a visitor. In 1865, he tried to attend Utrecht University without having the necessary credentials required for a regular student. He then moved to Switzerland and passed the entrance examination of the Federal Polytechnic School in Zurich (now ETH Zurich), where he became a mechanical engineering student. In 1869, he received his Ph.D. from the University of Zurich. At the University, he was the favorite student of August Kundt\u2014whom he followed to the University of Wuerzburg after graduation, then to the University of Strassburg in 1873. \nCareer.\nIn 1874, R\u00f6ntgen became a lecturer at the University of Strassburg. The following year, he became a professor at the Academy of Agriculture in Hohenheim. In 1876, he returned to Strassburg as Professor of Physics, and in 1879 was appointed to the Chair of Physics at the University of Giessen. In 1888, he reacquired German citizenship (after being stateless for 40 years) and obtained the Physics Chair at the University of Wuerzburg, and in 1900 at the University of Munich, by special request of the Bavarian government.\nR\u00f6ntgen had family in Iowa in the United States and planned to emigrate. He accepted an appointment at Columbia University in New York City and bought transatlantic tickets. However, the outbreak of World War I changed his plans, and he remained in Munich for the rest of his career.\nLater life and death.\nWith the inflation following World War I, R\u00f6ntgen fell into bankruptcy, spending his final years at his country home in Weilheim.\nR\u00f6ntgen died of colorectal cancer on 10 February 1923 in Munich at the age of 77. In keeping with his will, his personal and scientific correspondence\u2014with few exceptions\u2014were destroyed upon his death.\nDiscovery of X-rays.\nIn 1895, in his laboratory in the Physical Institute at the University of Wuerzburg, R\u00f6ntgen was investigating the external effects of passing an electric discharge through various types of vacuum tube equipment\u2014apparatuses from Heinrich Hertz, Johann Hittorf, William Crookes, Nikola Tesla, and Philipp Lenard. In early November, he was repeating an experiment with one of Lenard's tubes in which a thin aluminium window had been added to permit the cathode rays to exit the tube but a cardboard covering was added to protect the aluminium from damage by the strong electrostatic field that produces the cathode rays. He knew that the cardboard covering prevented light from escaping, yet he observed that the invisible cathode rays caused a fluorescent effect on a small cardboard screen painted with barium platinocyanide when it was placed close to the aluminium window. It occurred to R\u00f6ntgen that the Crookes\u2013Hittorf tube, which had a much thicker glass wall than the Lenard tube, might also cause this fluorescent effect.\nIn the late afternoon of 8 November 1895, R\u00f6ntgen was determined to test his idea. He carefully constructed a black cardboard covering similar to the one he had used on the Lenard tube. He covered the Crookes\u2013Hittorf tube with the cardboard and attached electrodes to an induction coil to generate an electrostatic charge. Before setting up the barium platinocyanide screen to test his idea, he darkened the room to test the opacity of his cardboard cover. As he passed the induction coil charge through the tube, he determined that the cover was light-tight and turned to prepare for the next step of the experiment. It was at this point that he noticed a faint shimmering from a bench a few feet away from the tube. To be sure, he tried several more discharges and saw the same shimmering each time. Striking a match, he discovered the shimmering had come from the location of the barium platinocyanide screen he had been intending to use next.\nBased on the formation of regular shadows, R\u00f6ntgen termed the phenomenon \"rays\". As 8 November was a Friday, he took advantage of the weekend to repeat his experiments and made his first notes. In the following weeks, he ate and slept in his laboratory as he investigated many properties of the new rays he temporarily termed \"X-rays\", using the mathematical designation (\"X\") for something unknown. The word for X-ray in German and some languages in Central and Eastern Europe are derived from R\u00f6ntgen's name (and the associated X-ray radiograms as \"R\u00f6ntgenograms\").\nAt one point, while he was investigating the ability of various materials to stop the rays, R\u00f6ntgen brought a small piece of lead into position while a discharge was occurring. R\u00f6ntgen thus saw the first radiographic image: his own flickering ghostly skeleton on the barium platinocyanide screen.\nAbout six weeks after his discovery, he took a picture\u2014a radiograph\u2014using X-rays of his wife Anna Bertha's hand. When she saw her skeleton she exclaimed \"I have seen my death!\" He later took a better picture of his friend Albert von K\u00f6lliker's hand at a public lecture.\nR\u00f6ntgen's original paper, \"Ueber eine neue Art von Strahlen\" (On a new kind of rays), was published on 28 December 1895. On 5 January 1896, an Austrian newspaper reported his discovery of a new type of radiation. He was awarded an honorary M.D. from the University of Wuerzburg after his discovery. He also received the Rumford Medal of the Royal Society in 1896, jointly with Philipp Lenard, who had already shown that a portion of the cathode rays could pass through a thin film of a metal such as aluminium. He published a total of three papers on X-rays between 1895 and 1897. \nR\u00f6ntgen's analysis and publications stirred enormous excitement among physicists. It led Henri Becquerel to look for connections with phosphorescence, leading to his discovery of spontaneous radioactivity in 1896. Marie and Pierre Curie were also taken by the X-ray work but upon hearing of Becquerel findings they returned to isolating and identifying radioactive isotopes leading to the recognition that the radiation was generated at the atomic level.\nIn 1901, R\u00f6ntgen was awarded the inaugural Nobel Prize in Physics \"in recognition of the extraordinary services he has rendered by the discovery of the remarkable rays subsequently named after him.\" Shy in public speaking, he declined to give a Nobel lecture. He donated the 50,000 kr prize money to research at the University of Wuerzburg. Like Marie and Pierre Curie, he refused to take out patents related to his discovery of X-rays, as he wanted society as a whole to benefit from practical applications of the phenomenon.\nPersonal life.\nR\u00f6ntgen was married to Anna Bertha Ludwig for 47 years until her death in 1919 at the age of 80. In 1866, they met in Zurich at Anna's father's caf\u00e9, Zum Gr\u00fcnen Glas. They became engaged in 1869 and wed in Apeldoorn, Netherlands, on 7 July 1872; the delay was due to Anna being six years Wilhelm's senior and his father disapproving of her age or humble background. Their marriage began with financial difficulties as family support from R\u00f6ntgen had ceased. \nThey raised one child, Josephine Bertha Ludwig, whom they adopted as a 6-year-old after her father, Anna's only brother, died in 1887. \nR\u00f6ntgen was a member of the Dutch Reformed Church.\nCommemorations.\nIn November 2004, the IUPAC named element number 111 roentgenium (Rg) in his honor. The IUPAP adopted the name in November 2011.\nA collection of R\u00f6ntgen's papers is held at the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland.\nToday, in Remscheid-Lennep, 40 kilometres east of R\u00f6ntgen's birthplace in D\u00fcsseldorf, is the Deutsches R\u00f6ntgen-Museum.\nIn W\u00fcrzburg, where R\u00f6ntgen discovered X-rays, a non-profit organization maintains his laboratory and provides guided tours to the R\u00f6ntgen Memorial Site.\nWorld Radiography Day is an annual event promoting the role of medical imaging in modern healthcare. It is celebrated on 8 November each year, coinciding with the anniversary of R\u00f6ntgen's discovery. It was first introduced in 2012 as a joint initiative between the European Society of Radiology, the Radiological Society of North America, and the American College of Radiology.\nAs of 2023, 55 stamps from 40 countries have been issued commemorating R\u00f6ntgen as the discoverer of X-rays.\nR\u00f6ntgen Peak in Antarctica is named after Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen.\nMinor planet 6401 Roentgen is named after him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "61326", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61326", "title": "Triple 6 Mafia", "text": ""}
{"id": "61328", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61328", "title": "Hippopotamidae", "text": "Family of mammals\nHippopotamidae is a family of stout, naked-skinned, and semiaquatic artiodactyl mammals, possessing three-chambered stomachs and walking on four toes on each foot. While they resemble pigs physiologically, their closest living relatives are the cetaceans. They are formally referred to as hippopotamids.\nThere are two living species of hippopotamid in two genera; the pygmy hippo, \"Choeropsis liberiensis\" of the forests of west Africa, and the common hippo, \"Hippopotamus amphibius\". The term \"hippopotamus\" can also be applied to hippopotamids in general, although it is most frequently used for the common hippo and its respective genus.\nCharacteristics.\nHippopotamids are large mammals, with short, stumpy legs, and barrel-shaped bodies. They have large heads, with broad mouths, and nostrils placed at the top of their snouts. Like pigs, they have four toes, but unlike pigs, all of the toes are used in walking. Hippopotamids are unguligrade, although, unlike most other such animals, they have no hooves, instead using a pad of tough connective tissue on each foot. Their stomachs have three chambers, but they are not true ruminants.\nThe living species are smooth-skinned and lack both sebaceous glands and sweat glands. The outer epidermis is relatively thin, so hippos dehydrate rapidly in dry environments.\nBoth the incisors and canines are large and tusk-like, although the canine tusks are by far the larger. The tusks grow throughout life. The postcanine teeth are large and complex, suited for chewing the plant matter that comprises their diets. The number of incisors varies even within the same species, but the general dental formula is given in the table below: \nEvolution.\nThe hippopotamids are descended from the anthracotheres, a family of semiaquatic and terrestrial artiodactyls that appeared in the late Eocene, and are thought to have resembled small- or narrow-headed hippos. The hippos split off from the anthracotheres some time during the Miocene. The oldest records of Hippopotamidae are from Afro-Arabia and date to the late Miocene, approximately 7.4 million years ago, expanding into Eurasia around 6 million years ago. It has been theorised that this Late Miocene radiation of hippopotamids represents the coevolution of hippopotamids with the expansion of C4 grasslands, a phenomenon known as the hippopotamine event (HE). After the appearance of the hippopotamids, the remaining anthracotheres went into a decline brought about by a combination of climatic change and competition with their descendants, until the last genus, \"Merycopotamus\", died out in the early Pliocene of India.\nThere were once many species of hippopotamid, but only two survive today: \"Hippopotamus amphibius\", and \"Choeropsis liberiensis\". They are the last survivors of two major evolutionary lineages, the hippos proper and the pygmy hippos, respectively; these lineages could arguably be considered subfamilies, but their relationship to each other \u2013 apart from being fairly distant relatives \u2013 is not well resolved.\nThe enigmatic Miocene \"Kenyapotamus\" is insufficiently known to be assigned a place in the hippo phylogeny with any degree of certainty. In addition, the genus \"Hexaprotodon\", which is now largely restricted to South Asia and Southeast Asia, formerly included many fossil hippopotamuses that are now thought to be unrelated.\nTaxonomy.\nHippopotamidae's placement within Artiodactyla can be represented in the following cladogram:\nAnalogous structures.\nThe lower canine teeth of hippopotamids are similar in function and structure to the tusks of elephants. While hippopotamids and elephants are only very distantly related within the Mammalia, the lower canine teeth of both groups are long and have a slight curve, and species of both families use this structure when fighting.\nSpecies.\nThe systematics and taxonomy used here mostly follows a review by J.-R. Boisserie\nand the American Society of Mammalogists.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61330", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61330", "title": "Augustin Cauchy", "text": ""}
{"id": "61331", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61331", "title": "Third century BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "61332", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61332", "title": "Midsummer in New York City", "text": "NYC Midsummer or Swedish Midsommar is a Swedish midsummer celebration organized since 1996 in one of New York City's parks on the Friday afternoon close to the June solstice, or St John's Day. For several years now, Battery Park City in lower Manhattan has hosted this event. A sizable portion of the Swedish expatriate community in NYC shows up to celebrate Midsummer the Swedish way. The event in Battery Park City is co-hosted by the Swedish consulate and Hugh L. Carey Battery Park City Authority.\nMidsummer is one of the year's great family holidays in the Scandinavian countries, since long before Christianization. Even though the church has linked it to the day of St John the Baptist, it is primarily celebrated outside of church. A midsummer pole decorated with leaves and flowers is erected and children and families dance around it. A Swedish sm\u00f6rg\u00e5sbord of herring, new potatoes, and other dishes is served.\nThere are many other smaller celebrations around town, New Jersey and boroughs outside Manhattan. For example, there is the annual Sweden Day celebration held at Manhem Club in Throgs Neck. Previously, Swedish-American tourism official Birger Nordholm hosted several Midsummer festivities in and around the area."}
{"id": "61333", "revid": "1078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61333", "title": "Graph (function)", "text": ""}
{"id": "61334", "revid": "90173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61334", "title": "Pygmy hippopotamus", "text": "Small species of hippopotamus\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe pygmy hippopotamus or pygmy hippo (Choeropsis liberiensis) is a small hippopotamid which is native to the forests and swamps of West Africa, primarily in Liberia, with small populations in Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Ivory Coast. It has been extirpated from Nigeria.\nThe pygmy hippopotamus is reclusive and nocturnal. It is one of only two extant species in the family Hippopotamidae, the other being its much larger relative, the common hippopotamus (\"Hippopotamus amphibius\") or Nile hippopotamus. The pygmy hippopotamus displays many terrestrial adaptations, but like the common hippopotamus, it is semiaquatic and relies on water to keep its skin moist and its body temperature cool. Behaviors such as mating and giving birth may occur in water or on land. The pygmy hippopotamus is herbivorous, feeding on ferns, broad-leaved plants, grasses, and fruits it finds in the forests.\nA rare nocturnal forest creature, the pygmy hippopotamus is a difficult animal to study in the wild.\nPygmy hippos were unknown outside West Africa until the 19th century. Introduced to zoos in the early 20th century, they breed well in captivity and the vast majority of research is derived from zoo specimens. The survival of the species in captivity is more assured than in the wild; in a 2015 assessment, the International Union for Conservation of Nature estimated that fewer than 2,500 pygmy hippos remain in the wild.\nPygmy hippos are primarily threatened by loss of habitat, as the forests are logged and converted to farm land, and are also vulnerable to poaching, hunting for bushmeat, natural predators and war. Pygmy hippos are among the species illegally hunted for food in Liberia.\nTaxonomy and origins.\nNomenclature of the pygmy hippopotamus reflects that of the hippopotamus; the plural form is pygmy hippopotamuses or pygmy hippopotami. A male pygmy hippopotamus is known as a \"bull\", a female as a \"cow\", and a baby as a \"calf\". A group of hippopotami is known as a \"herd\" or a \"bloat\".\nThe pygmy hippopotamus is a member of the family Hippopotamidae where it is classified as a member of the genus \"Choeropsis\" (from Ancient Greek \u03c7\u03bf\u1fd6\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (\"kho\u00eeros\"), meaning \"pig\", and \u1f44\u03c8\u03b9\u03c2 (\"\u00f3psis\"), meaning \"sight, resemblance\"). Members of Hippopotamidae are sometimes known as hippopotamids. Sometimes the sub-family Hippopotaminae is used. Further, some taxonomists group hippopotami and anthracotheres in the superfamily Anthracotheroidea or Hippopotamoidea.\nThe taxonomy of the genus of the pygmy hippopotamus has changed as understanding of the animal has developed. Samuel G. Morton initially classified the animal as \"Hippopotamus minor\", but later determined it was distinct enough to warrant its own genus, and labeled it \"Choeropsis\". In 1977, Shirley C. Coryndon proposed that the pygmy hippopotamus was closely related to \"Hexaprotodon\", a genus that consisted of prehistoric hippos mostly native to Asia.\nThis assertion was widely accepted, until Boisserie asserted in 2005 that the pygmy hippopotamus was not a member of \"Hexaprotodon\", after a thorough examination of the phylogeny of Hippopotamidae. He suggested instead that the pygmy hippopotamus was a distinct genus, and returned the animal to \"Choeropsis\". ITIS verifies \"Hexaprotodon liberiensis\" as the valid scientific name. All agree that the modern pygmy hippopotamus, be it \"H.\u00a0liberiensis\" or \"C.\u00a0liberiensis\", is the only extant member of its genus. The American Society of Mammalogists moved it back to \"Choeropsis\" in 2021, a move supported by the IUCN.\nNigerian subspecies.\nA distinct subspecies of pygmy hippopotamus existed in Nigeria until at least the 20th century, though the validity of this has been questioned. The existence of the subspecies, makes \"Choeropsis liberiensis liberiensis\" (or \"Hexaprotodon liberiensis liberiensis\" under the old classification) the full trinomial nomenclature for the Liberian pygmy hippopotamus. The Nigerian pygmy hippopotamus was never studied in the wild and never captured. All research and all zoo specimens are the Liberian subspecies. The Nigerian subspecies is classified as \"C.\u00a0liberiensis heslopi\".\nThe Nigerian pygmy hippopotamus ranged in the Niger River Delta, especially near Port Harcourt, but no reliable reports exist after the collection of the museum specimens secured by Ian Heslop, a British colonial officer, in the early 1940s. It is probably extinct. The subspecies is separated by over and the Dahomey Gap, a region of savanna that divides the forest regions of West Africa. The subspecies is named after Heslop, who shot three members of it in 1935 and 1943. He estimated that perhaps no more than 30 pygmy hippos remained in the region.\nHeslop sent four pygmy hippopotamus skulls he collected to the British Museum of Natural History in London. These specimens were not subjected to taxonomic evaluation, however, until 1969 when Gordon Barclay Corbet classified the skulls as belonging to a separate subspecies based on consistent variations in the proportions of the skulls. The Nigerian pygmy hippos were seen or shot in Rivers State, Imo State and Bayelsa State, Nigeria. While some local humans are aware that the species once existed, its history in the region is poorly documented.\nEvolution.\nThe evolution of the pygmy hippopotamus is most often studied in the context of its larger cousin. Both species were long believed to be most closely related to the family Suidae (pigs and hogs) or Tayassuidae (peccaries), but research within the last 10 years has determined that pygmy hippos and hippos are most closely related to cetaceans (whales and dolphins). Hippos and whales shared a common semi-aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls around https:// mya.\nThis hypothesized ancestor likely split into two branches about six million years later. One branch would evolve into cetaceans, the other branch became the anthracotheres, a large family of four-legged beasts, whose earliest member, from the Late Eocene, would have resembled narrow hippopotami with comparatively small and thin heads.\nHippopotamids are deeply nested within the family Anthracotheriidae. The oldest known hippopotamid is the genus \"Kenyapotamus\", which lived in Africa from https:// 8. \"Kenyapotamus\" is known only through fragmentary fossils, but was similar in size to \"C.\u00a0liberiensis\". The Hippopotamidae are believed to have evolved in Africa, and while at one point the species spread across Asia and Europe, no hippopotami have ever been discovered in the Americas. Starting https:// 1.8 the \"Archaeopotamus\", likely ancestors to the genus \"Hippopotamus\" and \"Hexaprotodon\", lived in Africa and the Middle East.\nWhile the fossil record of hippos is still poorly understood, the lineages of the two modern genera, \"Hippopotamus\" and \"Choeropsis\", may have diverged as far back as https:// mya. The ancestral form of the pygmy hippopotamus may be the genus \"Saotherium\". \"Saotherium\" and \"Choeropsis\" are significantly more basal than \"Hippopotamus\" and \"Hexaprotodon\", and thus more closely resemble the ancestral species of hippos.\nExtinct pygmy and dwarf hippos.\nSeveral species of small hippopotamids have also become extinct in the Mediterranean in the late Pleistocene or early Holocene. Though these species are sometimes known as \"pygmy hippopotami\" they are not believed to be closely related to \"C.\u00a0liberiensis\". These include the Cretan dwarf hippopotamus (\"Hippopotamus creutzburgi\"), the Sicilian hippopotamus (\"Hippopotamus pentlandi\"), the Maltese hippopotamus (\"Hippopotamus melitensis\") and the Cyprus dwarf hippopotamus (\"Hippopotamus minor\").\nThese species, though comparable in size to the pygmy hippopotamus, are considered dwarf hippopotamuses, rather than pygmies. They are likely descended from a full-sized species of European hippopotamus, and reached their small size through the evolutionary process of insular dwarfism which is common on islands; the ancestors of pygmy hippopotami were also small and thus there was never a dwarfing process. There were also several species of pygmy hippopotamus on the island of Madagascar (see Malagasy hippopotamus).\nDescription.\nPygmy hippopotamuses share the same general form as a hippopotamus. They have a graviportal skeleton, with four stubby legs and four toes on each foot, supporting a portly frame. Yet, the pygmy is only half as tall as the hippopotamus and weighs less than 1/4 as much as its larger cousin. Adult pygmy hippos stand about high at the shoulder, are in length and weigh . Their lifespan in captivity ranges from 30 to 55 years, though it is unlikely that they live this long in the wild.\nThe skin is greenish-black or brown, shading to a creamy gray on the lower body. Their skin is very similar to the common hippo's, with a thin epidermis over a dermis that is several centimeters thick. Pygmy hippos have the same unusual secretion as common hippos, that gives a pinkish tinge to their bodies, and is sometimes described as \"blood sweat\" though the secretion is neither sweat nor blood. This substance, hipposudoric acid, is believed to have antiseptic and sunscreening properties. The skin of hippos dries out quickly and cracks, which is why both species spend so much time in water.\nThe skeleton of \"C.\u00a0liberiensis\" is more gracile than that of the common hippopotamus, meaning their bones are proportionally thinner. The common hippo's spine is parallel with the ground; the pygmy hippo's back slopes forward, a likely adaptation to pass more easily through dense forest vegetation. Proportionally, the pygmy hippo's legs and neck are longer and its head smaller.\nThe orbits and nostrils of a pygmy hippopotamus are much less pronounced, an adaptation from spending less time in deep water (where pronounced orbits and nostrils help the common hippo breathe and see). The feet of pygmy hippos are narrower, but the toes are more spread out and have less webbing, to assist in walking on the forest floor.\nDespite adaptations to a more terrestrial life than the common hippopotamus, pygmy hippos are still more aquatic than all other terrestrial even-toed ungulates. The ears and nostrils of pygmy hippos have strong muscular valves to aid submerging underwater, and the skin physiology is dependent on the availability of water.\nBehavior.\nThe behavior of the pygmy hippopotamus differs from the common hippo in many ways. Much of its behavior is more similar to that of a tapir, though this is an effect of convergent evolution. While the common hippopotamus is gregarious, pygmy hippos live either alone or in small groups, typically a mated pair or a mother and calf. Pygmy hippos tend to ignore each other rather than fight when they meet. Field studies have estimated that male pygmy hippos range over , while the range of a female is .Pygmy hippos spend most of the day hidden in rivers. They will rest in the same spot for several days in a row, before moving to a new spot. At least some pygmy hippos make use of dens or burrows that form in river banks. It is unknown if the pygmy hippos help create these dens, or how common it is to use them. Though a pygmy hippopotamus has never been observed burrowing, other artiodactyls, such as warthogs, are burrowers.\nDiet.\nLike the common hippopotamus, the pygmy hippopotamus emerges from the water at dusk to feed. It relies on game trails to travel through dense forest vegetation. It marks trails by vigorously waving its tail while defecating to further spread its feces. The pygmy hippopotamus spends about six hours a day foraging for food.\nPygmy hippos are herbivorous. They do not eat aquatic vegetation to a significant extent and rarely eat grass because it is uncommon in the thick forests they inhabit. The bulk of a pygmy hippo's diet consists of herbs, ferns, broad-leaved plants, herbaceous shoots, forbs, sedges and fruits that have fallen to the forest floor. The wide variety of plants pygmy hippos have been observed eating suggests that they will eat any plants available. This diet is of higher quality than that of the common hippopotamus.\nReproduction.\nA study of breeding behavior in the wild has never been conducted; the artificial conditions of captivity may cause the observed behavior of pygmy hippos in zoos to differ from natural conditions. Sexual maturity for the pygmy hippopotamus occurs between three and five years of age. The youngest reported age for giving birth is a pygmy hippopotamus in the Zoo Basel, Switzerland which bore a calf at three years and three months. The oestrus cycle of a female pygmy hippopotamus lasts an average of 35.5 days, with the oestrus itself lasting between 24 and 48\u00a0hours.\nPygmy hippopotamuses consort for mating, but the duration of the relationship is unknown. In zoos they breed as monogamous pairs. Copulation can take place on land or in the water, and a pair will mate one to four times during an oestrus period. In captivity, pygmy hippos have been conceived and born in all months of the year. The gestation period ranges from 190 to 210 days, and usually a single young is born, though twins are known to occur.\nThe common hippopotamus gives birth and mates only in the water, but pygmy hippopotamuses mate and give birth on both land and water. Young pygmy hippos can swim almost immediately. At birth, pygmy hippos weigh 4.5\u20136.2\u00a0kg (9.9\u201313.7\u00a0lb) with males weighing about 0.25\u00a0kg (0.55\u00a0lb) more than females. Pygmy hippos are fully weaned between six and eight months of age; before weaning they do not accompany their mother when she leaves the water to forage, but instead hide in the water by themselves. The mother returns to the hiding spot about three times a day and calls out for the calf to suckle. Suckling occurs with the mother lying on her side.\nTemperament.\nAlthough not considered dangerous to humans and generally docile, pygmy hippopotamuses can be highly aggressive at times. Although there have been no human deaths associated with pygmy hippos, there have been several attacks - while most of these were provoked by human behaviour, several have had no apparent cause.\nConservation.\nThe greatest threat to the remaining pygmy hippopotamus population in the wild is loss of habitat. The forests in which pygmy hippos live have been subject to logging, settling and conversion to agriculture, with little efforts made to make logging sustainable. As forests shrink, the populations become more fragmented, leading to less genetic diversity in the potential mating pool.\nPygmy hippos are among the species illegally hunted for food in Liberia. Their meat is said to be of excellent quality, like that of a wild boar; unlike those of the common hippo, the pygmy hippo's teeth have no value. The effects of West Africa's civil strife on the pygmy hippopotamus are unknown, but unlikely to be positive. The pygmy hippopotamus can be killed by leopards, pythons and crocodiles. How often this occurs is unknown.\n\"C. liberiensis\" was identified as one of the top 10 \"focal species\" in 2007 by the Evolutionarily Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) project. Some populations inhabit protected areas, such as the Gola Forest Reserve in Sierra Leone.\nBasel Zoo in Switzerland holds the international studbook and coordinates the entire captive pygmy hippopotamus population that freely breeds in zoos around the world. Between 1970 and 1991 the population of pygmy hippos born in captivity more than doubled. The survival of the species in zoos is more certain than the survival of the species in the wild. In captivity, the pygmy hippopotamus lives from 42 to 55 years, longer than in the wild. Since 1919, only 41 percent of pygmy hippos born in zoos have been male.\nHistory and folklore.\nWhile the common hippopotamus has been known to Europeans since classical antiquity, the pygmy hippopotamus was unknown outside its range in West Africa until the 19th century. Due to their nocturnal, forested existence, they were poorly known within their range as well. In Liberia the animal was traditionally known as a \"water cow\".\nEarly field reports of the animal misidentified it as a wild hog. Several skulls of the species were sent to the American natural scientist Samuel G. Morton, during his residency in Monrovia, Liberia. Morton first described the species in 1843. The first complete specimens were collected as part of a comprehensive investigation of Liberian fauna in the 1870s and 1880s by Dr. Johann B\u00fcttikofer. The specimens were taken to the Natural History Museum in Leiden, The Netherlands.\nThe first pygmy hippopotamus was brought to Europe in 1873 after being captured in Sierra Leone by a member of the British Colonial Service but died shortly after arrival. Pygmy hippos were successfully established in European zoos in 1911. They were first shipped to Germany and then to the Bronx Zoo in New York City where they also thrived.\nIn 1927, Harvey Firestone of Firestone Tires presented Billy the pygmy hippo to U.S. President Calvin Coolidge. Coolidge donated Billy to the National Zoo in Washington, D.C. According to the zoo, Billy is a common ancestor to most pygmy hippos in U.S. zoos today.\nMoo Deng is a pygmy hippopotamus living in Khao Kheow Open Zoo, in Thailand, who gained notability in September 2024 as a popular Internet meme after images of her went viral online. Because of the popularity of the hippo, whose name translates to \"bouncy pork\", the zoo saw a boosted attendance. It has been reported that some visitors to the zoo threw water and other objects at the baby hippo to get her to react.\nSeveral folktales have been collected about the pygmy hippopotamus. One tale says that pygmy hippos carry a shining diamond in their mouths to help travel through thick forests at night; by day the pygmy hippopotamus has a secret hiding place for the diamond, but if a hunter catches a pygmy hippopotamus at night the diamond can be taken. Villagers sometimes believed that baby pygmy hippos do not nurse but rather lick secretions off the skin of the mother.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61335", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61335", "title": "Differentiation", "text": "Differentiation may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "61338", "revid": "35839912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61338", "title": "Addition", "text": "Arithmetic operation\nAddition, usually denoted with the plus sign +, is one of the four basic operations of arithmetic, the other three being subtraction, multiplication, and division. The addition of two whole numbers results in the total or \"sum\" of those values combined. For example, the adjacent image shows two columns of apples, one with three apples and the other with two apples, totaling to five apples. This observation is expressed as \"3 + 2 = 5\", which is read as \"three plus two equals five\".\nBesides counting items, addition can also be defined and executed without referring to concrete objects, using abstractions called numbers instead, such as integers, real numbers, and complex numbers. Addition belongs to arithmetic, a branch of mathematics. In algebra, another area of mathematics, addition can also be performed on abstract objects such as vectors, matrices, and elements of additive groups.\nAddition has several important properties. It is commutative, meaning that the order of the numbers being added does not matter, so 3 + 2 = 2 + 3, and it is associative, meaning that when one adds more than two numbers, the order in which addition is performed does not matter. Repeated addition of 1 is the same as counting (see Successor function). Addition of 0 does not change a number. Addition also obeys rules concerning related operations such as subtraction and multiplication.\nPerforming addition is one of the simplest numerical tasks to perform. Addition of very small numbers is accessible to toddlers; the most basic task, 1 + 1, can be performed by infants as young as five months, and even some members of other animal species. In primary education, students are taught to add numbers in the decimal system, beginning with single digits and progressively tackling more difficult problems. Mechanical aids range from the ancient abacus to the modern computer, where research on the most efficient implementations of addition continues to this day.\n\\\\[1ex]\\scriptstyle\\frac{\\scriptstyle\\text{numerator}}{\\scriptstyle\\text{denominator}}\\end{matrix}\\right\\}\\,=\\,&lt;/math&gt;\nNotation and terminology.\nAddition is written using the plus sign \"+\" between the terms, and the result is expressed with an equals sign. For example, formula_8 reads \"one plus two equals three\". Nonetheless, some situations where addition is \"understood\", even though no symbol appears: a whole number followed immediately by a fraction indicates the sum of the two, called a \"mixed number\", with an example,formula_9 This notation can cause confusion, since in most other contexts, juxtaposition denotes multiplication instead.\nThe numbers or the objects to be added in general addition are collectively referred to as the terms, the addends or the summands. This terminology carries over to the summation of multiple terms.\nThis is to be distinguished from \"factors\", which are multiplied.\nSome authors call the first addend the \"augend\". In fact, during the Renaissance, many authors did not consider the first addend an \"addend\" at all. Today, due to the commutative property of addition, \"augend\" is rarely used, and both terms are generally called addends.\nAll of the above terminology derives from Latin. \"Addition\" and \"add\" are English words derived from the Latin verb , which is in turn a compound of \"to\" and \"to give\", from the Proto-Indo-European root \"to give\"; thus to \"add\" is to \"give to\". Using the gerundive suffix \"-nd\" results in \"addend\", \"thing to be added\". Likewise from \"to increase\", one gets \"augend\", \"thing to be increased\".\n\"Sum\" and \"summand\" derive from the Latin noun \"the highest\" or \"the top\", used in Medieval Latin phrase (\"top line\") meaning the sum of a column of numerical quantities, following the ancient Greek and Roman practice of putting the sum at the top of a column.\n and date back at least to Boethius, if not to earlier Roman writers such as Vitruvius and Frontinus; Boethius also used several other terms for the addition operation. The later Middle English terms \"adden\" and \"adding\" were popularized by Chaucer.\nDefinition and interpretations.\nAddition is one of the four basic operations of arithmetic, with the other three being subtraction, multiplication, and division. This operation works by adding two or more terms. An arbitrary of many operation of additions is called the summation. An infinite summation is a delicate procedure known as a series, and it can be expressed through capital sigma notation formula_10, which compactly denotes iteration of the operation of addition based on the given indexes. For example,\nformula_11\nAddition is used to model many physical processes. Even for the simple case of adding natural numbers, there are many possible interpretations and even more visual representations.\nCombining sets.\nPossibly the most basic interpretation of addition lies in combining sets, that is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When two or more disjoint collections are combined into a single collection, the number of objects in the single collection is the sum of the numbers of objects in the original collections.\nThis interpretation is easy to visualize, with little danger of ambiguity. It is also useful in higher mathematics (for the rigorous definition it inspires, see below). However, it is not obvious how one should extend this interpretation to include fractional or negative numbers.\nOne possibility is to consider collections of objects that can be easily divided, such as pies or, still better, segmented rods. Rather than solely combining collections of segments, rods can be joined end-to-end, which illustrates another conception of addition: adding not the rods but the lengths of the rods.\nExtending a length.\nA second interpretation of addition comes from extending an initial length by a given length:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When an original length is extended by a given amount, the final length is the sum of the original length and the length of the extension.\nThe sum formula_12 can be interpreted as a binary operation that combines formula_13 and formula_14 algebraically, or it can be interpreted as the addition of formula_14 more units to formula_13. Under the latter interpretation, the parts of a sum formula_12 play asymmetric roles, and the operation formula_12 is viewed as applying the unary operation formula_19 to formula_13. Instead of calling both formula_13 and formula_14 addends, it is more appropriate to call formula_13 the \"augend\" in this case, since formula_13 plays a passive role. The unary view is also useful when discussing subtraction, because each unary addition operation has an inverse unary subtraction operation, and vice versa.\nProperties.\nCommutativity.\nAddition is commutative, meaning that one can change the order of the terms in a sum, but still get the same result. Symbolically, if formula_13 and formula_14 are any two numbers, then:\nformula_27\nThe fact that addition is commutative is known as the \"commutative law of addition\" or \"commutative property of addition\". Some other binary operations are commutative too as in multiplication, but others are not as in subtraction and division.\nAssociativity.\nAddition is associative, which means that when three or more numbers are added together, the order of operations does not change the result. For any three numbers formula_13, formula_14, and formula_30, it is true that:\nformula_31\nFor example, formula_32.\nWhen addition is used together with other operations, the order of operations becomes important. In the standard order of operations, addition is a lower priority than exponentiation, nth roots, multiplication and division, but is given equal priority to subtraction.\nIdentity element.\nAdding zero to any number does not change the number. In other words, zero is the identity element for addition, and is also known as the additive identity. In symbols, for every formula_13, one has:\nformula_34\nThis law was first identified in Brahmagupta's \"Brahmasphutasiddhanta\" in 628\u00a0AD, although he wrote it as three separate laws, depending on whether formula_13 is negative, positive, or zero itself, and he used words rather than algebraic symbols. Later Indian mathematicians refined the concept; around the year 830, Mahavira wrote, \"zero becomes the same as what is added to it\", corresponding to the unary statement formula_36. In the 12th\u00a0century, Bhaskara wrote, \"In the addition of cipher, or subtraction of it, the quantity, positive or negative, remains the same\", corresponding to the unary statement formula_37.\nSuccessor.\nWithin the context of integers, addition of one also plays a special role: for any integer formula_13, the integer formula_39 is the least integer greater than formula_13, also known as the successor of formula_13. For instance, 3 is the successor of 2, and 7 is the successor of 6. Because of this succession, the value of formula_12 can also be seen as the formula_14-th successor of formula_13, making addition an iterated succession. For example, 6 + 2 is 8, because 8 is the successor of 7, which is the successor of 6, making 8 the second successor of 6.\nUnits.\nTo numerically add physical quantities with units, they must be expressed with common units. For example, adding 50\u00a0milliliters to 150\u00a0milliliters gives 200\u00a0milliliters. However, if a measure of 5\u00a0feet is extended by 2\u00a0inches, the sum is 62\u00a0inches, since 60\u00a0inches is synonymous with 5\u00a0feet. On the other hand, it is usually meaningless to try to add 3\u00a0meters and 4\u00a0square meters, since those units are incomparable; this sort of consideration is fundamental in dimensional analysis.\nPerforming addition.\nInnate ability.\nStudies on mathematical development starting around the 1980s have exploited the phenomenon of habituation: infants look longer at situations that are unexpected. A seminal experiment by Karen Wynn in 1992 involving Mickey Mouse dolls manipulated behind a screen demonstrated that five-month-old infants \"expect\" 1 + 1 to be 2, and they are comparatively surprised when a physical situation seems to imply that 1 + 1 is either 1 or 3. This finding has since been affirmed by a variety of laboratories using different methodologies. Another 1992 experiment with older toddlers, between 18 and 35\u00a0months, exploited their development of motor control by allowing them to retrieve ping-pong balls from a box; the youngest responded well for small numbers, while older subjects were able to compute sums up to 5.\nEven some nonhuman animals show a limited ability to add, particularly primates. In a 1995 experiment imitating Wynn's 1992 result (but using eggplants instead of dolls), rhesus macaque and cottontop tamarin monkeys performed similarly to human infants. More dramatically, after being taught the meanings of the Arabic numerals 0 through 4, one chimpanzee was able to compute the sum of two numerals without further training. More recently, Asian elephants have demonstrated an ability to perform basic arithmetic.\nAddition by counting.\nTypically, children first master counting. When given a problem that requires that two items and three items be combined, young children model the situation with physical objects, often fingers or a drawing, and then count the total. As they gain experience, they learn or discover the strategy of \"counting-on\": asked to find two plus three, children count three past two, saying \"three, four, \"five\"\" (usually ticking off fingers), and arriving at five. This strategy seems almost universal; children can easily pick it up from peers or teachers. Most discover it independently. With additional experience, children learn to add more quickly by exploiting the commutativity of addition by counting up from the larger number, in this case, starting with three and counting \"four, \"five\".\" Eventually children begin to recall certain addition facts (\"number bonds\"), either through experience or rote memorization. Once some facts are committed to memory, children begin to derive unknown facts from known ones. For example, a child asked to add six and seven may know that 6 + 6 = 12 and then reason that 6 + 7 is one more, or 13. Such derived facts can be found very quickly and most elementary school students eventually rely on a mixture of memorized and derived facts to add fluently.\nDifferent nations introduce whole numbers and arithmetic at different ages, with many countries teaching addition in pre-school. However, throughout the world, addition is taught by the end of the first year of elementary school.\nSingle-digit addition.\nAn ability to add a pair of single digits (numbers from 0 to 9) is a prerequisite for addition of arbitrary numbers in the decimal system. With 10 choices for each of the two digits to be added, this makes 100 single-digit \"addition facts\", which can be presented in an addition table.\nLearning to fluently and accurately compute single-digit additions is a major focus of early schooling in arithmetic. Sometimes students are encouraged to memorize the full addition table by rote, but pattern-based strategies are typically more enlightening and, for most people, more efficient:\nAs students grow older, they commit more facts to memory and learn to derive other facts rapidly and fluently. Many students never commit all the facts to memory, but can still find any basic fact quickly.\nCarry.\nThe standard algorithm for adding multidigit numbers is to align the addends vertically and add the columns by using the above addition table, starting from the ones column on the right. If the result of a column exceeds nine, the extra digit is \"carried\" into the next column. For example, in the following image, the ones in the addition of 59 + 27 is 9 + 7 = 16, and the digit 1 is the carry. An alternate strategy starts adding from the most significant digit on the left; this route makes carrying a little clumsier, but it is faster at getting a rough estimate of the sum.\nDecimal fractions.\nDecimal fractions can be added by a simple modification of the above process. One aligns two decimal fractions above each other, with the decimal point in the same location. If necessary, one can add trailing zeros to a shorter decimal to make it the same length as the longer decimal. Finally, one performs the same addition process as above, except the decimal point is placed in the answer, exactly where it was placed in the summands. As an example, 45.1 + 4.34 can be solved as follows:\n 4 5 . 1 0\n + 0 4 . 3 4\n 4 9 . 4 4\nScientific notation.\nIn scientific notation, numbers are written in the form formula_46, where formula_47 is the significand and formula_48 is the exponential part. To add numbers in scientific notation, they should be expressed with the same exponent, so that the two significands can simply be added.\nFor example:\n formula_49\nNon-decimal.\nAddition in other bases is very similar to decimal addition. As an example, one can consider addition in binary. Adding two single-digit binary numbers is relatively simple, using a form of carrying:\n 0 + 0 \u2192 0\n 0 + 1 \u2192 1\n 1 + 0 \u2192 1\n 1 + 1 \u2192 0, carry 1 (since 1 + 1 = 2 = 0 + (1 \u00d7 21))\nAdding two \"1\" digits produces a digit \"0\", while 1 must be added to the next column. This is similar to what happens in decimal when certain single-digit numbers are added together; if the result equals or exceeds the value of the radix (10), the digit to the left is incremented:\n 5 + 5 \u2192 0, carry 1 (since 5 + 5 = 10 = 0 + (1 \u00d7 101))\n 7 + 9 \u2192 6, carry 1 (since 7 + 9 = 16 = 6 + (1 \u00d7 101))\nThis is known as \"carrying\". When the result of an addition exceeds the value of a digit, the procedure is to \"carry\" the excess amount divided by the radix (that is, 10/10) to the left, adding it to the next positional value. This is correct since the next position has a weight that is higher by a factor equal to the radix. Carrying works the same way in binary:\n 1 1 1 1 1 (carried digits)\n 0 1 1 0 1\n + 1 0 1 1 1\n 1 0 0 1 0 0 = 36\nIn this example, two numerals are being added together: 011012 (1310) and 101112 (2310). The top row shows the carry bits used. Starting in the rightmost column, 1 + 1 = 102. The 1 is carried to the left, and the 0 is written at the bottom of the rightmost column. The second column from the right is added: 1 + 0 + 1 = 102 again; the 1 is carried, and 0 is written at the bottom. The third column: 1 + 1 + 1 = 112. This time, a 1 is carried, and a 1 is written in the bottom row. Proceeding like this gives the final answer 1001002 (3610).\nComputers.\nAnalog computers work directly with physical quantities, so their addition mechanisms depend on the form of the addends. A mechanical adder might represent two addends as the positions of sliding blocks, in which case they can be added with an averaging lever. If the addends are the rotation speeds of two shafts, they can be added with a differential. A hydraulic adder can add the pressures in two chambers by exploiting Newton's second law to balance forces on an assembly of pistons. The most common situation for a general-purpose analog computer is to add two voltages (referenced to ground); this can be accomplished roughly with a resistor network, but a better design exploits an operational amplifier.\nAddition is also fundamental to the operation of digital computers, where the efficiency of addition, in particular the carry mechanism, is an important limitation to overall performance.\nThe abacus, also called a counting frame, is a calculating tool that was in use centuries before the adoption of the written modern numeral system and is still widely used by merchants, traders and clerks in Asia, Africa, and elsewhere; it dates back to at least 2700\u20132300\u00a0BC, when it was used in Sumer.\nBlaise Pascal invented the mechanical calculator in 1642; it was the first operational adding machine. Pascal's calculator was limited by its gravity-assisted carry mechanism, which forced its wheels to only turn one way so it could add. To subtract, the operator had to use the Pascal's calculator's complement, which required as many steps as an addition. Gottfried Leibniz built the stepped reckoner, another mechanical calculator, finished in 1694, and Giovanni Poleni improved on the design in 1709 with a calculating clock made of wood that could perform all four arithmetical operations. These early attempts were not commercially successful but inspired later mechanical calculators of the 19th century.\nAdders execute integer addition in electronic digital computers, usually using binary arithmetic. The simplest architecture is the ripple carry adder, which follows the standard multi-digit algorithm. One slight improvement is the carry skip design, again following human intuition; one does not perform all the carries in computing 999 + 1, but one bypasses the group of 9s and skips to the answer.\nIn practice, computational addition may be achieved via XOR and AND bitwise logical operations in conjunction with bitshift operations. Both XOR and AND gates are straightforward to realize in digital logic, allowing the realization of full adder circuits, which in turn may be combined into more complex logical operations. In modern digital computers, integer addition is typically the fastest arithmetic instruction, yet it has the largest impact on performance since it underlies all floating-point operations as well as such basic tasks as address generation during memory access and fetching instructions during branching. To increase speed, modern designs calculate digits in parallel; these schemes go by such names as carry select, carry lookahead, and the Ling pseudocarry. Many implementations are, in fact, hybrids of these last three designs.\nSome decimal computers in the late 1950s and early 1960s used add tables instead of adders, e.g., RCA 301, IBM 1620.\nArithmetic implemented on a computer can deviate from the mathematical ideal in various ways. For example, if the result of an addition is too large for a computer to store, an arithmetic overflow occurs, resulting in an error message and/or an incorrect answer. Unanticipated arithmetic overflow is a fairly common cause of program errors. Such overflow bugs may be hard to discover and diagnose because they may manifest themselves only for very large input data sets, which are less likely to be used in validation tests. The Year 2000 problem was a series of bugs where overflow errors occurred due to the use of a 2-digit format for years.\nComputers have another way of representing numbers, called \"floating-point arithmetic\", which is similar to the scientific notation described above and which reduces the overflow problem. Each floating point number has two parts, an exponent and a mantissa. To add two floating-point numbers, the exponents must match, which typically means shifting the mantissa of the smaller number. If the disparity between the larger and smaller numbers is too great, a loss of precision may result. If many smaller numbers are to be added to a large number, it is best to add the smaller numbers together first and then add the total to the larger number, rather than adding small numbers to the large number one at a time. This makes floating-point addition non-associative in general.\nAddition of numbers.\nTo prove the usual properties of addition, one must first define addition for the context in question. Addition is first defined on the natural numbers. In set theory, addition is then extended to progressively larger sets that include the natural numbers: the integers, the rational numbers, and the real numbers. In mathematics education, positive fractions are added before negative numbers are even considered; this is also the historical route.\nNatural numbers.\nThere are two popular ways to define the sum of two natural numbers formula_13 and formula_14. If one defines natural numbers to be the cardinalities of finite sets (the cardinality of a set is the number of elements in the set), then it is appropriate to define their sum as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere formula_52 means the union of formula_53 and formula_54. An alternate version of this definition allows formula_53 and formula_54 to possibly overlap and then takes their disjoint union, a mechanism that allows common elements to be separated out and therefore counted twice.\nThe other popular definition is recursive:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAgain, there are minor variations upon this definition in the literature. Taken literally, the above definition is an application of the recursion theorem on the partially ordered set formula_57. On the other hand, some sources prefer to use a restricted recursion theorem that applies only to the set of natural numbers. One then considers formula_13 to be temporarily \"fixed\", applies recursion on formula_14 to define a function \"formula_60\", and pastes these unary operations for all formula_13 together to form the full binary operation.\nThis recursive formulation of addition was developed by Dedekind as early as 1854, and he would expand upon it in the following decades. He proved the associative and commutative properties, among others, through mathematical induction.\nIntegers.\nThe simplest conception of an integer is that it consists of an absolute value (which is a natural number) and a sign (generally either positive or negative). The integer zero is a special third case, being neither positive nor negative. The corresponding definition of addition must proceed by cases:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For an integer formula_62, let formula_63 and formula_64 are equal if and only if formula_65. So, one can define formally the integers as the equivalence classes of ordered pairs of natural numbers under the equivalence relation formula_66 if and only if formula_65. The equivalence class of formula_68 contains either formula_69 if formula_70, or formula_71 if otherwise. Given that formula_62 is a natural number, then one can denote formula_73 the equivalence class of formula_74, and by formula_75 the equivalence class of formula_76. This allows identifying the natural number formula_62 with the equivalence class formula_73.\nThe addition of ordered pairs is done component-wise:\nformula_79\nA straightforward computation shows that the equivalence class of the result depends only on the equivalence classes of the summands, and thus that this defines an addition of equivalence classes, that is, integers. Another straightforward computation shows that this addition is the same as the above case definition.\nRational numbers (fractions).\nAddition of rational numbers involves the fractions. The computation can be done by using the least common denominator, but a conceptually simpler definition involves only integer addition and multiplication:\nformula_80\nAs an example, the sum formula_81.\nAddition of fractions is much simpler when the denominators are the same; in this case, one can simply add the numerators while leaving the denominator the same:\nformula_82\nso formula_83.\nThe commutativity and associativity of rational addition are easy consequences of the laws of integer arithmetic.\nReal numbers.\nA common construction of the set of real numbers is the Dedekind completion of the set of rational numbers. A real number is defined to be a Dedekind cut of rationals: a non-empty set of rationals that is closed downward and has no greatest element. The sum of real numbers \"a\" and \"b\" is defined element by element:\nformula_84\nThis definition was first published, in a slightly modified form, by Richard Dedekind in 1872.\nThe commutativity and associativity of real addition are immediate; defining the real number 0 as the set of negative rationals, it is easily seen as the additive identity. Probably the trickiest part of this construction pertaining to addition is the definition of additive inverses.\nUnfortunately, dealing with the multiplication of Dedekind cuts is a time-consuming case-by-case process similar to the addition of signed integers. Another approach is the metric completion of the rational numbers. A real number is essentially defined to be the limit of a Cauchy sequence of rationals, lim\u00a0\"a\"\"n\". Addition is defined term by term:\nformula_85\nThis definition was first published by Georg Cantor, also in 1872, although his formalism was slightly different.\nOne must prove that this operation is well-defined, dealing with co-Cauchy sequences. Once that task is done, all the properties of real addition follow immediately from the properties of rational numbers. Furthermore, the other arithmetic operations, including multiplication, have straightforward, analogous definitions.\nComplex numbers.\nComplex numbers are added by adding the real and imaginary parts of the summands. That is to say:\nformula_86\nUsing the visualization of complex numbers in the complex plane, the addition has the following geometric interpretation: the sum of two complex numbers \"A\" and \"B\", interpreted as points of the complex plane, is the point \"X\" obtained by building a parallelogram three of whose vertices are \"O\", \"A\" and \"B\".\nGeneralizations.\nMany binary operations can be viewed as generalizations of the addition operation on the real numbers. The field of algebra is centrally concerned with such generalized operations, and they also appear in set theory and category theory.\nAbelian group.\nIn group theory, a Group is an algebraic structure that allows for composing any two elements. \nIn the special case where the order does not matter, the composition operator is sometimes called addition. Such groups are referred to as Abelian or commutative; the composition operator is often written as \"+\".\nLinear algebra.\nIn linear algebra, a vector space is an algebraic structure that allows for adding any two vectors and for scaling vectors. A familiar vector space is the set of all ordered pairs of real numbers; the ordered pair formula_68 is interpreted as a vector from the origin in the Euclidean plane to the point formula_68 in the plane. The sum of two vectors is obtained by adding their individual coordinates:\nformula_89\nThis addition operation is central to classical mechanics, in which velocities, accelerations and forces are all represented by vectors.\nMatrix addition is defined for two matrices of the same dimensions. The sum of two \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" (pronounced \"m by n\") matrices A and B, denoted by A + B, is again an \"m\" \u00d7 \"n\" matrix computed by adding corresponding elements:\nformula_90\nFor example:\n formula_91\nIn modular arithmetic, the set of available numbers is restricted to a finite subset of the integers, and addition \"wraps around\" when reaching a certain value, called the modulus. For example, the set of integers modulo 12 has twelve elements; it inherits an addition operation from the integers that is central to musical set theory. The set of integers modulo\u00a02 has just two elements; the addition operation it inherits is known in Boolean logic as the \"exclusive or\" function. A similar \"wrap around\" operation arises in geometry, where the sum of two angle measures is often taken to be their sum as real numbers modulo\u00a02\u03c0. This amounts to an addition operation on the circle, which in turn generalizes to the operations of higher-dimensional Lie groups.\nThe general theory of abstract algebra allows an \"addition\" operation to be any associative and commutative operation on a set. Basic algebraic structures with such an addition operation include commutative monoids and abelian groups.\nLinear combinations combine multiplication and summation; they are sums in which each term has a multiplier, usually a real or complex number. Linear combinations are especially useful in contexts where straightforward addition would violate some normalization rule, such as mixing of strategies in game theory or superposition of states in quantum mechanics.\nSet theory and category theory.\nA far-reaching generalization of the addition of natural numbers is the addition of ordinal numbers and cardinal numbers in set theory. These give two different generalizations of the addition of natural numbers to the transfinite. Unlike most addition operations, the addition of ordinal numbers is not commutative. Addition of cardinal numbers, however, is a commutative operation closely related to the disjoint union operation.\nIn category theory, disjoint union is seen as a particular case of the coproduct operation, and general coproducts are perhaps the most abstract of all the generalizations of addition. The coproduct such as direct sum is named to evoke their connection with addition.\nRelated operations.\nArithmetic.\nSubtraction can be thought of as a kind of addition\u2014that is, the addition of an additive inverse. Subtraction is itself a sort of inverse to addition, in that adding formula_92 and subtracting formula_92 are inverse functions. Given a set with an addition operation, one cannot always define a corresponding subtraction operation on that set; the set of natural numbers is a simple example. On the other hand, a subtraction operation uniquely determines an addition operation, an additive inverse operation, and an additive identity; for this reason, an additive group can be described as a set that is closed under subtraction.\nMultiplication can be thought of as repeated addition. If a single term x appears in a sum formula_62 times, then the sum is the product of formula_62 and x. Nonetheless, this works only for natural numbers. By the definition in general, multiplication is the operation between two numbers, called the multiplier and the multiplicand, that are combined into a single number called the product.\nIn the real and complex numbers, addition and multiplication can be interchanged by the exponential function:\nformula_96\nThis identity allows multiplication to be carried out by consulting a table of logarithms and computing addition by hand; it also enables multiplication on a slide rule. The formula is still a good first-order approximation in the broad context of Lie groups, where it relates multiplication of infinitesimal group elements with addition of vectors in the associated Lie algebra.\nThere are even more generalizations of multiplication than addition. In general, multiplication operations always distribute over addition; this requirement is formalized in the definition of a ring. In some contexts, integers, distributivity over addition, and the existence of a multiplicative identity are enough to determine the multiplication operation uniquely. The distributive property also provides information about the addition operation; by expanding the product formula_97 in both ways, one concludes that addition is forced to be commutative. For this reason, ring addition is commutative in general.\nDivision is an arithmetic operation remotely related to addition. Since formula_98, division is right distributive over addition: formula_99. However, division is not left distributive over addition, such as formula_100 is not the same as formula_101.\nOrdering.\nThe maximum operation formula_102 is a binary operation similar to addition. In fact, if two nonnegative numbers formula_13 and formula_14 are of different orders of magnitude, their sum is approximately equal to their maximum. This approximation is extremely useful in the applications of mathematics, for example, in truncating Taylor series. However, it presents a perpetual difficulty in numerical analysis, essentially since \"max\" is not invertible. If formula_14 is much greater than formula_13, then a straightforward calculation of formula_107 can accumulate an unacceptable round-off error, perhaps even returning zero. See also \"Loss of significance\".\nThe approximation becomes exact in a kind of infinite limit; if either formula_13 or formula_14 is an infinite cardinal number, their cardinal sum is exactly equal to the greater of the two. Accordingly, there is no subtraction operation for infinite cardinals.\nMaximization is commutative and associative, like addition. Furthermore, since addition preserves the ordering of real numbers, addition distributes over \"max\" in the same way that multiplication distributes over addition:\nformula_110\nFor these reasons, in tropical geometry one replaces multiplication with addition and addition with maximization. In this context, addition is called \"tropical multiplication\", maximization is called \"tropical addition\", and the tropical \"additive identity\" is negative infinity. Some authors prefer to replace addition with minimization; then the additive identity is positive infinity.\nTying these observations together, tropical addition is approximately related to regular addition through the logarithm:\nformula_111\nwhich becomes more accurate as the base of the logarithm increases. The approximation can be made exact by extracting a constant formula_112, named by analogy with the Planck constant from quantum mechanics, and taking the \"classical limit\" as formula_112 tends to zero:\nformula_114\nIn this sense, the maximum operation is a \"dequantized\" version of addition.\nIn probability theory.\nConvolution is used to add two independent random variables defined by distribution functions. Its usual definition combines integration, subtraction, and multiplication.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61339", "revid": "40800862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61339", "title": "Balderdash", "text": "Board game\nBalderdash is a board game variant of a classic parlour game known as Fictionary or the Dictionary Game. It was created by Laura Robinson and Paul Toyne of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The game was first released in 1984 by the Canada Games Company. A US edition appeared that year from TSR, Inc., copyrighted to Gameworks Creations, Inc. and licensed from Canada Games. Subsequent editions have appeared from a variety of companies including The Games Gang, Hasbro and Mattel. The game has sold over 15\u00a0million copies worldwide to date. It is aimed at fans of word games, such as \"Scrabble\".\nOrigin.\n\"Balderdash\" is based on an earlier game, \"Fictionary\", of essentially similar gameplay, varying in that obscure words are found in an unabridged dictionary instead of the definitions and meanings provided on cards. They are then read out to the unsuspecting individual.\nThe board game version was created by Laura Robinson and Paul Toyne of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.\nGameplay.\nThe game presents rare and unusual words, and players secretly submit definitions for them, hoping that other players will believe their definition is the real one. It is therefore advantageous to have an excellent vocabulary and the ability to deceive.\nThe game begins by all players rolling a die, with the high roll chosen to be the first \"dasher\". The dasher draws a \"definition card\" from the supplied box, and rolls the dice to decide which of the words listed there is to be used. Then the dasher writes the definition of the word (as supplied on the card) on a piece of paper. All other players then write down a definition, which may be an honest attempt to supply the correct definition, or, if they do not know or for tactical reasons decide not to, a fictitious definition for the word designed to sound convincing.\nThe players hand their definitions to the dasher. Players submitting the correct definition are immediately awarded three points, and, if there is more than one, the round is abandoned (though the points are retained). The definitions, including the real definition, are then read out in random order. Players record which answer they believe is correct. Players are awarded two points if they guess the correct definition. Players are awarded one point for each other player who incorrectly chooses the fake definition they wrote. The dasher is awarded three points if no one guesses the correct definition. Players move their tokens around the game board one square for each point awarded. The role of dasher then passes to another player. The winner is the individual whose token reaches the end square first.\nVariants.\nThere are many different variations of ways to break ties (when two or more players hit the end at the same time). One way to resolve a tie is to say all of the players that crossed the finish line won. Another way is to have a sudden death, tie-breaker round where whoever gets more points on the tiebreaker round wins.\nIn 1993, \"Beyond Balderdash\" was released. In addition to more up-to-date words, \"Beyond Balderdash\" offers obscure acronyms, dates, names, and movie titles, for which the players have to provide full names, major events, major accomplishments, and plot summaries, respectively. The die is used for choosing which category will be chosen from the card. In later editions, the \"Major Events\" category was switched out for obscure state laws, such as \"After midnight in Denver, Colorado, it is illegal to...\", with players completing the law.\nAn informal variation of the game consists of the players exclusively submitting hilarious and outrageous definitions. No points are awarded, and the winner is determined by who garnered the most laughs throughout the course of the game.\nTelevision version.\nA television game show based on the game aired on Pax TV in 2004 with comedian Elayne Boosler as host.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "61340", "revid": "745100", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61340", "title": "Closed interval", "text": ""}
{"id": "61341", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61341", "title": "Mathematical function", "text": ""}
{"id": "61343", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61343", "title": "Intestine", "text": ""}
