{"id": "63556", "revid": "30211467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63556", "title": "Fredric March", "text": "American actor (1897\u20131975)\nFredric March (born Ernest Frederick McIntyre Bickel; August 31, 1897 \u2013 April 14, 1975) was an American actor, regarded as one of Hollywood's most celebrated stars of the 1930s and 1940s. As a performer he was known for his versatility. He received numerous accolades including two Academy Awards, a Golden Globe Award, two Tony Awards, two Volpi Cups, the Silver Bear, as well as nominations for three BAFTA Awards and three Emmy Awards.\nMarch began his career in 1920, by working as an extra in movies filmed in New York City. He made his stage debut on Broadway in 1926 at the age of 29, and by the end of the decade, he had signed a film contract with Paramount Pictures. He made seven pictures in 1929. He went on to receive\ntwo Academy Awards, for his performances in \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (1931) and \"The Best Years of Our Lives\" (1946). His other Oscar-nominated performances were in the films \"The Royal Family of Broadway\" (1930), \"A Star is Born\" (1937), and \"Death of a Salesman\" (1951). \nMarch gained popularity after establishing himself with leading man roles in films such as \"Honor Among Lovers\" (1931), \"Merrily We Go to Hell\" (1932), \"Design for Living\" (1933), \"Death Takes a Holiday\", \"The Barretts of Wimpole Street\" (both 1934), \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", \"Anna Karenina\", \"The Dark Angel\" (all 1935), \"Nothing Sacred\" (1937), and \"I Married a Witch\" (1942). His later film roles include \"Executive Suite\", \"The Bridges at Toko-Ri\" (both 1954), \"The Desperate Hours\" (1955), \"Inherit the Wind\" (1960), and \"Seven Days in May\" (1964). He made his final film appearance in \"The Iceman Cometh\" (1973).\nMarch was also known for his stage roles; he made his Broadway debut in the play \"The Melody Man\" (1926), and during his stage career he twice won the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play, for his performances in the Ruth Gordon play \"Years Ago\" (1947) and in Eugene O'Neill's \"Long Day's Journey into Night\" (1956). He and Helen Hayes are the only actors to have won both the Academy Award and the Tony Award twice.\nEarly life.\nMarch was born in Racine, Wisconsin, the son of Cora Brown Marcher (1863\u20131936), a schoolteacher from England, and John F. Bickel (1859\u20131941), a devout Presbyterian Church elder who worked in the wholesale hardware business. March attended the Winslow Elementary School (established in 1855), Racine High School, and the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison, where he was a member of Alpha Delta Phi.\nMarch served in the United States Army during World War I as an artillery lieutenant.\nHe began a career as a banker, but an emergency appendectomy caused him to re-evaluate his life and, in 1920, he began working as an \"extra\" in movies made in New York City, using a shortened form of his mother's maiden name. He appeared on Broadway in 1926, and by the end of the decade, he signed a film contract with Paramount Pictures.\nCareer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"March's special ability was to suggest genuine mental pain. As a portrayer of tortured and distressed men, he has no equal. The complete physical control which allows him convincingly to sag, stoop and collapse is assisted by a face suggesting at the same time both intelligence and sensitivity\"\u2014Australian-born film historian John Baxter.\nLike Laurence Olivier, March had a rare protean quality to his acting that allowed him to assume almost any persona convincingly, from Robert Browning to William Jennings Bryan to Dr Jekyll - or Mr. Hyde. He received an Oscar nomination for the 4th Academy Awards in 1930 for \"The Royal Family of Broadway\", in which he played a role modeled on John Barrymore. He won the Academy Award for Best Actor for the 5th Academy Awards in 1932 for \"Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde\" (tied with Wallace Beery for \"The Champ\", although March accrued one more vote than Beery). This led to roles in a series of classic films based on stage hits and classic novels like \"Design for Living\" (1933) with Gary Cooper and Miriam Hopkins; \"Death Takes a Holiday\" (1934); \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" (1935) with Charles Laughton; \"Anna Karenina\" (1935) with Greta Garbo; \"Anthony Adverse\" (1936) with Olivia de Havilland; and as the original Norman Maine in \"A Star is Born\" (1937) with Janet Gaynor, for which he received his third Academy Award nomination.\nMarch resisted signing long-term contracts with the studios, enabling him to play roles in films from a variety of studios. He returned to Broadway after a ten-year absence in 1937 with a notable flop, \"Yr. Obedient Husband\", but after the success of Thornton Wilder's \"The Skin of Our Teeth\", he focused as much on Broadway as on Hollywood. He won two Best Actor Tony Awards: in 1947 for the play \"Years Ago\", written by Ruth Gordon, and in 1957 for his performance as James Tyrone in the original Broadway production of Eugene O'Neill's \"Long Day's Journey Into Night\". He also had major successes in \"A Bell for Adano\" in 1944 and \"Gideon\" in 1961, and he played in Ibsen's \"An Enemy of the People\" on Broadway in 1951. During this period, he also starred in films, including \"I Married a Witch\" (1942) and \"Another Part of the Forest\" (1948). March won his second Oscar in 1946 for \"The Best Years of Our Lives\".\nMarch also branched out into television, winning Emmy nominations for his third attempt at \"The Royal Family\" for the series \"The Best of Broadway\" as well as for television performances as Samuel Dodsworth and Ebenezer Scrooge. On March 25, 1954, March co-hosted the 26th Annual Academy Awards ceremony from New York City, with co-host Donald O'Connor in Los Angeles.\nMarch's neighbor in Connecticut, playwright Arthur Miller, was thought to favor March to inaugurate the part of Willy Loman in the Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning \"Death of a Salesman\" (1949). However, March read the play and turned down the role, whereupon director Elia Kazan cast Lee J. Cobb as Willy and Arthur Kennedy as one of Willy's sons, Biff Loman. Cobb and Kennedy were two actors with whom the director had worked in the film \"Boomerang\" (1947). March later regretted turning down the role and finally played Willy Loman in Columbia Pictures's 1951 film version of the play, directed by Laslo Benedek. March earned his fifth and final Oscar nomination as well as a Golden Globe Award. He also played one of two leads in \"The Desperate Hours\" (1955) with Humphrey Bogart. Bogart and Spencer Tracy had both insisted upon top billing, and Tracy withdrew, leaving the part available for March.\nIn 1957, March was awarded the George Eastman Award, given by George Eastman House for \"distinguished contribution to the art of film\".\nOn February 12, 1959, March appeared before a joint session of the 86th United States Congress, reading the Gettysburg Address as part of a commemoration of the 150th anniversary of Abraham Lincoln's birth.\nMarch co-starred with Spencer Tracy in the 1960 Stanley Kramer film \"Inherit the Wind\", in which he played a dramatized version of famous orator and political figure William Jennings Bryan. March's Bible-thumping character provided a rival for Tracy's Clarence Darrow-inspired character. In the 1960s, March's film career continued with a performance as President Jordan Lyman in the political thriller \"Seven Days in May\" (1964) in which he co-starred with Burt Lancaster, Kirk Douglas, and Edmond O'Brien; the part earned March a Golden Globe nomination as Best Actor.\nMarch made several spoken word recordings, including a version of Oscar Wilde's \"The Selfish Giant\" issued in 1945 in which he narrated and played the title role, and \"The Sounds of History\", a twelve volume LP set accompanying the twelve volume set of books \"The Life History of the United States\", published by Time-Life. The recordings were narrated by Charles Collingwood, with March and his wife Florence Eldridge performing dramatic readings from historical documents and literature.\nFollowing surgery for prostate cancer in 1970, it seemed his career was over; yet, he managed to give one last performance in \"The Iceman Cometh\" (1973) as the complicated Irish saloon keeper, Harry Hope.\nMarriage and public activities.\nIn 1926, March was the leading man in the summer stock cast at Elitch Theatre, and the leading lady was Florence Eldridge. They fell in love and were married in 1927. They remained married until his death in 1975, and they had two adopted children. They appeared in seven films together, the last being \"Inherit the Wind\".\nMarch and Eldridge commissioned Wallace Neff to build their house in Ridgeview Drive, Bel Air, in 1934. It has subsequently been owned by the philanthropist Wallis Annenberg and the actors Brad Pitt and Jennifer Aniston.\nThroughout his life, March and Eldridge were supporters of the Democratic Party. In July 1936, March co-founded the Hollywood Anti-Nazi League (HANL), along with the writers Dorothy Parker and Donald Ogden Stewart, the director Fritz Lang, and the composer Oscar Hammerstein.\nIn 1938, March was one of many Hollywood personalities who were investigated by the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) and the hunt for Communists in the film community. In July 1940, he was among a number of individuals who were questioned by a HUAC subcommittee which was led by Representative Martin Dies Jr.\nLater, in 1948, he and his wife sued the anti-communist publication \"Counterattack\" for defamation, seeking $250,000 in damages. The suit was settled out of court.\nMarch died of prostate cancer in Los Angeles on April 14, 1975, at the age of 77. He was buried at his estate in New Milford, Connecticut.\nLegacy.\nModern assessment.\nMarch is regarded as one of the most eminent Hollywood actors of the 1930s and 1940s. Critic and Turner Classic Movies host Ben Mankiewicz opined that \"two actors from Hollywood\u2019s golden age really stand in a tier above the rest ... Spencer Tracy and Fredric March\". Boston Globe writer Joan Wickersham described March as a Hollywood great who \"rejected the Hollywood studio system\" and \"built a brilliant stage and film career\" despite lacking the \"instant name recognition\" of contemporaries like Humphrey Bogart and Cary Grant. March is also remembered for his later character roles such as those in \"Inherit the Wind\", \"Seven Days in May\", and \"The Iceman Cometh\", roles he played during what was considered a downturn in his film career at the time.\nControversy.\nMarch was briefly a member of an interfraternity society composed of leading students formed at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison in 1919 and 1920 named the Ku Klux Klan which is not believed to have been affiliated with the notorious organization of that name. In actuality, March was an outspoken proponent of the civil rights movement for five decades, and worked closely with the NAACP. When the collegiate organization was named, the (later national) KKK was a small regional organization. As the national KKK became better known, the collegiate organization changed its name in 1922.\nFalse rumors based on a misunderstanding of the organization of which March was a member were spread on social media and alleged that March was a white supremacist. The 500-seat theater at the University of Wisconsin\u2013Oshkosh was formerly named after March. The University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison had named the 168-seat at the Memorial Union as the Fredric March Play Circle Theater; however, in 2018, his name was removed, after student protests following reports of March's membership in a student fraternal organization calling itself Ku Klux Klan. UW\u2013Oshkosh pulled March's name from what is now the Theatre Arts Center shortly before the 2020\u201321 academic term. After new revelations about the nature of the KKK fraternity, as of autumn 2022, there were discussions for a return of March's name.\nAwards and nominations.\nMarch has a star for motion pictures on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, at 1620 Vine Street.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63557", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63557", "title": "Amateur telescope making", "text": "Activity of building telescopes as a hobby\nAmateur telescope making is the activity of building telescopes as a hobby, as opposed to being a paid professional. Amateur telescope makers (sometimes called ATMs) build their instruments for personal enjoyment of a technical challenge, as a way to obtain an inexpensive or personally customized telescope, or as a research tool in the field of astronomy. Amateur telescope makers are usually a sub-group in the field of amateur astronomy.\nBeginnings.\nEver since Galileo Galilei adapted a Dutch invention for astronomical use, astronomical telescope making has been an evolving discipline. Many astronomers after the time of Galileo built their own telescopes out of necessity, but the advent of amateurs in the field building telescopes for their own enjoyment and education seems to have come into prominence in the 20th century.\nBefore the advent of modern mass-produced telescopes, the price of even a modest instrument was often beyond the means of an aspiring amateur astronomer. Building your own was the only economical method to obtain a suitable telescope for observing. Many published works piqued interest in building telescopes, such as the 1920 book \"The Amateur's Telescope\" by Irish telescope maker Rev. W. F. A. Ellison.\nIn the United States in the early 1920s, articles in \"Popular Astronomy\" by Russell W. Porter and in \"Scientific American\" by Albert G. Ingalls featuring Porter and the \"Springfield Telescope Makers\" helped expand interest in the hobby. There was so much public interest, Ingalls began a regular column for \"Scientific American\" on the subject (spawning that publications \"The Amateur Scientist\" column) and later compiled into three books titled \"Amateur Telescope Making\" Vol. 1\u20133. These had a large readership of enthusiast (sometimes called \"telescope nuts\") constructing their own instruments. Between 1933 and 1990, \"Sky &amp; Telescope\" magazine ran a regular column called \"Gleanings for ATMs\" edited by Earle Brown, Robert E. Cox, and Roger Sinnott. The ready supply of surplus optical components after World War II and later Sputnik and the Space Race also greatly expanded the hobby.\nCommon amateur designs.\nAlthough the types of telescopes that amateurs build vary widely, including Refractors, Schmidt\u2013Cassegrains and Maksutovs, the most popular telescope design is the Newtonian reflector, described by Russell W. Porter as \"The Poor Man's Telescope\". The Newtonian has the advantage of being a simple design that allows for maximum size for the minimum expense. And since the design employs a single front surface mirror as its objective it only has one surface that has to be ground and polished, as opposed to three for the Maksutov and four for the refractor and the Schmidt\u2013Cassegrain. Typically a Newtonian telescope of aperture is a standard starter project, constructed as a club project or by individuals working from books or from plans found on the Internet.\nMirror making.\nSince the Newtonian reflector is the most common telescope built by amateur telescope makers, large sections of the literature on the subject are devoted to fabrication of the primary mirror. The mirrors start as a flat disk of glass, typically plate glass or borosilicate glass (Pyrex). The disk is carefully ground, polished and figured to an extremely accurate shape, usually a paraboloid. Telescopes with high focal ratios may use spherical mirrors since the difference in the two shapes is insignificant at those ratios. The tools used to achieve this shape can be simple, consisting of a similarly sized glass tool, a series of finer abrasives, and a polishing pitch lap made from a type of tree sap. Through a whole series of random strokes the mirror naturally tends to become spherical in shape. At that point, a variation in polishing strokes is typically used to create and perfect the desired paraboloidal shape.\nFoucault test.\nThe equipment most amateurs use to test the shape of the mirrors, a Foucault knife-edge test, is, like the tools used to create the surface, simple to fabricate. At its most basic it consists of a light bulb, a piece of tinfoil with a pinhole in it, and a razorblade.\nAfter the mirror is polished out it is placed vertically in a stand. The Foucault tester is set up at a distance close to the mirror's radius of curvature. The tester is adjusted so that the returning beam from the pinhole light source is interrupted by the knife edge. Viewing the mirror from behind the knife edge shows a pattern on the mirror surface. If the mirror surface is part of a perfect sphere, the mirror appears evenly lighted across the entire surface. If the mirror is spherical but with defects such as bumps or depressions, the defects appear greatly magnified in height. If the surface is paraboloidal, the mirror looks like a doughnut or lozenge. It is possible to calculate how closely the mirror surface resembles a perfect paraboloid by placing a special mask over the mirror and taking a series of measurements with the tester. This data is then reduced and graphed against an ideal parabolic curve.\nSome amateur telescope makers use a similar test called a Ronchi test that replaces the knife edge with a \"grating\" comprising several fine parallel wires or an etching on a glass plate. Other tests used include the Gaviola or Caustic test which can measure mirrors of fast f/ratio more accurately, and home-brew Interferometric testing made possible in recent years by affordable lasers, digital cameras (such as webcams), and computers.\nAluminizing or \"silvering\" the mirror.\nOnce the mirror surface has the correct shape a very thin coating of a highly reflective material is added to the front surface.\nHistorically this coating was silver. Silvering was put on the mirror chemically, typically by the mirror maker or user. Silver coatings have higher reflectivity than aluminum but corrode quickly and need replacing after a few months.\nSince the 1950s most mirror makers have an aluminum coating applied by a thin-film deposition process (work is done by a firm specializing in the process). Modern coatings usually consist of an aluminum layer overcoated with protective transparent compounds.\nThe mirror is aluminized by placing it in a vacuum chamber with electrically heated tungsten or nichrome coils that can evaporate aluminum. In a vacuum, the hot aluminum atoms travel in straight lines. When they hit the surface of the mirror, they cool and stick. Some mirror coating shops then evaporate a layer of quartz onto the mirror, whereas others expose it to pure oxygen or air in an oven so that the mirror will form a tough, clear layer of aluminum oxide.\nTelescope design.\nThe telescopes amateur telescope makers build range from backyard variety to sophisticated instruments that make meaningful contributions to the field of astronomy. Instruments built by amateurs have been employed in planetary study, astrometry, photometry, comet and asteroid discovery to name just a few. Even the \u201chobbyist\u201d end of the field can break down into several distinct categories such as: observing deep sky objects, observing the planets, solar observing, lunar observation, and astrophotography of all those classes of objects. Therefore, the design, size, and construction of the telescopes vary as well. Some amateur telescope makers build instruments that, while looking crude, are wholly suited to the purpose they are designed for. Others may strive for a more aesthetic look with high levels of mechanical \u201cfinish\u201d. Since some amateur telescope makers do not have access to high-precision machining equipment, many elegant designs such as the Poncet Platform, Crayford focuser, and the Dobsonian telescope have evolved, which achieve functionality and stability without requiring precision machining.\nThe difficulty of construction is another factor in an amateur's choice of project. For a given design the difficulty of construction grows roughly as the square of the diameter of the objective. For example, a Newtonian telescope of aperture is a moderately easy science fair project. A Newtonian is considered a good compromise size since construction is not difficult and results in an instrument that would be expensive to purchase commercially. A reflecting telescope is difficult, but still within the ability of the average amateur who has had experience building smaller instruments. Amateurs have constructed telescopes as large as across, but usually small groups or astronomy clubs take on such projects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63558", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63558", "title": "Crohns", "text": ""}
{"id": "63563", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63563", "title": "Anatomical pathology", "text": "Medical specialty\nAnatomical pathology (\"Commonwealth\") or anatomic pathology (\"U.S.\") is a medical specialty that is concerned with the diagnosis of disease based on the macroscopic, microscopic, biochemical, immunologic and molecular examination of organs and tissues. Over the 20th century, surgical pathology has evolved tremendously: from historical examination of whole bodies (autopsy) to a more modernized practice, centered on the diagnosis and prognosis of cancer to guide treatment decision-making in oncology. Its modern founder was the Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Morgagni from Forl\u00ec.\nAnatomical pathology is one of two branches of pathology, the other being clinical pathology, the diagnosis of disease through the laboratory analysis of bodily fluids or tissues. Often, pathologists practice both anatomical and clinical pathology, a combination known as general pathology. Similar specialties exist in veterinary pathology.\nDifferences with clinical pathology.\nAnatomic pathology relates to the processing, examination, and diagnosis of surgical specimens by a physician trained in pathological diagnosis. Clinical pathology involves the laboratory analysis of tissue samples and bodily fluids; procedures may include blood sample analysis, urinalysis, stool sample analysis, and analysis of spinal fluid. Clinical pathologists may specialize in a number of areas, including blood banking, clinical chemistry, microbiology, and hematology.\nSkills and procedures.\nThe procedures used in anatomic pathology include:\nSubspecialties.\nSurgical pathology.\nSurgical pathology is the most significant and time-consuming area of practice for most anatomical pathologists. Surgical pathology involves the gross and microscopic examination of surgical specimens, as well as biopsies submitted by non-surgeons such as general internists, medical subspecialists, dermatologists, and interventional radiologists. Surgical pathology increasingly requires technologies and skills traditionally associated with clinical pathology such as molecular diagnostics.\nOral and maxillofacial pathology.\nIn the United States, subspecialty-trained doctors of dentistry, rather than medical doctors, can be certified by a professional board to practice Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology.\nCytopathology.\nCytopathology is a sub-discipline of anatomical pathology concerned with the microscopic examination of whole, individual cells obtained from exfoliation or fine-needle aspirates. Cytopathologists are trained to perform fine-needle aspirates of superficially located organs, masses, or cysts and are often able to render an immediate diagnosis in the presence of the patient and consulting physician. In the case of screening tests such as the Papanicolaou smear, non-physician cytotechnologists are often employed to perform initial reviews, with only positive or uncertain cases examined by the pathologist. Cytopathology is a board-certifiable subspecialty in the U.S.\nMolecular pathology.\nMolecular pathology is an emerging discipline within anatomical and clinical pathology that is focused on the use of nucleic acid-based techniques such as in-situ hybridization, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, and nucleic acid microarrays for specialized studies of disease in tissues and cells. Molecular pathology shares some aspects of practice with both anatomic and clinical pathology, and is sometimes considered a \"crossover\" discipline.\nForensic pathology.\nForensic pathologists receive specialized training in determining the cause of death and other legally relevant information from the bodies of persons who died suddenly with no known medical condition, those who die from non-natural causes, as well as those dying as a result of homicide, or other criminally suspicious deaths. A majority of the forensic pathologists cases are due to natural causes. Often, additional tests such as toxicology, histology, and genetic testing will be used to help the pathologist determine the cause of death. Forensic pathologists will often testify in courts regarding their findings in cases of homicide and suspicious death. They also play a large role in public health, such as investigating deaths in the workplace, deaths in custody, as well as sudden and unexpected deaths in children.\nForensic pathologists often have special areas of interest within their practice, such as sudden death due to cardiac pathology, deaths due to drugs, or Sudden Infant Death (SIDS), and various others.\nTraining and certification.\nAustralia.\nAnatomical Pathology is one of the specialty training programs offered by the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia (RCPA). The RCPA. To qualify as a Fellow of the RCPA in Anatomical Pathology, the candidate must complete a recognised undergraduate or postgraduate medical qualification and then complete a minimum of 2 years of clinical medical experience as a prerequisite to selection as a training registrar. The training program is a minimum of 5 years, served in at least two laboratories, and candidates must pass a Basic Pathological Sciences examination (usually in first year), the Part 1 examinations (not before 3rd year) and the Part 2 examinations (not before 5th year). Fellows may then continue into subspecialty training.\nCanada.\nAnatomical Pathology (AP) is one of the specialist certificates granted by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada. Other certificates related to pathology include general pathology (GP), hematopathology, and neuropathology. Candidates for any of these must have completed four years of medical school and five years of residency training.\nUnited States.\nAnatomic Pathology (AP) is one of the two primary certifications offered by the American Board of Pathology (the other is Clinical Pathology (CP)) and one of three primary certifications offered by the American Osteopathic Board of Pathology. To be certified in anatomic pathology, the trainee must complete four years of medical school followed by three years of residency training. Many U.S. pathologists are certified in both AP and CP, which requires a total of four years of residency. After completing residency, many pathologists enroll in further years of fellowship training to gain expertise in a subspecialty of AP or CP. Pathologists' Assistants are highly trained medical professionals with specialized training in Anatomic and Forensic pathology. To become a Pathologists' Assistant one must enter and successfully complete a NAACLS accredited program and pass the ASCP Board of Certification Exam.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63564", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63564", "title": "Hematology", "text": "Study of blood and blood diseases\nHematology (spelled haematology in British English) is the branch of medicine concerned with the study of the cause, prognosis, treatment, and prevention of diseases related to blood. It involves treating diseases that affect the production of blood and its components, such as blood cells, hemoglobin, blood proteins, bone marrow, platelets, blood vessels, spleen, and the mechanism of coagulation. Such diseases might include hemophilia, sickle cell anemia, blood clots (thrombus), other bleeding disorders, and blood cancers such as leukemia, multiple myeloma, and lymphoma. The laboratory analysis of blood is frequently performed by a medical technologist or medical laboratory scientist.\nSpecialization.\nPhysicians specialized in hematology are known as hematologists or haematologists. Their routine work mainly includes the care and treatment of patients with hematological diseases, although some may also work at the hematology laboratory viewing blood films and bone marrow slides under the microscope, interpreting various hematological test results and blood clotting test results. In some institutions, hematologists also manage the hematology laboratory. Physicians who work in hematology laboratories, and most commonly manage them, are pathologists specialized in the diagnosis of hematological diseases, referred to as hematopathologists or haematopathologists. Hematologists and hematopathologists generally work in conjunction to formulate a diagnosis and deliver the most appropriate therapy if needed. Hematology is a distinct subspecialty of internal medicine, separate from but overlapping with the subspecialty of medical oncology. Hematologists may specialize further or have special interests, for example, in:\nTraining.\nStarting hematologists (in the US) complete a four-year medical degree followed by three or four more years in residency or internship programs. After completion, they further expand their knowledge by spending two or three more years learning how to experiment, diagnose, and treat blood disorders. Some exposure to hematopathology is typically included in their fellowship training. Job openings for hematologists require training in a recognized fellowship program to learn to diagnose and treat numerous blood-related benign conditions and blood cancers. Hematologists typically work across specialties to care for patients with complex illnesses, such as sickle cell disease, who require complex, multidisciplinary care, and to provide consultation on cases of disseminated intravascular coagulation, thrombosis and other conditions that can occur in hospitalized patients.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63565", "revid": "551700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63565", "title": "Forensic pathology", "text": "Medical speciality\nForensic pathology is pathology that focuses on determining the cause of death by examining a corpse. A post mortem examination is performed by a medical examiner or forensic pathologist, usually during the investigation of criminal law cases and civil law cases in some jurisdictions. Coroners and medical examiners are also frequently asked to confirm the identity of remains.\nDuties.\nForensic pathology is an application of medical jurisprudence. A forensic pathologist is a medical doctor who has completed training in anatomical pathology and has subsequently specialized in forensic pathology. The requirements for becoming a \"fully qualified\" forensic pathologist vary from country to country. Some of the different requirements are discussed below (see \"\u00a7 Education\").\nThe forensic pathologist performs autopsies/postmortem examinations with the goal of determining the cause of death as well as the possible manner of death. The autopsy report contains conclusions made relating to the following:\nThe autopsy also provides an opportunity for other issues raised by the death to be addressed, such as the collection of trace evidence or determining the identity of the deceased. Autopsies are performed when a death occurs, when an unexpected death occurs, when someone dies while not under the care of a physician, to solve criminal cases, when a mass disaster occurs and requires the identification of the victims and upon request by the family or loved ones of the deceased. Typically, autopsies can cost anywhere from $3,000 to $5,000, however the price can vary from country to country.\nThe forensic pathologist examines and documents wounds and injuries, along with the possible causation of those injuries, at autopsy, at the scene of a crime and occasionally in a clinical setting, such as rape investigation or deaths in custody.\nForensic pathologists collect and examine tissue specimens under the microscope (histology) to identify the presence or absence of natural disease and other microscopic findings such as asbestos bodies in the lungs or gunpowder particles around a gunshot wound.\nThey collect and interpret toxicological specimens of body tissues and fluids to determine the chemical cause of accidental overdoses or deliberate poisonings.\nForensic pathologists work closely with the medico-legal authority for the area concerned with the investigation of sudden and unexpected deaths: the coroner (England and Wales), procurator fiscal (Scotland), or coroner or medical examiner (United States).\nIn mass disaster settings, forensic pathologists will work alongside Forensic Odontologists, Forensics Anthropologists as well as other forensic specialties with the goal of identifying the victims of the disaster. The process of identification involves the recovery of the victims, the collection of antemortem data, the initial examination along with the collection of any postmortem evidence, and finally the comparison of the antemortem and postmortem data gathered in order to identify those victims.\nThey serve as expert witnesses in courts of law testifying in civil or criminal law cases.\nIn an autopsy, the forensic pathologist is often assisted by an autopsy/mortuary technician (sometimes called a diener in the US).\nForensic physicians sometimes referred to as \"forensic medical examiners\" or \"police surgeons\" (in the UK until recently), are medical doctors trained in the examination of, and provision of medical treatment to, living victims of assault, including sexual assault, and individuals who find themselves in police custody. Many forensic physicians in the UK practice clinical forensic medicine part-time, and they also practice family medicine or another medical specialty.\nIn the United Kingdom, membership of the Royal College of Pathologists is not a prerequisite of appointment as a coroner's \"medical expert\". Doctors in the UK who are not forensic pathologists or pathologists are allowed to perform medicolegal autopsies, as the wording of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009, which merely stipulates a \"registered medical practitioner\": anyone on the General Medical Council register.\nForensic pathologists make great contributions to public health and preventative medicine by studying the dead. By using their findings during autopsies, they can use their knowledge to prevent the death of another person.\nInvestigation of death.\nPathologists determine the cause of death through postmortem examination or autopsy. There are three stages of death investigation: examination, correlation, and interpretation. Deaths where there is an unknown cause and those considered unnatural are investigated. In most jurisdictions this is done by a \"\"forensic pathologist\",\" \"coroner\", \"medical examiner\", or hybrid \"medical examiner-coroner\" offices.\nMethods.\nForensic pathologists must be trained in several fields to succeed at their job. They utilize a wide variety of methods such as conducting autopsies which in itself has a variety of methods. Some of these methods require various identification techniques, including immunohistological studies, which can be valuable for determining the time of injury and assessing axonal damage resulting from traumatic brain injury When conducting an autopsy a forensic pathologist may take X-Rays, samples of bodily fluids, samples of tissues, and samples of bacterial culture found within the body. While conducting the autopsy the forensic pathologist uses the stages of death as another method to inspect both the time of death and the amount of time the body has been deceased. Using the Information received during the autopsy paired with evidence provided by law enforcement provides the basis for the determination of the cause of death.\nTerminology inconsistencies across jurisdictions.\nIn some jurisdictions, the title of \"Medical Examiner\" is used by a non-physician, elected official involved in a medicolegal death investigation. In others, the law requires the medical examiner to be a physician, pathologist, or forensic pathologist.\nSimilarly, the title \"coroner\" is applied to both physicians and non-physicians. Historically, coroners were not all physicians (most often serving primarily as the town mortician). However, in some jurisdictions, the topic of \"Coroner\" is exclusively used by physicians.\nCanadian coroners.\nIn Canada, there was a mix of coroner and medical examiner systems, depending on the province or territory. In Ontario, coroners are licensed physicians, usually but not exclusively family physicians. In Quebec, there is a mix of medical and non-medical coroners, whereas, in British Columbia, there is predominantly a non-physician coroner system. Alberta and Nova Scotia are examples of ME systems\nCoroners and medical examiners in the United States.\nIn the United States, a coroner is typically an elected public official in a particular geographic jurisdiction who investigates and certifies deaths. The vast majority of coroners lack a Doctor of Medicine degree and the amount of medical training that they have received is highly variable, depending on their profession (e.g. law enforcement, judges, funeral directors, emergency medical technicians, nurses).\nIn contrast, a medical examiner is typically a physician who holds the degree of Doctor of Medicine (M.D.) or Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (D.O.). Ideally, a medical examiner has completed both a pathology residency and a fellowship in forensic pathology. In some jurisdictions, a medical examiner must be both a doctor and a lawyer, with additional training in forensic pathology.\nHistory.\nForensic pathology was founded by Rudolf Virchow, a German pathologist, who developed the Virchow method which is one of the main and popular techniques still used by forensic pathologists today. The Virchow method is of doing autopsies as well as instituting cell theory which would shed light on the effects and damage of disease on the human body. Rudolf Virchow began the practice of regulated autopsies where the entire body would be inspected rather than a particular area of interest which would expose additional damage that injuries and ailments inflicted on the human body. In German-speaking Europe, lectures on forensic pathology were regularly held in Freiburg in the mid 18th century and Vienna in 1804. Scientists like Auguste Ambroise Tardieu, Johann Ludwig Casper and Carl Liman made great efforts to develop forensic pathology into a science based on empirics.\nAmbroise Par\u00e9 is also considered one of the fathers of modern forensic pathology and surgery. His inventions in the early 16th century include surgical instruments and techniques. He pioneered battlefield medicine and treatments of wounds. One technique he used was pouring boiling oil into wounds.\nThis history of forensic pathology can be traced all the way back to the fourth century BC in Babylonia but instead of practicing on deceased human bodies, the practice of forensic pathology was strictly practiced on animals. This was said to be done only to animals since humans during this era were believed to be sacred. Later on, in forensic pathology history, forensic pathology would be practiced among those who live in Asia. Muslim doctors would discover infectious diseases and as a result, would operate on deceased bodies; one of those doctors being Ibn Zuhr. Zuhr would go on to performing autopsies on bodies in postmortem and research diseases such as leprosy, mange, and sexually transmitted diseases.\nWhile Zuhr was busy learning about contagious diseases, Yee Siung, a Chinese government official was assembling a group of physicians who were in charge of dissecting criminal murder victims. These victims\u2019 cause of death would be investigated alongside the actual case itself and this would be the first time pathology would be used to help solve criminal cases.\nForensic pathology was first recognized in the United States by the American Board of Pathology in 1959 after toxicology and pathology had been used to solve thousands of criminal cases worldwide for years.\nIn Canada, it was formally recognized in 2003, and a formal training program (a fellowship) is currently being established under the auspices of the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada.\nEducation.\nIn most English speaking countries, forensic pathology is a subspecialty of anatomical pathology. Training requirements differ from country to country, however, it is common for pathologists to study at a medical school and then go on to study pathology. Many forensic pathologists practice as a histo (hospital) pathologists before moving onto forensic science. Another requirement for forensic pathologists includes having a working knowledge of specific fields of study like toxicology, firearms examination (wound ballistics), trace evidence, forensic serology and DNA technology.\nAustralia.\nThere are currently three paths to qualify as a forensic pathologist in Australia. The first is to train solely in forensic pathology (although a significant amount of anatomical pathology knowledge is still required) and pass two examinations for forensic pathology only. The second is to commence training in anatomical pathology, and complete an initial anatomical pathology examination, which takes a minimum of three years; then go on to train solely in forensic pathology and complete a forensic pathology examination, which takes a minimum of two years. The third is to complete a minimum 5 years' training in anatomical pathology to qualify as a fellow in anatomical pathology, then complete a post-fellowship year in forensic pathology (a minimum twelve months further training plus successful completion of an examination).\nCanada.\nIn Canada, individuals must complete an undergraduate science degree, followed by a doctor of medicine degree from one of the seven medical schools in Canada. After these are completed individuals may enter the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons (RCPSC) which requires the completion of residency training. Anatomical pathology is a five-year residency. Residents who wish to become forensic pathologists must then complete a one-year fellowship in forensic pathology. Forensic pathology is a sub-specialty by the RCPSC. As of 2022, there are three schools in Canada that offer the forensic pathology training program. These schools are the University of Alberta, the University of Ottawa and the University of Toronto. McMaster University ceased their training program in 2019.\nGermany.\nOnce students have acquired the \"Abitur\" diploma and completed all the requirements, they can study medicine at a university. Within the medical education system, there are four subdivisions individuals must partake in prior to moving into a specialization.\nThe first section is a two year preclinical study period where individuals are introduced to the basics. A two month work period at a hospital must be completed between each semester in order to become familiar with everyday life in a hospital. A final exam on the basics concludes this portion.\nThe second section is a one year clinical period to familiarize the students with the basics of clinical practice. The students complete the first part of the physician's exam at the end of this period.\nThe third section is another clinical period which lasts for two years, which practices non-surgical, surgical, neurological, ecological and general medicine domains. Here is where forensic medicine is first introduced. Between the first and second clinical sections, four months of medical clerkship are required, which consists of two months in a hospital and two months at any other medical institution. Students complete the second part of the physician's exam at the end of this period.\nThe final section is a one year practical period where students partake in three 4 month practicums: four months of internal medicine, four months of surgery and four months of clinical practical study of their choice. Students write the final part of the physician's exam before this period and have the oral part afterwards.\nOnce individuals have completed their medical studies, there is a minimum of six extra years of specialization training for forensic pathology. During this training individuals must complete at least three years and six months working for a legal medicine institution, focusing on clinical forensic pathology training. Then, at least one year of pathology work at a specialized institute is required partaking in autopsy technical training. As well, a minimum of 6 months working with forensic psychiatrists is also required. Finally, a single year of work in any field of medicine or legal medicine must be completed. During these work periods, it is required that these physicians write a number of opinions on their post-mortem examinations, crime scene investigations, crime scene reconstructions and insurance medical cases. There is also a minimum number of reports consisting of their own autopsies, police inquiries, histological investigation and other investigative results. Finally, the practicing physician must complete a certain number of oral court proceedings. Once all of this has been completed, an oral examination, overseen by the Chamber of Physicians (also known as the German Medical Association) is to be completed which allows individuals to officially become a forensic pathologist upon completion.\nIndia.\nIn India, the specialty is commonly referred to as Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, or Legal Medicine. After completion of medical graduation (MBBS), one has to complete three years of study and training including thesis research, which leads to the award of a degree of MD (Forensic Medicine). One can also alternately pass the board examination conducted by the http:// , leading to awarding of Diplomate of National Board (DNB).\nThe majority of the specialists are attached to the Department of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology in various medical colleges. The classification of posts includes Assistant Professor (Lecturer), Associate Professor (Reader), and Professor. The work profile of the specialists includes conducting autopsies and clinical forensic examinations; apart from teaching the medical students. They have to regularly appear in the courts as expert witnesses. A typical department in a government institution conducts 100 to 5,000 autopsies a year depending upon the jurisdiction. Apart from this, clinical forensic examinations constitute a major part of the work and the number of cases can run up to ten thousand a year in an average institution.\nThe largest association of the specialty is Indian Academy of Forensic Medicine https:// (IAFM), which also publishes its quarterly Journal of Indian Academy of Forensic Medicine https:// regularly. This association has a specialist member strength of more than 1000.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, forensic medicine, also known as legal medicine (\"kedokteran kehakiman\"), is a 3-year specialty program that can be taken directly after completing medical school. It is separate from anatomical pathology and clinical pathology. Upon completion of the program, a forensic medicine specialist will obtain the title \"Spesialis Forensik\", or \"Sp.F\". He or she may be addressed in public as \"Dokter Forensik\" (\"forensic doctor\"). Note that there is no pre-medicine program, making the total duration of formal education for one to become a forensic specialist 9 years. It was first introduced through the Dutch colonial criminal justice system in the early twentieth century.\nForensic medicine is also a mandatory round during medical school clerkship. Medical students assist the doctors on autopsies, and they may also be allowed to perform an autopsy under supervision, and to witness in the court.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the profession of forensic pathology is not commonly pursued compared to other medical professions such as clinicians and doctors. In Japan, there are 33 of 42 universities that have a department of pathology established on their campuses yet, even so, only\u00a0 21 of the 42 universities offer residency programs pertaining to forensic pathology.\nTo become a forensic pathologist, it requires individuals to pursue a four year undergraduate degree. After completing their undergraduate career, it is then required for individuals to attend medical school to either earn their Masters or Doctorates degree. After completing medical school, individuals are then required to have 2 years of mandatory postgraduate clinical education where they learn important clinical skills such as communication skills, common laboratory procedures such as Gram\u2019s stain and urinalysis. When the two year mandatory clinical training is completed, another 3-4 years of training is needed to focus more on surgical procedures which is especially for forensic pathologists. During these last 3\u20134 years of training, forensic pathologists will learn more about specified human anatomy and they will also have the chance to interact with real patients as well as interacting with other forensic pathologists as well. The department of Forensic Medicine at Kyoto University in Japan has a legacy that can be traced back to 1899 when the department of forensic was first founded. The department has been active forces in promoting the significance of forensic medicine through its innovative programs, research, and analysis.\nWhen their training is completed, forensic pathologists in Japan will then have the opportunity to receive their certificate of pathology awarded by the Japanese Society of Pathology\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, forensic histopathology is a five/five and a half year training programme, consisting of two and half years of histopathology followed by two and half/three years of forensic histopathology. Successful candidates are eligible for inclusion on the specialist register of the General Medical Council (GMC), which is a requirement to work as a consultant forensic pathologist.\nEntry to forensic histopathology specialty training requires completion of the UK Foundation Programme, stages A and B of histopathology specialty training, and a pass in the FRCPath Part 1 examination in histopathology. Candidates are in year 3 of specialty training (ST3) when entering forensic histopathology and progress immediately to stage C. Completion of stages C and D, and a pass in the FRCPath Part 2 examination in forensic histopathology allow the candidate to apply for the Certificate of Completion of Training (CCT).\nAnother option is to obtain the full FRCPath in general histopathology, followed by another 18\u201324 months of training in forensic pathology, which will qualify the candidates with either the Diploma of the Royal College of Pathologists in Forensic Pathology (DipRCPath (forensic)) or the Diploma in Medical Jurisprudence (DMJ). In England and Wales, the candidate will also need to be Home Office Accredited, which will require checks of the training portfolio and completion of a security check and the Expert Witness Training Course run by the Forensic Science Service.\nCurrently approved centres for forensic pathology training in the UK include Belfast, Edinburgh, Liverpool, Leicester, Cardiff, London, Glasgow and Dundee. Not all the posts are currently actively training.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, forensic pathologists typically complete at least one year of additional training (a fellowship) after completing an anatomical pathology residency and having passed the \"board\" examination administered by The American Board of Pathology or The American Osteopathic Board of Pathology (\"board-certified\"). Becoming an anatomic pathologist in the United States requires completing a residency in anatomic pathology, which is on-the-job training one must perform upon completing medical school before one may practice unsupervised. \"Anatomic pathology\" (as it is called) by itself is a three-year residency. Most U.S. pathologists complete a combined residency in both anatomic and \"clinical pathology\", which requires a total of four years.\nIn the United States, all told, the education after high school is typically 13\u201315 years in duration (4 years of undergraduate training + 4 years of medical school + 4\u20135 years of residency [anatomic and clinical pathology combined] + 1\u20132 years of forensic pathology fellowship). Generally, the biggest hurdle is gaining admission to medical school, although the pass rate for anatomic and forensic pathology board examinations (in the U.S.) is approximately 80-90 and 90-100 percent, respectively. The courts do not require the American Board of Pathology certification in order for a witness to be qualified as an expert in the field of forensic pathology, and there are several \"diploma mills\" that give online certificates in the field.\nIn popular culture.\nPathologists often feature in crime fiction. The following television series are listed alphabetically by the character's name:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63567", "revid": "408561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63567", "title": "Mount Ruapehu", "text": "Volcano in New Zealand\nMount Ruapehu (; English ) is an active stratovolcano at the southern end of the Taup\u014d Volcanic Zone and North Island volcanic plateau in New Zealand. It is northeast of Ohakune and southwest of the southern shore of Lake Taup\u014d, within Tongariro National Park. The North Island's major ski resorts and only glaciers are on its slopes.\nRuapehu, the largest active volcano in New Zealand, has the highest point in the North Island and has three major peaks: Tahurangi (2,797\u00a0m), Te Heuheu (2,755\u00a0m) and Paretetaitonga (2,751\u00a0m). The deep, active crater is between the peaks and fills with water between major eruptions, being known as Crater Lake (). The name \"Ruapehu\" means \"pit of noise\" or \"exploding pit\" in M\u0101ori.\nGeography.\nRuapehu is located in the centre of the North Island of New Zealand, northeast of Ohakune, New Zealand, and southwest of the southern shore of Lake Taup\u014d, within Tongariro National Park. Ruapehu is the largest and southernmost volcano in the national park, with an estimated volume of 110\u00a0km3. The volcano is surrounded by a ring plain of volcanic material, made from lahar deposits, ash fall, and landslide debris.\nThere are three access routes to Ruapehu, and each access route leads to one of the three skifields that are found on its slopes. State Highway 48 leads to Whakapapa Village at the base of the mountain, and from there an access road leads up the mountain to Iwikau Village at the base of the Whakapapa skifield on the northwestern bumpy hilly slopes. An access road from Ohakune leads to Turoa skifield on the southwestern slopes, and a four-wheel drive track leads from the Desert Road (State Highway 1) to the Tukino skifield on the eastern slopes.\nRuapehu's active crater, dubbed Crater Lake (Te Wai \u0101-moe), is situated at the southern end of the Summit Plateau, and as the name suggests, is filled with a warm, acidic lake. The lake's outlet is at the head of the Whangaehu Valley, where the Whangaehu River arises. The Whangaehu River is notorious for destructive lahars caused by Ruapehu's eruptions. In historic times, eruptions have built tephra dams across the outlet on several occasions, most recently in 1945 and 1996. These dams failed in 1953 and 2007 respectively, causing an outburst of Crater Lake each time, which sent destructive lahars down the river. The 1953 lahar was the cause of the Tangiwai disaster, in which 151 people died. Even larger lahars occurred in 1862 and 1895.\nGlaciers.\nA total of 18 glaciers have been recognised on Ruapehu, of which six are named. Two glaciers are found in the active crater: one on the north side of the crater under Paretetaitonga Peak and another one to the south, and these are New Zealand's only crater glaciers. Most of the ice on Ruapehu is contained in only three of its glaciers: the Whangaehu, Summit Plateau, and Mangatoetoenui glaciers. The Summit Plateau glacier is not a glacier in the true sense, but rather an ice field that fills an extinct volcanic crater, and the ice there reaches more than 130\u00a0m thick. The Whangaehu glacier feeds the Whangaehu River, and the Mangatoetoenui glacier is one of the principal sources of the Waikato River, which arises as a series of streams on Ruapehu's eastern slopes. On the western side of the mountain, many of the streams that arise there, such as the Whakapapa and Manganui o te Ao rivers, feed the Whanganui River.\nRuapehu's glaciers are situated at the northern limit for the formation of permanent ice in New Zealand, and thus they are extremely sensitive to changes in climate. Surveys of the glaciers undertaken since 1955 have found that the glaciers have all been thinning and retreating, with the exception of the northern crater glacier, which thickened and lengthened after the 1953 outburst of Crater Lake lowered the lake water level.\nClimate.\nRuapehu has a polar tundra climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"ET\") on the upper slopes, with average temperatures ranging from in summer and in winter, depending on elevation and cloudiness. On the lower slopes, Ruapehu has a subpolar oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfc\").\nThe prevalent wind direction in the region is westerly or northwesterly, and gale force conditions (i.e. wind speeds higher than ) are common on the mountain. Rainfall is higher on the western flanks of Ruapehu than the eastern flanks due to the rain shadow effect. Whakapapa Village receives an average of 2,200\u00a0mm of rain per year, whereas the Rangipo Desert to the east of Ruapehu receives slightly more than 1,500\u00a0mm of rain annually. Snow falls on average as low as 1,500\u00a0m elevation.\nSevere weather incidents.\nWeather conditions can be changeable over the day, and mountain visitors are advised to be prepared and carry basic survival equipment. Severe weather has claimed several lives over the years, including a party of five NZ Army soldiers and one RNZN naval rating, caught in a week-long storm while undergoing winter survival training in 1990. The same storm also trapped an experienced Japanese mountaineer when the weather unexpectedly closed in on him, but he built a snow cave and sheltered in it until he was rescued days later.\nExtreme weather conditions have caused visitors to be trapped on the mountain in the past. In 2003, about 350 visitors to Whakapapa skifield and 70 staff had to stay overnight in various lodges at Iwikau village (small village at the top of mountain road) after a snow storm made the road too dangerous to descend. In 2008 extreme weather resulted in about 2000 visitors being evacuated from Whakapapa skifield, with cars being led down the mountain in groups of five. About 100 cars were left at the skifield overnight.\nGeology.\nRuapehu is a composite andesitic stratovolcano located at the southern end of the Taup\u014d Volcanic Zone and forming part of the Tongariro Volcanic Centre. Volcanism at Ruapehu is caused by the subduction of the Pacific Plate under the Australian Plate at the Hikurangi Trough to the east of the North Island. Ruapehu has erupted from multiple craters over its lifetime, however, only one crater is presently active, a deep crater at the southern end of the summit plateau which is filled with hot, acidic water, dubbed Crater Lake (Te Wai \u0101-moe). The lake water currently covers separate north and central vents.\nRuapehu sits on a basement of Mesozoic greywacke overlain by a thin layer of sediments of the Wanganui Basin, composed of sands, silts, shell beds, and limestone. It has not been clearly established when Ruapehu first began erupting, only that eruptions began at least 250,000 years ago and possibly as early as 340,000 years ago. Ruapehu has been built in four distinct stages of relatively intense eruptive activity followed by periods of relative quiet. Each of these four stages of activity has left behind distinct rock formations, named the Te Herenga Formation (erupted 250,000\u2013180,000 years ago), the Wahianoa Formation (erupted 160,000\u2013115,000 years ago), the Mangawhero Formation (erupted 55,000\u201315,000 years ago), and the Whakapapa Formation (erupted 15,000\u20132,000 years ago). Each of these rock formations is composed of lava flows and tuff breccias, and studies of these formations has revealed how volcanic activity at Ruapehu has developed over time. During the Te Herenga stage of activity, magma rose quickly through the crust during eruptions. However, by 160,000 years ago a complex network of magma dikes and sills had formed in the crust under the volcano, and lava erupted since that time shows signs of extensive mixing between different magma chambers prior to eruptions.\nIn more recent times, volcanic activity has been centred on Crater Lake. There are two active vents under the lake, dubbed North Vent and Central Vent. Activity is characterized by cyclic heating and cooling of the lake over periods of 6\u201312 months. Each heating cycle is marked by increased seismic activity under the crater and is accompanied by increased emission of volcanic gases, indicating that the vents under Crater Lake are open to gas escape. Evidence suggests that an open-vent system such as this has been in place throughout Ruapehu's 250,000 year history. This prevents build-up of pressure and results in relatively small, frequent eruptions (every 20\u201330\u00a0years on average) at Ruapehu compared to other andesitic volcanoes around the world.\nCrater Lake is emptied by major eruptions, such as the ones in 1945 and 1995\u20131996, but refills after eruptions subside, fed by melting snow and vented steam. In historic times, major eruptions have deposited a tephra dam across the lake's outlet, preventing lake overflow into the Whangaehu valley. The dam collapses after several years causing a large lahar down the valley. The tephra dam created by the 1945 eruptions collapsed on 24\u00a0December\u00a01953, sending a lahar down the Whangaehu River and causing the Tangiwai disaster. 151 people died when the lahar swept away the Tangiwai railway bridge just before an express train crossed it. Another dam was deposited by the 1995\u20131996 eruptions, which collapsed on 18\u00a0March\u00a02007. A warning system, the Eastern Ruapehu Lahar Alarm and Warning System (ERLAWS) system began operation on the mountain in 2002 to detect such a collapse and alert the relevant authorities. The ERLAWS system detected the 2007 lahar, and roads were closed and railway traffic stopped until the lahar had subsided.\nEarly eruptive history.\nThe earliest known volcanic activity in Tongariro National Park was approximately 933,000\u2009\u00b1\u200946,000 years ago at Hauhungatahi, northwest of Ruapehu. Subsequently, andesitic clasts found 100\u00a0km southwest of Ruapehu, near Whanganui, demonstrate that volcanism was likely present in the Ruapehu area 340,000 years ago. However, the oldest rocks on Ruapehu itself are approximately 250,000 years old. Eruptions during this period are believed to have built a steep volcanic cone around a central crater, which would have been located somewhere near the present-day upper Pinnacle Ridge. Cone-building eruptions ceased about 180,000 years ago, and the cone began to be eroded away by glacial action. Rock formations that date to this period are collectively named the Te Herenga Formation, and today these formations be seen at Pinnacle Ridge, Te Herenga Ridge, and Whakapapanui Valley, all on the northwestern slopes of Ruapehu.\nApproximately 160,000 years ago, cone-building eruptions began again, this time from a crater that is thought to have lain northwest of present-day Mitre Peak (Ringatoto)\u2014southeast of the original Te Herenga vent. Eruptions continued until approximately 115,000 years ago, and the lava erupted during this period is known as the Wahianoa Formation. This formation has also been heavily eroded by glacial activity, and it now forms the southeastern flanks of modern Ruapehu. The formation consists of lava flows and tuff breccias.\nBeginning approximately 55,000 years ago, a third phase of cone-building eruptions began, creating the Mangawhero Formation. This formation was erupted onto the eroded Wahianoa Formation in two phases: the first occurring 55,000\u201345,000 years ago and the second 30,000\u201315,000 years ago. Multiple summit craters were active during this period, all lying between Tahurangi and the northern summit plateau. Possible Parasitic eruptions also occurred at Pukeonake, a scoria cone to the north-west of Ruapehu and at several isolated craters near Ohakune making up the Ohakune volcanic complex and the maar lakes of Rangatauanui and Rangatauaiti. The Mangawhero Formation can be found over most of modern Ruapehu, and it forms most of the mountain's high peaks as well as the Turoa skifield.\nHolocene activity.\nLava flows that have been erupted from Ruapehu since the last glacial maximum are called the Whakapapa Formation. These flows all erupted between 15,000 and 2,000 years ago from a number of different craters on the summit of Ruapehu as well as from craters on the northern and southern flanks of the mountain. Rangataua on the southern flanks had a large lava flow between 15,000 and 10,000 years ago.\nApproximately 10,000 years ago, a series of major eruptions occurred, not just on Ruapehu, but also at the Tama Lakes between Ruapehu and Tongariro volcanoes. This period of intense eruptions is called the Pahoka-Mangamate event and is thought to have lasted between 200 and 400 years. On Ruapehu, lava was erupted from Saddle Cone\u2014a flank crater on the northern slopes\u2014and from another crater on the southern slopes. This southern crater erupted three times, and lava flows from this crater travelled nearly 14\u00a0km to the south.\nThere is evidence that a sector collapse on the northwestern slopes about 9,400 years ago formed the amphitheatre that now comprises the Whakapapa skifield and left an extensive avalanche deposit on the northwestern ring plain that can still be seen today. Since then eruptions have been an order of magnitude lower in intensity and volume. Accordingly, most of the cone and ring-plain is older than 10,000 years. Eruptions between 10,000 and 2,500 years ago generated lava flows that all flowed into the Whakapapa amphitheatre and created the slopes of the modern skifield.\nFor the past 2,000 years, activity at Ruapehu has been largely focused through a crater lake at the summit. Eruptive activity has typically consisted of relatively small but explosive phreatomagmatic eruptions occurring every few decades and lasting several months each. The eruptive record is only well understood from tephra deposits before 1950 for 1718 years from the Taup\u014d Hatepe eruption in 232 CE. Over this period there are 30 assigned tephra units by composition studies to Ruapehu and in the 370 years before 1950 the mean time between these months of eruptive period was 40 years.\nIn recorded history, these eruptions have occurred about 50\u00a0years apart, in 1895 (lahar), 1945 and 1995\u20131996. Minor phreatic or hydrothermal eruptions occur every few years on average, with notable minor eruptions occurring in 1969, 1975, and 2007. More than 600 eruptive events of various sizes have been documented since 1830.\n1945 eruptions and 1953 lahar.\nRuapehu entered an eruptive phase in March 1945 after several weeks of volcanic tremors. The first indication of an eruption was reported on 8 March, with ashfall seen on the eastern slopes. A lava dome was observed in Crater Lake on 19\u00a0March but was destroyed in a series of explosive eruptions over the following week. A second, larger lava dome appeared in May, which continued to grow over the following months and had emptied Crater Lake of water by July.\nEruptions increased from August through November. A particularly powerful eruption in the early hours of 21 August was heard in Hawkes Bay and the Tararua District, loud enough to awaken people from sleep and cause alarm. Eruptions began declining in December and had ended by January.\nThe eruptions dispersed ash across most of the North Island, and eruption columns could be seen from as far afield as Palmerston North, Whanganui, and Hawkes Bay. Ash caused disruption to several North Island communities, entering houses, causing eye and throat irritation, and damaging paintwork on cars. Crop damage was reported in Ohakune, and the water supply at Taumarunui was disrupted.\nAfter eruptions subsided in late December, Crater Lake slowly began refilling, with a \"boiling lake\" already filling the bottom of the crater by mid-January. A tephra dam had formed at the lake's normal outlet during the eruptions, which eventually collapsed on 24\u00a0December\u00a01953 causing a lahar that led to the Tangiwai disaster with the loss of 151 lives when the Tangiwai railway bridge across the Whangaehu River collapsed while the lahar was in full flood, just before an express train crossed it.\n1969 and 1975 eruptions.\nRuapehu saw a period of heightened activity between 1966 and 1982, with multiple small eruptions occurring in Crater Lake and two larger eruptions in 1969 and 1975, which ejected rocks across the summit region and produced significant lahars.\nThe eruption in 1969 occurred in the early hours of 22 June. It was a moderate phreatic eruption, which blasted rocks up to 1\u00a0km northwest of the crater and sent lahars down several valleys. The Whakapapa skifield was left covered in mud. This was the largest eruption since 1945.\nA larger phreatic eruption occurred at 3:59\u00a0a.m. on 24 April 1975, blasting rocks up to 1.6\u00a0km northwest of the crater, against the wind, and depositing ash more than 100\u00a0km to the southeast. Nine minutes of seismic activity preceded the eruption, but crater dilation had been measured two weeks earlier. Nearly half of the water in Crater Lake was erupted into the air, which subsequently rained down onto the summit, generating lahars down several river valleys. Lahars which travelled down the Whakapapa and Manganui o te Ao rivers entered the Whanganui River and poisoned it, which affected much of the aquatic life downstream. Additionally, the lahars damaged ski installations on the Whakapapa ski field, several bridges and hydroelectric tunnel intakes, but no loss of life occurred.\nThree days later, on the morning of 27 April, Ruapehu erupted again. A series of five eruptions occurred between 7:10\u00a0a.m. and 10:18\u00a0a.m., sending surges of mud, rocks, and ash northwards across the summit plateau and producing eruption columns up to 500\u00a0m high.\nThe 1975 eruptions deepened Crater Lake from 55 to 60\u00a0m to more than 90\u00a0m.\n1995\u20131996 eruptions.\nEarthquake swarms to the west of Ruapehu between November 1994 and September 1995 marked the beginning of renewed heightened activity at the volcano. Bursts of earthquake activity immediately preceded rapid rises in the temperature of Crater Lake, with the surface temperature reaching in January 1995\u2014one of the highest temperatures recorded in 30 years and about higher than its usual peak temperature. A minor eruption occurred on 26 April, which sent waves against the walls of the crater and damaged some monitoring equipment there. A second eruption on 29 June destroyed the equipment and produced a lahar. Chemical analysis showed that magma was interacting with water under the lake.\nThe first significant eruption took place at 8:05\u00a0a.m. on 18 September 1995, raining tephra onto the summit region and sending lahars down the mountain. On 23 September, an even larger eruption blasted rocks up to 1.5\u00a0km from the crater, sent lahars down three valleys, and generated an eruption column 12\u00a0km high. Phreatomagmatic eruptions occurred through the rest of the month and throughout October, with some eruptions continuing for hours at a time. Ash fell up to 250\u00a0km downwind. Explosive eruptions on 11 October emptied Crater Lake of water.\nFollowing this, activity died off until 15 June 1996 when renewed seismic activity was recorded. This was followed by eruptions on 17 and 18 June which once again emptied the partially refilled Crater Lake of water. Strombolian eruptions occurred on 27 June and throughout July and August, producing eruption columns more than 10\u00a0km high and shooting rocks 1.4\u00a0km from the crater.\nThese eruptions produced more than 7 million tonnes of ash, which contaminated water supplies, destroyed crops, and led to the deaths of livestock. Ash in the Tongariro River also damaged the intake turbines at the Rangipo power station, and ash clouds caused airport closures as far away as Auckland and Wellington. The eruptions also caused closures to the three ski fields on the mountain, costing the region an estimated $100 million in lost revenue. During the 1995\u20131996 summer period between the eruptions, Ruapehu Alpine Lifts ran its chairlifts up the mountain and organised guided tours to within 500 metres of the crater. Hundreds of tourists visited, even though the volcano was still emitting steam and toxic sulphur gas and the Department of Conservation was warning that further eruptions were possible.\nBoth the 1995 and 1996 eruptions were filmed and streamed to the internet via a custom-built 'volcano-cam', possibly the first such camera in the world. The website hosting the feed during the 1996 eruption received up to 4000 hits an hour.\nLahar danger.\nAfter the 1996 eruption it was recognised that a catastrophic lahar could again occur when Crater Lake burst the volcanic ash dam blocking the lake outlet as it did in 1953. In 1997, the government proposed digging a trench through the blockage in the wall of Crater Lake, but this was plan was opposed by conservation groups and M\u0101ori. A Ng\u0101ti Rangi spokesman noted that the mountain was sacred, and said: \"as far as we are concerned if these things [lahars] do happen well we step aside. Let them go past\".\nOther plans considered were building a stop bank on the Desert Road, or creating an early-warning system, which would be much more expensive than digging a trench. In 2001, the Eastern Ruapehu Lahar Alarm and Warning System (ERLAWS) system was installed on the mountain to detect a crater wall collapse and alert the relevant authorities. It began operating in 2002. The lake gradually filled with snowmelt and had reached the level of the hard rock rim by January 2005. The lahar finally occurred on 18 March 2007 (see below).\n2006 and 2007 activity.\nRuapehu erupted at 10:24\u00a0p.m. on 4 October 2006. The small eruption was marked by a magnitude 2.9 volcanic earthquake and sent waves 4\u2013 tall crashing into the wall of the crater. No ash was erupted into the atmosphere, and the eruption is presumed to have occurred entirely underwater.\nAt 11:22\u00a0a.m. 18 March 2007, the tephra dam which had been holding back Crater Lake burst, sending a lahar down the mountain. An estimated 1.9\u20133.8\u00a0million cubic metres of mud, rock, and water travelled down the Whangaehu river. ERLAWS activated, sending an alarm to pagers at 11:25\u00a0a.m. and automatically activating warning lights and barrier arms to close roads and stop trains. There was no serious damage and no injuries. A toilet block at the Tangiwai memorial was destroyed, but the memorial had already been closed due to the lahar threat. One family was trapped for around 24\u00a0hours after the lahar swept away the access route to their home.\nAt 8:16\u00a0p.m. on 25 September 2007, volcanic tremor was detected underneath Ruapehu, which was followed at 8:26\u00a0p.m. by an explosive surtseyan eruption. The explosive phase of the eruption lasted for less than a minute and blasted ash, mud, and rocks northward, reaching to about 2\u00a0km from Crater Lake. Two climbers were caught in the eruption at Dome Shelter, an alpine hut approximately 600\u00a0m from the crater, when the hut was struck by the surge. The climbers nearly drowned before the hut floor gave way and the water drained into the basement seismometer vault. One of them, a 22-year-old primary school teacher, had a leg pinned and crushed by a boulder as the water subsided. A rescue operation was mounted after his companion, who was unable to free him, went down the mountain for help.\nThe eruption initiated lahars down the Whangaehu valley and the Whakapapa skifield. ERLAWS detected the lahars in the Whangaehu valley. A snow groomer on the Whakapapa skifield narrowly avoided being caught in the lahar there.\nCurrent activity and future hazards.\nOnly one eruptive event has been recorded at Ruapehu since the 2007 eruption\u2014a minor event on 13 July 2009 when a small volcanic earthquake beneath Crater Lake caused the lake water level to rise 15\u00a0cm and triggered a snow slurry lahar in the upper Whangaehu valley. Since then, Crater Lake has continued its regular cycle of heating and increased gas emissions, although with periods of sustained high temperatures that occurred in 2011, 2016 and 2019.\nSince 2019, seismic unrest and volcanic activity have decreased. In 2020, the temperature of the crater lake had risen to . In May of 2022, lake temperatures peaked at . Between May 2022 and September 2025, lake temperatures have steadily decreased, however, substantial amounts of volcanic gas continue to be released. This demonstrates that an open pathway persists between the magma source and the lake, allowing gas to escape and reducing the likelihood of pressure buildup beneath the crater. Scientists interpret this behavior as shorter durations of volcanic gas entering the lake. Other monitoring indicators\u2014including earthquakes, tremor, gas emissions, and lake chemistry\u2014are all within normal ranges.\nEruptions at Ruapehu are expected to continue as they have for the past 2,000 years, with frequent minor eruptions and more significant events every 20\u201330 years, although the possibility of larger events like the Pahoka-Mangamate event cannot be ruled out. The previous activity trend until 10,000 years ago was about erupted each 10,000 years. Minor eruptions, such as the one in 2007, especially if they are hydrothermal, can occur at any time without warning. However, in historic times, major eruptions such as the ones in 1995\u201396 have only occurred within periods of enhanced activity.\nThe main recent volcanic hazard at Ruapehu is from lahars. Two major lahar paths run through the Whakapapa skifield, and in recent times, lahars have travelled through the ski field in 1969, 1975, 1995, and 2007. An eruption warning system operates in the ski field to warn skiers in the event of another eruption. Lahars also represent a significant hazard to surrounding river valleys, particularly the Whangaehu River, which is crossed by national highways, the North Island Main Trunk railway line, and electricity transmission lines. Large, destructive lahars have been observed in the Whangaehu River in 1862, 1895, 1953, 1975, and 2007.\nGNS Science continuously monitors Ruapehu using a network of seismographs, GPS stations, microphones and webcams. Chemical analysis of the water in Crater Lake is regularly undertaken along with airborne gas measurements. Live data can be viewed on the https://.\nRecreational.\nThe mountain, as part of Tongariro National Park is host to a wide range of recreational activities.\nSkiing.\nSince the first ski field developments in 1923, Ruapehu has had three ski areas developed, Whakapapa on the north-western side, T\u016broa on the south western slopes, and a club Tukino field on the east of the mountain. The commercial developments have not been a consistent success, with at least two business failures by 2023. While as of 2001, Mount Ruapehu had the largest total ski area in New Zealand, developments in the South Island may see by 2025 the establishment there of the largest single commercial ski area in New Zealand. A 60-year concession for commercial ski field operation was granted to the then operator of the Whakapapa ski field, in 2015. After the operator went into receivership in 2023 a new operator has expressed interest in taking over the Whakapapa concession. From April 2024, T\u016broa operated by Pure T\u016broa Limited has a limited ten year concession.\nWinter access to the mountain, car parks and ski fields has restrictions.\nClimbing and walking.\nThere are multiple walking tracks and routes on the mountain's slopes. Alpine huts are provided for trampers and climbers. These are mainly owned by private clubs. Blyth Hut, Lupton Hut (private), Mangaehuehu Hut, Mangaturuturu Hut, Rangipo Hut, and Whangaehu Hut on the mountain are potentially listed as available for use by the Department of Conservation. Campsites also exist on the slopes of the mountain.\nWaihohonu Hut.\nWaihohonu Hut is a historic cabin located in the Tongariro National Park. The cabin was constructed in 1904 and is now the oldest extant mountain hut in New Zealand. It was registered as a category 1 historic building with Heritage New Zealand in 1993. It was used early in its history as a stop over for stage coaches.\nGlacier Hut.\nGlacier Hut now serves as a skiing museum. It was built in 1923 and was New Zealand's first purpose-built structure for the sport of skiing.\nIn popular culture.\nSome scenes of the fictional Mordor and Mount Doom in Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy were filmed on the slopes of Mount Ruapehu.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63568", "revid": "50686527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63568", "title": "Dennis the Menace (U.S. comics)", "text": "American newspaper comic strip\nDennis the Menace is a daily syndicated newspaper comic strip originally created, written, and illustrated by Hank Ketcham. The comic strip made its debut on March 12, 1951 in 16 newspapers and was originally distributed by Post-Hall Syndicate. The full-color Sunday strip debuted in January 1952. It is now written and drawn by Ketcham's former assistants, Marcus Hamilton (weekdays, since 1995), Ron Ferdinand (Sundays, since 1981), and son Scott Ketcham (since 2010), and distributed to at least 1,000 newspapers in 48 countries and in 19 languages by King Features Syndicate. The comic strip usually runs for a single panel on weekdays and a full strip on Sundays.\nIt has been adapted to other popular media, including several television shows, both live-action and animated, and several feature films, including theatrical and direct-to-video releases.\nCoincidentally, a UK comic strip of the same name debuted on the same day. The two are not related and change their names subtly in each other's respective countries of origin to avoid confusion.\nCharacters and setting.\n\"Dennis the Menace\" takes place in a middle-class suburban neighborhood in Wichita, Kansas. In the comics, the Mitchell family lives in a two-story house at the fictional address of 2251 Pine Street. The Wilson family lives next door at 2253 Pine Street. The television series differs, putting the Wilsons at the also-fictional 627 Elm Street.\nHistory.\nInspiration.\nThe inspiration for the comic strip came from Dennis Ketcham, the real-life son of Hank Ketcham, who, at four years old, refused to take a nap and made a complete mess of his room. Hank tried many possible names for the character and translated them into rough pencil sketches, but when his studio door flew open, his then-wife Alice, in utter exasperation, exclaimed, \"Your son is a menace!\", the \"Dennis the Menace\" name stuck. The character of Henry Mitchell bore a striking resemblance to Ketcham, while the Mitchell family of Dennis, Henry/Hank, and Alice were all named after the Ketchams.\nVisuals.\nKetcham's line work has been highly praised over the years. A review on comicbookbin.com states: \"...a growing legion of cartoonists, scholars, aficionados, etc. have come to appreciate the artistry of Dennis's creator, Hank Ketcham. Ketcham's beautiful artwork defines cartooning elegance. The design, the composition, and the line: it's all too, too beautiful.\" AV Club reviewer Noel Murray wrote: \"Ketcham also experimented with his line a little early on, tightening and thickening without losing the looseness and spontaneity that remains the strip's best aspect even now.\"\nIn 2005, Dennis appeared as a guest for Blondie and Dagwood's 75th anniversary party in the comic strip \"Blondie\".\nAwards.\nKetcham received the Reuben Award for the strip in 1953.\nHe was also made honorary mayor of Wichita. He was quoted as saying, \"I set the whole thing in Wichita, Kansas, and as a result I got made an honorary mayor of Wichita.\"\nKetcham retires.\nHank Ketcham retired from the comic strip in 1994, turning over production of the strip to his assistants Ron Ferdinand and Marcus Hamilton. They continued their run after Ketcham's death in 2001, alongside Scott Ketcham since 2010.\nAdvertising.\nDennis the Menace appeared in A&amp;W Restaurants advertising in the 1960s, then Dairy Queen marketing from 1971 until 2001, when he was dropped because Dairy Queen felt children could no longer relate to him. Dennis also appeared in the Sears Roebuck Wish Book Christmas catalog in the 1970s.\nComic books.\nDennis the Menace has been published in comic books and comic digests from the 1950s through the 1980s by a variety of publishers, including Standard/Pines (1953\u201358), Fawcett Comics (1958\u201380, during their only return to comics after settling the Captain Marvel lawsuit and selling much of their comics division to Charlton Comics), and Marvel Comics (1981\u201382). These included both newspaper strip reprints and original \"Dennis the Menace\" comic book stories, produced by others besides Ketcham. Al Wiseman, one of Ketcham's assistants in the 1950s and '60s, worked on many of them. Ron Ferdinand, Ketcham's Sunday page artist, drew several of the Dennis stories in the Marvel books, including the cover for issue No. 11.\nMain series.\nThe main comic book series (simply named \"Dennis the Menace\") was initially published by Standard Comics, running for fourteen issues from August 1953 to January 1956. After his Standard Comics imprint became defunct, publisher Ned Pines continued the series at Pines Comics for another seventeen issues (15\u201331) from March 1956 to November 1958, after which the series moved to Hallden-Fawcett. Fawcett had previously ceased publishing comics after settling a lawsuit (\"National Comics Publications, Inc. v. Fawcett Publications, Inc.\") over Captain Marvel with DC Comics and selling much of their comics division to Charlton Comics. The series carried the \"Hallden\" cover imprint for issues 32\u201340 (January 1959\u2013January 1960), \"Hallden-Fawcett\" for issues 41\u201376 (March 1960\u2013January 1965), and simply \"Fawcett\" for issues 77\u2013154 (March 1965\u2013January 1978). The series was published by CBS Consumer Publishing for the final issues 155\u2013166 (March 1978\u2013November 1979), with the relevant indicias listing \"the Hallden Unit, CBS Consumer Publishing, a division of CBS, Inc.\" From issue 156 on, the covers featured a \"Dennis the Menace - Fun Fest\" label in the corner, which was continued onto the covers of \"Dennis the Menace Fun Fest\" #16 &amp; 17 (January &amp; March 1980).\nGiant series.\nRunning in tandem with the main comic book series was the \"Dennis the Menace Giant Series\", beginning with the publication of \"Dennis the Menace Giant Vacation Special\" and \"Dennis the Menace Christmas Issue\" by Standard Comics in 1955. Those issues inaugurated the \"Giant\" series, which was published by Pines for issues 2\u20136, and was continued by Hallden/Fawcett for issues 6\u201375. The \"Giant\" series was renamed the \"Dennis the Menace Bonus Magazine Series\" beginning with issue #76 in 1970. While the indicia titled remained the same until the end of the series, under CBS Consumer Publishing, the covers began to feature \"Big Bonus Series\" in small text at the top left beginning with issue #174 (March 1978), and the cover title became \"Dennis the Menace Big Bonus Series\" beginning with issue #181 (August 1978), continuing until the series ended with issue #194 (October 1979). The cover title continued in 1980 with the February and April releases of \"Dennis the Menace Big Bonus Series\" #10 &amp; 11, after which the character moved to Marvel Comics.\nIn 1972, the \"Dennis the Menace Bonus Magazine Series\" #103 \"Short Stuff Special\" featured Dennis visiting Children's Fairyland in Oakland, California.\nOther series.\nIn the Summer of 1961, Fawcett published two one-shots, first \"Dennis the Menace and His Dog Ruff\" #1 and then \"Dennis the Menace and His Pal Joey\" #1. Eight years later, \"Dennis the Menace and Joey\" #2 (July 1969) was published, followed by \"Dennis the Menace and Ruff\" #2 (September 1969), \"Dennis the Menace and Mr. Wilson\" #1 (October 1969), and \"Dennis the Menace and Margaret\" #1 (Winter 1969). These four issues continued into Dennis the Menace and His Friends Series, which began with #5 (January 1970), and which featured Margaret, Joey, Ruff, and Mr. Wilson (along with matching cover titles) in rotation four times a year until concluding with issue #46 (April 1980).\nFrom Summer 1959 to Spring 1961, Hallden-Fawcett published five issues of The Best of Dennis the Menace, a one-hundred-page digest series collecting previously published stories from Standard, Pines, and Hallden-Fawcett. Similarly, from Spring 1969 to March 1980, fifty issues of Dennis the Menace: Pocket Full of Fun! were published by Hallden-Fawcett and (for the final three issues) CBS Consumer Publishing. It was a quarterly (January, April, July, and October) digest series collecting stories from previously published comics. Finally, just before \"Dennis the Menace\" moved to Marvel, CBS Consumer Publishing released two issues of The Very Best of Dennis the Menace (July 1979\u2013April 1980).\nBible Kids series.\nIn 1977, Word Books, Inc. (now HarperCollins) commissioned Hank Ketcham Enterprises, Inc. to produce a series of 10 comic books under the title \"Dennis and the Bible Kids\", with the usual cast of characters reading (and sometimes partly acting out) the stories of Joseph, Moses, David, Esther, Jesus, and other Biblical characters. These were sold through Christian bookstores and related outlets. Each issue contained several inspirational renderings by Hank Ketcham himself.\nMarvel series.\nAfter the end of the Hallden and CBS comics run in 1980, Ketcham had half of the comic book rights purchased by Stan Lee and Marvel Comics, so they were able to produce a new series of \"Dennis the Menace\" comic books. The new Marvel series ran for thirteen issues from December 1981 to November 1982. The smaller one-hundred-page \"Dennis the Menace\" comic digests published by Hallden-Fawcett were briefly resurrected in by Marvel in 1982 for a run of three issues titled The Very Best of Dennis the Menace, as well as a run of three issues simply titled Dennis the Menace Comics Digest.\nBook compilations.\n\"Dennis the Menace\" has also been published in mass market paperback collections, made up of newspaper strip reprints:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 1990, Abbeville Press published Hank Ketcham's fully illustrated autobiography: \"The Merchant of Dennis\" (, hardcover). The book was reprinted by Fantagraphics in 2005 (, trade paperback). Abbeville also published a softcover retrospective of the strip in 1991, \"Dennis the Menace: His First 40 Years\".\n\"Hank Ketcham's Complete Dennis the Menace\".\nIn 2005, comics publisher Fantagraphics began to reprint Ketcham's entire run on \"Dennis the Menace\" (excluding Sunday strips) in a projected 25-volume series over 11 years. No new volumes have been issued since 2009 and it is unknown when and if the series will resume. They are published in hardcover editions as well as paperback.\nWorldwide success.\nFilm and television.\n\"Dennis the Menace\" has been the subject of a number of adaptations.\nThe first one produced is a CBS sitcom that aired from 1959 to 1963 starring Jay North as Dennis, Herbert Anderson as Henry Mitchell; Joseph Kearns as George Wilson, and subsequently Gale Gordon as his brother, John Wilson. North also appeared as Dennis on an episode of \"The Donna Reed Show\" and in the theatrical film \"Pepe\" (both 1960). In the United Kingdom, the series was titled simply \"Just Dennis\", so as not to conflict with the \"Beano\" character of the same name.\nOn September 11, 1987, a \"Dennis the Menace\" live-action television film was broadcast; it was later released on video under the title \"Dennis the Menace: Dinosaur Hunter\". Distributed by LBS Communications, it was produced by Colex Enterprises and DIC Entertainment as a pilot for a potential series.\nAnother live-action \"Dennis the Menace\" film, starring Walter Matthau as Mr. Wilson and Mason Gamble as Dennis, was released to theaters in 1993. It was originally titled \"The Real Dennis the Menace\" before the final name was approved. This was followed with the direct-to-video \"Dennis the Menace Strikes Again\" in 1998, starring Don Rickles as Mr. Wilson. The most recent film adaptation, \"A Dennis the Menace Christmas\" was released to DVD on November 6, 2007. The Warner Bros. production starred Robert Wagner as Mr. Wilson, Louise Fletcher as Mrs. Wilson, and Maxwell Perry Cotton, then a six-year-old actor, as Dennis.\nAnimation.\n\"Dennis the Menace\" was adapted into an animated special, \"Dennis the Menace in Mayday for Mother\" which aired in 1981 and was produced by DePatie\u2013Freeling Enterprises and Mirisch Films.\nA daily animated syndicated series was produced by DIC Entertainment in 1986, featuring Brennan Thicke as the voice of Dennis, and Phil Hartman as George Wilson and Henry Mitchell. Both roles were recast to Maurice LaMarche in the second season.\nDIC also produced \"The All-New Dennis the Menace\" for CBS Saturday Mornings in 1993 with Adam Wylie voicing Dennis, Greg Burson voicing George Wilson, and June Foray voicing Martha Wilson.\nAn animated film, \"Dennis the Menace in Cruise Control\", premiered as part of Nickelodeon's \"Sunday Movie Toons\" block in 2002 and later released to DVD.\nList of film and TV adaptations.\nFilms\nTelevision shows and specials\nPlaygrounds.\nMonterey, California.\nIn 1952, Hank Ketcham spearheaded the construction of the Dennis the Menace Playground, designed by Arch Garner. It opened in Monterey, California on November 17, 1956. The playground featured a bronze statue of Dennis sculpted by Wah Chang. On the night of October 25, 2006, the 125 lb statue, which was estimated to be worth $30,000, was stolen from the playground. In April 2007, it was replaced by a reproduction of another Dennis statue Chang made for the Ketchams. It was donated by Willis W. and Ethel M. Clark Foundation. In 2015 the missing statue was found in a scrap yard in Florida, returned to Monterey, and installed in front of the city recreation office.\nMidland, Texas.\nOn July 11, 1959, another Dennis the Menace Park opened in Midland, Texas. It was an adventure playground modeled after the park in Monterey. The park was funded by an anonymous donor with the stipulation there would be no charge for admission. The city of Midland updated the park in 1993 and again in 2019 to include new and inclusive play equipment and a splash pad.\n\"Dennis the Menace\" in other languages.\nThe comic strip has been translated into many foreign languages, which has helped make the strip's characters famous worldwide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63569", "revid": "96647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63569", "title": "QuickBASIC", "text": "IDE for the BASIC programming language\nMicrosoft QuickBASIC (also QB) is an Integrated Development Environment (or IDE) and compiler for the BASIC programming language that was developed by Microsoft. QuickBASIC runs mainly on MS-DOS, though there was also a short-lived version for Classic Mac OS. It is loosely based on GW-BASIC but adds user-defined types, improved programming structures, better graphics and disk support and a compiler in addition to the interpreter. \nMicrosoft marketed QuickBASIC as the introductory level for their BASIC Professional Development System. Microsoft marketed two other similar IDEs for C and Pascal, viz QuickC and QuickPascal.\nHistory.\nMicrosoft released the first version of QuickBASIC on August 18, 1985 on a single 5.25-inch 360\u00a0KB floppy disk. QuickBASIC version 2.0 and later contained an Integrated Development Environment (IDE), allowing users to edit directly in its on-screen text editor.\nAlthough still supported in QuickBASIC, line numbers became optional. Program jumps also worked with named labels. Later versions also added control structures, such as multiline conditional statements and loop blocks.\nMicrosoft's \"PC BASIC Compiler\" was included for compiling programs into DOS executables. Beginning with version 4.0, the editor included an interpreter that allowed the programmer to run the program without leaving the editor. The interpreter was used to debug a program before creating an executable file. Unfortunately, there were some subtle differences between the interpreter and the compiler, which meant that large programs that ran correctly in the interpreter might fail after compilation, or not compile at all because of differences in the memory management routines.\nThe last version of QuickBASIC was version 4.5 (1988), although development of the Microsoft BASIC Professional Development System (PDS) continued until its last release of version 7.1 in October 1990. At the same time, the QuickBASIC packaging was silently changed so that the disks used the same compression used for BASIC PDS 7.1. The Basic PDS 7.x version of the IDE was called QuickBASIC Extended (QBX), and it only ran on DOS, unlike the rest of Basic PDS 7.x, which also ran on OS/2.\nQuickBASIC 4.5 was the subject of numerous books, articles, and programming tutorials, and arrived near the high-point of BASIC saturation in the PC marketplace. In 1989, Microsoft Press bundled the QuickBASIC Interpreter into a book-and-software learning system called \"Learn BASIC Now\". The product was priced at $39.95 and included a Foreword written by Bill Gates, who reported that BASIC was in active use by over four million PC users.\nThe successor to QuickBASIC and Basic PDS was Visual Basic version 1.0 for MS-DOS, shipped in Standard and Professional versions. Later versions of Visual Basic did not include DOS versions, as Microsoft concentrated on Windows applications.\nA subset of QuickBASIC 4.5, named QBasic, was included with MS-DOS 5 and later versions, replacing the GW-BASIC included with previous versions of MS-DOS. Compared to QuickBASIC, QBasic is limited to an interpreter only, lacks a few functions, can only handle programs of a limited size, and lacks support for separate program modules. Since it lacks a compiler, it cannot be used to produce executable files, although its program source code can still be compiled by a QuickBASIC 4.5, PDS 7.x or VBDOS 1.0 compiler, if available.\nQuickBASIC 1.00 for the Apple Macintosh operating system was launched in 1988. It was officially supported on machines running System 6 with at least 1\u00a0MB of RAM. QuickBASIC could also be run on System 7, as long as 32-bit addressing was disabled. QuickBASIC programming was significantly different on the Macintosh, because the system offered a graphical user interface and an event-driven programming model.\nSyntax example.\nHello, World, shortest version:\n?\"Hello, World\"\nHello, World, extended version:\nCLS\nPRINT \"Hello, World\"\nEND\n99 Bottles of Beer:\nLET BOTTLES = 99: LET BOTTLES$ = \"99\": LET BOTTLE$ = \" bottles\"\nFOR A = 1 TO 99\nPRINT BOTTLES$; BOTTLE$; \" of beer on the wall, \"; BOTTLES$; BOTTLE$; \" of beer.\"\nLET BOTTLES = BOTTLES - 1\nIF BOTTLES &gt; 0 THEN LET BOTTLES$ = LTRIM$(STR$(BOTTLES)): LET PRONOUN$ = \"one\"\nIF BOTTLES = 0 THEN LET BOTTLES$ = \"no more\": LET PRONOUN$ = \"it\"\nIF BOTTLES &lt;&gt; 1 THEN LET BOTTLE$ = \" bottles\"\nIF BOTTLES = 1 THEN LET BOTTLE$ = \" bottle\"\nPRINT \"Take \"; PRONOUN$; \" down and pass it around, \"; BOTTLES$; BOTTLE$; \" of beer on the wall.\"\nPRINT: NEXT A\nPRINT \"No more bottles of beer on the wall, no more bottles of beer.\"\nPRINT \"Go to the store and buy some more, 99 bottles of beer on the wall.\"\nGraphics example:\nSCREEN 13\nDIM a(3976) AS INTEGER, b(3976) AS INTEGER, c(3976) AS INTEGER\nDIM d(3976) AS INTEGER, e(3976) AS INTEGER\ncol% = 16: col1% = 16: col2% = 16: col3% = 16: col4% = 16\ncol5% = 16: col6% = 16: col7% = 16: flag = 1: flag1 = 1\nflag2 = 1: flag3 = 1:flag4 = 1: flag5 = 1: flag6 = 1: flag7 = 1\nDO\n GET (1, 38)-(318, 62), a\n PUT (2, 38), a, PSET\n LINE (1, 38)-(1, 62), col%\n IF flag = 1 THEN col% = col% + 1: IF col% = 32 THEN flag = 2\n IF flag = 2 THEN col% = col% - 1: IF col% = 16 THEN flag = 1\n GET (2, 63)-(319, 87), b\n PUT (1, 63), b, PSET\n LINE (319, 63)-(319, 87), col1%\n IF flag1 = 1 THEN col1% = col1% + 1: IF col1% = 32 THEN flag1 = 2\n IF flag1 = 2 THEN col1% = col1% - 1: IF col1% = 16 THEN flag1 = 1\n GET (1, 88)-(318, 112), c\n PUT (2, 88), c, PSET\n LINE (1, 88)-(1, 112), col2%\n IF flag2 = 1 THEN col2% = col2% + 1: IF col2% = 32 THEN flag2 = 2\n IF flag2 = 2 THEN col2% = col2% - 1: IF col2% = 16 THEN flag2 = 1\n GET (2, 113)-(319, 137), d\n PUT (1, 113), d, PSET\n LINE (319, 113)-(319, 137), col3%\n IF flag3 = 1 THEN col3% = col3% + 1: IF col3% = 32 THEN flag3 = 2\n IF flag3 = 2 THEN col3% = col3% - 1: IF col3% = 16 THEN flag3 = 1\n GET (1, 138)-(318, 162), e\n PUT (2, 138), e, PSET\n LINE (1, 138)-(1, 162), col4%\n IF flag4 = 1 THEN col4% = col4% + 1: IF col4% = 32 THEN flag4 = 2\n IF flag4 = 2 THEN col4% = col4% - 1: IF col4% = 16 THEN flag4 = 1\nLOOP UNTIL LEN(INKEY$)\nBubble sort:\nREM sample of bubble sort\nN = 10\nDIM A(1 TO N) AS INTEGER\nFOR L = 1 TO N\n A(L) = INT(RND * 10 + 1)\nNEXT\nFOR X = 1 TO N - 1\n FOR Y = X + 1 TO N\n IF A(X) &lt; A(Y) THEN SWAP A(X), A(Y)\n NEXT\nNEXT\nFOR L = 1 TO N\n PRINT A(L)\nNEXT\nEND\nCurrent uses.\nQuickBASIC has a community of hobby programmers who use the compiler to write video games, GUIs and utilities. The community has several Web sites, message boards and online magazines.\nToday, programmers sometimes use DOS emulators, such as DOSBox, to run QuickBASIC on Linux and on modern personal computers that no longer support the compiler. Alternatives to this include FreeBASIC and QB64, but they cannot yet run \"all\" QBasic/QuickBASIC programs.\nSince 2008, a set of TCP/IP routines for QuickBASIC 4.x and 7.1 has revitalized some interest in the software. In particular, the vintage computer hobbyist community has been able to write software for old computers that run DOS, allowing these machines to access other computers through a LAN or the internet. This has allowed systems even as old as an 8088 to serve new functions, such as acting as a Web server or using IRC.\nSuccessors.\nMicrosoft's Visual Basic was the successor of QuickBASIC. Other compilers, like PowerBASIC and FreeBASIC, have varying degrees of compatibility. QB64, a multiplatform QuickBASIC to C++ translator, retains close to 100% compatibility and compiles natively for Windows, Linux and macOS.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "63570", "revid": "39546679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63570", "title": "Grouse", "text": "Tribe of birds\nGrouse are a group of birds from the order Galliformes, in the family Phasianidae. Grouse are presently assigned to the tribe Tetraonini (formerly the subfamily Tetraoninae and the family Tetraonidae), a classification supported by mitochondrial DNA sequence studies, and applied by the American Ornithologists' Union, ITIS, International Ornithological Congress, and others. \nGrouse inhabit temperate and subarctic regions of the Northern Hemisphere, from pine forests to moorland and mountainside, from 83\u00b0N (rock ptarmigan in northern Greenland) to 28\u00b0N (Attwater's prairie chicken in Texas). \nThe turkeys are closely allied with grouse, but they have traditionally been excluded from Tetraonini, often placed in their own tribe, subfamily, or family; certain more modern treatments also exclude them. Later phylogenomic analyses demonstrated conclusively that they are sister to the traditionally defined grouse, and they, along with the somewhat earlier-diverging koklass pheasant, may be treated as grouse (i.e., as basal members of the Tetraonini). This is reflected in some more recent circumscriptions.\nDescription.\nLike many other galliforms, grouse are generally compact, heavily-built birds. True grouse (excluding meleagrids) range in length from , and in weight from . If the latter are counted, wild turkey toms are the largest tetraonids, attaining lengths of 130 cm (50 in) and weighing up to 10 kg (22 lbs). Male grouse are significantly larger than females, and can be twice as heavy in the western capercaillie (the largest of the true grouse). Like many other galliforms, males often sport incredibly elaborate ornamentation, such as crests, fan-tails, and inflatable, brightly colored patches of bare skin. Many grouse have feathered nostrils, and some species, such as the ptarmigans, have legs which are entirely covered in feathers; in winter the toes, too, have feathers or small scales on the sides, an adaptation for walking on snow and burrowing into it for shelter. Unlike most other galliforms, they typically lack spurs, with the exception of meleagrids, who possess sharp, prominent spurs.\nFeeding and habits.\nGrouse feed mainly on vegetation\u2014buds, catkins, leaves, and twigs\u2014which typically accounts for over 95% of adults' food by weight. Thus, their diets vary greatly with the seasons. Hatchlings eat mostly insects and other invertebrates, gradually reducing their proportion of animal food to adult levels. Several of the forest-living species are notable for eating large quantities of conifer needles, which most other vertebrates refuse. To digest vegetable food, grouse have big crops and gizzards, eat grit to break up food, and have long intestines with well-developed caeca in which symbiotic bacteria digest cellulose.\nForest species flock only in autumn and winter, though individuals tolerate each other when they meet. Prairie species are more social, and tundra species (ptarmigans, \"Lagopus\") are the most social, forming flocks of up to 100 in winter. All grouse spend most of their time on the ground, though when alarmed, they may take off in a flurry and go into a long glide.\nMost species stay within their breeding range all year, but make short seasonal movements; many individuals of the ptarmigan (called rock ptarmigan in the US) and willow grouse (called willow ptarmigan in the US) migrate hundreds of kilometers.\nReproduction.\nIn all but one species (the willow ptarmigan), males are polygamous. Many species have elaborate courtship displays on the ground at dawn and dusk, which in some are given in leks. The displays feature males' brightly colored combs and in some species, brightly colored inflatable sacs on the sides of their necks. The males display their plumage, give vocalizations that vary widely between species, and may engage in other activities, such as drumming or fluttering their wings, rattling their tails, and making display flights. Occasionally, males fight.\nThe nest is a shallow depression or scrape on the ground\u2014often in cover\u2014with a scanty lining of plant material. The female lays one clutch, but may replace it if the eggs are lost. She begins to lay about a week after mating and lays one egg every day or two; the clutch comprises five to 12 eggs. The eggs have the shape of hen's eggs and are pale yellow, sparsely spotted with brown. On laying the second-last or last egg, the female starts 21 to 28 days of incubation. Chicks hatch in dense, yellow-brown down and leave the nest immediately. They soon develop feathers and can fly shortly before they are two weeks old. The female (and the male in the willow grouse) stays with them and protects them until their first autumn, when they reach their mature weights (except in the male capercaillies). They are sexually mature the following spring, but often do not mate until later years.\nPopulations.\nGrouse make up a considerable part of the vertebrate biomass in the Arctic and Subarctic. Their numbers may fall sharply in years of bad weather or high predator populations\u2014significant grouse populations are a major food source for lynx, foxes, martens, and birds of prey.\nThe three tundra species have maintained their former numbers. The prairie and forest species have declined greatly because of habitat loss, though popular game birds such as the red grouse and the ruffed grouse have benefited from habitat management. Most grouse species are listed by the IUCN as \"least concern\" or \"near threatened\", but the greater and lesser prairie chicken are listed as \"vulnerable\" and the Gunnison grouse is listed as \"endangered\". Some subspecies, such as Attwater's prairie chicken and the Cantabrian capercaillie, and some national and regional populations are also in danger. The wild turkey precipitously declined before returning to abundance, even in developed areas.\nSexual size dimorphism.\nMale size selection.\nThe phenotypic difference between males and females is called sexual dimorphism. Male grouse tend to be larger than female grouse, which seems to hold true across all the species of grouse, with some difference within each species in terms of how drastic the size difference is. The hypothesis with the most supporting evidence for the evolution of sexual dimorphism in grouse is sexual selection. Sexual selection favors large males; stronger selection for larger size in males leads to greater size dimorphism. Female size will increase correspondingly as male size increases, and this is due to heredity (but not to the extent of the male size). This is because females that are smaller will still be able to reproduce without a substantial disadvantage, but this is not the case with males. The largest among the male grouse (commonly dubbed 'Biggrouse') attract the greatest numbers of females during their mating seasons.\nMating behavior selection.\nMale grouse display lekking behavior, which is when many males come together in one area and put on displays to attract females. Females selectively choose among the males present for traits they find more appealing. Male grouse exhibit two types: typical lekking and exploded lekking. In typical lekking, males display in small areas defending a limited territory, and in exploded lekking, displaying males are covered over an expansive land area and share larger territories. Male grouse can also compete with one another for access to female grouse through territoriality, in which a male defends a territory which has resources that females need, like food and nest sites. These differences in male behavior in mating systems account for the evolution of body size in grouse. Males of territorial species were smaller than those of exploded lekking species, and males of typical lekking species were the largest overall. The male birds that exhibit lekking behavior, and have to compete with other males for females to choose them, have greater sexual dimorphism in size. This suggests the hypothesis of sexual selection affecting male body size and also gives an explanation for why some species of grouse have a more drastic difference between male and female body size than others.\nContrast with other bird species.\nSexual size dimorphism can manifest itself differently between grouse and other birds. In some cases, the female is dominant over the male in breeding behavior, which can result in females that are larger than the males.\nIn culture.\nGrouse are game, and hunters kill millions each year for food, sport, and other uses. In the United Kingdom, this takes the form of driven grouse shooting. The male black grouse's tail feathers are a traditional ornament for hats in areas such as Scotland and the Alps. Folk dances from the Alps to the North American prairies imitate the displays of lekking males.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63572", "revid": "47023628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63572", "title": "Old World sparrow", "text": "Family of songbirds\nOld World sparrows are a group of small passerine birds forming the family Passeridae. They are also known as true sparrows, a name also used for a particular genus of the family, \"Passer\". They are distinct from both the New World sparrows, in the family Passerellidae, and from a few other birds sharing their name, such as the Java sparrow of the family Estrildidae. Many species nest on buildings and the house and Eurasian tree sparrows, in particular, inhabit cities in large numbers. They are primarily seed-eaters, though they also consume small insects. Some species scavenge for food around cities and, like pigeons or gulls, will eat small quantities of a diversity of items.\nDescription.\nGenerally, Old World sparrows are small, plump, brown and grey birds with short tails and stubby, powerful beaks. The differences between sparrow species can be subtle. Members of this family range in size from the chestnut sparrow (\"Passer eminibey\"), at and , to the parrot-billed sparrow (\"Passer gongonensis\"), at and . Sparrows are physically similar to other seed-eating birds, such as finches, but have a vestigial dorsal outer primary wing feather and an extra bone in the tongue. This bone, the preglossale, helps stiffen the tongue when holding seeds. Other adaptations for eating seeds are specialised bills and elongated and specialised alimentary canals.\nTaxonomy and systematics.\nThe family Passeridae was introduced (as Passernia) by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1815. Under the classification used in the \"Handbook of the Birds of the World\" (\"HBW\") main groupings of the sparrows are the true sparrows (genus \"Passer\"), the snowfinches (typically one genus, \"Montifringilla\"), and the rock sparrows (\"Petronia\" and the pale rockfinch). These groups are similar to each other, and are each fairly homogeneous, especially \"Passer\". Some classifications also include the sparrow-weavers (\"Plocepasser\") and several other African genera (otherwise classified among the weavers, Ploceidae) which are morphologically similar to \"Passer\". According to a study of molecular and skeletal evidence by Jon Fjelds\u00e5 and colleagues, the cinnamon ibon of the Philippines, previously considered to be a white-eye, is a sister taxon to the sparrows as defined by the \"HBW\". They therefore classify it as its own subfamily within Passeridae.\nMany early classifications of the Old World sparrows placed them as close relatives of the weavers among the various families of small seed-eating birds, based on the similarity of their breeding behaviour, bill structure, and moult, among other characters. Some, starting with P. P. Suskin in the 1920s, placed the sparrows in the weaver family as the subfamily Passerinae, and tied them to \"Plocepasser\". Another family sparrows were classed with was the finches (Fringillidae).\nSome authorities previously classified the related estrildid finches of the Old World tropics and Australasia as members of the Passeridae. Like sparrows, the estrildid finches are small, gregarious and often colonial seed-eaters with short, thick, but pointed bills. They are broadly similar in structure and habits, but tend to be very colourful and vary greatly in their plumage. The 2008 Christidis and Boles taxonomic scheme lists the estrildid finches as the separate family Estrildidae, leaving just the true sparrows in Passeridae.\nDespite some resemblance such as the seed-eater's bill and frequently well-marked heads, New World sparrows are members of a different family, Passerellidae, with 29 genera recognised. Several species in this family are notable singers. New World sparrows are related to Old World buntings, and until 2017, were included in the Old World bunting family Emberizidae.\n The hedge sparrow or dunnock (\"Prunella modularis\") is similarly unrelated. It is a sparrow in name only, a relict of the old practice of calling more types of small birds \"sparrows\". A few further bird species are also called sparrows, such as the Java sparrow, an estrildid finch.\nSpecies.\nThe family contains 43 species divided into eight genera:\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe Old World sparrows are indigenous to Europe, Africa and Asia. In the Americas, Australia, and other parts of the world, settlers imported some species which quickly naturalised, particularly in urban and degraded areas. House sparrows, for example, are now found throughout North America, Australia (every state except Western Australia), parts of southern and eastern Africa, and over much of the heavily populated parts of South America.\nThe Old World sparrows are generally birds of open habitats, including grasslands, deserts, and scrubland. The snowfinches and ground-sparrows are all species of high latitudes. A few species, like the Eurasian tree sparrow, inhabit open woodland. The aberrant cinnamon ibon has the most unusual habitat of the family, inhabiting the canopy of cloud forest in the Philippines.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nOld World sparrows are generally social birds, with many species breeding in loose colonies and most species occurring in flocks during the non-breeding season. The great sparrow is an exception, breeding in solitary pairs and remaining only in small family groups in the non-breeding season. They form large roosting aggregations in the non-breeding seasons that contain only a single species (in contrast to multi-species flocks that might gather for foraging). Sites are chosen for cover and include trees, thick bushes and reed beds. The assemblages can be quite large with up to 10,000 house sparrows counted in one roost in Egypt.\nThe Old World sparrows are some of the few passerine birds that engage in dust bathing. They will first scratch a hole in the ground with their feet, then lie in it and fling dirt or sand over their bodies with flicks of their wings. They will also bathe in water, or in dry or melting snow. Water bathing is similar to dust bathing, with the sparrow standing in shallow water and flicking water over its back with its wings, also ducking its head under the water. Both activities are social, with up to a hundred birds participating at once, and is followed by preening and sometimes group singing.\nEggs.\nThe house sparrow typically lays 3\u20136 eggs, but has been known to lay as few as 1 and as many as 8 greenish-white eggs. The incubation period is typically 10\u201314 days.\nRelationships with humans.\nOld World sparrows may be the most familiar of all wild birds worldwide. Many species commonly live in agricultural areas, and for several, human settlements are a primary habitat. The Eurasian tree and house sparrows are particularly specialised in living around humans and inhabit cities in large numbers. 17 of the 26 species recognised by the \"Handbook of the Birds of the World\" are known to nest on and feed around buildings.\nGrain-eating species, in particular the house and Sudan golden sparrows, can be significant agricultural pests. They can be beneficial to humans as well, especially by eating insect pests. Attempts at large-scale control have failed to affect populations significantly, or have been accompanied by major increases in insect attacks probably resulting from a reduction of numbers, as in the Great Sparrow Campaign in 1950s China.\nBecause of their familiarity, the house sparrow and other species of the family are frequently used to represent the common and vulgar, or the lewd. Birds usually described later as Old World sparrows are referred to in many works of ancient literature and religious texts in Europe and western Asia. These references may not always refer specifically to Old World sparrows, or even to small, seed-eating birds, but later writers who were inspired by these texts often had the house sparrow and other members of the family in mind. In particular, Old World sparrows were associated by the ancient Greeks with Aphrodite, the goddess of love, due to their perceived lustfulness, an association echoed by later writers such as Chaucer and Shakespeare. Jesus's use of \"sparrows\" as an example of divine providence in the Gospel of Matthew also inspired later references, such as that in the final scene of Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" and the hymn \"His Eye Is on the Sparrow\".\nSparrows are represented in ancient Egyptian art very rarely, but an Egyptian hieroglyph G37 is based on the house sparrow. The symbol had no phonetic value and was used as a determinative in words to indicate \"small\", \"narrow\", or \"bad\".\nOld World sparrows have been kept as pets at many times in history, even though most are not particularly colourful and their songs are unremarkable. The earliest mentions of pet sparrows are from the Romans. Not all the \"passeri\" mentioned, often as pets, in Roman literature were necessarily sparrows. John Skelton's \"The Boke of Phyllyp Sparowe\" is a lament for a pet house sparrow belonging to a Jane Scrope, narrated by Scrope. Sparrows are difficult to keep, as pet sparrows must be raised by hand and a considerable amount of insects are required to feed them. Nevertheless, many people succeed at hand-raising orphaned or abandoned baby sparrows.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63573", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63573", "title": "Defenestration", "text": "Act of throwing someone out of a window\nDefenestration (from Neo-Latin ) is the act of throwing someone or something out of a window.\nThe term was coined around the time of an incident in Prague Castle in the year 1618 which became the spark that started the Thirty Years' War. This was done in \"good Bohemian style\", referring to the defenestration which had occurred in Prague's New Town Hall almost 200 years earlier (July 1419), and on that occasion led to the Hussite war. The word comes from the Neo-Latin \"de-\" (\"down from\") and \"fenestra\" (window or opening).\nBy extension, the term is also used to describe the forcible or summary removal of an adversary.\nOrigin.\nThe term originates from two incidents in history, both occurring in Prague. In 1419, seven town officials were thrown from the New Town Hall, precipitating the Hussite War. In 1618, two Imperial governors and their secretary were tossed from the Prague Castle, sparking the Thirty Years' War. These incidents, particularly that in 1618, were referred to as the Defenestrations of Prague and gave rise to the term and the concept.\nThe word itself is derived from Neo-Latin \"defenestratio\"; with \"d\u0113\" meaning \"out\" + \"fenestra\" meaning \"window\" + \"-atio\" as a suffix indicating an action or process.\nNotable cases.\nNotable autodefenestrations.\n\"Autodefenestration\" (or \"self-defenestration\") is the term used for the act of jumping, propelling oneself, or causing oneself to fall, out of a window. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63574", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63574", "title": "-logy", "text": "English language suffix\n-logy is a suffix in the English language, used with words originally adapted from Ancient Greek ending in (\"\"). The earliest English examples were anglicizations of the French \"-logie\", which was in turn inherited from the Latin \"-logia\".\nThe suffix became productive in English from the 18th century, allowing the formation of new terms with no Latin or Greek precedent.\nThe English suffix has two separate main senses, reflecting two sources of the suffix in Greek:\nPhilology is an exception: while its meaning is closer to the first sense, the etymology of the word is similar to the second sense.\n-logy versus -ology.\nIn English names for fields of study, the suffix \"-logy\" is most frequently found preceded by the euphonic connective vowel \"o\" so that the word ends in \"-ology\". In these Greek words, the root is always a noun and \"-o-\" is the combining vowel for all declensions of Greek nouns. However, when new names for fields of study are coined in modern English, the formations ending in \"-logy\" almost always add an \"-o-\", except when the root word ends in an \"l\" or a vowel, as in these exceptions: \"analogy\", \"dekalogy\", \"disanalogy\", \"genealogy\", \"genethlialogy\", \"hexalogy\"; \"herbalogy\" (a variant of \"herbology\"), \"mammalogy\", \"mineralogy\", \"paralogy\", \"petralogy\" (a variant of \"petrology\"); \"elogy\"; heptalogy; \"antilogy\", \"festilogy\"; \"trilogy\", \"tetralogy\", \"pentalogy\"; \"palillogy\", \"pyroballogy\"; \"dyslogy\"; \"eulogy\"; and \"brachylogy\". Linguists sometimes jokingly refer to haplology as \"haplogy\" (subjecting the word \"haplology\" to the process of haplology itself).\nAdditional usage as a suffix.\nPer metonymy, words ending in \"-logy\" are sometimes used to describe a subject rather than the study of it (e.g., \"technology\"). This usage is particularly widespread in medicine; for example, \"pathology\" is often used simply to refer to \"the disease\" itself (e.g., \"We haven't found the pathology yet\") rather than \"the study of a disease\".\nBooks, journals, and treatises about a subject also often bear the name of this subject (e.g., the scientific journal \"Ecology\").\nWhen appended to other English words, the suffix can also be used humorously to create nonce words (e.g., \"beerology\" as \"the study of beer\"). As with other classical compounds, adding the suffix to an initial word-stem derived from Greek or Latin may be used to lend grandeur or the impression of scientific rigor to humble pursuits, as in \"cosmetology\" (\"the study of beauty treatment\") or \"cynology\" (\"the study of dog training\").\nCompound series of works of art.\nThe -logy or -ology suffix is commonly used to indicate finite series of art works like books or movies. For paintings, the \"tych\" suffix is more common (e.g. diptych, triptych). Examples include:\nFurther terms like duology (two, mostly in genre fiction) quadrilogy (four) and octalogy (eight) have been coined but are rarely used: for a series of 10, sometimes \"decalog\" is used (e.g. in the Virgin Decalog) instead of \"decalogy\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63576", "revid": "30845620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63576", "title": "John Stith Pemberton", "text": "American pharmacist, inventor of Coca-Cola (1831\u20131888)\nJohn Stith Pemberton (July 8, 1831 \u2013 August 16, 1888) was an American pharmacist and Confederate States Army officer who is best known as the inventor of Coca-Cola. On May 8, 1886, he developed an early version of a beverage that would later become Coca-Cola, but sold the rights to the drink shortly before his death in 1888.\nPemberton suffered from a sabre wound sustained in April 1865, during the Battle of Columbus. His efforts to control his chronic pain led to morphine addiction. In an attempt to curb his addiction he began to experiment with various painkillers and toxins. The development of an earlier beverage blending alcohol and cocaine led to the recipe that later was adapted to make Coca-Cola.\nBackground.\nPemberton was born on July 8, 1831, in Knoxville, Georgia, and spent most of his childhood in Rome, Georgia. His parents were James C. Pemberton and Martha L. Gant.\nPemberton entered the Reform Medical College of Georgia in Macon, Georgia, and in 1850, at the age of nineteen, he earned his medical degree. His main talent was chemistry. After initially practicing some medicine and surgery, Pemberton opened a drug store in Columbus.\nDuring the American Civil War, Pemberton served in the Third Cavalry Battalion of the Georgia State Guard, which was at that time a component of the Confederate Army. He achieved the rank of lieutenant colonel.\nPersonal life.\nPemberton met Ann Eliza Clifford \"Cliff\" Lewis of Columbus, Georgia, known to her friends as \"Cliff\", who had been a student at Wesleyan College in Macon. They were married in Columbus in 1853. Their only child, Charles Nay Pemberton, was born in 1854.\nThey lived in a Victorian cottage, the Pemberton House in Columbus, a home of historic significance which was added to the National Register of Historic Places on September 28, 1971.\nFounding Coca-Cola.\nIn April 1865, Pemberton sustained a sabre wound to the chest during the Battle of Columbus. He soon became addicted to the morphine used to ease his pain.\nIn 1866, seeking a cure for his addiction, he began to experiment with painkillers that would serve as morphine-free alternatives. His first recipe was \"Dr. Tuggle's Compound Syrup of Globe Flower\", in which the active ingredient was derived from the buttonbush (\"Cephalanthus occidentalis\"), a toxic plant. He next began experimenting with coca and coca wines, eventually creating a recipe that contained extracts of kola nut and damiana, which he called Pemberton's French Wine Coca.\nAccording to Coca-Cola historian Phil Mooney, Pemberton's world-famous soda was created in Columbus, Georgia and carried to Atlanta. With public concern about drug addiction, depression, and alcoholism among war veterans, and \"neurasthenia\" among \"highly-strung\" Southern women, Pemberton's \"medicine\" was advertised as particularly beneficial for \"ladies, and all those whose sedentary employment causes nervous prostration\".\nIn 1886, when Atlanta and Fulton County enacted temperance legislation, Pemberton had to produce a non-alcoholic alternative to his French Wine Coca. Pemberton relied on Atlanta drugstore owner-proprietor Willis E. Venable to test, and help him perfect, the recipe for the beverage, which he formulated by trial and error. With Venable's assistance, Pemberton worked out a set of directions for its preparation. \nPemberton blended the base syrup with carbonated water by accident when trying to make another glassful of the beverage. Pemberton decided then to sell this as a fountain drink rather than a medicine. Frank Mason Robinson came up with the name \"Coca-Cola\" for the alliterative sound, which was popular among other wine medicines of the time. Although the name refers to the two main ingredients, because of controversy over its cocaine content, the Coca-Cola Company later said that the name was \"meaningless but fanciful\". \nRobinson handwrote the Spencerian script on the bottles and ads. Pemberton made many health claims for his product, touting it as a \"valuable brain tonic\" that would cure headaches, relieve exhaustion, and calm nerves, and marketed it as \"delicious, refreshing, pure joy, exhilarating\", and \"invigorating\".\nPemberton sells the business.\nSoon after Coca-Cola was launched, Pemberton fell ill and was nearly bankrupt. Sick and desperate, he began selling rights to his formula to his business partners in Atlanta. Part of his motivation to sell was that he still suffered from expensive continuing morphine addiction. Pemberton had a hunch that his formula \"someday will be a national drink,\" so he attempted to retain a share of the ownership to leave to his son. However, Pemberton's son wanted the money, so in 1888, Pemberton and his son sold the remaining portion of the patent to a fellow Atlanta pharmacist, Asa Griggs Candler, for $300 (USD), which in 2022 purchasing power is equal to $9,372.88 (USD).\nDeath.\nPemberton died from stomach cancer at the age of 57 on 16 August 1888. At the time of his death, he was poor and had become increasingly addicted to morphine. His body was returned to Columbus, Georgia, where he was buried at Linwood Cemetery. His grave marker is engraved with symbols showing his service in the Confederate Army and his membership as a Freemason. His son Charles continued to sell his father's formula, but six years later Charles Pemberton himself died, having succumbed to opium addiction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63577", "revid": "21295589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63577", "title": "Cashew", "text": "Flowering plant in the family Anacardiaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCashew is the common name of a tropical evergreen tree Anacardium occidentale, in the family Anacardiaceae. It is native to South America and is the source of the cashew nut and the cashew apple, an accessory fruit. The tree can grow as tall as , but the dwarf cultivars, growing up to , prove more profitable, with earlier maturity and greater yields. The cashew nut is edible and is eaten on its own as a snack, used in recipes, or processed into cashew cheese or cashew butter. The nut is often simply called a 'cashew'. The cashew apple is a light reddish to yellow fruit, whose pulp and juice can be processed into a sweet, astringent fruit drink or fermented and distilled into liquor.\nIn 2023, 3.9 million tons of cashew nuts were harvested globally, led by the Ivory Coast and India. In addition to the nut and fruit, the shell yields derivatives used in lubricants, waterproofing, and paints. \nDescription.\nThe cashew tree is large and evergreen, growing to tall, with a short, often irregularly shaped trunk. The leaves are spirally arranged, leathery textured, elliptic to obovate, long and broad, with smooth margins. The flowers are produced in a panicle or corymb up to long; each flower is small, pale green at first, then turning reddish, with five slender, acute petals long. The largest cashew tree in the world covers an area around and is located in Parnamirim, Brazil.\nThe fruit of the cashew tree is an accessory fruit (sometimes called a pseudocarp or false fruit). What appears to be the fruit is an oval or pear-shaped structure, a hypocarpium, that develops from the pedicel and the receptacle of the cashew flower. Called the cashew apple, better known in Central America as , it ripens into a yellow or red structure about long.\nThe true fruit of the cashew tree is a kidney-shaped or boxing glove-shaped drupe that grows at the end of the cashew apple. The drupe first develops on the tree and then the pedicel expands to become the cashew apple. The drupe becomes the true fruit, a single shell-encased seed, which is often considered a nut in the culinary sense. The seed is surrounded by a double-shell that contains an allergenic phenolic resin, anacardic acid - which is a potent skin irritant chemically related to the better-known and also toxic allergenic oil urushiol, which is found in the related poison ivy and lacquer tree.\nEtymology.\nThe English name derives from the Portuguese name for the fruit of the cashew tree: (), also known as , which itself is from the Tupi word , literally meaning \"nut that produces itself\".\nThe generic name \"Anacardium\" is composed of the Greek prefix \"ana-\" (), the Greek \"cardia\" (), and the Neo-Latin suffix . It possibly refers to the heart shape of the fruit, to \"the top of the fruit stem\" or to the seed. The word \"anacardium\" was earlier used to refer to \"Semecarpus anacardium\" (the marking nut tree) before Carl Linnaeus transferred it to the cashew; both plants are in the same family. The epithet \"occidentale\" derives from the Western (or Occidental) world.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe species is native to tropical South America and later was distributed around the world in the 1500s by Portuguese explorers. Portuguese colonists in Brazil began exporting cashew nuts as early as the 1550s. The Portuguese took it to Goa, formerly Estado da \u00cdndia Portuguesa in India, between 1560 and 1565. From there, it spread throughout Southeast Asia and eventually Africa.\nCultivation.\nThe cashew tree is cultivated in the tropics between 25\u00b0N and 25\u00b0S, and is well-adapted to hot lowland areas with a pronounced dry season, where the mango and tamarind trees also thrive. The traditional cashew tree is tall, up to {{cvt|14|m}}, requiring three years from planting before it starts production, and eight years before economic harvests.\nMore recent breeds, such as the dwarf cashew trees, are up to {{cvt|6|m}} tall and start producing after the first year, with economic yields after three years. The cashew nut yields for the traditional tree are about {{cvt|0.25|MT}} per hectare, in contrast to over a ton per hectare for the dwarf variety. Grafting and other modern tree management technologies improve and sustain cashew nut yields in commercial orchards.\nProduction.\nIn 2023, global production of cashew nuts (as the kernel) was 3.9 million tonnes, led by Ivory Coast and India with a combined 46% of the world total (table).\nTrade.\nAlmost all cashews produced in Africa between 2000 and 2019 were exported as raw nuts which are much less profitable than shelled nuts. One of the goals of the African Cashew Alliance is to promote Africa's cashew processing capabilities to improve the profitability of Africa's cashew industry. Half of the world's cashews were sold by American retailer Costco, as of 2025.\nToxicity.\nSome people are allergic to cashews, but they are a less frequent allergen than other tree nuts or peanuts. For up to 6% of children and 3% of adults, consuming cashews may cause allergic reactions, ranging from mild discomfort to life-threatening anaphylaxis. These allergies are triggered by the proteins found in tree nuts, and cooking often does not remove or change these proteins. Reactions to cashew and tree nuts can also occur as a consequence of hidden nut ingredients or traces of nuts that may inadvertently be introduced during food processing, handling, or manufacturing. \nThe shell of the cashew nut contains oil compounds that can cause contact dermatitis similar to poison ivy, primarily resulting from the phenolic lipids, anacardic acid, and cardanol. Because it can cause dermatitis, cashews are typically not sold in the shell to consumers. Readily and inexpensively extracted from the waste shells, cardanol is under research for its potential applications in nanomaterials and biotechnology.\nUses.\nNutrition.\nRaw cashew nuts are 5% water, 30% carbohydrates, 44% fat, and 18% protein (table). In a 100-gram reference amount, raw cashews provide 553 kilocalories, 67% of the Daily Value (DV) in total fats, 36% DV of protein, 13% DV of dietary fiber, and 11% DV of carbohydrates. Cashew nuts are rich sources (20% or more of the DV) of dietary minerals, including particularly copper, manganese, phosphorus, and magnesium (79-110% DV), and of thiamin, vitamin B6, and vitamin K (32-37% DV). Iron, potassium, zinc, and selenium are present in significant content (14-61% DV) (table). Cashews (100g, raw) contain {{convert|113|mg}} of beta-sitosterol.\nNut and shell.\nCulinary uses for cashew seeds in snacking and cooking are similar to those for all tree seeds called nuts.\nIn the 21st century, cashew cultivation increased in several African countries to meet the manufacturing demands for cashew milk, a plant milk alternative to dairy milk. In Mozambique, \"bolo polana\" is a cake prepared using powdered cashews and mashed potatoes as the main ingredients. This dessert is common in South Africa.\nHusk.\nThe cashew nut kernel has a slight curvature and two cotyledons, each representing around 20-25% of the weight of the nut. It is encased in a reddish-brown membrane called a husk, which accounts for approximately 5% of the total nut. Cashew nut husk is used in emerging industrial applications, such as an adsorbent, composites, biopolymers, dyes, and enzyme synthesis.\nApple.\nThe mature cashew apple can be eaten fresh, cooked in curries, or fermented into vinegar, citric acid, or an alcoholic drink. It is also used to make preserves, chutneys, and jams in some countries, such as India and Brazil. In many countries, particularly in South America, the cashew apple is used to flavor drinks, both alcoholic and nonalcoholic.\nIn Brazil, cashew fruit juice and fruit pulp are used to make sweets, and juice mixed with alcoholic beverages such as \"cacha\u00e7a\", and as flour, milk, or cheese. In Panama, the cashew fruit is cooked with water and sugar for a prolonged time to make a sweet, brown, paste-like dessert called {{lang|es|dulce de mara\u00f1\u00f3n}} ({{lang|es|mara\u00f1\u00f3n}} being a Spanish name for cashew).\nCashew nuts are more widely traded than cashew apples, because the fruit, unlike the nut, is easily bruised and has a very limited shelf life. Cashew apple juice, however, may be used for manufacturing blended juices.\nWhen the apple is consumed, its astringency is sometimes removed by steaming the fruit for five minutes before washing it in cold water. Steeping the fruit in boiling salt water for five minutes reduces the astringency.\nIn Cambodia, where the plant is usually grown as an ornamental rather than an economic tree, the fruit is a delicacy and is eaten with salt.\nAlcohol.\nIn the Indian state of Goa, the ripened cashew apples are mashed, and the juice, called \"neero\", is extracted and kept for fermentation for a few days. This fermented juice then undergoes a double distillation process. The resulting beverage is called \"feni\" or fenny. \"Feni\" is about 40-42% alcohol (80-84 proof). The single-distilled version is called \"urrak\", which is about 15% alcohol (30 proof). In Tanzania, the cashew apple (\"bibo\" in Swahili) is dried and reconstituted with water and fermented, then distilled to make a strong liquor called \"gongo\".\nNut oil.\nCashew nut oil is a dark yellow oil derived from pressing the cashew nuts (typically from lower-value broken chunks created accidentally during processing) and used for cooking or salad dressing. The highest quality oil is produced from a single cold pressing.\nShell oil.\nCashew nutshell liquid (CNSL) or cashew shell oil (CAS registry number 8007-24-7) is a natural resin with a yellowish sheen found in the honeycomb structure of the cashew nutshell, and is a byproduct of processing cashew nuts. Since it is a strong irritant, it should not be confused with edible cashew nut oil. It is dangerous to handle in small-scale processing of the shells, but is itself a raw material with multiple uses. It is used in tropical folk medicine and for anti-termite treatment of timber. Its composition varies depending on how it is processed.\nThese substances are skin allergens, like lacquer and the oils of poison ivy, and they present a danger during manual cashew processing.\nThis natural oil phenol has interesting chemical structural features that can be modified to create a wide spectrum of biobased monomers. These capitalize on the chemically-versatile construct, which contains three functional groups: The aromatic ring, the hydroxyl group, and the double bonds in the flanking alkyl chain. These include polyols, which have recently seen increased demand for their biobased origin and key chemical attributes such as high reactivity, range of functionalities, reduction in blowing agents, and naturally occurring fire retardant properties in the field of rigid polyurethanes, aided by their inherent phenolic structure and larger number of reactive units per unit mass.\nCNSL may be used as a resin for carbon composite products. CNSL-based novolac is another versatile industrial monomer deriving from cardanol typically used as a reticulating agent (hardener) for epoxy matrices in composite applications providing good thermal and mechanical properties to the final composite material.\nAnimal feed.\nDiscarded cashew nuts are unfit for human consumption and the residues of oil extraction from cashew kernels can be fed to livestock. Animals can also eat the leaves of cashew trees.\nOther uses.\nIn addition to its nut and fruit, the plant has several other uses. In Cambodia, the bark gives a yellow dye, the timber is used in boat-making, and for house-boards, and the wood makes excellent charcoal. The shells yield a black oil used as a preservative and water-proofing agent in varnishes, cement, and as a lubricant or timber seal. Timber is used to manufacture furniture, boats, packing crates, and charcoal. Its juice turns black on exposure to air, providing an indelible ink."}
{"id": "63578", "revid": "42755547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63578", "title": "List of designated terrorist groups", "text": "Several national governments and two international organizations have created lists of organizations that they designate as terrorist. The following list of designated terrorist groups lists groups designated as terrorist by current and former national governments, and inter-governmental organizations. Such designations have often had a significant effect on the groups' activities.\nMany organizations that have been designated as terrorist have denied using terrorism as a military tactic to achieve their goals, and there is no international consensus on the legal definition of terrorism.\nThis listing does not include unaffiliated individuals accused of terrorism, which is considered lone wolf terrorism. This list also excludes groups which might be widely considered terrorist, but who are not officially designated according to the criteria specified above.\nOrganizations designated as terrorist.\nBy the United Nations Security Council Committee.\nOrganizations listed by the United Nations Security Council ISIL (Da'esh) and Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.\nOrganizations formerly designated as terrorist.\nBelow is the list of organizations that have officially been designated as terrorist in the past, by the respective parties, but have since been delisted. \nProcess of designation.\nAmong the countries that publish a list of designated terrorist organizations, some have a clear established procedure for listing and delisting, and some are opaque. The Berghof Foundation argues that opaque delisting conditions reduce the incentive for the organization to abandon terrorism, while fuelling radicalism.\nAustralia.\nSince 2002, the Australian Government maintains a list of terrorist organizations under the \"Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002\". Listing, de-listing and re-listing follows a protocol that mainly involves the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and the Attorney-General's Department.\nBahrain.\nThe Ministry of Foreign Affairs maintains a public list of designated terrorist individuals and entities.\nCanada.\nSince 18 December 2001, section 83.05 of the Canadian \"Criminal Code\" allows the Governor in Council to maintain a list of entities that are engaged in terrorism, facilitating it, or acting on behalf of such an entity.\nA review is conducted every five years by the Minister of Public Safety to determine whether an entity should remain listed. Entities may apply for a judicial review by the Chief Justice of the Federal Court. Both ministerial and judicial reviews are published in the \"Canada Gazette\". The list is also published on the website of Public Safety Canada.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Union has two lists of designated terrorist organisations that provide for different sanctions for the two groups. The first list is copied from the United Nations, and the second is an autonomous list. As of 2020,[ [update]] there are 21 organizations in the autonomous list.\nIndia.\nUnder the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, the Ministry of Home Affairs maintains a list of banned organizations.\nIran.\nThe state maintains a list of designated terror groups; it includes the US Armed Forces, CENTCOM, Iran International.\nIsrael.\nThe Israeli list of \"Terrorists Organizations and Unauthorized Associations\" is available at the National Bureau for Counter Terror Financing of Israel.\nKazakhstan.\nThe Government of Kazakhstan publishes a list of terrorist organizations banned by courts.\nKyrgyzstan.\nKyrgyzstan maintains a consolidated list of \"destructive, extremist and terrorist\" organizations officially banned by courts. As of 2020,[ [update]] the list includes 21 organizations and 12 of them are recognized as terrorist organizations.\nMalaysia.\nThe Ministry of Home Affairs of Malaysia maintains a sanction list of individuals and organizations involved in terrorist activity. The list is regulated by the Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorism Financing and Proceeds From Illegal Activities Act 2001 and is complementary to the United Nations Security Council sanction lists.\nMyanmar.\nIn Myanmar (formerly \"Burma\"), the \"Anti-Terrorism Central Committee\" is responsible for designating terrorist organisations in accordance with the country's counter-terrorism law. Designations must be approved by the union government before being official. There are only two groups on Myanmar's terror list: the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army and Arakan Army, declared on 25 August 2017 and January 2019\nNew Zealand.\nThe\u00a0New Zealand Police\u00a0are responsible for coordinating any requests to the Prime Minister for designation as a terrorist entity. The designation of terrorist organizations is also guided by the Terrorism Suppression Act 2002. New Zealand also abides by several United Nations resolutions dealing with counter-terrorism including UN Resolutions 1267, 1989, 2253, 1988, and 1373.\nPakistan.\nGovernment of Pakistan under section 11-B of Anti Terrorism Act can declare an organization believed to be concerned with terrorism as a Proscribed Organization or put it under surveillance. Ministry of Interior issues the formal notification of proscription of an organization. National Counter Terrorism Authority is primarily concerned with monitoring for any signs of re-emergence through intelligence coordination, once an organization is proscribed.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nIn 2003, the Ministry of Public Security published a list of \"East Turkestan\" terrorist organizations on its website https://. This list was translated to English by the Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the US.\nPhilippines.\nThe Department of Foreign Affairs publishes a list of designated terrorist organizations under the Human Security Act or the Terrorism Financing Prevention and Suppression Act of 2012.\nThe passage of the Anti-Terrorism Act of 2020 automatically recognized all terrorist group designations by the United Nations under Philippine law which includes the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Under the same law, the Anti-Terrorism Council was formed to designate groups as terrorists.\nRussia.\nA single federal list of organizations recognized as terrorist is used by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation. The National Anti-Terrorism Committee maintains a list of terrorist organizations, named \"Federal United list of Terrorist Organizations\".\nSri Lanka.\nSri Lanka bans using the 'Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, No. 48 of 1979 regulations, cited as the Prevention of Terrorism (Proscription of Extremist Organizations).\nTajikistan.\nThe National Bank of Tajikistan publishes national lists of individuals and organizations declared terrorist or extremists by the Supreme Court.\nIn 2015, the Islamic Renaissance Party of Tajikistan was banned in Tajikistan as a terrorist organization.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nThe Cabinet of the United Arab Emirates periodically issues resolutions to include individuals and organizations on its terrorist list. As of 2020,[ [update]] issued resolutions are 2014/41, 2017/18, 2017/28, 2017/45, 2018/24 and 2018/50.\nUnited Nations.\nThe United Nations does not have a list of all terrorist organizations. Instead, it has several lists focusing on international sanctions in particular contexts. The United Nations Security Council Resolution 1267 established lists focused Al-Qaeda, the Taliban and their associates. The listing process was later extended to include the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom Home Office maintains a list of proscribed terrorist groups.\nUnited States.\nThe United States Department of State maintains a list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63579", "revid": "48344398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63579", "title": "Manilla", "text": "Manilla may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63580", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63580", "title": "Manilla, Iowa", "text": "Manilla is a city in Crawford County, Iowa, United States, along the West Branch of the West Nishnabotna River. The population was 775 at the time of the 2020 United States census.\nHistory.\nManilla is working to bolster its declining population by providing free land and property tax abatements to attract new residents.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , all land.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the census of 2020, there were 775 people, 328 households, and 204 families residing in the city. The population density was 728.8 inhabitants per square mile (281.4/km2). There were 368 housing units at an average density of 346.1 per square mile (133.6/km2). The racial makeup of the city was 88.9% White, 0.1% Black or African American, 0.0% Native American, 0.4% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 4.9% from other races and 5.5% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino persons of any race comprised 8.0% of the population.\nOf the 328 households, 25.0% of which had children under the age of 18 living with them, 50.6% were married couples living together, 6.7% were cohabitating couples, 24.4% had a female householder with no spouse or partner present and 18.3% had a male householder with no spouse or partner present. 37.8% of all households were non-families. 31.7% of all households were made up of individuals, 14.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years old or older.\nThe median age in the city was 46.1 years. 24.0% of the residents were under the age of 20; 5.3% were between the ages of 20 and 24; 20.4% were from 25 and 44; 26.8% were from 45 and 64; and 23.5% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 50.2% male and 49.8% female.\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 776 people, 337 households, and 214 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 369 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 97.9% White, 0.1% Asian, 1.2% from other races, and 0.8% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 2.6% of the population.\nThere were 337 households, of which 27.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.9% were married couples living together, 8.9% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.7% had a male householder with no wife present, and 36.5% were non-families. 33.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 18.1% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.18 and the average family size was 2.74.\nThe median age in the city was 47.7 years. 20.9% of residents were under the age of 18; 5.4% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 19.5% were from 25 to 44; 27.4% were from 45 to 64; and 26.7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 47.6% male and 52.4% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 839 people, 337 households, and 222 families living in the city. The population density was . There were 369 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 97.74% White, 0.24% African American, 0.36% from other races, and 1.67% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 0.48% of the population.\nThere were 337 households, out of which 27.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 56.7% were married couples living together, 7.1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.1% were non-families. 30.3% of all households were made up of individuals, and 17.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.31 and the average family size was 2.89.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 22.8% under the age of 18, 6.8% from 18 to 24, 21.8% from 25 to 44, 21.1% from 45 to 64, and 27.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 44 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.2 males.\nThe median income for a household was $31,146, and the median income for a family was $37,625. Males had a median income of $27,292 versus $16,875 for females. The per capita income for the city was $14,011. About 10.5% of families and 12.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 17.2% of those under age 18 and 7.0% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nManilla is served by the IKM\u2013Manning Community School District. The district previously operated a middle school in Manilla but it closed in 2014; at the time the district continued to have its headquarters there.\nThe Manilla Community School District was formed as a consolidation of various area school districts in 1889, and a four classroom building served as the first school in the city. In 1904 the first class graduated. A new school building funded by a $45,000 bond opened in 1915. In 1956 the school was renamed the Manilla Community School. On July 1, 1992, the Manilla district merged into the IKM Community School District. That in turn, on July 1, 2011, merged into IKM\u2013Manning.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63582", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63582", "title": "Simkin", "text": "Simkin is a surname. As a surname in Slavic countries it's used for males, while the feminine counterpart is Simkina. Notable people with the surname include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "63585", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63585", "title": "Glucinium", "text": ""}
{"id": "63586", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63586", "title": "Mikhail Vasilyevich Lomonosov", "text": ""}
{"id": "63587", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63587", "title": "Campylobacter", "text": "Genus of gram-negative bacteria\nCampylobacter is a type of bacteria that can cause a diarrheal disease in people. Its name means 'curved bacterium' because the germ typically appears in a comma or \"s\" shape. According to its scientific classification, it is a genus of gram-negative bacteria that is motile.\nThe germ is common in nature and in domestic animals. It is frequently found in raw food of vegetable and animal origin. Its numbers can be very high in some foods, such as raw poultry. Due to their diverse natural reservoir, some \"Campylobacter\" can also be detected in the air, although not at an epidemiologically significant level. The disease that some of the species of the bacteria can cause is called campylobacteriosis.\nAt least a dozen species of \"Campylobacter\" have been implicated in human disease, with \"C. jejuni\" (80\u201390%) and \"C. coli\" (5\u201310%) being the most common. \"C. jejuni\" is recognized as one of the main causes of bacterial foodborne disease in many developed countries. It is the number one cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in Europe, with over 246,000 cases confirmed annually. \"C. jejuni\" infection can also cause bacteremia in immunocompromised people, while \"C. lari\" is a known cause of recurrent diarrhea in children. \"C. fetus\" can cause spontaneous abortions in cattle and sheep, and it is an opportunistic pathogen in humans.\nMorphology and phenotype.\n\"Campylobacter\" spp. generally appear as curved or comma-shaped rods, and they are able to move via unipolar or bipolar flagella. They grow best between 37 and 42\u00a0\u00b0C in a microaerophilic environment. When exposed to atmospheric oxygen, \"C. jejuni\" is able to change into a coccus form. Most species of \"Campylobacter\" are positive by the oxidase test and catalase test and are able to reduce nitrate. The number of known quinolone-resistant \"Campylobacter\" strains is growing. It is suggested that this is caused by the overuse of quinolone antibiotics in animal agriculture.\nHistory.\nTheodor Escherich was the first to describe in 1886 what are known today as \"Campylobacters\" in the stool samples of infants, who perished from a disease he named \"cholera infantum\". In the following years until the end of the century, a number of publications appeared, describing the occurrence of such \"spirilla\" in cases of \"cholera-like\" and \"dysenteric\" disease. These organisms were mainly found in the colon or associated with mucus in diarrhoeal stool specimens. \"Vibrio\"-like bacteria were also described by Sir John McFadyean and Stockman in 1913 in fetal tissues of aborted sheep. For several years Campylobacters were continuously referred to as \"Vibrio-like organisms\", until 1963 when Sebald and Veron gave the name \"Campylobacter\" to the genus based on their shape and microaerophilic growth requirement and after showing significant biological differences with \"Vibrio\" species.\nGenomics.\nThe genomes of several \"Campylobacter\" species have been sequenced, beginning with \"C. jejuni\" in 2000. These genome studies have identified molecular markers specific to members of \"Campylobacter\". \"Campylobacter\" spp. genomes are rather small compared to those of other gastrointestinal pathogens, with sizes ranging between 1.60 and 1.90 Mbp. A characteristic of most \"Campylobacter\" genomes is the presence of hypervariable regions, which can differ greatly between different strains.\nStudies have investigated the genes responsible for motility in \"Campylobacter\" species. Some \"Campylobacter\" species contain two flagellin genes in tandem for motility, \"flaA\" and \"flaB\". These genes undergo intergenic recombination, further contributing to their virulence. A single Type VI secretion system (T6SS) cluster was also predicted in approximately one-third of \"Campylobacter\" species, grouping into three distinct organisations and harbouring up to five \"vgrG\" genes.\nPhylogeny.\nThe currently accepted taxonomy is based on the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) and National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)\nSpecies incertae sedis:\n\"Campylobacter\"-specific bacteriophages.\n\"Campylobacter\"-specific bacteriophages are natural viral predators of the organism. Bacteriophages specific to the species now known as \"C. coli\" and \"C. fetus \"(previously \"Vibrio coli\" and \"V. fetus\"), were first isolated from cattle and pigs during the 1960s, and \"Campylobacter\" bacteriophage therapy is an ongoing area of research in the age of bacterial antibiotic resistance.\nPathogenesis.\n\"Campylobacter\" can cause a gastrointestinal infection, campylobacteriosis. The incubation period is 24\u201372 hours after infection. This is characterized by an inflammatory, sometimes bloody diarrhea or dysentery syndrome, mostly including cramps, fever, and pain. The most common routes of transmission are fecal-oral, ingestion of contaminated food or water, and the eating of raw meat. Foods implicated in campylobacteriosis include raw or under-cooked poultry, raw dairy products, and contaminated produce. \"Campylobacter\" is sensitive to the stomach's normal production of hydrochloric acid: as a result, the infectious dose is relatively high, and the bacteria rarely cause illness when a person is exposed to less than 10,000 organisms. Nevertheless, people taking antacid medication (e. g. people with gastritis or stomach ulcers) are at higher risk of contracting disease from a smaller number of organisms, since this type of medication neutralizes normal gastric acid.\nIn humans, the sites of tissue injury include the jejunum, the ileum, and the colon. Most strains of \"C. jejuni\" produce cytolethal distending toxin, which inhibits cell division and impedes activation of the immune system. This helps the bacteria to evade the immune system and survive for a limited time inside intestinal cells. \"Campylobacter\" has, on rare occasions, been suggested to cause hemolytic uremic syndrome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, though no unequivocal case reports exist. \"Campylobacter\" infection is the most common trigger of Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome. Gastrointestinal perforation is a rare complication of ileal infection.\n\"Campylobacter\" has also been associated with periodontitis.\nDetection.\nCampylobacter testing needs to be done to manage the risk of foodborne \"Campylobacter\" and reducing the level of foodborne \"Campoboteriosis\", to protect people and to determine if a person is infected with \"Campylobacter.\"\nIn humans.\nUsually, detection of \"Campylobacter\" in humans is done by laboratory culturing a stool sample or swab of the rectum collected by a healthcare provider. Results take about 48\u201372 hours for preliminary results. Confirmation test and testing to determine the species of \"Campylobacter\" or drug sensitivities of the organism require additional time.\nIn livestock.\nUsually, detection of Campylobacter in livestock is done by laboratory culturing a faecal sample. Results take about 48\u201372 hours.\nIn meat.\nUsually, detection of Campylobacter in meat is done by laboratory culturing a homogenised sample. Results takes about 48\u201372 hours.\nTreatment.\nThe infection is usually self-limiting and, in most cases, symptomatic treatment by liquid and electrolyte replacement is sufficient to treat human infections. Symptoms typically last 5\u20137 days. Treatment with antibiotics has only a minor effect on the typical duration of the infection in non-complex cases, and is discouraged except in high-risk patients. \nDiagnosis of campylobacteriosis is made by testing a fecal specimen. Standard treatment in high-risk cases is azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, especially for \"Campylobacter\" infections in children, although other antibiotics, such as quinolones, tetracycline and other macrolides are sometimes used to treat gastrointestinal \"Campylobacter\" infections in adults. In case of systemic infection, other bactericidal antibiotics are used, such as ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, or aminoglycosides. Fluoroquinolone antibiotics, such as ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin, may no longer be effective in some cases, due to resistance. In addition to antibiotics, dehydrated patients may require intravenous fluid treatment in a hospital.\nEpidemiology.\nCanada.\nFoodNet Canada has reported that \"Campylobacter\" was the most common pathogen found on packaged chicken breast, with nearly half of all samples testing positive. Additionally, \"Campylobacter\" and \"Salmonella\" were the most common causes of gastrointestinal illness in Canada.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, the annual prevalence of \"Campylobacter\" infections appears to be relatively stable based on findings from a national survey conducted on more than 5000 isolates. The survey revealed that the most common species of \"Campylobacter\" were \"C. jejuni\", accounting for 83.7% of isolates, followed by \"C. coli\" (13.5%) and \"C. fetus\" (0.6%). The mean age of affected patients was 34.61 years, with males constituting 57.1% of cases. Outpatients represented the majority of cases, comprising 54% of the total. \"Campylobacter\" infections were predominantly isolated from feces, accounting for 97.3% of cases, while a smaller proportion (2.7%) was isolated from blood. Notably, \"C. fetus\" was primarily isolated from blood samples, constituting 88.2% of cases. Regarding antibiotic resistance patterns, the survey found that resistance to ciprofloxacin and tetracyclines was relatively high, with rates of 75.5% and 54.8%, respectively. In contrast, resistance to macrolides, including erythromycin, clarithromycin, and azithromycin, was lower, with rates ranging from 2% to 4.8%. Additionally, approximately 50% of \"C. jejuni\" and \"C. coli\" isolates exhibited resistance to two or more antibiotics. There was a significant decrease in resistance to ciprofloxacin and tetracyclines over time, while resistance to macrolides remained stable.\nNew Zealand.\nIn August 2016, an estimated 8,000+ residents of Havelock North, a town with around 13,000 residents, had gastric illness after the water supply was thought to be contaminated by \"Campylobacter\".\nNorway.\nIn June 2019, an estimated 2,000 residents of Ask\u00f8y municipality got sick due to the presence of \"C. jejuni\" in the water supply. Two deaths were connected to the outbreak, and it was the largest outbreak of \"Campylobacter\" in Norway. The suspected source of the contamination was thought to be horse faeces, which leaked into a drinking water pool. A \"C. jejuni\" water isolate thought to be the cause of the outbreak was examined with human isolates, and showed the highest pathogenic potential in vitro, transcriptomic and genomic investigations. This could suggest why the isolate was able to cause an outbreak.\nSweden.\nDuring the period of August 2016 to June 2017 there was a large outbreak of \"C. jejuni\" in Sweden. It was the largest outbreak that has been reported so far. 5000 more cases than would be expected during this period were reported to the authorities. The source of the outbreak was contaminated chicken meat that came from the same producer. The reason for the increased incidence and elevated levels of \"Campylobacter\" was reported to be an improperly installed washing plant, where dirty water was accidentally used to wash transport cages.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn January 2013, the UK's Food Standards Agency (FSA) warned that two-thirds of all raw chicken bought from UK shops was contaminated with \"Campylobacter\", affecting an estimated half a million people annually and killing about 100 of them. In June 2014, the FSA started a campaign against washing raw chicken, as washing can spread germs onto clean surfaces by splashing. In May 2015, cumulative results for samples taken from fresh chickens between February 2014 and February 2015 were published by the FSA and showed 73% of chickens tested positive for the presence of \"Campylobacter\".\nUnited States.\n\"Campylobacter\" infections increased 14% in the United States in 2012 compared to the rate from 2006 to 2008. This represents the highest reported number of infections since calendar year 2000.\nHigh prevalence of \"Campylobacter\" (40% or more) has been reported in raw chicken meat in regional retail stores in the US, which remained steady from 2005 through 2011. The last USDA quarterly progress report on \"Salmonella\" and \"Campylobacter\" testing of meat and poultry, for July\u2013September 2014, showed a low prevalence of \"Campylobacter\" spp. in ground chicken meat, but a larger prevalence (20%) in mechanically separated chicken meat (which is sold only for further processing).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63591", "revid": "42803445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63591", "title": "Jeff Kennett", "text": "Australian politician (born 1948)\nJeffrey Gibb Kennett (born 2 March 1948) is an Australian former politician who served as the 43rd Premier of Victoria between 1992 and 1999, Leader of the Victorian Liberal Party from 1982 to 1989 and from 1991 to 1999, and the Member for Burwood from 1976 to 1999. He is currently a media commentator.\nKennett was previously the president of the Hawthorn Football Club, from 2005 to 2011 and again from 2017 to 2022. He is the founding Chairman of beyondblue, a national mental health advocacy organisation.\nEarly life.\nThe son of Kenneth Munro Gibb Kennett (1921\u20132007), and Wendy Anne Kennett (1925\u20132006; n\u00e9e Fanning), he was born in Melbourne on 2 March 1948. He attended Scotch College; and, although an unexceptional student academically, he did well in the school's Cadet Corps Unit. He also played football (on the wing) for the school. His failure to rise above the middle band academically almost led him to quit school in Fourth Form (Year 10 \u2013 1963), but he was persuaded to stay on. His Fifth and Sixth Forms were an improvement, but he was still described in school reports as \"[a] confident and at times helpful boy. Sometimes irritates. Sometimes works hard\" (1964), and \"[a] keen, pleasant, though sometimes erratic boy\" (1965).\nAfter leaving school, Kennett was persuaded by his father Ken to attend the Australian National University in Canberra, but lost interest and left after one year of an economics degree. He returned to Melbourne and found work in the advertising department of the retail giant Myer \u2013 kindling an interest for advertising that would one day earn him his living.\nKennett's life in the regular workforce was cut short when, in 1968, he was conscripted into the Australian Army. Kennett was selected for officer training and graduated third in his class from the Officer Training Unit, Scheyville (OTU), near Windsor, New South Wales, outside Sydney. He was posted to Malaysia and Singapore as Second Lieutenant, commander of 1st Platoon, A Company, 1st Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment (1RAR). This military career (and his earlier experience in the Scotch College Cadet Corps) has been noted by many biographers as an essential formative influence on the adult Kennett's character. His sense and regard for hierarchical loyalty, punctuality, and general intolerance of dissent or disobedience may be traced to this period.\nKennett returned to civilian life in 1970, reentering a divided Australian society, split by the Vietnam War, of which Kennett was a firm supporter. Having returned to Myer, Kennett became impatient with his work, and so with Ian Fegan and Eran Nicols, he formed his own advertising company (KNF) in June 1971.\nThereafter, in December 1972, Kennett married Felicity Kellar, an old friend whom he had first met on a Number 69 tram on the long trips to school. Their first son was born in 1974, followed by a daughter and two more sons.\nPolitical career.\nKennett was elected as a Liberal Member of the Victorian Legislative Assembly (MLA) for Burwood in 1976, having had an interest in local politics since the early 1970s. His preselection for the seat reportedly irritated then Premier Dick Hamer, who disliked Kennett's campaigning style, and had endorsed the sitting member, Haddon Storey. However, by 1981, Kennett was promoted to Cabinet as Minister for Housing and Minister of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. He was one of several younger MPs whom Hamer promoted to Cabinet in a bid to renew his government. Kennett retained his post when Hamer was replaced as Liberal leader and Premier by Lindsay Thompson in June of that year. Following the defeat of the longstanding Liberal government in 1982, Kennett was the leading candidate to replace Thompson despite being the youngest member of the outgoing government. On 26 October, he was elected leader of the Liberal Party and hence Leader of the Opposition. He took an aggressive posture against the Cain government, and was often criticised for his \"bull-in-a-china-shop\" style and his anti-government rhetoric.\nUnder his leadership, the Liberals were heavily defeated by Labor in 1985. Afterwards he faced a challenge to his leadership of the party from Ian Smith. Kennett survived, but increasingly, he was seen as an erratic and unapproachable leader. He faced two more challenges to his leadership in 1986 and 1987. In 1987, in one notable incident Kennett referred to the Federal Liberal leader John Howard as a 'cunt' in a mobile telephone conversation with Howard rival Andrew Peacock. The car-phone conversation damaged both Howard and Kennett politically, but aided Peacock in his push to return as Federal Liberal leader (1989).\nToward the end of its second term the Cain government had lost support and the Liberals were expected to win the 1988 election. The Liberal vote indeed rebounded strongly \u2013 they won a majority of the two-party vote \u2013 however much of this margin was wasted on landslide majorities in their heartland. As a result, the Liberals took only one seat from Labor in the capital, and were left four seats short of a majority. Failing to become premier, Kennett was again criticised within his own party, and in 1989 he was deposed in favour of a little-known rural MLA, Alan Brown.\nKennett's performance during his first stint as Liberal leader is a matter of debate. Economou sees his 1985 and 1988 election campaigns as weak, while Parkinson believes he was a significant asset in pushing the Labor government of John Cain in several key seats.\nFirst term as premier.\nKennett publicly pledged never to attempt a return to the Liberal leadership. However, when Brown proved unable to challenge the government effectively, he allowed his supporters to call a spill in 1991. Brown realised he didn't have enough support to keep his post and resigned, allowing Kennett to retake the leadership unopposed.\nWith Victoria facing billions of dollars of debt, Kennett was seen as \"Premier-in-waiting\" from the moment he retook the leadership. Cain had resigned a year earlier in favour of Deputy Premier Joan Kirner, who was unable to regain the upper hand despite being personally more popular than Kennett. The Liberals' advantage was strengthened by an important decision taken during Brown's brief tenure as leader\u2014negotiating a Coalition agreement with the National Party. The Liberals and Nationals have historically had a strained relationship in Victoria; they had sat separately for most of the second half of the 20th century. It had been believed that Kennett had been denied victory in 1988 due to a large number of three-cornered contests in rural seats.\nThe Coalition went into the October 1992 state election as unbackable favourites, having been ahead in opinion polling by large margins for almost two years. They stoked the voters' anger with a series of \"Guilty Party\" ads, targeting many Labor ministers and highlighting concerns in their portfolios. In the second-largest defeat that a sitting government has ever suffered in Victoria, the Coalition scored a 19-seat swing, attaining a 16-seat majority in the Legislative Assembly. The Liberals won 52 seats, enough for a majority in their own right. Nevertheless, Kennett supported his coalition partner, retaining the Nationals in his cabinet.\nState school closures.\nIn the first three years of office, funding for public schools and the Department of Education was substantially reduced. 350 government schools were closed, including every Technical High School (\"Tech\") in Victoria, and 7,000 teaching jobs eliminated. The Tech School closures had a widespread, delayed effect two decades later when a skilled labour shortage in the state was declared by the government, attributable largely to the generation of children who were denied a trade-focused high school education, significantly reducing the number of school leavers commencing trade apprenticeships. The few who did so were insufficient to counterbalance the number of retiring tradespeople in the coming years. This directly resulted in the number of Skilled Migrant (subclass 190) visas being made available each year increasing to 190,000 from 2012 and an active campaign to entice migrants with trade qualifications to Victoria.\nPublic transport.\nOther controversial moves included the sacking of 16,000 public transport workers in a major technological upgrade of the system, and the initiation of a major scheme for privatisation of state-owned services, including the electricity (SECV) and gas (Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria) utilities, the ambulance service, as well as several prisons and other minor services. The sale of the Totalisator Agency Board raised $609 million. Between 1995 and 1998, $29 billion of state assets in gas and electricity alone were sold to private enterprise (for statistics, see Parkinson, \"Jeff\", 1999).\nIn the wake of these changes, investment and population growth slowly resumed, though unemployment was to remain above the national average for the duration of Kennett's premiership. While the benefits to the State budget figures were indisputable in the short term, the social and longer-term economic cost of the Kennett reforms have been questioned by many commentators, academics and those who suffered economically through the period of reform. This campaign of privatisations and cutbacks led to governmental acts of privatisation by splitting up Melbourne's rail (Hillside, Bayside, V/Line and West Coast Rail) and tramways (Yarra and Swanston) or budget-cutting becoming popularly known as being \"Jeffed\". He also cut back many regional rail services including The Vinelander (ran to Mildura, services later restored to Maryborough as a regular V/Line service in 2011) and services to Leongatha, Bairnsdale (returned in 2003), Dimboola (services later returned to Ararat in 2004).\nThe largest public protest in Melbourne since the Vietnam War Moratorium occurred on 10 November 1992, with an estimated 100,000 people marching in opposition to the retrenchment of many workers and the large State budget cutbacks. Kennett was undeterred by this protest, and famously commented that though there were 100,000 outside his office at Parliament that day, there were 4.5 million who stayed at home or at work.\nHigh-profile capital works projects.\nThe Kennett government also embarked on a series of high-profile capital works projects, such as the restoration of Parliament House, construction of a new $250 million Melbourne Museum and IMAX theatre, and a new $130 million Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre (which became known colloquially as \"Jeff's Shed\"). Other projects included a $160 million expansion of the National Gallery of Victoria; $100 million for refurbishment of the State Library of Victoria; $65 million for a new Melbourne Sports and Aquatic Centre (MSAC); and $130 million for the construction of a new civic square on the site of the old Gas and Fuel Buildings, to be known as Federation Square.\nThe relocation of the Formula 1 Grand Prix from Adelaide in 1993 was a particular coup for Kennett, who had worked hard with his friend Ron Walker, the Chairman of the Melbourne Major Events Company, helped deliver Melbourne the hosting rights for the event from Adelaide in 1993.\nThe most controversial project of the Kennett era was the $1.85 billion Crown Casino and Entertainment Complex, a gambling and entertainment centre on Melbourne's Southbank. Initial plans for a casino had been made under the Labor government, however the tendering process and construction occurred under Kennett.\nA$2 billion project to redevelop Melbourne's derelict Docklands area to include a new football stadium was also undertaken, in addition to the large CityLink project, a project resurrected from the 1969 Melbourne Transportation Plan, aimed at linking Melbourne's freeways, easing traffic problems in the inner city, and reducing commuting times from the outer suburbs to the CBD.\nMacedonian name dispute.\nIn the mid-1990s, Premier Kennett backed the Greek position over the Macedonian question in his attempts to shore up local electoral support. Kennett's stance gained him supporters from the Melburnian Greek community, whereas he was referred to as \"Kennettopoulos\" by the Macedonian community.\nAt Kennett's insistence, his state government in 1994 issued its own directive that all its departments refer to the language as \"Macedonian (Slavonic)\" and to Macedonians as \"Slav Macedonians\". Reasons given for the decision were \"to avoid confusion\", be consistent with federal naming protocols toward Macedonians and repair relations between Macedonian and Greek communities. It was accepted that it would not impact the way Macedonians self identified themselves. The decision upset Macedonians, as they had to use the terms in deliberations with the government or its institutions related to education and public broadcasting. The Macedonian Community challenged the decision on the basis of the Race Discrimination Act. After years of litigation at the Australian Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC), the Federal Court and High Court, previous judicial rulings were upheld that found Kennett's directive unlawful as it caused discrimination based on ethnic background and was struck down from usage in 2000.\nSecond term as premier.\nKennett's personal popularity was mostly average to high through his first term, though that of the government as a whole went through peaks and troughs. Without a by-election in the previous four years, the 1996 state election shaped up as the first test of the 'Kennett Revolution' with the electorate. The Coalition was expected to win a second term at the 30 March election, albeit with a somewhat reduced majority. At the federal election held four weeks earlier, while Labor was heavily defeated, it actually picked up a swing in Victoria.\nHowever, to the surprise of most commentators, the Coalition only suffered a two-seat swing, allowing it to retain a comfortable 14-seat majority. The Coalition actually picked up modest swings in Melbourne's outer suburbs, which have traditionally decided most state elections. Several negative trends (for the Liberals) were obscured somewhat by the euphoria of victory. The government's sharp cuts to government services were particularly resented in country Victoria, where the Liberals and Nationals held almost all the seats. The loss of the Mildura seat to independent Russell Savage was an indication of this disaffection, and when in February 1997 independent Susan Davies was elected to the seat of Gippsland West, this trend seemed set to continue.\nHowever, the verdict of many was that the 'Kennett Revolution' was far from over \u2013 indeed it was seemingly set in stone with the opening of the Crown Casino in May 1997. Kennett's profile continued to grow as he became a major commentator on national issues, including urging the new government of John Howard to introduce tax reform, and actively opposing the rise of the One Nation Party of Pauline Hanson. In this last case, Kennett did not shy away from criticising the media, but also the decision of the Howard government to not actively oppose Hanson's agenda.\nKennett was influential in Melbourne bidding for the 2006 Commonwealth Games. Three cities initially expressed interest in hosting the event; Melbourne, Wellington and Singapore. Singapore dropped out before its bid was officially selected by the Commonwealth Games Federation, leaving only two candidate cities. In the weeks prior to the announcement of the 2006 host, Wellington withdrew its bid, citing the costs involved with matching the bid plan presented by Melbourne, which became the default host without members of the Federation going to vote.\nThe government lost ground over the next few years, with high-profile disagreements with the Director of Public Prosecutions Bernard Bongiorno, and Auditor-General Ches Baragwanath fuelling criticism of Kennett's governmental style. Kennett's perceived antipathy to Baragwanath led to 1997 legislation to restructure the office of the Auditor-General and set up Audit Victoria. While Kennett promised the independence of the office would be maintained, many saw his government's actions as an attempt to curb the Auditor-General's power to criticise government policy. Widespread community debate and substantial public dissent from Liberal MPs and Party members ensued, with MLA Roger Pescott resigning from Parliament at the height of the debate; citing his disagreement with this Bill and Kennett's style in general. The Liberal Party lost the by-election in Mitcham.\nFurther scandals involving the handling of contracts for the state emergency services response system damaged the credibility of Kennett in 1997\u20131998, while rural dissent continued to grow.\nPersonal difficulties also began to affect Kennett and his family. The strains of public life led to a trial separation between Felicity and Jeff in early 1998 (patched up by the end of the year), while earlier in Kennett's first term, public scrutiny had led to the forced sale of the KNF Advertising Company, despite all Kennett's involvement having been transferred to his wife's name. There were rumors in 1998 that Kennett might retire from politics; these were mostly centred around Phil Gude, his party deputy. These eventually came to nothing.\nIn July 1998, Liberal MP Peter McLellan, Member for Frankston East, resigned from the party in protest over alleged corrupt Liberal Party Senate preselection, changes to WorkCover and the auditor-general's office. Again, Kennett failed to pick up the warning signs of declining support for his style of leadership.\nLabor leader John Brumby took care to capitalize on each of Kennett's mistakes over this period, though his absences in rural electorates were misunderstood by many Labor MPs, and led to his replacement by Steve Bracks in early 1999. Bracks, who came from Ballarat, was popular in rural areas and was seen as a fresh alternative to Brumby, who nevertheless remained a key figure in the shadow Cabinet.\n1999 election loss.\nDespite Bracks' appeal, Kennett entered the 1999 election campaign with a seemingly unassailable lead, and most commentators and opinion polls agreed that the Coalition would win a third term.\nHowever, in a shock result, the Coalition suffered a 13-seat swing to Labor. While there was only a modest swing in eastern Melbourne, which has historically decided elections in Victoria, the Coalition suffered significant losses in regional centres such as Ballarat and Bendigo. ABC elections analyst Antony Green later said that when he first saw the results coming in, it looked so unusual that he thought \"something was wrong with the computer.\"\nInitial counting showed Labor on 41 seats and the Coalition on 43; a supplementary election had to be held in Frankston East following the death of sitting independent Peter McLellan. The balance of power rested with three independents--Russell Savage, Susan Davies and newly elected Craig Ingram. Negotiations began between the Coalition and the three independents. While Kennett acceded to all but two of their demands, his perceived poor treatment of Savage and Davies in the previous parliament meant that they would not even consider supporting a Coalition minority government headed by Kennett. On 18 October, two days after Labor won the supplementary election in Frankston East, the independents announced they would support a Labor minority government. The agreement entailed Labor signing a Charter of Good Government, pledging to restore services to rural areas, and promising parliamentary reforms.\nKennett's supporters urged the Coalition to force a vote of 'no confidence' on the floor of the parliament in a last-ditch effort to force Savage, Davies and Ingram to support Kennett. However, with the Liberals divided on Kennett's future role, Kennett retired from all of his offices, saying he wished to have no further involvement in politics. Labor won the ensuing by-election in Burwood.\nRumoured returns to politics.\nFollowing the Liberals' second successive defeat in the 2002 election, rumours began that Kennett was planning a comeback to politics. The issue came to a head in May 2006 after the sudden resignation of Kennett's successor, Robert Doyle, when Kennett announced he would contemplate standing in a by-election for Doyle's old seat of Malvern and offering himself as party leader. His stance was supported by Prime Minister John Howard, who rated him as the party's best hope to win the November 2006 state election. But within 24 hours Kennett announced he would not return to Parliament rather than running against Ted Baillieu, whom Kennett had been grooming for the top post since 1999. John Howard was reported to have been \"embarrassed\" by having publicly supported Kennett before his decision not to re-enter politics.\nIn 2008, it was rumoured that Kennett was planning to stand for Lord Mayor of Melbourne. Despite endorsing future Lord Mayor John So in the 2001 mayoral elections, Kennett was quoted as saying \"I think the city is ready for a change\". Kennett claimed he had been approached by \"a range of interests\" to run for the position, but in the end did not do so. Former Liberal leader Robert Doyle ultimately won the election.\n2020: Indigenous voice to government.\nOn 15 January 2020, it was announced that Kennett would be one of the members of the National Co-design Group of the Indigenous voice to government.\nLife after politics.\nIn 2000, Kennett became the inaugural chairman of beyondblue (the National Depression Initiative), a body that was largely formed by the efforts of the Victorian State Government. On 24 June 2008, he announced that he would be stepping down from his role at beyondblue at the end of 2010. This did not happen. After 17 years as the chair of beyondblue, he stood down in 2017, handing the reins to former PM Julia Gillard. He stated \"beyondblue is part of my DNA, outside my family, it has been my most important role.\nKennett has previously served on the boards of Australian Seniors Finance, a reverse mortgage company, and SelecTV, which was a satellite television group.\nKennett has said in an interview that he rarely thinks about the media or \"bloody history\", though he regrets the \"disastrous\" introduction of the Metcard ticketing system for trains and trams.\nKennett angered gay rights groups in July 2008 when he supported the Bonnie Doon Football Club in their sacking of trainer Ken Campagnolo for being bisexual; and compared homosexuality to pedophilia. Anti-discrimination campaigner Gary Burns pursued an action in the NSW Administrative Decisions Tribunal against Kennett for making the following statement:\n\"The club felt that once this had been pointed out and you had this gentleman there who was obviously close to young men \u2013 massaging young men \u2013 it ran an unnecessary risk, and that's why it decided it was best that he not perform those duties again. So the club was trying to do the right thing,\"\nThe case was dropped due to Gary Burns' lack of funds to pursue the case.\nHawthorn FC presidency.\nOn 14 December 2005, Kennett was made president of Hawthorn Football Club, taking over from Ian Dicker.\nFollowing the exit of the St Kilda Football Club from the Tasmanian AFL market in 2006, Kennett was president when the Hawthorn Football Club negotiated a five-year sponsorship deal with the Tasmanian state government. The sponsorship deal was worth an estimated $12 million for which the Tasmanian government bought naming rights to the club's guernsey, and the HFC committed to playing an agreed number of pre-season and four regular season \"home games\" at York Park.\nKennett was instrumental in Hawthorn's 2007 5-year business plan titled \"five2fifty\", the core idea being that in the next \"five\" years the club will target to win \"2\" premierships and have \"fifty\" thousand members. As part of the plan, the football club wants to be seen as the most professional club in the AFL, and places great emphasis on the welfare of the people associated with the club.\nFollowing Hawthorn's 2008 AFL Grand Final victory over Geelong, Kennett claimed that the Cats \"lacked the mentality to defeat Hawthorn\", this being in reference to the Cats' inability to counter-attack the running game of the Hawks in the aforementioned Grand Final. Kennett's comments led to the subsequent eleven-match losing streak for Hawthorn against Geelong becoming known as the \"Kennett curse\".\nHe stepped down at the end of his second three-year term in 2011, he also changed the club's constitution so that presidents could only serve two 3-year terms.\nSecond stint.\nIn what Fox Footy described as a \"stunning return\", Kennett was announced as the president of the Hawthorn Football Club on 4 October 2017 following the sudden resignation of the incumbent president Richard Garvey. Garvey had taken criticism on the hiring and later sacking of club CEO Tracey Gaudry. Kennett subsequently appointed Justin Reeves as the club's new CEO.\nOn 4 October 2017 he announced that he would serve the position for a full 3-year term.\nSoon after his re-appointment, Kennett and the club released a vision statement outlining the future of the club up to 2050. The first five-year strategic plan titled 'Dare to be Different' will drive the club's priorities from 2018 to 2022.\nKennett said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Hawthorn we aren't ones to sit back and wait, we work hard to achieve and deliver exciting results, on and off the field. Our vision for our strategic plan, \"Dare to be Different\", encapsulates this as we continue to strive for excellence. \"We have set ourselves some ambitious targets but all are within our grasp if we continue to innovate, grow and forge new frontiers within the AFL industry.\"On 6 July 2021, Kennett and the Hawthorn board announced that they would not be renewing head coach Alastair Clarkson's contract following its expiry at the conclusion of the 2022 AFL Premiership season. It was announced that Box Hill Hawks and Hawthorn development coach, former player Sam Mitchell had been chosen by Kennett and the board to become the Hawthorn coach at the end of Clarkson's reign.\nChairman of The Original Juice Company.\nOn 12 December 2022, The Original Juice Company announced that it would appoint Kennett as Chairman and Non-Executive Director.\nHonours.\nIn the Australia Day Honours of 2005, Kennett received Australia's then highest civilian honour, when he was made a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC). The honour was for \"service to the Victorian Parliament and the introduction of initiatives for economic and social benefit, to business and commerce, and to the community in the development of the arts, sport and mental health awareness strategies.\"\nIn May 2000, he was also awarded an honorary doctorate \u2013 DBus (Honoris Causa) \u2013 by the University of Ballarat.\nMedia work.\nFor a brief period during 2002, Kennett was a radio presenter for Melbourne station 3AK, continuing an interest in mass communication which was also a feature of his premiership.\nSince 2010, Kennett has been a regular contributor to Neil Mitchell's 3AW radio program every Thursday, as a social commentator.\nOn 28 March 2013 it was announced that Kennett had joined the Seven television network as national political commentator which will involve him appearing on breakfast show Sunrise every Tuesday and on Seven news as required.\nOn 12 February 2017 Jeff Kennett engaged ex-Seven West Media employee on Twitter over leaked documents potentially breaching the company's own gag order on Amber Harrison.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63592", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63592", "title": "Tsarina Alexandra", "text": ""}
{"id": "63594", "revid": "1313674387", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63594", "title": "Joan Kirner", "text": "Premier of Victoria from 1990 to 1992\nJoan Elizabeth Kirner (\"n\u00e9e\" Hood; 20 June 1938 \u2013 1 June 2015) was an Australian politician who was the 42nd Premier of Victoria, serving from 1990 to 1992. A Labor Party member of the Parliament of Victoria from 1982 to 1994, she was a member of the Legislative Council before later winning a seat in the Legislative Assembly. Kirner was a minister and briefly deputy premier in the government of John Cain Jr., and succeeded him as premier following his resignation. She was Australia's third female head of government and second female premier, Victoria's first, and held the position until her party was defeated in a landslide at the 1992 state election.\nEarly life and career.\nBorn Joan Elizabeth Hood in Essendon, Melbourne, the only child of John Keith and Beryl Edith (\"n\u00e9e\" Cole) Hood, a fitter and turner and music teacher, respectively, Kirner was educated at state and private schools. She graduated in arts from the University of Melbourne, and completed a teaching qualification. She taught in state schools and became active in school and parents' organisations. In 1960 she married Ron Kirner, with whom she had three children. She was President of the Victorian Federation of States School Parents' Clubs, an influential education lobby from 1971 to 1977 and its executive officer from 1978 to 1982. She was appointed to several government advisory bodies on education.\nEntry into state politics.\nKirner joined the Labor Party in 1978 and became a member of its Socialist Left faction. In 1982, she was elected as a Labor member of the Victorian Legislative Council, the upper house of the Victorian Parliament. In 1985, she was elected to the Cabinet of John Cain Jr.'s Labor government and became Minister for Conservation, Forests and Lands. She proposed the Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act 1988, the first Australian legislation, which gave legal protection to rare species. While Minister, and in association with Heather Mitchell from the Victorian Farmers' Federation, Kirner was instrumental in the formation of the first Landcare groups.\nAt the 1988 election, Kirner shifted to the Legislative Assembly, becoming MP for Williamstown, and was promoted to the Education portfolio. In this portfolio, Kirner carried out a series of controversial reforms aimed at reducing what Kirner saw as the class-based inequity of the education system, culminating in a new system of assessment, the Victorian Certificate of Education.\nPremiership.\nLater in 1988 Kirner was elected deputy leader of the party and became Deputy Premier of Victoria. When Cain resigned after a collapse in his political support in August 1990, Kirner was elected Labor leader and thus became Victoria's first female Premier. By this time the Labor government was in deep crisis, with some of the state's financial institutions on the brink of insolvency, the budget deficit unsustainably high and growing and the Labor Party deeply divided on how to respond to the situation. The party hoped that the elevation of a popular woman as its new leader would improve its position, but Kirner never succeeded in gaining control of the crisis into which the state had plunged. The conservative-leaning Melbourne newspaper, the \"Herald Sun,\" reacted unfavourably to a Premier from the Socialist Left, dubbing her \"Mother Russia\". She was lampooned alternatively as a sinister commissar and as a frumpy housewife in a polka-dot dress. She seemed unfazed by the \"Herald Sun\" and gradually won some respect, though she was unable to improve the government's standing significantly.\nDuring 1991 and 1992, Kirner made several decisions to cut government spending and raise revenue to some extent, however her government failed to cut spending in many areas including education. Most of the Kirner Government attempts to cut spending were actively opposed by trade unions and some members of the government. The interest bill alone was $3.5\u00a0billion per year, the government sold off trains and trams and leased them back. Another decision was the sale of the state-owned State Bank of Victoria to the Commonwealth Bank in 1991.\nKirner went into 1992 knowing she faced a statutory general election, one which opinion polls gave her virtually no chance of winning. She waited as long as she could, finally calling an election for October. It was obvious as soon as the writs were dropped that Labor would not win a fourth term. Although she remained personally more popular than the Liberal Opposition Leader, Jeff Kennett, it was not nearly enough to overcome Victorians' growing anger at Labor. The Coalition's \"Guilty Party\" campaign did much to stoke this anger, targeting many Ministers in the Kirner Government and providing examples of concerns in their portfolios.\nThe campaign attracted controversy with ALP ads stating that if the Liberals won the election it would institute the same policies that were implemented in New Zealand by the then Fourth National Government.\nNew Zealand Prime Minister Jim Bolger responded in reference to the campaign, \"You know, they say that the show\u2019s never over until the fat lady sings. Well, I think it was her we heard warming up in the wings this week\".\nThe \"fat lady\" was in reference to Kirner being overweight. Bolger refused to apologise for this remark citing that he himself was overweight and did not want to make \"an international incident\" out of it.\nIt did, however, anger women from Bolger's own National Party.\nThe Coalition won the election in a landslide, scoring a 19-seat swing\u2014the second-worst defeat that a sitting government has ever suffered in Victoria. The Liberals actually won enough seats that they could have governed in their own right. Kirner remained Opposition Leader for a short period before resigning. She retired from Parliament in 1994 and was succeeded by one of her former aides for the electorate of Williamstown, future premier Steve Bracks.\nA portrait of Kirner painted by Adelaide artist Annette Bezor in 1994 hangs in Queen's Hall at Parliament House Victoria.\nLife after Parliament.\nAfter leaving Parliament, Kirner remained active in community affairs and politics. Initially this led her to a leading role in the Landcare movement. Subsequently, she devoted her energies to the Australian affiliate of EMILY's List Australia, an organisation which promotes pro-choice women's careers in politics. Kirner was one of the leaders of the movement in the Labor Party to adopt a policy of setting targets for the number of women candidates in winnable electorates. She repeatedly publicly supported candidates identified with her Socialist Left faction.\nFrom January 2006, Kirner was the Chair of the Ministerial Advisory Committee for Victorian Communities.\nKirner was also a board member of Museum Victoria, operators of Melbourne Museum, Royal Exhibition Building, Scienceworks Museum and Immigration Museum, Melbourne.\nKirner was a long-time advocate of abortion law reform to legalise abortion. She was an avid supporter of the Essendon Football Club.\nIn 1993, she famously appeared on \"The Late Show\" with colleague David White, MLC for Doutta Galla, in a musical skit performing Joan Jett's \"I Love Rock 'n' Roll\". This brief performance was covered nationally by the media.\nIn an August 2009 interview with GTV-9, Kirner revealed that she had suffered a heavy near-fatal fall at a meeting 18 months earlier. She also revealed that she had osteoporosis and was blind in one eye.\nDeath.\nIn August 2013, it was announced that Kirner had been diagnosed with esophageal cancer and was undergoing chemotherapy and radiation treatment. Kirner died on 1 June 2015, 19 days short of her 77th birthday.\nHonours.\nOn 26 January 1980, she was named a Member of the Order of Australia for her community service.\nOn 1 January 2001, Kirner was awarded the Centenary Medal. In the same year she was inducted onto the Victorian Honour Roll of Women.\nOn 11 June 2012, she was named a Companion of the Order of Australia for \"eminent service to the Parliament of Victoria and to the community through conservation initiatives, contributions to gender equality, the development of education and training programs and the pursuit of civil rights and social inclusion.\"\nIn May 2017, the Victorian Government recognised her legacy by offering 25 scholarships to young women, who will participate in the Joan Kirner Young and Emerging Women Leaders program.\nIn May 2019, the new specialist maternity and paediatric centre at Sunshine Hospital was named the Joan Kirner Women's and Children's Hospital.\nOne of two tunnel-boring machines (TBM) to be utilised on the Metro Tunnel project is named \"Joan\", in honour of Kirner. This TBM was officially launched on 15 August 2019.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPapers of Joan Kirner : manuscript, typescript, printed 1920 -2016.] at State Library of Victoria."}
{"id": "63595", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63595", "title": "Johann Christian G\u00fcnther", "text": "German poet (1695\u20131723)\nJohann Christian G\u00fcnther (8 April 1695 \u2013 15 March 1723) was a German poet from Striegau in Lower Silesia. After attending the gymnasium at Schweidnitz, he was sent in 1715 by his father, a country doctor, to study medicine at Wittenberg; but he was idle and dissipated, had no taste for the profession chosen for him, and came to a complete rupture with his family. In 1717 he went to Leipzig, where he was befriended by Johann Burkhard Mencke (1674\u20131732), who recognized his genius; and there he published a poem on the peace of Passarowitz (concluded between the German emperor and the Porte in 1718) which acquired him reputation. A recommendation from Mencke to Frederick Augustus II of Saxony, king of Poland, proved worse than useless, as G\u00fcnther appeared at the audience drunk. From that time he led an unsettled and dissipated life, sinking ever deeper into the slough of misery, until he died at Jena on March 15, 1723, when only in his 28th year. Goethe pronounces G\u00fcnther to have been a poet in the fullest sense of the term. His lyric poems as a whole give evidence of deep and lively sensibility, fine imagination, clever wit, and a true ear for melody and rhythm; but an air of cynicism is more or less present in most of them, and dull or vulgar witticisms are not infrequently found side by side with the purest inspirations of his genius.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63596", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63596", "title": "John Cain (41st Premier of Victoria)", "text": "Australian politician (1931\u20132019)\nJohn Cain (26 April 1931 \u2013 23 December 2019) was an Australian politician who was the 41st Premier of Victoria, in office from 1982 to 1990 as leader of the Labor Party. During his time as premier, reforms were introduced such as liberalised shop trading hours and liquor laws, equal opportunity initiatives, and occupational health and safety legislation.\nEarly life.\nCain was born in Northcote, Victoria, where his father, John Cain, the leader of the Australian Labor Party in Victoria from 1937 to 1957 and three times premier, was the local member. His mother ran a successful chain of millinery stores in the inner north of Melbourne.\nHe was educated at Bell Primary School, Northcote High School, Scotch College, and at the University of Melbourne, where he graduated in law in 1952. He practised law in suburban Melbourne, and was president of the Law Institute of Victoria in 1972\u201373. He was also a member of the Law Council of Australia and a member of the Australian Law Reform Commission.\nCain was 24 when the 1955 split in the Labor Party brought down his father's last government. He lost a preselection battle with Frank Wilkes for his father's seat of Northcote after his father died in 1957.\nDuring the 1960s, he was a member of the group, known as The Participants, which also included John Button, Richard McGarvie, Frank Costigan and Barry Jones, who opposed the left-wing group which controlled the Victorian Labor Party from 1955 onwards. In 1971 he supported moves by supporters of Gough Whitlam, led by Bob Hawke and others, that in 1971 brought about federal intervention in the Victorian branch and ended left-wing control. He became vice-chairman of the Victorian Labor Party in 1973. That group of Participants later became known as the Independents faction which predominantly voted with the Socialist Left.\nPolitical career.\nIn 1976, Cain was elected to the Victorian Legislative Assembly as MP for Bundoora. He became shadow Attorney-General under the leadership of Frank Wilkes. After Wilkes narrowly lost the 1979 election to the Liberal premier, Dick Hamer, Cain challenged him for the leadership, becoming leader in September 1981.\nHamer had been forced to resign a few months earlier and was succeeded by deputy premier Lindsay Thompson. However, the Liberals appeared tired and complacent after over a quarter-century in power, and Cain consistently got the better of Thompson. After waiting as long as he could, Thompson called an election for April 1982. At that election, Labor won a sweeping victory on a 17-seat swing\u2014the worst defeat that a non-Labor government has ever suffered in Victoria. Cain took office at the helm of the first Labor government in Victoria since the one led by his father 27 years earlier.\nFirst term as premier.\nDuring the first term of his government, Cain's government carried out many reforms to Victorian government, particularly in the areas of education, environment, law reform and public administration. The Government brought in nude beaches, legalised brothels, extended Saturday shop trading hours, extended nightclub hours, extended hotel hours and allowed Sunday VFL football and more gambling opportunities.\nCain was a Keynesian, opposed to the doctrines of economic rationalism, and he increased government spending in the hope of stimulating growth and investment. Following the lead of New South Wales premier Neville Wran, Cain demanded Government-owned enterprises pay dividends to the treasury, these dividends were increased every year forcing these enterprises to borrow to pay the dividend. Other schemes such as the Victorian Economic Development Corporation, and the Victorian Equity Trust promised good returns. These schemes worked so long as the national economy remained buoyant.\nControversially the Government of Victoria refused to approve the plans for the upgrade of VFL Park in 1982/1983 because the upgrade would threaten the Melbourne Cricket Ground's right to host the VFL Grand Final. Cain, who had played Australian football at Scotch College, made sure Waverley Park had no chance to succeed and the MCG remained the number one venue. Cain said that such a major event must be played in the centre of Melbourne, but his real reason for sabotaging Waverley Park was to look after the MCC. He saw his first VFL Grand Final with his father in 1942, and watched every one after that. He also kept the Australian Open in Melbourne by building the National Tennis Centre in Melbourne Park.\nCain forced exclusive male-only sporting clubs like the Melbourne Cricket Club and Victorian Racing Club (VRC) \u2013 private clubs on public lands \u2013 to accept women as full members. The VRC had notorious lines painted on the ground that women were forbidden to cross. He told the VRC that the lines had to go if they were to ever again receive government funding.\nOne of Cain's major achievements was the introduction of Victoria's Freedom of Information laws, making Victoria the first state to pass such laws.\nCain was also responsible for the appointment as Governor of Davis McCaughey, then aged 71, who served from 1986 to 1992. A highly respected theologian, McCaughey was a popular choice after the controversy surrounding the resignation of Rear Admiral Sir Brian Murray, following disputed accusations that he had improperly accepted free air travel.\nSecond term.\nHistorically, Labor had not been very successful in Victoria. However, Cain remained very popular with the Victorian electorate, and was easily elected to a second term in 1985 over the Liberals under Jeff Kennett, the first time a Labor government had been reelected in Victoria. Labor also won the Victorian Legislative Council seat of Nunawading after a tied vote forced the parties to draw from a hat to decide the winner, giving Labor control of the upper house for the first time ever. However, a fresh election was ordered by the Court of Disputed Returns after it was found that the Chief Electoral Officer should have cast deciding vote. The Liberals won the seat, and Labor lost its slim majority. Within a week the chairman of the Victorian Nuclear Disarmament Party lodged an official complaint about a deceptive NDP how to vote card handed out at the booths. It was claimed that Labor members were recognised handing out this card and that the allocation of preferences to the ALP on the card damaged the NDP.\nDuring its second term Cain's government began to run into difficulties with the state budget. The stock market crash of 1987 created a crisis which forced the government to cut spending, alienating some trade union supporters. The State Bank of Victoria, in particular its merchant banking arm Tricontinental, ran up a huge portfolio of bad loans, without adequate fiduciary supervision.\nProgress had created a vast amount of vacant inner-city land, with the introduction of containerisation in the shipping industry, the docks became inadequate for the new container ships. This made the docks within Victoria Dock obsolete as the principal docking area shifted closer to the mouth of the Yarra, and this was seen as a large urban blight by the Cain state government. The size of the Melbourne Docklands area meant that political influences were inescapable.\nThe Docklands was high on the government's agenda, however, the government at the time could not afford to initiate the investment for the project so the Docklands project stayed on the drawing board. There was a bid for the 1996 Olympic Games and another proposal was to turn the Docklands into a technology city known as the Multifunction Polis (MFP).\nThird term.\nThe Cain government was narrowly re-elected to a third term in 1988. The Liberals actually won a majority of the two-party vote. However, much of the Liberal margin was wasted on large majorities in their heartland. In contrast, Labor only lost one seat in the capital, and won enough marginal urban seats to cling to power by only two seats. Immediately after the election a huge shortfall in the government's workers' compensation scheme, WorkCare, was revealed.\nThe VEDC (Victorian Economic Development Corporation), established by the previous Liberal Government, and its sister, the Victorian Investment Corporation, were created to back new industries to replace outdated smokestack manufacturers. The VEDC collapsed under poor management and an absence of accountability after it had provided $450 million of loan and equity assistance to business.\nThis was followed by a budgetary crisis. The deputy premier, Robert Fordham, took some of the blame and resigned. This led to the elevation of Education Minister Joan Kirner to deputy premier.\nFor 33 days from 1 January 1990, 250 trams were parked in Melbourne's CBD streets by tram drivers. The Cain government wanted to save $24 million a year, by the introduction of a new Met Ticket system \u2013 or \"scratchies\" as they were colloquially known. Scratch tickets were supposed to save money by cutting 550 ticket conductor jobs and 550 train station staff. The trams did not move because the government shut down the power grid.\nIn February 1990, it was rumoured that Pyramid, a privately owned building society, was in difficulties. Ministers in Cain's government accepted assurances from Pyramid directors that the society's position was sound, and passed these assurances on to the public. In fact, it was insolvent. When it failed, causing thousands of investors and depositors to lose their money, the government was blamed by investors and the media. This was followed shortly after by the collapse of Tricontinental Bank, which threatened to bankrupt the Victorian Government-owned State Bank, Victoria's largest financial institution. The bank eventually had to be sold to the Commonwealth Bank, which was shortly thereafter privatised by the federal government.\nBy this time Cain was becoming frustrated at the reluctance of his government's caucus members to approve his plans for tax rises and spending cuts to reduce the growing budget deficit. He issued an ultimatum at the Labor Party Conference \u2013 \"back me or sack me.\" When the undermining of his position continued, he resigned on 7 August 1990. During an interview after his resignation, he remarked, \"We appointed a few dills but we weren't crook.\" Kirner was elected Labor leader in Cain's place and became the first female Premier of Victoria. By this time, Labor had bottomed out at 22 percent in opinion polling. Kirner was unable to make up the lost ground, and Labor was heavily defeated at the 1992 Victorian state election. Cain did not run in this election.\nLife after politics.\nCain did not seek publicity after his retirement from politics. He became a professorial fellow in politics at the University of Melbourne in 1991, and completed three books. In 2004 he surfaced in the media with a damning critique of the University of Melbourne's experimentation with what he said were risky financial ventures and what he argued was its departure from its public mission. \"Off Course: From Public Place to Marketplace at Melbourne University\" attracted a range of critical commentary. He was a regular political commentator on local radio. He remained active in the affairs of the Victorian Labor Party, and in 2011 he was critical of what he saw as the dominance of factions in the party, particularly the Labor Right.\nJohn Cain sat on the board of the Melbourne Cricket Ground Trust. He was also a member of the Patrons Council of the Epilepsy Foundation of Victoria. The John Cain Foundation is a think tank on political affairs of relevance to Victoria\nPersonal life.\nCain married Nancye Williams in 1955. He has two sons, John and James and a daughter, Joanne. Cain's son, also named John, is a judge of the County Court and also the State Coroner for Victoria.\nCain died on 23 December 2019, aged 88. He had suffered a severe stroke on 10 December and was being cared for at the Royal Melbourne Hospital. Cain remains the longest-lived Premier of Victoria.\nHe has a library named in his honour at Northcote High School, of which he was an alumnus.\nA State Memorial Service for the Honourable John Cain, former Premier of Victoria, was held on Monday 3 February 2020 at St Paul's Cathedral. On the same day, Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews announced that the Melbourne Multi Purpose Venue would be renamed \"John Cain Arena\" in recognition of the critical role that Cain played in keeping the Australian Open in Melbourne in the mid-1980s. The new name came into effect in December 2020.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63597", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63597", "title": "John Caine", "text": "British writer\nJohn Caine (born in Salford, Lancashire, England) is an author and playwright who was appointed MBE in 1987 for his services to theatre.\nBiography.\nCaine was educated at Salford Grammar School.\nAfter national service as Lieutenant in Malaya, Caine returned to Manchester where he became writer-in-residence and then Chairman of Trustees of the Salford Playhouse before moving to London.\nHis first novel \"A Nest of Singing Birds\" was awarded the prestigious Litchfield Prize. He has written plays for stage, radio and television, including \"Mister Lowry\" staged by the Bristol Old Vic and \"On the Knocker\", a play for radio and winner of an LBC Radio Drama Award.\nA journalist and broadcaster, Caine writes for national newspapers, and broadcasts regularly as London correspondent for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Radio Canada.\nHe is a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, and lives in London with his second wife, Carole. He has two children from his first marriage to Irene, Jonathan (b. 1962), who is a music manager and Naomi (b. 1964) who is a freelance writer and journalist.\nHe also has done commentary for BBC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63607", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63607", "title": "Van (disambiguation)", "text": "A van is a road vehicle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVan, VAN and other capitalizations may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63608", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63608", "title": "First Balkenende cabinet", "text": "Cabinet of the Netherlands, 2002 to 2003\nThe first Balkenende cabinet was the executive branch of the Netherlands government from 22 July 2002 until 27 May 2003. The cabinet was formed by the Christian-democratic Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), the nationalistic Pim Fortuyn List (LPF) and the conservative-liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) after the election of 2002. The cabinet was a right-wing coalition and had a substantial majority in the House of Representatives with Christian Democratic Leader Jan Peter Balkenende serving as Prime Minister. Prominent economist Eduard Bomhoff served as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Health, Welfare and Sport, while prominent Liberal politician Johan Remkes served as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations. \nThe cabinet served during the early unstable 2000s. Domestically, it had to deal with the fallout of the assassination of Pim Fortuyn, and internationally, with the start of the war on terror. The cabinet suffered several major internal conflicts including multiple cabinet resignations. The internal conflicts between the cabinet members of the Pim Fortuyn List led to the fall of the cabinet just 87 days into its term on 16 October 2002 and it continued in a demissionary capacity until it was replaced following the election of 2003.\nFormation.\nOn 17 May 2002 Queen Beatrix appointed Member of the Council of State Piet Hein Donner (CDA) as \"informateur\", to investigate the possibilities for a new government. A coalition between CDA, LPF and VVD was established relatively quickly, despite some initial resistance by the VVD. By 4 July a detailed coalition agreement had been drawn up and the Queen appointed Jan Peter Balkenende, the lijsttrekker for the CDA, as formateur to form a new cabinet. The cabinet was named on 16 July and was sworn in on 22 July. The first Balkenende cabinet comprised 14 ministers and 14 State Secretaries, with each post allocated to one of the coalition parties. Each of the ministers headed a department, with the exception of one \"minister without a portfolio\" to deal with \"foreigners policy and integration\", accommodated by the Ministry of Justice.\nTerm.\nIncidents and scandals.\nThe first Balkenende cabinet was very unstable from the beginning. Elections had been held in the very recent aftermath of the assassination of Pim Fortuyn, the leader of the newly established Pim Fortuyn List. Emotions in the Netherlands had run very high. The LPF was catapulted into enormous wins, but was unprepared for cabinet participation.\nOnly three of the 27 cabinet members had previous experience in government, leading to speculation that it wouldn't last long. As it turned out, personality conflicts and the general inexperience of LPF cabinet members led to the rapid implosion of the cabinet after a little more than two months.\nResignation of State Secretary Bijlhout.\nThe first scandal in the new government came only nine hours after it took office. Philomena Bijlhout, the State Secretary for Social Affairs and Employment and a member of the LPF, resigned after RTL 4 reported that she had been a member of a militia of Surinamese military dictator D\u00e9si Bouterse in 1982 and 1983. This was during the period when the militia had committed the political murders known as the \"December Murders\". Bijlhout, who was born in Suriname, had never denied being part of the militia, but claimed she'd left prior to the December Murders.\nPower struggles within the LPF and resignation of the cabinet.\nIn the months following the election, the LPF was beset by power struggles between various factions. A big incident was when Immigration and Integration Minister Hilbrand Nawijn declared to be in favour of the death penalty. The cabinet was officially opposed to the death penalty. Nawijn responded that he made his remark as leader of the LPF. The party in its turn declared that it was opposed to the death penalty. Nawijn was highly criticised when he declared that it was a personal remark, because it was normal that a minister in a coalition cabinet could make remarks as a party member outside his ministerial responsibility.\nIn September and October Herman Heinsbroek speculated in public about leading a new party and resigning from the government. This led to tension between him and his supporter Steven van Eyck and Bomhoff. VVD-leader Zalm tried to convince the LPF ministers to replace both Bomhoff and Heinsbroek but his real aim was to use these resignations to call for new elections and to repair the huge losses of his VVD party in the election after the murder of Fortuyn. Disregarding Bomhoff's warnings, the other LPF ministers took the bait and told Bomhoff and Heinsbroek to resign, which they did on 16 October. Immediately, Zalm broke his commitment to the remaining LPF ministers to accept replacements for Bomhoff and Heinsbroek and called for fresh elections. Meetings with the Queen did not take place until the week after the resignation, since she had travelled to Italy immediately after the funeral. On 21 October she accepted the resignation and new elections were called for 22 January 2003. The cabinet remained in place as a demissionary cabinet, without Bomhoff and Heinsbroek, until the elections and formation of the second Balkenende cabinet.\nOn 12 December 2002 Benk Korthals resigned as caretaker Minister of Defence after a commission of inquiry into building industry fraud accused him of giving false information to the Lower House during the previous cabinet. After resigning he said he still denied the allegations.\nAfter the ensuing new elections, the LPF lost two-thirds of its seats in the House of Representatives. The party was never a significant force in Dutch politics again, and dissolved in 2008.\nThe term of 87 days (counting the first and last days in full and excluding its \"caretaker\" function that continued for months afterwards) was the shortest since the fifth cabinet of Hendrikus Colijn (25 July 1939 \u2013 10 August 1939).\n\n\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63610", "revid": "18481282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63610", "title": "Peafowl", "text": "Group of large game birds\nPeafowl is a common name for two bird species of the genus \"Pavo\" and one species of the closely related genus \"Afropavo\" within the tribe Pavonini of the family Phasianidae (the pheasants and their allies). Male peafowl are referred to as peacocks, and female peafowl are referred to as peahens. Despite this, peacock is usually used to refer to both sexes, in common language.\nThe two Asiatic species are the blue or Indian peafowl originally from the Indian subcontinent, and the green peafowl from Southeast Asia. The third peafowl species, the Congo peafowl, is native only to the Congo Basin. Male peafowl are known for their piercing calls and their extravagant plumage. The latter is especially prominent in the Asiatic species, which have an eye-spotted \"tail\" or \"train\" of covert feathers, which they display as part of a courtship ritual.\nThe functions of the elaborate iridescent coloration and large \"train\" of peacocks have been the subject of extensive scientific debate. Charles Darwin suggested that they served to attract females, and the showy features of the males had evolved by sexual selection. More recently, Amotz Zahavi proposed in his handicap principle that these features acted as honest signals of the males' fitness, since less-fit males would be disadvantaged by the difficulty of surviving with such large and conspicuous structures.\nDescription.\nThe Indian peacock (\"Pavo cristatus\") has iridescent blue and green plumage, mostly metal-like blue and green. In both species, females are a little smaller than males in terms of weight and wingspan, but males are significantly longer due to the \"tail\", also known as a \"train\". The peacock train consists not of tail quill feathers but highly elongated upper tail coverts. These feathers are marked with eyespots, best seen when a peacock fans his tail. All species have a crest atop the head. The Indian peahen has a mixture of dull grey, brown, and green in her plumage. The female also displays her plumage to ward off female competition or signal danger to her young.\nMale green peafowls (\"Pavo muticus\") have green and bronze or gold plumage, and black wings with a sheen of blue. Unlike Indian peafowl, the green peahen is similar to the male, but has shorter upper tail coverts, a more coppery neck, and overall less iridescence. Both males and females have spurs.\nThe Congo peacock (\"Afropavo congensis\") male does not display his covert feathers, but uses his actual tail feathers during courtship displays. These feathers are much shorter than those of the Indian and green species, and the ocelli are much less pronounced. Females of the Indian and African species are dull grey and/or brown.\nChicks of both sexes in all the species are cryptically colored. They vary between yellow and tawny, usually with patches of darker brown or light tan and \"dirty white\" ivory.\nMature peahens have been recorded as suddenly growing typically male peacock plumage and making male calls. Research has suggested that changes in mature birds are due to a lack of estrogen from old or damaged ovaries, and that male plumage and calls are the default unless hormonally suppressed.\nIridescence and structural coloration.\nAs with many birds, vibrant iridescent plumage colors are not primarily pigments, but structural coloration. Optical interference of Bragg reflections, from regular, periodic nanostructures of the barbules (fiber-like components) of the feathers, produce the peacock's colors. Slight changes to the spacing of the barbules result in different colors. Brown feathers are a mixture of red and blue: one color is created by the periodic structure and the other is created by a Fabry\u2013P\u00e9rot interference peak from reflections from the outer and inner boundaries. Color derived from physical structure rather than pigment can vary with viewing angle, causing iridescence.\nCourtship.\nMost commonly, during a courtship display, the visiting peahen will stop directly in front of the peacock, thus providing her with the ability to assess the male at 90\u00b0 to the surface of the feather. Then, the male will turn and display his feathers about 45\u00b0 to the right of the sun's azimuth which allows the sunlight to accentuate the iridescence of his train. If the female chooses to interact with the male, he will then turn to face her and shiver his train so as to begin the mating process.\nEvolution.\nSexual selection.\nCharles Darwin suggested in \"The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex\" that peafowl plumage may have evolved through sexual selection:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many female progenitors of the peacock must, during a long line of descent, have appreciated this superiority; for they have unconsciously, by the continued preference for the most beautiful males, rendered the peacock the most splendid of living birds.\nAposematism and natural selection.\nIt has been suggested that a peacock's train, loud call, and fearless behavior have been formed by natural selection (with or without sexual selection too), and served as an aposematic display to intimidate predators and rivals. This hypothesis is designed to explain Takahashi's observations that in Japan, neither reproductive success nor physical condition correlate with the train's length, symmetry or number of eyespots.\nFemale choice.\nMultiple hypotheses involving female choice have been posited. One hypothesis is that females choose mates with good genes. Males with more exaggerated secondary sexual characteristics, such as bigger, brighter peacock trains, tend to have better genes in the peahen's eyes. These better genes directly benefit her offspring, as well as her fitness and reproductive success.\nRunaway selection is another hypothesis. In runaway sexual selection, linked genes in males and females code for sexually dimorphic traits in males, and preference for those traits in females. The close spatial association of alleles for loci involved in the train in males, and for preference for more exuberant trains in females, on the chromosome (linkage disequilibrium) causes a positive feedback loop that exaggerates both the male traits and the female preferences.\nAnother hypothesis is sensory bias, in which females have a preference for a trait in a non-mating context that becomes transferred to mating, such as Merle Jacobs' food-courtship hypothesis, which suggests that peahens are attracted to peacocks for the resemblance of their eye spots to blue berries.\nMultiple causalities for the evolution of female choice are also possible.\nThe peacock's train and iridescent plumage are perhaps the best-known examples of traits believed to have arisen through sexual selection, though with some controversy. Male peafowl erect their trains to form a shimmering fan in their display for females. Marion Petrie tested whether or not these displays signalled a male's genetic quality by studying a feral population of peafowl in Whipsnade Wildlife Park in southern England. The number of eyespots in the train predicted a male's mating success. She was able to manipulate this success by cutting the eyespots off some of the males' tails: females lost interest in pruned males and retained interest in untrimmed ones. Males with fewer eyespots, thus having lower mating success, suffered from greater predation. She allowed females to mate with males with differing numbers of eyespots, and reared the offspring in a communal incubator to control for differences in maternal care. Chicks fathered by more ornamented males weighed more than those fathered by less ornamented males, an attribute generally associated with better survival rate in birds. These chicks were released into the park and recaptured one year later. Those with heavily ornamented feathers were better able to avoid predators and survive in natural conditions. Thus, Petrie's work shows correlations between tail ornamentation, mating success, and increased survival ability in both the ornamented males and their offspring.\nFurthermore, peafowl and their sexual characteristics have been used in the discussion of the causes for sexual traits. Amotz Zahavi used the excessive tail plumes of male peafowls as evidence for his \"handicap principle\". Since these trains are likely to be deleterious to an individual's survival (as their brilliance makes them more visible to predators and their length hinders escape from danger), Zahavi argued that only the fittest males could survive the handicap of a large train. Thus, a brilliant train serves as an honest indicator for females that these highly ornamented males are good at surviving for other reasons, so are preferable mates. This theory may be contrasted with Ronald Fisher's hypothesis that male sexual traits are the result of initially arbitrary aesthetic selection by females.\nIn contrast to Petrie's findings, a seven-year Japanese study of free-ranging peafowl concluded that female peafowl do not select mates solely on the basis of their trains. Mariko Takahashi found no evidence that peahens preferred peacocks with more elaborate trains (such as with more eyespots), a more symmetrical arrangement, or a greater length. Takahashi determined that the peacock's train was not the universal target of female mate choice, showed little variance across male populations, and did not correlate with male physiological condition. Adeline Loyau and her colleagues responded that alternative and possibly central explanations for these results had been overlooked. They concluded that female choice might indeed vary in different ecological conditions.\nPlumage colours as attractants.\nA peacock's copulation success rate depends on the colours of his eyespots (ocelli) and the angle at which they are displayed. The angle at which the ocelli are displayed during courtship is more important in a peahen's choice of males than train size or number of ocelli. Peahens pay careful attention to the different parts of a peacock's train during his display. The lower train is usually evaluated during close-up courtship, while the upper train is more of a long-distance attraction signal. Actions such as train rattling and wing shaking also kept the peahens' attention.\nRedundant signal hypothesis.\nAlthough an intricate display catches a peahen's attention, the redundant signal hypothesis also plays a crucial role in keeping this attention on the peacock's display. The redundant signal hypothesis explains that whilst each signal that a male projects is about the same quality, the addition of multiple signals enhances the reliability of that mate. This idea also suggests that the success of multiple signalling is not only due to the repetitiveness of the signal, but also of multiple receivers of the signal. In the peacock species, males congregate a communal display during breeding season and the peahens observe. Peacocks first defend their territory through intra-sexual behaviour, defending their areas from intruders. They fight for areas within the congregation to display a strong front for the peahens. Central positions are usually taken by older, dominant males, which influences mating success. Certain morphological and behavioural traits come in to play during inter and intra-sexual selection, which include train length for territory acquisition and visual and vocal displays involved in mate choice by peahens.\nBehaviour.\nPeafowl are forest birds that nest on the ground, but roost in trees. They are terrestrial feeders. All species of peafowl are believed to be polygamous. In common with other members of the Galliformes, the males possess metatarsal spurs or \"thorns\" on their legs used during intraspecific territorial fights with some other members of their kind.\nIn courtship, vocalisation stands to be a primary way for peacocks to attract peahens. Some studies suggest that the intricacy of the \"song\" produced by displaying peacocks proved to be impressive to peafowl. Singing in peacocks usually occurs just before, just after, or sometimes during copulation.\nDiet.\nPeafowl are omnivores and mostly eat plants, flower petals, seed heads, insects and other arthropods, reptiles, and amphibians. Wild peafowl look for their food scratching around in leaf litter either early in the morning or at dusk. They retreat to the shade and security of the woods for the hottest portion of the day. These birds are not picky and will eat almost anything they can fit in their beak and digest. They actively hunt insects like ants, crickets and termites; millipedes; and other arthropods and small mammals. Indian peafowl also eat small snakes.\nDomesticated peafowl may also eat bread and cracked grain such as oats and corn, cheese, cooked rice and sometimes cat food. It has been noticed by keepers that peafowl enjoy protein-rich food including larvae that infest granaries, different kinds of meat and fruit, as well as vegetables including dark leafy greens, broccoli, carrots, beans, beets, and peas.\nCultural significance.\nIndian peafowl.\nThe peafowl is native to India and significant in its culture. In Hinduism, the Indian peacock is the mount of the god of war, Kartikeya, and the warrior goddess Kaumari, and is also depicted around the goddess Santoshi. During a war with Asuras, Kartikeya split the demon king Surapadman in half. Out of respect for his adversary's prowess in battle, the god converted the two halves into an integral part of himself. One half became a peacock serving as his mount, and the other a rooster adorning his flag. The peacock displays the divine shape of Omkara when it spreads its magnificent plumes into a full-blown circular form. In the Tantric traditions of Hinduism the goddess Tvarita is depicted with peacock feathers. A peacock feather also adorns the crest of the god Krishna.\nChandragupta Maurya, the founder of the Mauryan Empire, was born an orphan and raised by a family farming peacocks. According to the Buddhist tradition, the ancestors of the Maurya kings had settled in a region where peacocks (\"mora\" in Pali) were abundant. Therefore, they came to be known as \"Moriyas\", literally, \"belonging to the place of peacocks\". According to another Buddhist account, these ancestors built a city called Moriya-nagara (\"Moriya-city\"), which was so called, because it was built with the \"bricks coloured like peacocks' necks\". After conquering the Nanda Empire and defeating the Seleucid Empire, the Chandragupta dynasty reigned uncontested during its time. Its royal emblem remained the peacock until Emperor Ashoka changed it to a lion, as seen in the Lion Capital of Ashoka, as well in his edicts. The peacock continued to represent elegance and royalty in India during medieval times; for instance, the Mughal seat of power was called the Peacock Throne.\nThe peacock is represented in both the Burmese and Sinhalese zodiacs. To the Sinhalese people, the peacock is the third animal of the zodiac of Sri Lanka.\nPeacocks (often a symbol of pride and vanity) were believed to deliberately consume poisonous substances in order to become immune to them, as well as to make the colours of their resplendent plumage all the more vibrant \u2013 seeing as so many poisonous flora and fauna are so colourful due to aposematism, this idea appears to have merit. The Buddhist deity Mahamayuri is depicted seated on a peacock. Peacocks are seen supporting the throne of Amitabha, the ruby red sunset coloured archetypal Buddha of Infinite Light.\nIndia adopted the peacock as its national bird in 1963 and it is one of the national symbols of India.\nMiddle East.\nYazidism.\nTaw\u00fbs\u00ee Melek (lit.\u2009'Peacock Angel') one of the central figures of the Yazidi religion, is symbolized with a peacock. In Yazidi creation stories, before the creation of this world, God created seven Divine Beings, of whom Taw\u00fbs\u00ee Melek was appointed as the leader. God assigned all of the world's affairs to these seven Divine Beings, also often referred to as the Seven Angels or heft sirr (\"the Seven Mysteries\").\nIn Yazidism, the peacock is believed to represent the diversity of the world, and the colourfulness of the peacock's feathers is considered to represent of all the colours of nature. The feathers of the peacock also symbolize sun rays, from which come light, luminosity and brightness. The peacock opening the feathers of its tail in a circular shape symbolizes the sunrise.\nConsequently, due to its holiness, Yazidis are not allowed to hunt and eat the peacock, ill-treat it or utter bad words about it. Images of the peacock are also found drawn around the sanctuary of Lalish and on other Yazidi shrines and holy sites, homes, as well as religious, social, cultural and academic centres.\nMandaeism.\nIn \"The Baptism of Hibil Ziwa\", the Mandaean uthra and emanation Yushamin is described as a peacock.\nAncient Greece.\nAncient Greeks believed that the flesh of peafowl did not decay after death, so it became a symbol of immortality. In Hellenistic imagery, the Greek goddess Hera's chariot was pulled by peacocks, birds not known to Greeks before the conquests of Alexander. Alexander's tutor, Aristotle, refers to it as \"the Persian bird\". When Alexander saw the birds in India, he was so amazed at their beauty that he threatened the severest penalties for any man who slew one. Claudius Aelianus writes that there were peacocks in India, larger than anywhere else.\nOne myth states that Hera's servant, the hundred-eyed Argus Panoptes, was instructed to guard the woman-turned-cow, Io. Hera had transformed Io into a cow after learning of Zeus's interest in her. Zeus had the messenger of the gods, Hermes, kill Argus through eternal sleep and free Io. According to Ovid, to commemorate her faithful watchman, Hera had the hundred eyes of Argus preserved forever, in the peacock's tail.\nChristianity.\nThe symbolism was adopted by early Christianity, thus many early Christian paintings and mosaics show the peacock. The peacock is still used in the Easter season, especially in the east. The \"eyes\" in the peacock's tail feathers can symbolise the all-seeing Christian God, the Church, or angelic wisdom. The emblem of a pair of peacocks drinking from a vase is used as a symbol of the eucharist and the resurrection, as it represents the Christian believer drinking from the waters of eternal life. The peacock can also symbolise the cosmos if one interprets its tail with its many \"eyes\" as the vault of heaven dotted by the sun, moon, and stars. Due to the adoption by Augustine of the ancient idea that the peacock's flesh did not decay, the bird was again associated with immortality. In Christian iconography, two peacocks are often depicted either side of the Tree of Life.\nThe symbolic association of peacock feathers with the wings of angels led to the \nbelief that the waving of such liturgical fans resulted in an automated emission of \nprayers. This affinity between peacocks' and angels' feathers was also expressed in \nother artistic media, including paintings of angels with peacock feather wings\nJudaism.\nAmong Ashkenazi Jews, the golden peacock is a symbol for joy and creativity, with quills from the bird's feathers being a metaphor for a writer's inspiration.\nRenaissance.\nThe peacock motif was revived in the Renaissance iconography that unified Hera and Juno, and on which European painters focused.\nContemporary.\nIn 1956, John J. Graham created an abstraction of an 11-feathered peacock logo for American broadcaster NBC. This brightly hued peacock was adopted due to the increase in colour programming. NBC's first colour broadcasts showed only a still frame of the colourful peacock. The emblem made its first on-air appearance on 22 May 1956. The current, six-feathered logo debuted on 12 May 1986.\nPeacocks are a popular ornamental animal due to their beauty.\nBreeding and colour variations.\nHybrids between Indian peafowl and Green peafowl are called \"Spaldings\", after the first person to successfully hybridise them, Keith Spalding. Spaldings with a high-green phenotype do much better in cold temperatures than the cold-intolerant green peafowl while still looking like their green parents. Plumage varies between individual spaldings, with some looking far more like green peafowl and some looking far more like blue peafowl, though most visually carry traits of both.\nIn addition to the wild-type \"blue\" colouration, several hundred variations in colour and pattern are recognised as separate morphs of the Indian Blue among peafowl breeders. Pattern variations include solid-wing/black shoulder (the black and brown stripes on the wing are instead one solid colour), pied, white-eye (the ocelli in a male's eye feathers have white spots instead of black), and silver pied (a mostly white bird with small patches of colour). Colour variations include white, purple, Buford bronze, opal, midnight, charcoal, jade, and taupe, as well as the sex-linked colours purple, cameo, peach, and Sonja's Violeta. Additional colour and pattern variations are first approved by the United Peafowl Association to become officially recognised as a morph among breeders. Alternately-coloured peafowl are born differently coloured than wild-type peafowl, and though each colour is recognisable at hatch, their peachick plumage does not necessarily match their adult plumage.\nOccasionally, peafowl appear with white plumage. Although albino peafowl do exist, this is quite rare, and almost all white peafowl are not albinos; they have a genetic condition called leucism, which causes pigment cells to fail to migrate from the neural crest during development. Leucistic peafowl can produce pigment but not deposit the pigment to their feathers, resulting in a blue-grey eye colour and the complete lack of colouration in their plumage. Pied peafowl are affected by partial leucism, where only some pigment cells fail to migrate, resulting in birds that have colour but also have patches absent of all colour; they, too, have blue-grey eyes. By contrast, true albino peafowl would have a complete lack of melanin, resulting in irises that look red or pink. Leucistic peachicks are born yellow and become fully white as they mature.\nThe black-shouldered or Japanned mutation was initially considered as a subspecies of the Indian peafowl (\"P. c. nigripennis\") (or even a separate species (\"P. nigripennis\")) and was a topic of some interest during Darwin's time. Others had doubts about its taxonomic status, but the English naturalist and biologist Charles Darwin (1809\u20131882) presented firm evidence for it being a variety under domestication, which treatment is now well established and accepted. It being a colour variation rather than a wild species was important for Darwin to prove, as otherwise it could undermine his theory of slow modification by natural selection in the wild. It is, however, only a case of genetic variation within the population. In this mutation, the adult male is melanistic with black wings.\nGastronomy.\nIn ancient Rome, peafowl were served as a delicacy. The dish was introduced there in approximately 35 B.C. The poet Horace ridiculed the eating of peafowl, saying they tasted like chicken. Peafowl eggs were also valued. Gaius Petronius in his Satyricon also mocked the ostentation and snobbery of eating peafowl and their eggs.\nDuring the Medieval period, various types of fowl were consumed as food, with the poorer populations (such as serfs) consuming more common birds, such as chicken. However, the more wealthy gentry were privileged to eat less usual foods, such as swan, and even peafowl were consumed. On a king's table, a peacock would be for ostentatious display as much as for culinary consumption.\nFrom the 1864 \"The English and Australian Cookery Book\", regarding occasions and preparation of the bird:\nInstead of plucking this bird, take off the skin with the greatest care, so that the feathers do not get detached or broken. Stuff it with what you like, as truffles, mushrooms, livers of fowls, bacon, salt, spice, thyme, crumbs of bread, and a bay-leaf. Wrap the claws and head in several folds of cloth, and envelope the body in buttered paper. The head and claws, which project at the two ends, must be basted with water during the cooking, to preserve them, and especially the tuft. Before taking it off the spit, brown the bird by removing the paper. Garnish with lemon and flowers. If to come on the table cold, place the bird in a wooden trencher, in the middle of which is fixed a wooden skewer, which should penetrate the body of the bird, to keep it upright. Arrange the claws and feathers in a natural manner, and the tail like a fan, supported with wire. No ordinary cook can place a peacock on the table properly. This ceremony was reserved, in the times of chivalry, for the lady most distinguished for her beauty. She carried it, amidst inspiring music, and placed it, at the commencement of the banquet, before the master of the house. At a nuptial feast, the peacock was served by the maid of honour, and placed before the bride for her to consume.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63611", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63611", "title": "Peahen", "text": ""}
{"id": "63615", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63615", "title": "Helene (moon)", "text": "Trojan moon of Saturn\nHelene is a moon of Saturn. It was discovered by Pierre Laques and Jean Lecacheux in 1980 from ground-based observations at Pic du Midi Observatory, and was designated S/1980 S 6. In 1988 it was officially named after Helen of Troy, who was the granddaughter of Cronus (Saturn) in Greek mythology. Helene is also designated Saturn XII (12), which it was given in 1982, and Dione B, because it is co-orbital with Dione and located in its leading Lagrangian point (L4). It is one of four known trojan moons.\nExploration.\nHelene was initially observed from Earth in 1980, and \"Voyager\" flybys of Saturn in the early 1980s allowed much closer views. The \"Cassini\u2013Huygens\" mission, which went into orbit around Saturn in 2004, provided still better views, and allowed more in-depth analysis of Helene, including views of the surface under different lighting conditions. Some of the closest images of Helene to date are from the \"Cassini\" spacecraft's 1800\u00a0km flyby on March 3, 2010, and another very successful imaging sequence occurred in June 2011. There were many other approaches over the course of the \"Cassini\" mission.\nGeology.\nImages of Helene taken by the Cassini spacecraft, with resolutions of up to 24 meters per pixel, show a landscape characterized by broad 2\u201310km scale depressions with interior slopes no greater than 12\u00b0. These basins are likely the decayed remains of old impact craters.\nThin, elongated km-scale raised grooves trace the slopes of many of Helene's basins, likely representing mass flow features and indicating that the moon is undergoing active geologic processes such as mass-wasting and erosion. Digital elevation models suggest that the grooves have a positive relief of between 50 and 100 meters. Helene has more than 70 craters, while it shows a bimodal appearance\u2014the heavily cratered trailing hemisphere exhibits a crater density ten times greater than the smooth-looking leading hemisphere.\nSimulation models show that the time series of surface activity on Helene is chaotic.\nSurface material.\nHelene's surface material is of relatively high reflectance, suggesting grain sizes between 1 and 100 micrometers. Small craters appear somewhat buried, suggesting recent accretional processes of some sort.\nStress-strain laboratory testing of impact-gardened lunar regolith samples shows that at low packing densities, they behave like Non-Newtonian \u201cBingham\u201d materials, i.e., having the plastic quality of candle-wax and glaciers. This observation suggests that Helene's snow-like surface material may behave as a non-Newtonian mass flow and could be primarily responsible for the visible flow patterns seen on its low-gravity surface.\nSelected observations.\nMostly raw greyscale images with near infrared or ultraviolet channels.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nSources"}
{"id": "63617", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63617", "title": "Cannibal (fighting)", "text": ""}
{"id": "63618", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63618", "title": "Botanist", "text": ""}
{"id": "63619", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63619", "title": "List of botanists", "text": "This is a list of botanists who have Wikipedia articles, in alphabetical order by surname. The List of botanists by author abbreviation is mostly a list of plant taxonomists because an author receives a standard abbreviation only when that author originates a new plant name.\nBotany is one of the few sciences which has had, since the Middle Ages, substantial participation by women.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also\nA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nB.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nD.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nE.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nF.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nG.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nH.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nK.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nN.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nO.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nP.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nR.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nV.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nW.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nZ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "63620", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63620", "title": "Vipava, Vipava", "text": "Vipava (; , ) is a town in western Slovenia. It is the largest settlement and the seat of the Municipality of Vipava. Vipava is located near the numerous sources of the Vipava River, in the upper Vipava Valley, above sea level. Historically, it is part of the traditional region of Inner Carniola, but it is now generally regarded as part of the Slovenian Littoral.\nHistory.\nThe region around the town was probably settled by the Illyrians and Celts in the pre-Roman era. Some trace the name Vipava to the Celtic root \"vip\" (river). In 394, the Battle of the Frigidus took place in the vicinity of the town. In the late 6th century, Slavic tribes, ancestors of modern Slovenes, settled the area. In the late 8th century, the Vipava Valley was included in the Frankish Empire and the Christianization of Slovenes started.\nIn the Middle Ages, the valley was first included in the Duchy of Friuli. Between 1340 and 1355, Vipava and its surroundings were constantly contended between the Counts of Gorizia, the Patriarches of Aquileia and the Habsburg Duchy of Carniola. Modern Vipava was first mentioned in 1367. In the same period, it was finally included in the County of Gorizia. After a short Venetian interim, Vipava fell under the Habsburg domain in 1501 and in 1535 it was included in Carniola. In the mid-16th century, it emerged as an important center of the Protestant Reformation. It remained part of Carniola until 1918, when it was occupied by the Italian troops and annexed to the Kingdom of Italy.\nIn the period between 1922 and 1943, it was subjected to a violent policy of Fascist Italianization. Many locals joined the militant antifascist organization TIGR. During World War II, the entire area became an important center of Partisan resistance. In 1945, it was liberated by Partisan troops and in 1947 it became part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and of independent Slovenia in 1991.\nMass graves.\nVipava is the site of five known mass graves from the end of or after the Second World War. The Cemetery Mass Grave () is located next to the southwest wall of the Vipava Cemetery. It contained the remains of eight Slovene civilians murdered by the Yugoslav Army on July 14, 1945. The identities of six victims are known. The remains of six were exhumed in 1999 and reinterred in the cemetery. The Military Cemetery Mass Grave () is located by the west edge of the First World War military cemetery. It contains the remains of 15 Chetnik soldiers killed in late April or early May 1945. Three additional graves contain the remains of German prisoners of war that died of typhus at the nearby prison camp in 1945. The Vipava Field Mass Grave () extends south of the dairy to Mo\u010dilnik Creek. It is partially covered by the freeway and contains a large number of remains. The Princova Baronovka Mass Grave () lies in the southern part of the town. The Bevk Street Mass Grave () is located at Bevk Streek () no. 16. Human remains were unearthed during excavations for the building there.\nEconomy.\nVipava is an important agricultural center of western Slovenia. It is renowned for its wine production. Tourism is also important, as well as small and medium-sized businesses. Many locals work in the nearby town of Ajdov\u0161\u010dina.\nLanguage, culture, and religion.\nThe vast majority of the people of Vipava, around 93%, are Slovenes. Others are mostly descendants of immigrants from other regions of the former Yugoslavia. Over 96% of the people use Slovene as their first language; among the remaining 4%, most speak Bosnian as their first language. The native inhabitants speak a variant of the Inner Carniolan dialect of Slovene.\nAround 77% of the people are Catholic, a little less than 1% are adherents of Sunni Islam, and others are irreligious. The parish church in the town is dedicated to Saint Stephen and belongs to the Diocese of Koper.\nNotable people.\nNotable people that were born or lived in Vipava include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63621", "revid": "4977632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63621", "title": "Pseudo-science", "text": ""}
{"id": "63623", "revid": "34218277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63623", "title": "Brandywine", "text": "Brandywine may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63624", "revid": "50642732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63624", "title": "Ibiza", "text": "Spanish island in the Mediterranean Sea\nIbiza ( (US) (UK); ; ; see below) or Iviza is a Spanish island in the Mediterranean Sea off the eastern coast of the Iberian Peninsula. It is 150 kilometres (93 miles) from the city of Valencia. It is the third largest of the Balearic Islands in area, but the second-largest by population. Its largest settlements are Ibiza Town (, or simply ), Santa Eul\u00e0ria des Riu, and Sant Antoni de Portmany. Its highest point, called Sa Talaiassa (or Sa Talaia), is above sea level.\nIbiza is well known for its nightlife and electronic dance music club scene in the summer, which attract large numbers of tourists. The island's government and the Spanish Tourist Office have worked toward promoting more family-oriented tourism.\nIbiza is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Ibiza and the nearby island of Formentera to its south are called the Pine Islands, or \"Pityuses\".\nNames and pronunciation.\nIn standard British English, the name is usually pronounced in an approximation of the Peninsular Spanish variant ( ). In American English, the pronunciation is generally closer to the Latin American Spanish variant ( , , and so forth), and the first syllable is never pronounced as a homophone of \"eye\".\nPhoenician colonists called the island \"Ibossim\" or \"Iboshim\" (cf. Hebrew \u05d0\u05b4\u05d9\u05be\u05d1\u05bc\u05d5\u05b9\u05e9\u05b5\u05c2\u05dd, \"Fragrance Island\"), likely due the abundance of aromatic plants on the island. Other speculation is (, \u02beYB\u0160M, \"Dedicated to Bes\"). It was later known to Romans as .\nThe Greeks called the two islands of Ibiza and Formentera the (, probably meaning \"Pine-Covered Islands\"). The Catalan name and the Spanish name retain this Greek root.\nIts name in Catalan is () in most dialects, but () in a minority of dialects including Valencian. The Spanish name is ( in Spain / in Latin America).\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries the island was known to the British and especially to the Royal Navy as \"Ivica\", possibly from an older Spanish orthography with \u27e8\u00e7\u27e9.\nHistory.\nIn 654 BC, Phoenician settlers founded a port on Ibiza. With the decline of Phoenicia after the Assyrian invasions, Ibiza came under the control of Carthage, also a former Phoenician colony. The island produced dye, salt, fish sauce (garum) and wool.\nA shrine with offerings to the goddess Tanit was established in the cave at Es Cuieram, and the rest of the Balearic Islands entered Eivissa's commercial orbit after 400 BC. Ibiza was a major trading post along the Mediterranean routes. Ibiza began establishing its own trading stations along the nearby Balearic island of Mallorca (Majorca), such as \"Na Guardis\", and \"Na Galera\" where numerous Balearic mercenaries hired on, no doubt as slingers, to fight for Carthage.\nDuring the Second Punic War, the island was assaulted by the two Scipio brothers (Publius and Gnaeus) in 217 BC but remained loyal to Carthage. With the Carthaginian military failing on the Iberian mainland, Ibiza was last used, 205 B.C, by the fleeing Carthaginian general Mago to gather supplies and men before sailing to Menorca and then to Liguria. Ibiza negotiated a favorable treaty (Foedus) with the Romans, which spared Ibiza from further destruction and allowed it to continue its Carthaginian-Punic institutions, traditions and even coinage well into the Empire days, when it became an official Roman municipality.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire and a brief period of first Vandal and then Byzantine rule, the island was conquered by the Muslims in 902. The few remaining locals converted to Islam and Berber settlers came in. Under Islamic rule, Ibiza (Yabisah) came in close contact with the city of D\u00e9nia\u2014the closest port in the nearby Iberian peninsula, located in the Valencian Community\u2014and the two areas were administered jointly by the Taifa of D\u00e9nia for some time (11th century).\nIbiza, together with the islands of Formentera and Menorca, were invaded by the Norwegian King Sigurd I of Norway in the spring of 1110 on his crusade to Jerusalem. The king had previously conquered the cities of Sintra, Lisbon and Alc\u00e1cer do Sal and given them over to Christian rulers, in an effort to weaken the Muslim grip on the Iberian peninsula. King Sigurd continued to Sicily where he visited King Roger II of Sicily.\nThe island was conquered for the Crown of Aragon in 1235. The local Muslim population was deported, as was the case with neighboring Mallorca and elsewhere, and Christians arrived from Girona. The island maintained its own self-government in several forms until 1715, when King Philip V of Spain abolished the local government's autonomy. The arrival of democracy in the late 1970s led to the Statute of Autonomy of the Balearic Islands. Today, the island is part of the Balearic Autonomous Community, along with Mallorca, Menorca and Formentera.\nDevelopment.\nSince the early days of mass tourism on the island, there have been a large number of development projects ranging from successful ventures, such as the super clubs at Space and Privilege, to failed development projects, such as Josep Llu\u00eds Sert's abandoned hotel complex at Cala D'en Serra, the half-completed and now demolished \"Idea\" nightclub in Sant Antoni, and the ruins of a huge restaurant/nightclub in the hills near Sant Josep called \"Festival Club\" that only operated for three summer seasons in the early 1970s. The transient nature of club-oriented tourism is most obvious in these ruins scattered all over the island. Local artist Irene de Andr\u00e8s has tackled the difficult issue of the impact of mass tourism on the island local landscapes, both natural and cultural, in an ongoing project called \"Donde nada ocurre\" (Where nothing happens). In 2013, Ibiza property prices generally remained above market value, and many of the development projects on the island have now been completed or continue, as well as some new projects announced at the end of 2012. Since 2009, Ibiza has received an increase in the number of tourists every year, with nearly 6 million people travelling through Ibiza Airport in 2012. The summer season has become concentrated between June and September, focusing on the \"clubbing calendar\" which is currently booming. In recent years, the luxury market has dramatically improved, with new restaurants, clubs, and improvements to the marina in Ibiza Town.\nIbiza's increased popularity has led to problems with potable water shortages and overrun infrastructure. This has led to the imposition of a \"Sustainable Tourism Tax\" which went into effect on 1 July 2016. Minister of Tourism Vincente Torres stated in an interview in 2016 that the government has instituted a moratorium on building in certain areas. He said that with almost 100,000 legal tourist beds and about 132,000 inhabitants on the island's , not much more tourism can be supported.\nGeography.\nIbiza is a rock island covering an area of , almost one-sixth the size of Mallorca, but over five times larger than Mykonos in the Greek Isles, or 10 times larger than Manhattan in New York City.\nIbiza is the larger of a group of the western Balearic archipelago called the Pityusic Islands (\"Pitiusas\") or \"Pine Islands\" composed of itself and Formentera. The Balearic island chain includes over 50 islands, many of which are uninhabited. The highest point of the island is Sa Talaiassa, also known as Sa Talaia or Sa Talaia de Sant Josep at .\nAdministration.\nIbiza is administratively part of the autonomous community of the Balearic Islands, whose capital is Palma, on the island of Mallorca. Ibiza comprises five of the region's 67 municipalities:\nAt the 2001 census these municipalities had a total population of 88,076 inhabitants, which had risen to an officially estimated total of 159,180 at the start of 2023, and have a land area of .\nThe island's self-government institution is the Ibiza Island Council (\"Consell Insular d'Eivissa\"). Prior to its split in 2007, Formentera was part of the council.\nInsular government.\nElections are held every four years concurrently with local elections. From 1983 to 2007, councilors were indirectly elected from the results of the election to Parliament of the Balearic Islands for the constituencies of Ibiza and Formentera (then forming a single Island council, with Ibiza sending 12 councilors and Formentera a single one). Since 2007, however, separate direct elections are held to elect the Island Council of Ibiza, which has kept 13 as the number of seats (despite sending 12 to the Balearic Parliament).\nClimate.\nIbiza has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"BSh\"). The average annual temperature of Ibiza is , being warm and mild throughout the whole year. Ibiza lies at the same latitude as Atlantic City, yet it is much warmer for its location in the Mediterranean Basin. The climate of Ibiza is typically warm, sunny and dry, with low variation between highs and lows. The sunshine hours of Ibiza are 2700-2800 per year, while the yearly rain amount ranges from . The average high temperature is , while the average low is . Winters are slightly rainy and mild, from November to April normally the whole island turns green for the seasonal rains. Summers are hot and fairly humid, which contributes to high dew points and muggy weather, increasing the heat index, although with very little rainfall. The few rainy days are often accompanied by thunderstorms. During the coldest month, January, the average high temperature is , while the average low is . In the warmest month, August, the average high temperature is , while the low is . Extreme temperatures are rare for the influence of the sea. The average temperature of the sea in Ibiza is and beach weather usually lasts 7 months, from May to November. The highest temperature ever recorded on Ibiza Airport is on 13 August 2022.\nDemographics.\nDemographically, Ibiza displays a very peculiar configuration, as census agencies diverge on exact figures. According to the 2001 national census, Ibiza had 88,076 inhabitants (against 76,000 in 1991, 64,000 in 1981, 45,000 in 1971, and 38,000 in 1961). However, by the 2011 national census, this had grown to 133,594, and at the Census of 2021 had reached 154,186. This rapid growth stems from the amnesty which incorporated a number of unregistered foreign migrants. In terms of origin, about 55 percent of island residents were born in Ibiza; 35 percent are domestic migrants from mainland Spain (mostly working-class families from Andalusia, and the remainder from Catalonia, Valencia and Castile); and the remaining 10 to 15 per cent are foreign, dual and multi-national citizens of the EU and abroad (Govern de les Illes Balears \u2013 IBAE 1996). In decreasing order, the most commonly visiting foreigners are German, British, Latin American, French, Italian and Dutch.\nLanguage.\nEivissenc is the native dialect of Catalan that is spoken on Ibiza and nearby Formentera. Catalan shares co-official status with Spanish. Additionally, because of the influence of tourism and immigrants living in or maintaining residences on the island, other languages, such as English, French, German and Italian, are widely spoken.\nSights.\nThough primarily known for its party scene, large portions of the island are registered as UNESCO World Heritage Sites. \nA notable example includes the Renaissance walls of the old town of Ibiza City, which were awarded UNESCO World Heritage Status in 1999. They are one of the world's few Renaissance walls that were not demolished, and part of the medieval wall is still visible. There are some Ibizan cultural sites, such as the remains of the first Phoenician settlement at Sa Caleta. Other sites are still under threat from the developers, such as Ses Feixes Wetlands, but this site has now been recognised as a threatened environment, and it is expected that steps will be taken to preserve this wetland. The oceanic plant \"Posidonia oceanica\" is also part of UNESCO's World Heritage.\nTourism.\nNightlife.\nIbiza is considered to be a popular tourist destination, especially due to its well-known and at times riotous nightclub-based nightlife centred on two areas: Ibiza Town, the island's capital on the southern shore, and Sant Antoni to the west. Ibiza has garnered the reputation as the \"Party Capital of the world\".\nNightlife in Ibiza has undergone several changes since the island's opening to international tourism in the late 1950s. Origins of today's club culture may be traced back to hippie gatherings held during the 1960s and 1970s. During these, people of various nationalities sharing the hippie ethos would regroup, talk, play music and occasionally take recreational drugs. These would most often happen on beaches during the day, with nude bathing a common sight, and in rented country estates in the evenings or at nights. Apart from this confidential scene, which nevertheless attracted many foreigners to the island, local venues during the 1960s consisted mostly of bars, which would be the meeting points for Ibicencos, ex-pats, seafarers and tourists. The Estrella bar on the port and La Tierra in the old city of Eivissa were favourites.\nDuring the 1970s, a decade that saw the emergence of the contemporary nightclub, several venues opened and made a lasting impact on Ibiza's nightlife. Three of these original clubs are still in operation today: Pacha, Amnesia and Es Parad\u00eds. These four clubs mainly defined nightlife on the White Island, which has evolved and developed from several distinctive elements: open-air parties (Es Paradis, Privilege, Amnesia), held in isolated places, eventually old fincas (Pacha, Amnesia), that mixed in nudity and costume party (Es Paradis, Privilege, Pacha) and enabled people from various backgrounds to blend (all). The hippie ethos served as a common factor that infused all these venues and catalyzed the experience of a certain kind of freedom, accentuated by the holiday nature of most of the stays on the White Island.\nDuring the 1980s, the music played in these clubs gained in reputation and became known as Balearic beat, a precursor of the British acid house scene. As rave parties blossomed all over Europe, a DJ-driven club culture took hold of Ibizenca nightlife. It was at that time that Space opened, thanks to Pepe Rosello, which found a niche in the after-hour parties. The club would close at 18:00 and open again at 07:00, when all the other clubs were still closed, enabling party-goers to flock from the other clubs to Space and continue dancing in broad daylight.\nAt the end of the 1990s, the after-hour parties took firm root on the island. In 1999, the Circoloco parties made their debut at DC10, with some of the original elements of Ibiza nightlife at the forefront.\nIn recent years, during the summer, top producers and DJs in dance music come to the island and play at the various clubs, in between touring to other international destinations. Some of the most famous DJs run their own weekly nights around the island. Many of these DJs use Ibiza as an outlet for presenting new songs within the house, trance and techno genres of electronic dance music. The island has achieved fame as a cultural centre for house and trance in particular, with its name often being used as a partial metonym for the particular flavour of electronic music originating there, much like Goa in India.\nSince 2005, the live music event Ibiza Rocks has changed perceptions of the Ibiza party landscape. Bands such as Arctic Monkeys, Kasabian, The Prodigy and the Kaiser Chiefs have played in the courtyard of the Ibiza Rocks Hotel.\nThe season now traditionally begins at the end of April, where Opening Parties take place at Ibiza's clubs over the course of a three-week period. Opening Parties normally coincide with the culmination of the International Music Summit, a three-day conference promoting the electronic music industry, featuring speakers, masterclasses and performances, and co-hosted by Pete Tong and Jaguar. IMS has taken place on the island annually since 2007 and holds its closing party at the top of Dalt Vila. The first clubs that host opening parties are normally Ushua\u00efa, H\u00ef, Amnesia, and Pacha. The first parties take place at the end of April, starting with the H\u00ef and Ushua\u00efa Opening Parties, and the last parties occur around mid-October, usually being the Amnesia and Pacha Closing Parties. Ibiza has recently won numerous awards globally for its world class nightlife venues. The new super clubs including Hi and Ushua\u00efa, are two of the most notable as of 2024.\nOther.\nThe island's government is in the process of making policy changes to encourage a more family-friendly and quieter tourism scene. These include rules such as the closing of all nightclubs by 06:00 at the latest and requiring all new hotels to be 5-star. The administration wants to attract a more international mixture of tourists.\nThe island's tourism is not always characterized by its nightlife. Visitors can take a hot-air balloon ride, surf, visit the Cave Can Mark, or go to Cap Blanc's Aquarium.\nTransport.\nIbiza has its own airport, which has many international flights during the summer tourist season, especially from the European Union and the United Kingdom.\nThere are also ferries from the harbour of Sant Antoni and Ibiza Town to Barcelona, Mallorca, D\u00e9nia, and Valencia. There are also ferries to Formentera leaving Sant Antoni Harbour (normally every Wednesday), and daily from Ibiza Town, Santa Eul\u00e0ria, and Figueretes\u2013Platja d'en Bossa.\nSeveral public buses also travel between Sant Antoni and Ibiza Town, every 15 minutes in summer and every half-hour in winter. In addition, there are buses from Sant Antoni to Cala Bassa, Cala Conta and Cala Tarida, and to the airport. From Ibiza there are buses to the Platja d'en Bossa, Ses Salines, the airport and Santa Eul\u00e0ria. The late night bus line that stops at the various clubs is locally known as the Disco Bus.\nIn popular culture.\nA number of novels and other books have been written using Ibiza as the setting, including: \"The Life Impossible\" by Matt Haig, \"The Canticle of Ibiza\" by Justin Kurian, \"The White Island\" by Stephen Armstrong, \"Joshua Then and Now\" by Mordecai Richler, \"Soma Blues\" by Robert Sheckley, \"Vacation in Ibiza\" by Lawrence Schimel, \"A Short Life on a Sunny Isle: An Alphonse Dantan Mystery\" by Hannah Blank, \"They Are Ruining Ibiza\" by A. C. Greene, and \"The Python Project\" by Victor Canning. Books including \"Ibiza Bohemia\", which was published by Assouline, have explored the island itself with both photography and text, while other such as \"Memes Eivissencs\" have registered the traditions of their residents and their history in social media.\nThe third track on Prefab Sprout's 1990 album is 'Machine Gun Ibiza'. It is also mentioned in David Bowie's 1971 track 'Life on Mars?', \"See the mice in their million hordes, from Ibiza to the Norfolk Broads.\"\nIn \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", the opening sketch of Episode 33 features the pilot Biggles. His secretary teasingly calls him \"Se\u00f1or Biggles\", and Biggles protests, saying, \"I've never even been to Spain.\" The secretary responds, \" You went to Ibiza last year.\" Biggles counters, \"That's still not grounds for calling me se\u00f1or, or Don Beeg-les for that matter.\"\nThe 2000 UK comedy film \"Kevin and Perry Go Large\" is set in Ibiza with the two main teenage character trying to become DJs.\nWham's 1983 hit single https:// music video was filmed in Ibiza. It was the first time George Michael &amp; Andrew Ridgeley would leave the UK.\nVengaboys' 1999 single \"We're Going to Ibiza\" reached number one on the singles chart in United Kingdom and the Netherlands. The song saw a resurgence in Austria in 2019 due to the Ibiza affair.\nThe island is shown as the home of notorious art forger Elmyr de Hory in the 1973 docudrama \"F for Fake\" by \"Orson Welles\". \nThe fourth track off of The Prodigy\u2019s sixth studio album The Day Is My Enemy is titled Ibiza. The song has fast rapping and electronic beats. The rapping is performed by the band\u2019s frontman Keith Flint (died 2019). \nIn popular music, American singer-songwriter Mike Posner released \"I Took a Pill in Ibiza\" (alternatively known as \"In Ibiza\", or its clean title \"I Took a Plane to Ibiza\") in April 2015, as a single on his Vevo account and in the exclusive \"The Truth\" EP; it was later released on \"At Night, Alone\" in May 2016. Originally an acoustic guitar-based folk pop song, it was remixed by the Norwegian duo SeeB as a tropical house dance pop song, and released digitally as a single in the United States on 24 July 2015. \"I Took a Pill in Ibiza\" peaked at #4 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 in the U.S., and reached #1 on seventeen other charts. Tourism officials in Ibiza were reportedly \"annoyed\" by the song's apparent reinforcement of drug culture associated with Ibiza in the past, and Tourism Director Vicent Ferrer subsequently invited Posner to witness the island's culture and how it contrasts with the party \"typecast\".\nNotable people.\nThe Spanish composer and music theorist Miguel Roig-Francol\u00ed was born in Ibiza, as was the politician and Spain's former Minister of Foreign Affairs, Abel Matutes. Notable former residents of Ibiza include: Spandau Ballet's Steve Norman, English punk musician Sid Vicious, comic actor Terry-Thomas, Hungarian master forger Elmyr de Hory, American authors Cormac McCarthy and Clifford Irving.The famous English actor Denholm Elliott retired to and died at his home in Santa Eul\u00e0ria des Riu on Ibiza, on 6 October 1992, aged 70.\nSpanish pop band Locomia originated in Ibiza.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63625", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63625", "title": "Slovenian tolar", "text": "Currency of Slovenia from 1991 to 2007\nThe tolar was the currency of Slovenia from 8 October 1991 until the introduction of the euro on 1 January 2007. It was subdivided into 100 \"stotinov\" (cents). The ISO 4217 currency code for the Slovenian tolar was \"SIT\". From October 1991 until June 1992, the acronym \"SLT\" was in use.\nHistory.\nThe name \"tolar\" comes from Thaler, and is cognate with \"dollar\". The tolar was introduced on 8 October 1991. It replaced the 1990 (Convertible) version of Yugoslav dinar at parity. On 28 June 2004, the tolar was pegged against the euro in the ERM II, the European Union exchange rate mechanism. All recalled banknotes can be exchanged at the central bank for current issue.\nPhase-out.\nOn 1 January 2007, the tolar was supplanted by the euro. Slovenia issues its own euro coins, like all other nations in the Eurozone.\nThe timescale for conversion from the tolar to the euro operated differently from the first wave of European Monetary Union (EMU). The permanent euro/tolar conversion rate was finalised on 11 July 2006 at 239.640 tolar per euro. Unlike the\nfirst wave of EMU, this period was only a day (the conversion rates were fixed on 31 December 1998 and euro non-cash payments were possible from 1 January 1999). Also unlike the first wave of EMU which had a three-year transition period (1999\u20132001), there was no transition period when non-cash payments could be made in both tolar and euro. The tolar was used for all transactions (cash and non-cash) until 31 December 2006 and the euro was compulsory to use for all payments (cash and non-cash) from 1 January 2007. However, as with the first wave of EMU, cash payments with the tolar could continue until 14 January 2007, but change had to be given in euro.\nCoins.\nIn 1992, coins were introduced in denominations of 10, 20 and 50 stotinov (10, 20 and 50 stotins), 1 tolar, 2 tolarja and 5 tolarjev (2 and 5 tolars). 10 tolarjev (10 tolars) coins were added in 2000, followed by 20 and 50 tolarjev (20 and 50 tolars) in 2003. The obverse designs all show the denomination, with animals native to Slovenia on the reverses. The coins were designed by Miljenko Licul and Zvone Kosovelj and featured reliefs of animals by Janez Boljka.\nBanknotes.\nThe first banknotes were provisional payment notes issued on 8 October 1991, in denominations of 1, 2, 5, 10, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, and 5000 tolarjev (0.50 and 2000 tolarjev notes were also printed, but never issued; one thousand sets with matching serial numbers were sold for 5,000 tolarjev each beginning on 6 May 2002). These notes all feature Triglav, the tallest mountain in Slovenia, on the front, and the Prince's Stone, honeycomb pattern, and Carniolan honey bee on the back.\nIn 1992, the Bank of Slovenia introduced the following banknotes, all of which feature notable Slovenes. The banknotes were designed by Miljenko Licul and coauthors, with portraits drawn by Rudi \u0160panzel. They were printed by the British company De La Rue on paper produced in Rade\u010de, Slovenia.\nHistorical exchange rates.\nLower number indicates the tolar has a higher value.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63626", "revid": "30981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63626", "title": "Billy McNeil", "text": ""}
{"id": "63627", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63627", "title": "So\u010da", "text": "Slovenian-Italian river\nThe So\u010da (, in Slovene) or Isonzo (, in Italian; other names: ; ; or \"\") is a long river that flows through western Slovenia () and northeastern Italy ().\nAn Alpine river in character, its source lies in the Trenta Valley in the Julian Alps in northwestern Slovenia, at an elevation of . The river runs past the towns of Bovec, Kobarid, Tolmin, Kanal ob So\u010di, Nova Gorica (where it is crossed by the Solkan Bridge), and Gorizia, entering the Adriatic Sea close to the town of Monfalcone. It has a nival-pluvial regime in its upper course and pluvial-nival in its lower course.\nPrior to the First World War, the river ran parallel to the border between the Kingdom of Italy and the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During World War I, it was the scene of bitter fighting between the two countries, culminating in the Battle of Caporetto in October and November 1917.\nName.\nThe river was recorded in antiquity as \"Aesontius\", \"Sontius\", and \"Isontius\". Later attestations include \"super Sontium\" (in 507\u201311), \"a flumine Isontio\" (1028), \"in Lison\u00e7um\" (1261), \"an die Ysnicz\" (1401), and \"an der Snicz\" (ca. 1440). The Slovene name \"So\u010da\" is derived from the form \"*S\u01eb\u0165a\", which was borrowed from Latin (and Romance) \"Sontius\". In turn, this is probably based on the substrate name \"*Aisontia\", presumably derived from the PIE root \"*\" 'swift, rushing', referring to a quickly moving river. Another possible origin is the pre-Romance root \"*\" 'water, river'.\nMajor changes in the watershed.\nThe present course of the river is the result of several dramatic changes that occurred during the past 2,000 years. According to the Roman historian Strabo, the river named Aesontius, which in Roman times flowed past Aquileia to the Adriatic Sea, was essentially the Natisone and Torre River system.\nIn 585, a landslide cut off the upper part of the Natisone riverbed, causing its avulsion and subsequent stream capture by the Bontius River. The original subterranean discharge of the Bontius into the Timavo River became obstructed, and another avulsion returned the new watercourse into the bed of the lower Natisone.\nDuring the next centuries the estuary of this new river\u2014the So\u010da\u2014moved eastward until it captured the short coastal Sdobba River, through which the Isonzo now discharges into the Adriatic Sea. The former estuary (of the Aesontius, and the early Isonzo) in the newly formed lagoon of Grado became an independent coastal rivulet.\nAttractions.\nDue to its emerald-green water, the river is marketed as \"The Emerald Beauty.\" It is said to be one of the rare rivers in the world that retain such a colour throughout their length. Giuseppe Ungaretti, one of the greatest Italian poets, describes the Isonzo in the poem \"The Rivers\".\nThe river inspired the poet Simon Gregor\u010di\u010d to write his best-known poem \"So\u010di\" (\"To the So\u010da\"), one of the masterpieces of Slovene poetry. This region served as a location for the 2008 Disney film \"\".\nThe river is also well known for the marble trout (\"Salmo marmoratus\"); this species is native to rivers of the northern Adriatic basin, and it lives in the upper course of the river. This species is endangered due to the introduction of other non-indigenous trout species sometime between World War I and World War II.\nThe So\u010da Valley is a popular tourist destination due to its numerous natural attractions, including the Big So\u010da Gorge (), the Little So\u010da Gorge (), Kozjak Falls, Virje Falls, and the Tolmin Gorges ().\nSignificance in World War I.\nThe valley was the stage of major military operations including the twelve battles of the Isonzo on the Italian front in World War I between May 1915 and November 1917, in which over half a million Austro-Hungarian and Italian soldiers lost their lives.\nThe Isonzo campaign comprised the following battles:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63628", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63628", "title": "Zaragoza (disambiguation)", "text": "Zaragoza or Saragossa is a city in Spain.\nZaragoza may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63629", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63629", "title": "Kobarid", "text": "Kobarid (; ; ; ) is a settlement in Slovenia, the administrative centre of the Municipality of Kobarid.\nKobarid is known for the 1917 Battle of Caporetto, where the Italian retreat was documented by Ernest Hemingway in his novel \"A Farewell to Arms\". The battle is well documented in the museum in the centre of Kobarid. The museum won a Council of Europe award in 1993.\nName.\nKobarid was attested in written sources as \"Kauoretum\" in 1184 (and as \"de Cavoreto\" in 1258, \"Caboret\" in 1291, and \"de Chiavoretto\" in 1343). The Slovenian name is derived from \"*Koborid\u044a\", borrowed from Old Friulian \"*Kabor\u1ec7du\". The original Romance form of the name, \"*Cap(o)r\u0113tum\", is probably derived from and refers to a place where there are goats. The town is known as in Friulian, in German, and in Italian.\nGeography.\nThe municipality is the westernmost in Slovenia, situated in the Julian Alps in the Upper So\u010da (Isonzo) Valley, at the confluence with the Nadi\u017ea (Natisone) River, close to the border with Italy. In the southwest, the road leads to the neighbouring Italian \"comune\" of Pulfero. The area is located in the north of the historic Gori\u0161ka region, itself part of the larger Slovene Littoral.\nHistory.\nKobarid has been inhabited since prehistoric times. Archaeological remains from the Hallstatt period have been found in the area. The nearby Tonocov Grad archaeological site has remains of 5th-century Roman buildings, when the area was located in the forefront of the \"Claustra Alpium Iuliarum\" defense system. The settlement was an important base on the Roman road from \"Forum Iulii\" (present-day Cividale del Friuli) up to the Predil Pass and the Noricum province.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the 6th century, the area was settled by Slavic tribes, ancestors of the modern Slovenes. When Kobarid was first mentioned in 1184, it was part of the Patria del Friuli ruled by the Patriarchs of Aquileia.\nWhile the estates in the west were gradually conquered by the Republic of Venice until 1420, Kobarid together with Tolmin County and the possessions of the Counts of Gorizia was incorporated in the Inner Austrian territories of the Habsburg monarchy, like the Slovene-speaking territories of Carniola and Lower Styria.\nModern time.\nFrom 1754 Kobarid belonged to the newly established Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca, a Habsburg crown land which later formed the Austrian Littoral together with the March of Istria and the Imperial Free City of Trieste.\nWith the exception of a brief period between 1809 and 1813, when it was included under the Napoleonic Kingdom of Italy, Kobarid remained under Austrian rule until 1918. In the mid-19th century, the town became an important centre of the Slovene national revival.\nWorld wars.\nAt the outset of World War I, the area saw one of the first victims of the conflict, Countess Lucy Christalnigg, killed by Landsturmer guards while she was on a mission for the Red Cross. During the war, the whole area was the theatre of the Battles of the Isonzo, fought between the Kingdom of Italy and Austria-Hungary. The town was almost completely destroyed between 1915 and 1917.\nAfter the end of the war in 1918, Kobarid was occupied by the Italian Army, and upon the 1919 Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye it was officially annexed to Italy and incorporated into the Julian March region. Kobarid was a \"comune\" of the Province of Gorizia (as Caporetto), except during the period between 1924 and 1927, when the Province of Gorizia was abolished and annexed to the Province of Udine. Between 1922 and 1943, Kobarid was submitted to a policy of violent Fascist Italianization and many locals emigrated to the neighbouring Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The town became one of the crucial centres of recruitment and activity of the militant anti-fascist organization TIGR, which carried out an underground fight against the Italian Fascist regime. During the Italian administration, Kobarid also became an important symbolic place for the Fascist authorities because of its role in World War I. An Italian military ossuary was built on the hill above the town, and Benito Mussolini visited Kobarid in 1938.\nImmediately after the Italian armistice in September 1943, Kobarid was liberated by a Partisan uprising, and became the center of large liberated area of around 2,500 square kilometers, known as the Kobarid Republic, administered by the Liberation Front of the Slovenian People. During this period, almost all Italian families that settled in Kobarid during the 25 years of Italian administration left the town. In early November 1943, Nazi German forces took over the town and established their rule until May 1945, when the town was finally liberated by the Yugoslav People's Army.\nIn early June 1945, Kobarid came under joint British\u2013U.S. occupation and placed under Allied temporary military administration until the establishment of a final border between Italy and Yugoslavia. The Morgan Line, which divided the Allied military occupation zone from the Yugoslav one, ran just east of the town, along the So\u010da River.\nIn September 1947, the Paris Peace Treaties gave the town to Yugoslavia. Several hundred inhabitants, especially from the Breginj area, chose emigration to Italy rather than becoming citizens of a communist state.\nMass grave.\nKobarid was the site of a mass grave from the Second World War. The Cemetery Mass Grave () was in the town cemetery, right of the entrance, between the first and second rows of graves. It contained the remains of 11 German soldiers that fell at Kolovrat in April 1945. Unlike most mass graves in Slovenia, the graves were well maintained during the communist era. The remains were exhumed in 2000 and re-interred in a common grave at \u017dale Cemetery in Ljubljana.\nKobarid today.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Kobarid emerged as an important tourist center. In addition to the Kobarid Museum, the Napoleon Bridge has also become an important symbol of Kobarid. The bridge is a popular tourist destination that offers views of the mountains around Kobarid and the So\u010da River.\nWith the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991, Kobarid became part of independent Slovenia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63630", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63630", "title": "Historical linguistics", "text": "Study of language change over time\nHistorical linguistics, also known as diachronic linguistics, is the scientific study of how languages change over time. It seeks to understand the nature and causes of linguistic change and to trace the evolution of languages. Historical linguistics involves several key areas of study, including the reconstruction of ancestral languages, the classification of languages into families, (comparative linguistics) and the analysis of the cultural and social influences on language development.\nThis field is grounded in the uniformitarian principle, which posits that the processes of language change observed today were also at work in the past, unless there is clear evidence to suggest otherwise. Historical linguists aim to describe and explain changes in individual languages, explore the history of speech communities, and study the origins and meanings of words (etymology).\nDevelopment.\nModern historical linguistics dates to the late 18th century, having originally grown out of the earlier discipline of philology, the study of ancient texts and documents dating back to antiquity. Initially, historical linguistics served as the cornerstone of comparative linguistics, primarily as a tool for linguistic reconstruction. Scholars were concerned chiefly with establishing language families and reconstructing unrecorded proto-languages, using the comparative method and internal reconstruction. The focus was initially on the well-known Indo-European languages, many of which had long written histories; scholars also studied the Uralic languages, another Eurasian language-family for which less early written material exists. Since then, there has been significant comparative linguistic work expanding outside of European languages as well, such as on the Austronesian languages and on various families of Native American languages, among many others. Comparative linguistics became only a part of a more broadly-conceived discipline of historical linguistics. For the Indo-European languages, comparative study is now a highly specialized field.\nSome scholars have undertaken studies attempting to establish super-families, linking, for example, Indo-European, Uralic, and other families into Nostratic. These attempts have not met with wide acceptance. The information necessary to establish relatedness becomes less available as the time increases. The time-depth of linguistic methods is limited due to chance word resemblances and variations between language groups, but a limit of around 10,000 years is often assumed. Several methods are used to date proto-languages, but the process is generally difficult and its results are inherently approximate.\nDiachronic and synchronic analysis.\nIn linguistics, a synchronic analysis is one that views linguistic phenomena only at a given time, usually the present, but a synchronic analysis of a historical language form is also possible. It may be distinguished from diachronic, which regards a phenomenon in terms of developments through time. Diachronic analysis is the main concern of historical linguistics. However, most other branches of linguistics are concerned with some form of synchronic analysis. The study of language change offers a valuable insight into the state of linguistic representation, and because all synchronic forms are the result of historically evolving diachronic changes, the ability to explain linguistic constructions necessitates a focus on diachronic processes.\nInitially, all of modern linguistics was historical in orientation. Even the study of modern dialects involved looking at their origins. Ferdinand de Saussure's distinction between synchronic and diachronic linguistics is fundamental to the present day organization of the discipline. Primacy is accorded to synchronic linguistics, and diachronic linguistics is defined as the study of successive synchronic stages. Saussure's clear demarcation, however, has had both defenders and critics.\nIn practice, a purely-synchronic linguistics is not possible for any period before the invention of the gramophone, as written records always lag behind speech in reflecting linguistic developments. Written records are difficult to date accurately before the development of the modern title page. Often, dating must rely on contextual historical evidence such as inscriptions, or modern technology, such as carbon dating, can be used to ascertain dates of varying accuracy. Also, the work of sociolinguists on linguistic variation has shown synchronic states are not uniform: the speech habits of older and younger speakers differ in ways that point to language change. Synchronic variation is linguistic change in progress.\nSynchronic and diachronic approaches can reach quite different conclusions. For example, a Germanic strong verb (e.g. English \"sing\" \u2194 \"sang\" \u2194 \"sung\") is irregular when it is viewed synchronically: the native speaker's brain processes them as learned forms, but the derived forms of regular verbs are processed quite differently, by the application of productive rules (for example, adding \"-ed\" to the basic form of a verb as in \"walk\" \u2192 \"walked\"). That is an insight of psycholinguistics, which is relevant also for language didactics, both of which are synchronic disciplines. However, a diachronic analysis shows that the strong verb is the remnant of a fully regular system of internal vowel changes, in this case the Indo-European ablaut; historical linguistics seldom uses the category \"irregular verb\".\nThe principal tools of research in diachronic linguistics are the comparative method and the method of internal reconstruction. Less-standard techniques, such as mass lexical comparison, are used by some linguists to overcome the limitations of the comparative method, but most linguists regard them as unreliable. The findings of historical linguistics are often used as a basis for hypotheses about the groupings and movements of peoples, particularly in the prehistoric period. In practice, however, it is often unclear how to integrate the linguistic evidence with the archaeological or genetic evidence. For example, there are numerous theories concerning the homeland and early movements of the Proto-Indo-Europeans, each with its own interpretation of the archaeological record.\nComparative linguistics.\nComparative linguistics, originally \"comparative philology\", is a branch of historical linguistics that is concerned with comparing languages in order to establish their historical relatedness. Languages may be related by convergence through borrowing or by genetic descent, thus languages can change and are also able to cross-relate. Genetic relatedness implies a common origin among languages. Comparative linguists construct language families, reconstruct proto-languages, and analyze the historical changes that have resulted in the documented languages' divergences. \nEtymology.\nEtymology studies the history of words: when they entered a language, from what source, and how their form and meaning have changed over time. Words may enter a language in several ways, including being borrowed as loanwords from another language, being derived by combining pre-existing elements in the language, by a hybrid known as phono-semantic matching.\nIn languages with a long and detailed history, etymology makes use of philology, the study of how words change from culture to culture over time. Etymologists also apply the methods of comparative linguistics to reconstruct information about languages that are too old for any direct information (such as writing) to be known. By analysis of related languages by the comparative method, linguists can make inferences about their shared parent language and its vocabulary. In that way, word roots that can be traced all the way back to the origin of, for instance, the Indo-European language family have been found. Although originating in the philological tradition, much current etymological research is done in language families for which little or no early documentation is available, such as Uralic and Austronesian.\nDialectology.\nDialectology is the scientific study of linguistic dialect, the varieties of a language that are characteristic of particular groups, based primarily on geographic distribution and their associated features. This is in contrast to variations based on social factors, which are studied in sociolinguistics, or variations based on time, which are studied in historical linguistics. Dialectology treats such topics as divergence of two local dialects from a common ancestor and synchronic variation.\nDialectologists are concerned with grammatical features that correspond to regional areas. Thus, they are usually dealing with populations living in specific locales for generations without moving, but also with immigrant groups bringing their languages to new settlements. Immigrant groups often bring their linguistic practices to new settlements, leading to distinct linguistic varieties within those communities. Dialectologists analyze these immigrant dialects to understand how languages develop and diversify in response to migration and cultural interactions.\nPhonology.\nPhonology is a sub-field of linguistics which studies the sound system of a specific language or set of languages. Whereas phonetics is about the physical production and perception of the sounds of speech, phonology describes the way sounds function within a given language or across languages. Phonology studies when sounds are or are not treated as distinct within a language. For example, the \"p\" in \"pin\" is aspirated, but the \"p\" in \"spin\" is not. In English these two sounds are used in complementary distribution and are not used to differentiate words so they are considered allophones of the same phoneme. In some other languages like Thai and Quechua, the same difference of aspiration or non-aspiration differentiates words and so the two sounds, or phones, are considered to be distinct phonemes. In addition to the minimal meaningful sounds (the phonemes), phonology studies how sounds alternate, such as the in English, and topics such as syllable structure, stress, accent, and intonation.\nPrinciples of phonology have also been applied to the analysis of sign languages, but the phonological units do not consist of sounds. The principles of phonological analysis can be applied independently of modality because they are designed to serve as general analytical tools, not language-specific ones.\nMorphology and syntax.\nMorphology is the study of patterns of word-formation within a language. It attempts to formulate rules that model the knowledge of speakers. In the context of historical linguistics, formal means of expression change over time. Words as units in the lexicon are the subject matter of lexicology. Along with clitics, words are generally accepted to be the smallest units of syntax; however, it is clear in most languages that words may be related to one another by rules. These rules are understood by the speaker, and reflect specific patterns in how word formation interacts with speech. In the context of historical linguistics, the means of expression change over time.\nSyntax is the study of the principles and rules for constructing sentences in natural languages. Syntax directly concerns the rules and principles that govern sentence structure in individual languages. Researchers attempt to describe languages in terms of these rules. Many historical linguistics attempt to compare changes in sentence between related languages, or find universal grammar rules that natural languages follow regardless of when and where they are spoken.\nEvolutionary context.\nIn terms of evolutionary theory, historical linguistics (as opposed to research into the origin of language) studies Lamarckian acquired characteristics of languages. This perspective explores how languages adapt and change over time in response to cultural, societal, and environmental factors. Language evolution within the framework of historical linguistics is akin to Lamarckism in the sense that linguistic traits acquired during an individual's lifetime can potentially influence subsequent generations of speakers.\nRate of adaptation.\nHistorical linguists often use the terms \"conservative\" and \"innovative\" to describe the extent of change within a language variety relative to that of comparable varieties. Conservative languages change less over time when compared to innovative languages.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63633", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63633", "title": "Church of the Nativity", "text": "Basilica in Bethlehem, Palestine\nThe Church of the Nativity, or Basilica of the Nativity, is a basilica located in Bethlehem, West Bank, Palestine. The grotto holds a prominent religious significance to Christians of various denominations as the birthplace of Jesus. The grotto is the oldest site continuously used as a place of worship in Christianity, and the basilica is the oldest major church in the Holy Land.\nThe church was originally commissioned by Constantine the Great a short time after his mother Helena's visit to Jerusalem and Bethlehem in 325\u2013326, on the site that was traditionally considered to be the birthplace of Jesus. That original basilica was likely built between 330 and 333, being already mentioned in 333, and was dedicated on 31 May 339. It was probably destroyed by fire during the Samaritan revolts of the sixth century, possibly in 529, and a new basilica was built a number of years later by Byzantine Emperor Justinian (r. 527\u2013565), who added a porch or narthex, and replaced the octagonal sanctuary with a cruciform transept complete with three apses, but largely preserved the original character of the building, with an atrium and a basilica consisting of a nave with four side aisles.\nThe Church of the Nativity, while remaining basically unchanged since the Justinianic reconstruction, has seen numerous repairs and additions, especially from the Crusader period, such as two bell towers (now gone), wall mosaics and paintings (partially preserved). Over the centuries, the surrounding compound has been expanded, and today it covers approximately 12,000 square meters, comprising three different monasteries: one Catholic, one Armenian Apostolic, and one Greek Orthodox, of which the first two contain bell towers built during the modern era.\nThe silver star marking the spot where Christ was born, inscribed in Latin, was stolen in October 1847 by Greek monks who wished to remove this Catholic item. Some assert that this was a contributing factor in the Crimean War against the Russian Empire. Others assert that the war grew out of the wider European situation.\nSince 2012, the Church of the Nativity is a World Heritage Site and was the first to be listed by UNESCO under 'Palestine'.\nSince 1852, the rights of the three religious communities have been governed by an understanding known as the Status Quo. Initially informal, this was made official by the Treaty of Paris in 1856, and was codified by the United Nations in the Palestine Conciliation Commission in 1949.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBase in scripture.\nOf the four canonical gospels, Matthew and Luke mention the birth of Jesus, both placing it in Bethlehem. Luke mentions the manger: \"and she gave birth to her son. She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger, because there was no guest room available for them.\"\nA variant of the narrative is contained in the Gospel of James, an apocryphal infancy gospel.\nHistory.\nHoly site before Constantine (ca. 4 BC\u2013AD 326).\nThe holy site known as the Nativity Grotto is thought to be the manger where Jesus was born. In 135, Emperor Hadrian had the site above the grotto converted into a worship place for Adonis, the mortal lover of Aphrodite, the Greek goddess of beauty and desire. Jerome claimed in 420 that the grotto had been consecrated to the worship of Adonis, and that a sacred grove was planted there in order to completely wipe out the memory of Jesus from the world.\nAround AD 248, Greek philosopher Origen of Alexandria wrote the following about the grotto:\nIn Bethlehem the cave is pointed out where He was born, and the manger in the cave where He was wrapped in swaddling clothes. And the rumor is in those places, and among foreigners of the Faith, that indeed Jesus was born in this cave who is worshiped and reverenced by the Christians.\nConstantinian basilica (326 \u2013 529 or 556).\nThe first basilica on this site was built by Emperor Constantine I, on the site identified by his mother, Empress Helena and Bishop Makarios of Jerusalem. The construction started in 326 under the supervision of Makarios, who followed Constantine's orders, and was dedicated on 31 May 339\u2014however, it had already been visited in 333 by the Bordeaux Pilgrim, at which time it was already in use.\nConstruction of this early church was carried out as part of a larger project following the First Council of Nicaea during Constantine's reign, aimed to build churches on the sites assumed at the time to have witnessed the crucial events in the life of Jesus. The design of the basilica centered around three major architectural sections:\nThe structure was burned and destroyed in one of the Samaritan Revolts of 529 or 556, in the second of which Jews seem to have joined the Samaritans.\nJustinian's basilica (6th century).\nThe basilica was rebuilt in its present form in the 6th century on the initiative of Byzantine Emperor Justinian I (527\u2013565), after the destruction of either 529 or 556. It was probably accomplished after the Emperor's death, as is indicated by the dating of the wooden elements embedded in the church walls between 545 and 665, which was provided by the dendrochronological analyses made during the recent restoration works.\nThe Persians under Khosrau II invaded Palestine and conquered nearby Jerusalem in 614, but they did not destroy the structure. According to legend, their commander Shahrbaraz was moved by the depiction above the church entrance of the Three Magi wearing the garb of Persian Zoroastrian priests, so he ordered that the building be spared.\nCrusader period (1099\u20131187).\nThe First Crusade captured Jerusalem in 1099. The Latin conquerors promoted the redecoration of the building in the medium of wall painting: images of saints were displayed in the central and southern colonnades of the nave, largely on the initiative of private donors, as is shown by the frequent use of dedicatory inscriptions and portraits. Remnants of a cycle of narrative scenes are preserved in the north-western pillar of the choir and the south transepts, as well as in the chapel located below the bell tower.\nFrom 1131 until the end of the Latin rule over Jerusalem, the Holy Sepulchre was the site of royal coronations and burials. The Latins undertook extensive decoration and restoration on the basilica and grounds, a process that continued until 1169, from 1165 to 1169 even through a sort of \"joint venture\" between Bishop Ralph and King Amalric and the Byzantine emperor Manuel I Komnenos. As detailed in the bilingual Greek and Latin inscription in the altar space, the mosaic decoration was made by a teamwork headed by a painter named Ephraim. Another bilingual, Latin and Syriac, inscription located in the lower half of a mosaic panel displaying an angel in the northern wall of the nave bears witness to the work of a painter named Basil, who was probably a local Syrian Melkite. The two artists collaborated within the same workshop.\nAyyubid and Mamluk periods (1187\u20131516).\nThe Ayyubid conquest of Jerusalem and its area in 1187 was without consequences for the Nativity church. The Greek-Melkite clergy was granted the right to serve in the church, and similar concessions were given almost immediately also to other Christian denominations.\nIn the year 1227 the church was embellished with an elegantly carved wooden door, the remnants of which can still be seen in the narthex. As detailed in its double, Armenian and Arabic inscription, it was made by two Armenian monks, Father Abraham and Father Arakel, in the times of King Hethum I of Cilicia (1224\u20131269) and the Emir of Damascus, and Saladin's nephew, al-Mu'azzam Isa.\nIn 1229 Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II signed an agreement with Sultan al-Kamil which led to the restitution of the Holy Places to the Crusaders. The property of the Nativity Church came back into the possession of the Latin clergy on the condition that Muslim pilgrims may be allowed to visit the holy cave.\nLatin hegemony probably lasted until the incursion of Khwarezmian Turks in April 1244. On that occasion, the church treasures, now preserved in the Terra Sancta Museum in Jerusalem, were concealed underground and rediscovered only in 1863. The church was devastated, but not destroyed, the major damage being the dilapidation of its roof.\nUnder Mamluk rule, the church was used by different Christian denominations, including Greeks, Armenians, Copts, Ethiopians, and Syrians. In 1347 the Franciscans of the newly established Custody of the Holy Land were bestowed with the ownership of the former monastery of the regular canons to the north of the basilica. The Friars managed to gain a hegemonic role in Bethlehem until the Ottoman period.\nStarting from the late 13th century, pilgrims lament the dilapidation of the church interior by order of Mamluk authorities: in particular, the marble revetments of the walls and floor were gradually removed, until they thoroughly disappeared.\nThe Duchy of Burgundy committed resources to restore the roof in August 1448, and multiple regions contributed supplies to have the church roof repaired in 1480: England supplied the lead, the Second Kingdom of Burgundy supplied the wood, and the Republic of Venice provided the labor.\nOttoman period, first three centuries (16th\u201318th).\nAfter the Ottoman conquest of Palestine in 1516, the Nativity church suffered from a long decay. The nave was largely abandoned and used for profane purposes. In the aim to prevent people from entering the church with horses and cattle, the main entrance was walled up and transformed into a diminutive door, known until our days as the \"Door of Humility\", since visitors are forced to bend down to go through it. An elevated chancel, provided with three doors, thoroughly separated the nave from the east end of the building, which was reserved for liturgical activities.\nThe Ottoman period was characterized by increasing tensions between the different Christian denominations. In 1637, Greeks were granted hegemony by the Sublime Porte and the Franciscans were expelled from the holy cave. In 1621 the Armenian Patriarch Grigor Paronter bought the partly ruined buildings to the south of the courtyard and established there a monastery and a hospice for pilgrims. In 1639, the Cretan painter Jeremias Palladas was commissioned by the Greek Patriarch to paint new icons to embellish the church. Further works were made in 1671 on the initiative of Patriarch Dositheos II. In 1675, Dositheos managed to gain control also of the nave, and promoted restorations of the floor and the roof, as well as the making of a new iconostasis. The Franciscans were restored in their rights in 1690, but they lose their hegemony once again in 1757, when the Greek Orthodox were granted full ownership of the upper church and the authorization to keep the keys to the grotto. Afterwards, a redecoration of the church was promoted: the nave was newly paved, the bema was provided with a solemn iconostasis and a wooden baldachin was erected over the main altar.\nBecause of uninterrupted water infiltrations from the roof, the Crusader mosaics started falling down, as is documented in many pilgrims' accounts from the 16th century onwards.\nNineteenth century.\nEarthquakes inflicted significant damage to the Church of the Nativity between 1834 and 1837. The 1834 Jerusalem earthquake damaged the church's bell tower, the furnishings in the cave on which the church is built, and other parts of its structure. Minor damages were further inflicted by a series of strong aftershocks in 1836 and the Galilee earthquake of 1837. As part of the repairs executed by the Greek Orthodox after receiving a firman in 1842, a wall was built between the nave and aisles, used at the time as a market, and the eastern part of the church containing the choir, which allowed for worship to be continued there.\nThe religiously significant silver star marking the exact birthplace of Jesus was removed in October 1847 from the Grotto of the Nativity by the Greek Orthodox. The church was under the control of the Ottoman Empire, but around Christmas 1852, Napoleon III forced the Ottomans to recognise Catholic France as the \"sovereign authority\" over Christian holy sites in the Holy Land. The Sultan of Turkey replaced the silver star at the grotto, complete with a Latin inscription, but the Christian Orthodox Russian Empire disputed the change in authority. They cited the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca and then deployed armies to the Danube area. As a result, the Ottomans issued firmans essentially reversing their earlier decision, renouncing the French treaty, and restoring to the Orthodox Christians the sovereign authority over the churches of the Holy Land for the time being, thus increasing local tensions\u2014and all this fuelled the conflict between the Russian and the Ottoman empires over the control of holy sites around the region.\nTwentieth century to the present.\nIn 1918 British governor Colonel Ronald Storrs demolished the wall erected in 1842 by the Greek Orthodox between nave and choir.\nThe passageway which connects St. Jerome's Cave and the Cave of the Nativity was expanded in February 1964, allowing easier access for visitors. American businessman Stanley Slotkin was visiting at the time and purchased a quantity of the limestone rubble, more than a million irregular fragments about across. He sold them to the public encased in plastic crosses, and they were advertised in infomercials in 1995.\nDuring the Second Intifada in April 2002, the church was the site of a month-long siege in which approximately 50 armed Palestinians wanted by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) took refuge inside the church. Christians in the church gave refuge to the fighters, giving them food, water, and protection from Israeli military forces stationed outside. Israeli media claimed that the Christians inside were being held hostage, however, parishioners inside the church say they and the church were treated with respect.\nCurtains caught fire in the grotto beneath the church on 27 May 2014, which resulted in some slight damage.\nThe church's joint owners undertook a major renovation starting in September 2013, probably to be completed in 2021 (see also under Restoration (2013\u20132019)).\nWorld Heritage Site.\nIn 2012, the church complex became the first Palestinian site to be listed as a World Heritage Site by the World Heritage Committee at its 36th session on 29 June. It was approved by a secret vote of 13\u20136 in the 21-member committee, according to UNESCO spokeswoman Sue Williams, and following an emergency candidacy procedure that by-passed the 18-month process for most sites, despite the opposition of the United States and Israel. The site was approved under criteria four and six. The decision was a controversial one on both technical and political terms. It was placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger from 2012 to 2019, as it was suffering from damages due to water leaks.\nRestoration (2013\u20132019).\nEndangered status.\nThe basilica was placed on the 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites by the World Monuments Fund:\nThe present state of the church is worrying. Many roof timbers are rotting, and have not been replaced since the 19th century. The rainwater that seeps into the building not only accelerates the rotting of the wood and damages the structural integrity of the building, but also damages the 12th-century wall mosaics and paintings. The influx of water also means that there is an ever-present chance of an electrical fire. If another earthquake were to occur on the scale of the one of 1834, the result would most likely be catastrophic. ... It is hoped that the listing will encourage its preservation, including getting the three custodians of the church\u2014the Greek Orthodox Church, the Armenian Orthodox Church, and the Franciscan order\u2014to work together, which has not happened for hundreds of years. The Israeli government and the Palestinian Authority would also have to work together to protect it.\nA Presidential committee for the restoration of the Nativity Church was appointed in 2008. In the following year, an international consortium team of experts from different Universities, under the supervision of Prof. Claudio Alessandri (University of Ferrara, Italy), was given the task of planning and coordinating the restoration works.\nLogistics and organisation.\nIn 2010, the Palestinian Authority announced that a multimillion-dollar restoration programme was imminent. Although a majority Muslim nation, albeit with a significant Christian minority, Palestinians consider the church a national treasure and one of their most visited tourist sites. President Mahmoud Abbas has been actively involved in the project, which is led by Ziad al-Bandak. The project is partially funded by Palestinians and conducted by a team of Palestinian and international experts.\nRestoration process.\nThe initial phase of the restoration work was completed in early 2016. New windows have been installed, structural repairs on the roof have been completed and art works and mosaics have been cleaned and restored. The works went further with the consolidation of the narthex, the cleaning and consolidation of all wooden elements, the cleaning of wall mosaics, mural paintings, and floor mosaics. The works came to pause in 2021; however there is still restoration work to be done as of June 2024. The remaining goals of the project include: the conservation of the stone tiles of the Church of the Nativity\u2019s front yard, the addition of a firefighting system, a climate control system, structural consolidation, further prevention of seismic activity damage, and the restoration of the central nave. The most necessary of the repairs yet to be done is restoration of the Grotto of the Nativity.\nDiscoveries.\nItalian restoration workers uncovered a seventh surviving mosaic angel in July 2016, which was previously hidden under plaster. According to the Italian restorer Marcello Piacenti, the mosaics \"are made of gold leaf placed between two glass plates\" and solely \"faces and limbs are drawn with small pieces of stone.\"\nProperty and administration.\nThe property rights, liturgical use and maintenance of the church are regulated by a set of documents and understandings known as the Status Quo. The church is owned by three church authorities, the Greek Orthodox (most of the building and furnishings), the Catholic and the Armenian Apostolic (each of them with lesser properties). The Coptic Orthodox and Syriac Orthodox are holding minor rights of worship at the Armenian church in the northern transept, and at the Altar of Nativity.\nThere have been repeated brawls among monk trainees over quiet respect for others' prayers, hymns and even the division of floor space for cleaning duties. The Palestinian police are often called to restore peace and order.\nSite architecture and layout.\nThe centrepiece of the Nativity complex is the Grotto of the Nativity, a cave which enshrines the site where Jesus is said to have been born.\nThe core of the complex connected to the Grotto consists of the Church of the Nativity itself, and the adjoining Catholic Church of St. Catherine north of it.\nOuter courtyard.\nBethlehem's main city square, Manger Square, is an extension of the large paved courtyard in front of the Church of the Nativity and St Catherine's. Here crowds gather on Christmas Eve to sing Christmas carols in anticipation of the midnight services.\nBasilica of the Nativity.\nThe main Basilica of the Nativity is maintained by the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem. It is designed like a typical Roman basilica, with five aisles formed by Corinthian columns, and an apse in the eastern end containing the sanctuary.\nThe basilica is entered through a very low door called the \"Door of Humility.\"\nThe church's interior walls feature medieval golden mosaics once covering the side walls, which are now in large parts lost.\nThe original Roman-style floor of the basilica has been covered over with flagstones, but there is a trap door in the floor which opens up to reveal a portion of the original mosaic pavement from the Constantinian basilica.\nThere are 44 columns separating the aisles from each other and from the nave, some of which are painted with images of saints, such as the Irish monk Catald (fl. 7th century), the patron of the Sicilian Normans, Canute IV (c. 1042\u20131086), king of Denmark, and Olaf II (995\u20131030), king of Norway.\nThe east end of the church consists of a raised chancel, closed by an apse containing the main altar and separated from the chancel by a large gilded iconostasis.\nA complex array of sanctuary lamps is placed throughout the entire building.\nThe open ceiling exposes the wooden rafters, recently restored. The previous 15th-century restoration used beams donated by King Edward IV of England, who also donated lead to cover the roof; however, this lead was taken by the Ottoman Turks, who melted it down for ammunition to use in war against Venice.\nStairways on either side of the chancel lead down to the Grotto.\nGrotto of the Nativity.\nThe Grotto of the Nativity, the place where Jesus is said to have been born, is an underground space which forms the crypt of the Church of the Nativity. It is situated underneath its main altar, and it is normally accessed by two staircases on either side of the chancel. The grotto is part of a network of caves, which are accessed from the adjacent Church St Catherine's. The tunnel-like corridor connecting the Grotto to the other caves is normally locked.\nThe cave has an eastern niche said to be the place where Jesus was born, which contains the Altar of Nativity. The exact spot where Jesus was born is marked beneath this altar by a 14-pointed silver star with the Latin inscription \"Hic De Virgine Maria Jesus Christus Natus Est-1717\" (\"Here Jesus Christ was born to the Virgin Mary-1717\"). It was installed by the Catholics in 1717, removed \u2013 allegedly by the Greeks \u2013 in 1847, and replaced by the Turkish government in 1853. The star is set into the marble floor and surrounded by 15 silver lamps representing the three Christian communities: six belong to the Greek Orthodox, four to the Catholics, and five to the Armenian Apostolic. The Altar of the Nativity is maintained by the Greek Orthodox and Armenian Apostolic churches. The significance of the 14 points on the star is to represent the three sets of 14 generations in the genealogy of Jesus Christ. First 14 from Abraham to David, then 14 from David to the Babylonian captivity, then 14 more to Jesus Christ. In the middle of the 14 pointed star is a circular hole, through which one can reach in to touch the stone that is said to be the original stone that Mary lay on when she gave birth to Jesus. On the apse above the altar was a 12th-century mosaic depicting the Nativity; the base of the mosaic read \"Gloria in excelsis Deo et in terra pax hominibus bonae voluntatis\" (\"Glory to God in the highest and on earth peace to men of good will\"). The mosaic was vandalized in 1873 by Greeks who rioted against the Franciscans. Fragments of the mosaic can still be seen on the apse but are covered over by an icon during liturgical celebrations by the Greeks and Armenians.\nCatholics are in charge of a section of the grotto known as the \"Grotto of the Manger\", marking the traditional site where Mary laid the newborn baby in the manger. The Altar of the Magi is located directly opposite from the manger site. The Franciscans are also in charge of a door, at the opposite end of the Altar of the Nativity, that opens to a passageway connecting the grotto with the underground chapels of Saint Catherine Church.\nChurch of St. Catherine.\nThe adjoining Church of St. Catherine is a Catholic church dedicated to Catherine of Alexandria, built in a more modern Gothic Revival style. It has been further modernized according to the liturgical trends which followed Vatican II.\nThis is the church where the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem celebrates Midnight Mass on Christmas Eve. Certain customs in this Midnight Mass predate Vatican II, but must be maintained because the \"Status Quo\" was legally fixed by a Firman (decree) in 1852 under the Ottoman Empire, which is still in force today.\nThe bas-relief of the Tree of Jesse is a sculpture by Czes\u0142aw D\u017awigaj which was recently incorporated into the Church of St. Catherine as a gift of Pope Benedict XVI during his trip to the Holy Land in 2009. It represents an olive tree as the Tree of Jesse, displaying the genealogy of Jesus from Abraham through Joseph, as well as symbolism from the Old Testament. The upper portion is dominated by a crowned figure of Christ the King in an open-armed pose blessing the Earth. It is situated along the passage used by pilgrims making their way to the Grotto of the Nativity.\nCaves accessed from St. Catherine's.\nSeveral chapels are found in the caves accessed from St. Catherine's, including the Chapel of Saint Joseph commemorating the angel's appearance to Joseph, commanding him to flee to Egypt; the Chapel of the Innocents, commemorating the children killed by Herod; and the Chapel of Saint Jerome, in the underground cell where tradition holds he lived while translating the Bible into Latin (the Vulgate).\nTombs.\nTraditional tombs of saints.\nAccording to a tradition not sustained by history, the tombs of four Catholic saints are said to be located beneath the Church of the Nativity, in the caves accessible from the Church of St. Catherine:\nAncient burials.\nA number of ancient trough-shaped tombs can be seen in the Catholic-owned caves adjacent to the Nativity Grotto and St Jerome's Cave, some of them inside the Chapel of the Innocents; more tombs can be seen on the southern, Greek-Orthodox side of the Basilica of the Nativity, also presented as being those of the infants murdered by Herod.\nAccording to researcher Haytham Dieck, rock-cut tombs and bone fragments in one restricted room of the church date from the 1st century AD. In another clandestine chamber, the Cave of the Holy Innocents, skulls and other bones from as many as 2,000 people (according to Dieck) are collected, but are clearly not infantile.\nChristmas in Bethlehem.\nThere are three different dates for the celebration of Christmas Eve and Christmas Day in Bethlehem:\nLatin and Protestant.\nThe Catholic Midnight Mass in Bethlehem on Christmas Eve is broadcast around the world. Festivities begin hours earlier when dignitaries welcome the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem at the entrance to the city, near Rachel's Tomb. Accompanied by a parade of youth organizations, he then makes his way to Manger Square, where crowds are waiting. Finally, he enters the Catholic Church of Saint Catherine for Mass, after which he leads the way to the adjacent Church of the Nativity. The patriarch carries a figurine of the Baby Jesus and places it on the silver star in the Nativity Grotto under the basilica.\nProtestants worship either at the Lutheran church or the Church of the Nativity. However, some Protestant congregations go to Beit Sahour, a village near Bethlehem.\nGreek Orthodox.\nOn the Orthodox Christmas Eve, 13 days later, many visitors and faithful again fill Manger Square, this time to watch processions and receptions for the religious leaders of the different Eastern Orthodox communities.\nArmenian.\nMembers of the Armenian community are the last ones to celebrate Christmas, on 18 and 19 January, in their own section of the Nativity Church. The altars there are also used by the smaller denominations during their respective Christmas festivities.\nSee also.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63635", "revid": "6569922", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63635", "title": "Lewisburg", "text": "Lewisburg is the name of several places in the United States of America:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "63636", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63636", "title": "Littleton", "text": "Littleton may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlaces.\nIn Ireland:\nIn the United Kingdom:\nIn the United States:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63637", "revid": "1534529", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63637", "title": "Mercer", "text": "Mercer may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63638", "revid": "11360876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63638", "title": "Middletown", "text": "Middletown may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63639", "revid": "36869945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63639", "title": "Volga", "text": "River in Russia; longest river in Europe\nThe Volga (, ) is the longest river in Europe and the longest endorheic basin river in the world. Situated in Russia, it flows through Central Russia to Southern Russia and into the Caspian Sea. The Volga has a length of , and a catchment area of . It is also Europe's largest river in terms of average discharge at delta \u2013 between and \u2013 and of drainage basin. It is widely regarded as the national river of Russia. The hypothetical old Russian state, the Rus' Khaganate, arose along the Volga c.\u2009830 AD. Historically, the river served as an important meeting place of various Eurasian civilizations.\nThe river flows in Russia through forests, forest steppes and steppes. Five of the ten largest cities of Russia, including the nation's capital, Moscow, are located in the Volga's drainage basin. Because the Volga drains into the Caspian Sea, which is an endorheic body of water, the Volga does not naturally connect to any of the world's oceans.\nSome of the largest reservoirs in the world are located along the Volga River. The river has a symbolic meaning in Russian culture \u2013 Russian literature and folklore often refer to it as \u0412\u043e\u043b\u0433\u0430-\u043c\u0430\u0442\u0443\u0448\u043a\u0430 \"Volga-Matushka\" (Mother Volga).\nName.\nThe Russian hydronym () derives from Proto-Slavic *\"v\u00f2lga\" 'wetness, moisture', which is preserved in many Slavic languages, () 'moisture', Bulgarian () 'moisture', Czech 'dampness', Serbo-Croatian: () 'moisture', Slovene 'moisture', Polish 'moisture' and Macedonian () 'moisture', among others.\nThe Scythian name for the Volga was , literally meaning 'wetness'. This is related to the Avestan name for a mythical stream, (), which means \"wet\" or \"moisture\", and was derived from Proto-Indo-European or ). This name can be compared to several Indo-Iranic terms, such as:\nThe Scythian name survives in modern Moksha as ().\nThe Greek author Herodotus recorded two more ancient Iranic names of the Volga:\nThe Turkic peoples living along the river formerly referred to it as or \"Atil\". In modern Turkic languages, the Volga is known as () in Tatar, () in Chuvash, in Bashkir, in Kazakh, and in Turkish. The Turkic names go back to the ancient Turkic form \"/\", the origin and meaning of which are not clear. Perhaps this form has a connection with the hydronym \"Irtesh\".\nThe Turkic peoples associated the Itil's origin with the Kama. Thus, a left tributary to the Kama was named the 'White Itil' which unites with the 'Black Itil' at the modern city of Ufa. The name () is used in the Cherkess language.\nIn Asia the river was known by its other Turkic name 'yellow water', but the Oirats also used their own name, or 'adaptation river'. Presently the Mari, another Uralic group, call the river (), meaning 'way' in Tatar.\nDescription.\nThe Volga is the longest river in Europe, and its catchment area is almost entirely inside Russia, though the longest river in Russia is the Ob\u2013Irtysh river system. It belongs to the closed basin of the Caspian Sea, being the longest river to flow into a closed basin. The source of the Volga lies in the village of Volgoverkhov'e in Tver Oblast. Rising in the Valdai Hills above sea level northwest of Moscow and about southeast of Saint Petersburg, the Volga heads east past Lake Sterzh, Tver, Dubna, Rybinsk, Yaroslavl, Nizhny Novgorod, and Kazan. From there it turns south, flows past Ulyanovsk, Tolyatti, Samara, Saratov and Volgograd, and discharges into the Caspian Sea below Astrakhan at below sea level.\nThe Volga has many tributaries, most importantly the Kama, the Oka, the Vetluga, and the Sura. The Volga and its tributaries form the Volga river system, which flows through an area of about in the most heavily populated part of Russia. The Volga Delta has a length of about and includes as many as 500 channels and smaller rivers. The largest estuary in Europe, it is the only place in Russia where pelicans, flamingos, and lotuses may be found. The Volga freezes for most of its length for three months each year.\nThe Volga drains most of Western Russia. Its many large reservoirs provide irrigation and hydroelectric power. The Moscow Canal, the Volga\u2013Don Canal, and the Volga\u2013Baltic Waterway form navigable waterways connecting Moscow to the White Sea, the Baltic Sea, the Caspian Sea, the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea. High levels of chemical pollution have adversely affected the river and its habitats.\nThe fertile river valley provides large quantities of wheat and other agricultural produce, and also has many mineral riches. A substantial petroleum industry centers on the Volga valley. Other resources include natural gas, salt, and potash. The Volga Delta and the Caspian Sea are fishing grounds.\nReservoirs (downstream to upstream).\nA number of large hydroelectric reservoirs were constructed on the Volga during the Soviet era. They are:\nHuman history.\nThe Volga\u2013Oka region has been occupied for at least 9,000 years and supported a bone and antler industry for producing bone arrowheads, spearheads, lanceheads, daggers, hunters knives, and awls. The makers also used local quartz and imported flints.\nDuring classical antiquity, the Volga formed the boundary between the territories of the Cimmerians in the Caucasian Steppe and the Scythians in the Caspian Steppe. After the Scythians migrated to the west and displaced the Cimmerians, the Volga became the boundary between the territories of the Scythians in the Pontic and Caspian Steppes and the Massagetae in the Caspian and Transcaspian steppes.\nBetween the 6th and the 8th centuries, the Alans settled in the Middle Volga region and in the steppes of Russia's southern region in the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe.\nThe area around the Volga was inhabited by the Slavic tribes of Vyatichs and Buzhans, by Finno-Ugric, Scandinavian, Baltic, Hunnic and Turkic peoples (Tatars, Kipchaks, Khazars) in the first millennium AD, replacing the Scythians. Furthermore, the river played a vital role in the commerce of the Byzantine people. The ancient scholar Ptolemy of Alexandria mentions the lower Volga in his \"Geography\" (Book 5, Chapter 8, 2nd Map of Asia). He calls it the \"Rha\", which was the Scythian name for the river. Ptolemy believed the Don and the Volga shared the same upper branch, which flowed from the Hyperborean Mountains. Between 2nd and 5th centuries Baltic people were very widespread in today's European Russia. Baltic people were widespread from Sozh River till today's Moscow and covered much of today's Central Russia and intermingled with the East Slavs. The Russian ethnicity in Western Russia and around the Volga river evolved to a very large extent, next to other tribes, out of the East Slavic tribe of the Buzhans and Vyatichis. The Vyatichis were originally concentrated on the Oka River. Furthermore, several localities in Russia are connected to the Slavic Buzhan tribe, like for example Sredniy Buzhan in the Orenburg Oblast, Buzan and the Buzan River in the Astrakhan Oblast. Buzhan (; also known as \"B\u016bz\u0101n\") is also a village in Nishapur, Iran. In late 8th century the Russian state Russkiy Kaganate is recorded in different Northern and Oriental sources. The Volga was one of the main rivers of the Rus' Khaganates culture.\nSubsequently, the river basin played an important role in the movements of peoples from Asia to Europe. A powerful polity of Volga Bulgaria once flourished where the Kama joins the Volga, while Khazaria controlled the lower stretches of the river. Such Volga cities as Atil, Saqsin, or Sarai were among the largest in the medieval world. The river served as an important trade route connecting Scandinavia, Finnic areas with the various Slavic tribes and Turkic, Germanic, Finnic and other people in Old Rus', and Volga Bulgaria with Khazaria, Persia and the Arab world.\nKhazars were replaced by Kipchaks, Kimeks and Mongols, who founded the Golden Horde in the lower reaches of the Volga. Later their empire divided into the Khanate of Kazan and Khanate of Astrakhan, both of which were conquered by the Russians in the course of the 16th century Russo-Kazan Wars. The Russian people's deep feeling for the Volga echoes in national culture and literature, starting from the 12th century Lay of Igor's Campaign. The Volga Boatman's Song is one of many songs devoted to the national river of Russia.\nConstruction of Soviet Union-era dams often involved enforced resettlement of huge numbers of people, as well as destruction of their historical heritage. For instance, the town of Mologa was flooded for the purpose of constructing the Rybinsk Reservoir (then the largest artificial lake in the world). The construction of the Uglich Reservoir caused the flooding of several monasteries with buildings dating from the 15th and 16th centuries. In such cases the ecological and cultural damage often outbalanced any economic advantage.\n20th-century conflicts.\nDuring the Russian Civil War, both sides fielded warships on the Volga. In 1918, the Red Volga Flotilla participated in driving the Whites eastward, from the Middle Volga at Kazan to the Kama and eventually to Ufa on the Belaya.\nDuring the Civil War, Joseph Stalin ordered the imprisonment of several military specialists on a barge in the Volga and the sinking of a floating prison in which the officers perished.\nDuring World War II, the city on the big bend of the Volga, currently known as Volgograd, witnessed the Battle of Stalingrad, possibly the bloodiest battle in human history, in which the Soviet Union and the German forces were deadlocked in a stalemate battle for access to the river. The Volga was (and still is) a vital transport route between central Russia and the Caspian Sea, which provides access to the oil fields of the Absheron Peninsula. Hitler planned to use access to the oil fields of Azerbaijan to fuel future German conquests. Apart from that, whoever held both sides of the river could move forces across the river, to defeat the enemy's fortifications beyond the river. By taking the river, Hitler's Germany would have been able to move supplies, guns, and men into the northern part of Russia. At the same time, Germany could permanently deny this transport route by the Soviet Union, hampering its access to oil and to supplies via the Persian Corridor.\nFor this reason, many amphibious military assaults were brought about in an attempt to remove the other side from the banks of the river. In these battles, the Soviet Union was the main offensive side, while the German troops used a more defensive stance, though much of the fighting was close quarters combat, with no clear offensive or defensive side.\nEthnic groups.\nMany different ethnicities lived on the Volga river. Numerous were the Eastern Slavic Vyatchi tribes which took a decisive role in the development of modern Russians. Among the first recorded people along the upper Volga were also the Finnic Mari (\u041c\u0430\u0440\u0438) and Merya (\u041c\u00e4\u0440\u04f9) people. Where the Volga flows through the steppes the area was also inhabited by the Iranian people of the Sarmatians from 200 BC. Since ancient times, even before Rus' states developed, the Volga river was an important trade route where not only Slavic, Turkic and Finnic peoples lived, but also where the Arab world of the Middle East met the Varangian people of the Nordic countries through trade.\nIn the 8th and 9th centuries colonization began from Kievan Rus'. Slavs from Kievan Rus' brought Christianity to the upper Volga, and a portion of non-Slavic local people adopted Christianity and gradually became East Slavs. The remainder of the Mari people migrated to the east far inland. In the course of several centuries the Slavs assimilated the indigenous Finnic populations, such as the Merya, Meshchera and Muroma peoples. The surviving peoples of Volga Finnic ethnicity include the Maris, Erzyas and Mokshas of the middle Volga. Also Khazar and Bulgar peoples inhabited the upper, middle and lower of the Volga River basin.\nApart from the Huns, the earliest Turkic tribes arrived in the 7th century and assimilated some Finno-Ugric and Indo-European population on the middle and lower Volga. The Turkic Christian Chuvash and Muslim Volga Tatars are descendants of the population of medieval Volga Bulgaria. Another Turkic group, the Nogais, formerly inhabited the lower Volga steppes.\nThe Volga region is home to a German minority group, the Volga Germans. Catherine the Great had issued a manifesto in 1763 inviting all foreigners to come and populate the region, offering them numerous incentives to do so. This was partly to develop the region but also to provide a buffer zone between the Russians and the Mongols to the east. Because of conditions in German territories, Germans responded in the largest numbers. Under the Soviet Union a slice of the region was turned into the Volga German Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.\nOn 22 June 1941, Hitler started the German-Soviet War. On 28 August 1941, Stalin had the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR pass a decree \u2018On the resettlement of Germans residing in the Volga region\u2019.\nThe approximately 400,000 remaining Volga Germans were accused of collective collaboration, deported to Siberia and Central Asia, and forced into labour camps of the \u2018Labour Army\u2019 (\u0422\u0440\u0443\u0434\u0430\u0440\u043c\u0438\u044f); thousands of them died. \nMost Russian Germans (men and women) were \u2018conscripted\u2019 between October 1942 and December 1943.\nIn 1964, they were officially cleared of the accusation of collaboration, albeit with restrictions. (1964 marked the end of the Khrushchev era, which had begun in 1953 after Stalin's death. The Thaw period lasted from about 1956 to October 1964. \nThe freedom of travel granted in 1972 allowed a return to the Volga, but explicitly not to the settlement inhabited before the deportation. This only became possible after the Dissolution of the Soviet Union.\nNavigation.\nThe Volga, widened for navigation purposes with construction of huge dams during the years of Joseph Stalin's industrialization, is of great importance to inland shipping and transport in Russia: all the dams in the river have been equipped with large (double) ship locks, so that vessels of considerable dimensions can travel from the Caspian Sea almost to the upstream end of the river.\nConnections with the river Don and the Black Sea are possible through the Volga\u2013Don Canal. Connections with the lakes of the North (Lake Ladoga, Lake Onega), Saint Petersburg and the Baltic Sea are possible through the Volga\u2013Baltic Waterway; and commerce with Moscow has been realised by the Moscow Canal connecting the Volga and the Moskva River.\nThis infrastructure has been designed for vessels of a relatively large scale (lock dimensions of on the Volga, slightly smaller on some of the other rivers and canals) and it spans many thousands of kilometers. A number of formerly state-run, now mostly privatized, companies operate passenger and cargo vessels on the river; Volgotanker, with over 200 petroleum tankers, is one of them.\nIn the later Soviet era, up to the modern times, grain and oil have been among the largest cargo exports transported on the Volga.\n Until recently access to the Russian waterways was granted to foreign vessels on a very limited scale. The increasing contacts between the European Union and Russia have led to new policies with regard to the access to the Russian inland waterways.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63640", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63640", "title": "Partridge", "text": "Common name for a type of bird\nA partridge is a medium-sized galliform bird in any of several genera, with a wide native distribution throughout parts of Europe, Asia and Africa. Several species have been introduced to the Americas. They are sometimes grouped in the Perdicinae subfamily of the Phasianidae (pheasants, quail, etc.). However, molecular research suggests that partridges are not a distinct taxon within the superfamily Phasianoidea, but that some species are closer to the pheasants, while others are closer to the junglefowl.\nDescription.\nPartridges are medium-sized game birds, generally intermediate in size between the larger pheasants and smaller quail; they're ground-dwelling birds that feature variable plumage colouration across species, with most tending to grey and brown.\nRange and habitat.\nPartridges are native to Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. Some species are found nesting on steppes or agricultural land, while other species prefer more forested areas. They nest on the ground and have a diet consisting of seeds and insects.\nHunting.\nSpecies such as the grey partridge and the red-legged partridge are popular as game birds, and are often reared in captivity and released for the purpose of hunting. For the same reason, they have been introduced into large areas of North America.\nCultural references.\nAccording to Greek legend, the first partridge appeared when Daedalus threw his apprentice, Talos, off the sacred hill of Athena in a fit of jealous rage. Supposedly mindful of his fall, the bird does not build its nest in the trees, nor take lofty flights and avoids high places.\nAs described by medieval scholar Madeleine Pelner Cosman, medical practitioners in the Middle Ages recommended partridge as a food of love: They suggested that \"Partridge was superior in arousing dulled passions and increasing the powers of engendering. Gentle to the human stomach, partridge stimulated bodily fluids, raised the spirits, and firmed the muscles.\"\nProbably the most famous reference to the partridge is in the Christmas carol, \"The Twelve Days of Christmas\". The first gift listed is \"a partridge in a pear tree\", and these words end each verse. Since partridges are unlikely to be seen in pear trees (they are ground-nesting birds) it has been suggested that the text \"a pear tree\" is a corruption of the French \"une perdrix\" (a partridge).\nThe partridge has also been used as a symbol that represents Kurdish nationalism. It is called \"Kew\". Sherko Kurmanj discusses the paradox of symbols in Iraq as an attempt to make a distinction between the Kurds and the Arabs. He says that while Iraqis generally regards the palm tree, falcon, and sword as their national symbols, the Kurds consider the oak, partridge, and dagger as theirs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63641", "revid": "1281233658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63641", "title": "Midland", "text": "Midland may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63642", "revid": "1138640320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63642", "title": "Morristown", "text": "Morristown may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63644", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63644", "title": "Palmyra (disambiguation)", "text": "Palmyra is the ancient Greek name for the Syrian city of Tadmur.\nFor the modern city of Palmyra (near ancient Palmyra) see Palmyra (modern)\nPalmyra may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63646", "revid": "48675950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63646", "title": "Petersburg", "text": "Petersburg, or Petersburgh, may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63648", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63648", "title": "Petersburgh", "text": ""}
{"id": "63649", "revid": "86857", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63649", "title": "Vaisya", "text": ""}
{"id": "63650", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63650", "title": "Pelham", "text": "Pelham may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63656", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63656", "title": "Quorn, Leicestershire", "text": "Village in Leicestershire, England\nQuorn () is a village and civil parish in Leicestershire, England, near the university town of Loughborough. Its name was shortened from Quorndon in 1889, to avoid postal difficulties owing to its similarity to the name of another village, Quarndon, in neighbouring Derbyshire.\nHistory.\nThe first known evidence of the village is in the Lincoln Episcopal Registers for 1209\u20131235, as Quernendon. Other variations of the village name over the centuries include Querne, Quendon, Querendon, Quarendon, Qaryndon, Querinden, Querondon, and Quernedon.\nThe quarrying of stone in Quorn began at a very early age at Buddon Wood, on the edge of the parish. Granite millstones were quarried in the early Iron Age, and under the Romans stone was quarried for building in Leicester. Some of the larger millstones can still be seen in the area, however these days they are either used as garden ornaments, or worked into seats or slabs. The village's name is thought to be derived from the Old English \"cweorndun\", meaning \"hill (\"dun\") where millstones (\"cweorn\") are obtained\".\nQuorn Hall, off Meynell Road on the eastern edge of the village, was built for the Farnham family in about 1680. It became the home of renowned fox hunter Hugo Meynell in 1753. He established his pack of hounds there, where it continued under later masters until 1905, thus giving a name to the famous Quorn Hunt. Three Royal Navy ships have been named HMS \"Quorn\" after the hunt.\nThroughout history, the village has suffered extensive flooding due to the shallow natural gradient of the River Soar. This was exacerbated in the late 18th century when locks and weirs were constructed as part of the Leicester Navigation (later the Grand Union) and the canalisation of the river.\nThe village is indirectly linked to the meat substitute Quorn, which began production in 1985.\nWorld Wars.\n96 men from Quorn lost their lives in the two World Wars (77 in World War I and 19 in World War II). A cenotaph in Quorn's Memorial Gardens honours these men.\nQuorn Camp was established on the grounds of Quorn House during World War II. It was used as a PoW camp and was also host to a number of the United States Army 82nd Airborne Division's 505th Parachute Infantry Regiment. These paratroopers were involved in liberating the town of Sainte-M\u00e8re-\u00c9glise, in Normandy, France, on the morning of D-Day and included Pvt. John Marvin Steele who famously became caught on the town's church spire. This incident is today commemorated with a dummy paratrooper and parachute attached to the church in Sainte-M\u00e8re-\u00c9glise.\nA number of American veterans come back to Quorn, particularly every tenth anniversary of the D-Day landings, to remember their time in Quorn and their comrades who did not return.\nThere is a plaque commemorating the lost US servicemen in Quorn's Memorial Gardens, upon which a poppy wreath is placed each year on Remembrance Sunday. There is also an avenue of lime trees in Stafford Orchard (the village park) in remembrance of those American soldiers that died, together with a plaque.\nToday.\nQuorn is built around the old A6 road which runs through the centre of the village. On 28 October 1991 a dual carriageway bypass opened taking the A6 away to the north-eastern edge of the village.\nThe village has a railway station called Quorn and Woodhouse, shared with the neighbouring hamlet of Woodhouse, which was on the national Great Central Railway network, with the section through Quorn preserved as the Great Central Railway (heritage railway). Numerous royal visitors have disembarked at the station to take part in the Quorn Hunt, including the Prince of Wales (later King Edward VIII). As well as being a site of historical and cultural interest throughout the year, the station hosts a fireworks display on the Bonfire weekend. The station is also home to a small vintage tea room at the 'bridge-most' end of the platform, and the Butler Henderson Caf\u00e9 in the main car park.\nSarson Street, running adjacent to Rawlins Community College, features many 19th-century terraced cottages, formerly those of framework knitters. Framework knitting was a major local industry until the onset of major mechanisation, and the cottages along this road display certain features typical of such an activity. Large windows for example were intended to allow in the necessary amount of light by which to work.\nM. Wright &amp; Sons Ltd have been manufacturing fabrics at Quorn Mill, on Leicester Road, since 1870. Originally producing fabrics for the footwear and corset trades, the factory now produces high technology textiles for various industries including military, aerospace and leisure.\n\"The Banks\" area of the village is an ornate paved area with seating, designed to resemble the letter 'Q' when seen from the air.\nThe village prides itself on its green spaces, and more evidence of this can be seen with the opposition to proposed development at Caves field. This is a large cricket pitch with pavilion where Quorn Cricket Club play during the season, near the centre of Quorn, which was the focus of interest from a housing development company. Objection was widespread, not only at the prospect of losing the cricket field but also due to the threat to a neighbouring wetland ecosystem, considered valuable by environmentalists and the village population. The Farley Way Stadium is home to local association football club Quorn F.C. as well as Leicester City W.F.C.\nIn the past few years, efforts have been made to cater for the local young people. These have resulted in a half pipe being built next to the basketball court on Stafford Orchard, and a green shelter erected on the same site. In recent years the half pipe was removed and replaced by ready made ramps. Stafford Orchard is the large park, with a shaded area by the stream, youngster's play area and half pipe now appeals to people of all ages. Examples of how the Stafford Orchard contributes to the village can be seen at the large and successful Mayday celebrations, as well as the local pub football matches occasionally held there.\nIn 2016, Quorn was named as one of the top five places in the UK to bring up a family in a survey conducted by estate agents, Leaders.\nIn 2024, Quorn village suffered https:// after Storm Henk hits the UK.\nNotable buildings.\nThe Church of St Bartholomew and Farnham Chapel is a Grade I listed building.\nQuorn House, off Meeting Street, is a Grade II listed building, built in 1820, and was the seat of the Farnham family from c.1260 until 1993 when it was sold to fitness instructor Rosemary Conley, whose business occupied the building until 2015. Quorn House and the surrounding 120 acres of parkland was then purchased by Tarmac, operators of Mountsorrel Quarry, who have used the building as office space.\nEducation.\nSt Bartholomew's Primary School is a Church of England controlled school for foundation-age children through year 6.\nIn the centre of the village, adjacent to St Bartholomew's Church, is Rawlins Academy, a secondary school which goes from years 7 to Sixth form where they got a good in the 2017 Ofsted report and outstanding in the Sixth form. The school also provides adult education and leisure classes. This is on the site of the Thomas Rawlins Grammar School for Girls.\nLoughborough Grammar School have a number of sports pitches on the edge of the village.\nPopulation.\nThe 2011 census showed Quorn's population to be 5,177 (an increase from 4,961 in 2001), composed of 2,524 males and 2,653 females.\nParish and boundaries.\nThe full name, Quorndon, is still the official name of the civil parish.\nThe River Soar forms much of Quorn's eastern boundary with the village of Barrow upon Soar and captures Pilling's Lock and parts of the Grand Union Canal, Midland Main Line railway and A6 dual carriageway. The southern boundary, with the neighbouring villages of Mountsorrel, Rothley and Swithland, encompasses Buddon Wood, Mountsorrel Quarry and part of Swithland Reservoir. The Great Central Railway makes up most of western boundary with the village of Woodhouse. The northern boundary captures Bull in the Hollow Farm and is shared with the hamlet of Woodthorpe and the town of Loughborough.\nQuorn, Australia.\nThe outback township of Quorn, South Australia, was named in May 1878 by Governor William Jervois of the then Province of South Australia after Quorn, Leicestershire \u2013 the birthplace of his private secretary, Mr J. H. B. Warner.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "63658", "revid": "1316637612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63658", "title": "Ramsay", "text": "Ramsay may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63659", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63659", "title": "Napoleonic Empire Wars", "text": ""}
{"id": "63660", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63660", "title": "Riverdale", "text": "Riverdale may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63662", "revid": "43990906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63662", "title": "Roselle", "text": "Roselle may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63663", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63663", "title": "Fly", "text": "Order of insects\nFlies are insects of the order Diptera, the name being derived from the Greek \u03b4\u03b9- \"di-\" \"two\", and \u03c0\u03c4\u03b5\u03c1\u03cc\u03bd \"pteron\" \"wing\". Insects of this order use only a single pair of wings to fly, the hindwings having evolved into advanced mechanosensory organs known as halteres, which act as high-speed sensors of rotational movement and allow dipterans to perform advanced aerobatics. Diptera is a large order containing more than 150,000 species including horse-flies, crane flies, hoverflies, mosquitoes and others.\nFlies have a mobile head, with a pair of large compound eyes, and mouthparts designed for piercing and sucking (mosquitoes, black flies and robber flies), or for lapping and sucking in the other groups. Their wing arrangement gives them great manoeuvrability in flight, and claws and pads on their feet enable them to cling to smooth surfaces. Flies undergo complete metamorphosis; the eggs are often laid on the larval food-source and the larvae, which lack true limbs, develop in a protected environment, often inside their food source. Other species are ovoviviparous, opportunistically depositing hatched or hatching larvae instead of eggs on carrion, dung, decaying material, or open wounds of mammals. The pupa is a tough capsule from which the adult emerges when ready to do so; flies mostly have short lives as adults.\nDiptera is one of the major insect orders and of considerable ecological and human importance. Flies are major pollinators, second only to the bees and their Hymenopteran relatives. Flies may have been among the evolutionarily earliest pollinators responsible for early plant pollination. Fruit flies are used as model organisms in research, but less benignly, mosquitoes are vectors for malaria, dengue, West Nile fever, yellow fever, encephalitis, and other infectious diseases; and houseflies, commensal with humans all over the world, spread foodborne illnesses. Flies can be annoyances especially in some parts of the world where they can occur in large numbers, buzzing and settling on the skin or eyes to bite or seek fluids. Larger flies such as tsetse flies and screwworms cause significant economic harm to cattle. Blowfly larvae, known as gentles, and other dipteran larvae, known more generally as maggots, are used as fishing bait, as food for carnivorous animals, and in medicine in debridement, to clean wounds.\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nRelationships to other insects.\nDipterans are holometabolous, meaning that they undergo radical metamorphosis. They belong to the Mecopterida, alongside the Mecoptera, Siphonaptera, Lepidoptera and Trichoptera. The possession of a single pair of wings distinguishes most true flies from other insects with \"fly\" in their names. However, some true flies such as Hippoboscidae (louse flies) have become secondarily wingless.\nThe cladogram represents the current consensus view.\nRelationships between subgroups and families.\nThe first true dipterans known are from the Middle Triassic (around 240 million years ago), and they became widespread during the Middle and Late Triassic. Modern flowering plants did not appear until the Cretaceous (around 140 million years ago), so the original dipterans must have had a different source of nutrition other than nectar. Based on the attraction of many modern fly groups to shiny droplets, it has been suggested that they may have fed on honeydew produced by sap-sucking bugs which were abundant at the time, and dipteran mouthparts are well-adapted to softening and lapping up the crusted residues. The basal clades in the Diptera include the Deuterophlebiidae and the enigmatic Nymphomyiidae. Three episodes of evolutionary radiation are thought to have occurred based on the fossil record. Many new species of lower Diptera developed in the Triassic, about 220 million years ago. Many lower Brachycera appeared in the Jurassic, some 180 million years ago. A third radiation took place among the Schizophora at the start of the Paleogene, 66 million years ago.\nThe phylogenetic position of Diptera has been controversial. The monophyly of holometabolous insects has long been accepted, with the main orders being established as Lepidoptera, Coleoptera, Hymenoptera and Diptera, and it is the relationships between these groups which has caused difficulties. Diptera is widely thought to be a member of Mecopterida, along with Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths), Trichoptera (caddisflies), Siphonaptera (fleas), Mecoptera (scorpionflies) and possibly Strepsiptera (twisted-wing flies). Diptera has been grouped with Siphonaptera and Mecoptera in the Antliophora, but this has not been confirmed by molecular studies.\nDiptera were traditionally broken down into two suborders, Nematocera and Brachycera, distinguished by the differences in antennae. The Nematocera are identified by their elongated bodies and many-segmented, often feathery antennae as represented by mosquitoes and crane flies. The Brachycera have rounder bodies and much shorter antennae. Subsequent studies have identified the Nematocera as being paraphyletic with modern phylogenies placing the Brachycera within grades of groups formerly placed in the Nematocera. The construction of a phylogenetic tree has been the subject of ongoing research. The following cladogram is based on the FLYTREE project.\n\"Abbreviations used in the cladogram:\"\nA 2023 study revised the phylogeny of the Nematocera. The grouping remains paraphyletic with respect to the Brachycera, but is rearranged, with Deuterophlebiidae basal (sister to the rest), Nymphomyiidae placed inside Culicomorpha, and Blephariceridae within Psychodomorpha. Finally, Anisopodidae becomes sister to the Brachycera.\nDiversity.\nFlies are often abundant and are found in almost all terrestrial habitats. They include many familiar insects such as house flies, blow flies, mosquitoes, gnats, black flies, midges and fruit flies. More than 150,000 have been formally described and the actual species diversity is much greater, with the flies from many parts of the world yet to be studied intensively. The suborder Nematocera include generally small, slender insects with long antennae such as mosquitoes, gnats, midges and crane-flies, while the Brachycera includes broader, more robust flies with short antennae. Many nematoceran larvae are aquatic. There are estimated to be a total of about 19,000 species of Diptera in Europe, 22,000 in the Nearctic region, 20,000 in the Afrotropical region, 23,000 in the Oriental region and 19,000 in the Australasian region. While most species have restricted distributions, a few like the housefly (\"Musca domestica\") are cosmopolitan. \"Gauromydas heros\" (Asiloidea), with a length of up to , is generally considered to be the largest fly in the world, while the smallest is \"Euryplatea nanaknihali\", which at is smaller than a grain of salt.\nBrachycera are ecologically very diverse, with many being predatory at the larval stage and some being parasitic. Animals parasitised include molluscs, woodlice, millipedes, insects, mammals, and amphibians. Flies are the second largest group of pollinators after the Hymenoptera (bees, wasps and relatives). In wet and colder environments flies are significantly more important as pollinators. Compared to bees, they need less food as they do not need to provision their young. Many flowers that bear low nectar and those that have evolved trap pollination depend on flies. It is thought that some of the earliest pollinators of plants may have been flies.\nThe greatest diversity of gall-forming insects is found among the flies, principally among the gall midges (Cecidomyiidae). Many flies (most importantly in the family Agromyzidae) lay their eggs in the mesophyll tissue of leaves with larvae feeding between the surfaces forming blisters and mines. Some families feed on fungi. These include the cave dwelling fungus gnats (Mycetophilidae) whose larvae are bioluminescent, and the Sciaridae. Some plants are pollinated by fungus feeding flies that visit fungus-infected male flowers.\nThe larvae of \"Megaselia scalaris\" (Phoridae) are omnivorous and may consume such substances as paint and shoe polish. \"Exorista mella\" is a generalist and parasitoid of multiple hosts. The larvae of shore flies (Ephydridae) and some chironomid midges survive in extreme environments including glaciers (as in \"Diamesa\" sp.), hot springs, geysers, saline pools, sulphur pools, septic tanks and even crude oil (\"Helaeomyia petrolei\"). Adult hoverflies (Syrphidae) are well known for their mimicry and the larvae adopt diverse lifestyles including being inquiline scavengers inside the nests of social insects. Some brachycerans are agricultural pests, some bite animals and humans and suck their blood, and some transmit diseases.\nAnatomy and morphology.\nFlies are adapted for aerial movement and typically have short and streamlined bodies. The first tagma of the fly, the head, bears the eyes, the antennae, and the mouthparts (the labrum, labium, mandible, and maxilla make up the mouthparts). The second tagma, the thorax, bears the wings and contains the flight muscles on the second segment, which is greatly enlarged; the first and third segments have been reduced to collar-like structures, and the third segment bears the halteres, which help to balance the insect during flight. The third tagma is the abdomen consisting of 11 segments, some of which may be fused, and with the three hindmost segments modified for reproduction. Some Dipterans are mimics and can only be distinguished from their models by very careful inspection. An example of this is \"Spilomyia longicornis\", which is a fly but mimics a vespid wasp.\nFlies have a mobile head with a pair of large compound eyes on the sides of the head, and in most species, three small ocelli on the top. The compound eyes may be close together or widely separated, and in some instances are divided into a dorsal region and a ventral region, perhaps to assist in swarming behaviour. The antennae are well-developed but variable, being thread-like, feathery or comb-like in the different families. The mouthparts are adapted for piercing and sucking, as in the black flies, mosquitoes and robber flies, and for lapping and sucking as in many other groups. Female horse-flies use knife-like mandibles and maxillae to make a cross-shaped incision in the host's skin and then lap up the blood that flows. The gut includes large diverticulae, allowing the insect to store small quantities of liquid after a meal.\nFor visual course control, flies' optic flow field is analyzed by a set of motion-sensitive neurons. A subset of these neurons is thought to be involved in using the optic flow to estimate the parameters of self-motion, such as yaw, roll, and sideward translation. Other neurons are thought to be involved in analyzing the content of the visual scene itself, such as separating figures from the ground using motion parallax. The H1 neuron is responsible for detecting horizontal motion across the entire visual field of the fly, allowing the fly to generate and guide stabilizing motor corrections midflight with respect to yaw. The ocelli are concerned in the detection of changes in light intensity, enabling the fly to react swiftly to the approach of an object.\nLike other insects, flies have chemoreceptors that detect smell and taste, and mechanoreceptors that respond to touch. The third segments of the antennae and the maxillary palps bear the main olfactory receptors, while the gustatory receptors are in the labium, pharynx, feet, wing margins and female genitalia, enabling flies to taste their food by walking on it. The taste receptors in females at the tip of the abdomen receive information on the suitability of a site for ovipositing. Flies that feed on blood have special sensory structures that can detect infrared emissions, and use them to home in on their hosts. Many blood-sucking flies can detect the raised concentration of carbon dioxide that occurs near large animals. Some tachinid flies (Ormiinae) which are parasitoids of bush crickets, have sound receptors to help them locate their singing hosts.\nDiptera have one pair of fore wings on the mesothorax and a pair of halteres, or reduced hind wings, on the metathorax. A further adaptation for flight is the reduction in number of the neural ganglia, and concentration of nerve tissue in the thorax, a feature that is most extreme in the highly derived Muscomorpha infraorder. Some flies such as the ectoparasitic Nycteribiidae and Streblidae are exceptional in having lost their wings and become flightless. The only other order of insects bearing a single pair of true, functional wings, in addition to any form of halteres, are the Strepsiptera. In contrast to the flies, the Strepsiptera bear their halteres on the mesothorax and their flight wings on the metathorax. Each of the fly's six legs has a typical insect structure of coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia and tarsus, with the tarsus in most instances being subdivided into five tarsomeres. At the tip of the limb is a pair of claws, and between these are cushion-like structures known as pulvilli which provide adhesion.\nThe abdomen shows considerable variability among members of the order. It consists of eleven segments in primitive groups and ten segments in more derived groups, the tenth and eleventh segments having fused. The last two or three segments are adapted for reproduction. Each segment is made up of a dorsal and a ventral sclerite, connected by an elastic membrane. In some females, the sclerites are rolled into a flexible, telescopic ovipositor.\nFlight.\nFlies are capable of great manoeuvrability during flight due to the presence of the halteres. These act as gyroscopic organs and are rapidly oscillated in time with the wings; they act as a balance and guidance system by providing rapid feedback to the wing-steering muscles, and flies deprived of their halteres are unable to fly. The wings and halteres move in synchrony but the amplitude of each wing beat is independent, allowing the fly to turn sideways. The wings of the fly are attached to two kinds of muscles, those used to power it and another set used for fine control.\nFlies tend to fly in a straight line then make a rapid change in direction before continuing on a different straight path. The directional changes are called saccades and typically involve an angle of 90\u00b0, being achieved in 50 milliseconds. They are initiated by visual stimuli as the fly observes an object, nerves then activate steering muscles in the thorax that cause a small change in wing stroke which generate sufficient torque to turn. Detecting this within four or five wingbeats, the halteres trigger a counter-turn and the fly heads off in a new direction.\nFlies have rapid reflexes that aid their escape from predators but their sustained flight speeds are low. Dolichopodid flies in the genus \"Condylostylus\" respond in less than five milliseconds to camera flashes by taking flight. In the past, the deer bot fly, \"Cephenemyia\", was claimed to be one of the fastest insects on the basis of an estimate made visually by Charles Townsend in 1927. This claim, of speeds of 600 to 800 miles per hour, was regularly repeated until it was shown to be physically impossible as well as incorrect by Irving Langmuir. Langmuir suggested an estimated speed of 25 miles per hour.\nAlthough most flies live and fly close to the ground, a few are known to fly at heights and a few like \"Oscinella\" (Chloropidae) are known to be dispersed by winds at altitudes of up to 2,000\u00a0ft and over long distances. Some hover flies like \"Metasyrphus corollae\" have been known to undertake long flights in response to aphid population spurts.\nMales of fly species such as \"Cuterebra\", many hover flies, bee flies (Bombyliidae) and fruit flies (Tephritidae) maintain territories within which they engage in aerial pursuit to drive away intruding males and other species. While these territories may be held by individual males, some species, such as \"A. freeborni\", form leks with many males aggregating in displays. Some flies maintain an airspace and still others form dense swarms that maintain a stationary location with respect to landmarks. Many flies mate in flight while swarming.\nLife cycle and development.\nDiptera go through a complete metamorphosis with four distinct life stages \u2013 egg, larva, pupa and adult.\nLarva.\nIn many flies, the larval stage is long and adults may have a short life. Most dipteran larvae develop in protected environments; many are aquatic and others are found in moist places such as carrion, fruit, vegetable matter, fungi and, in the case of parasitic species, inside their hosts. They tend to have thin cuticles and become desiccated if exposed to the air. Apart from the Brachycera, most dipteran larvae have sclerotised head capsules, which may be reduced to remnant mouth hooks; the Brachycera, however, have soft, gelatinized head capsules from which the sclerites are reduced or missing. Many of these larvae retract their heads into their thorax. The spiracles in the larva and pupa do not have any internal mechanical closing device.\nSome other anatomical distinction exists between the larvae of the Nematocera and the Brachycera. Especially in the Brachycera, little demarcation is seen between the thorax and abdomen, though the demarcation may be visible in many Nematocera, such as mosquitoes; in the Brachycera, the head of the larva is not clearly distinguishable from the rest of the body, and few, if any, sclerites are present. Informally, such brachyceran larvae are called maggots, but the term is not technical and often applied indifferently to fly larvae or insect larvae in general. The eyes and antennae of brachyceran larvae are reduced or absent, and the abdomen also lacks appendages such as cerci. This lack of features is an adaptation to food such as carrion, decaying detritus, or host tissues surrounding endoparasites. Nematoceran larvae generally have well-developed eyes and antennae, while those of Brachyceran larvae are reduced or modified.\nDipteran larvae have no jointed, \"true legs\", but some dipteran larvae, such as species of Simuliidae, Tabanidae and Vermileonidae, have prolegs adapted to hold onto a substrate in flowing water, host tissues or prey. The majority of dipterans are oviparous and lay batches of eggs, but some species are ovoviviparous, where the larvae starting development inside the eggs before they hatch or viviparous, the larvae hatching and maturing in the body of the mother before being externally deposited. These are found especially in groups that have larvae dependent on food sources that are short-lived or are accessible for brief periods. This is widespread in some families such as the Sarcophagidae. In \"Hylemya strigosa\" (Anthomyiidae) the larva moults to the second instar before hatching, and in \"Termitoxenia\" (Phoridae) females have incubation pouches, and a full developed third instar larva is deposited by the adult and it almost immediately pupates with no freely feeding larval stage. The tsetse fly (as well as other Glossinidae, Hippoboscidae, Nycteribidae and Streblidae) exhibits adenotrophic viviparity; a single fertilised egg is retained in the oviduct and the developing larva feeds on glandular secretions. When fully grown, the female finds a spot with soft soil and the larva works its way out of the oviduct, buries itself and pupates. Some flies like \"Lundstroemia parthenogenetica\" (Chironomidae) reproduce by thelytokous parthenogenesis, and some gall midges have larvae that can produce eggs (paedogenesis).\nPupa.\nThe pupae take various forms. In some groups, particularly the Nematocera, the pupa is intermediate between the larval and adult form; these pupae are described as \"obtect\", having the future appendages visible as structures that adhere to the pupal body. The outer surface of the pupa may be leathery and bear spines, respiratory features or locomotory paddles. In other groups, described as \"coarctate\", the appendages are not visible. In these, the outer surface is a puparium, formed from the last larval skin, and the actual pupa is concealed within. When the adult insect is ready to emerge from this tough, desiccation-resistant capsule, it inflates a balloon-like structure on its head, and forces its way out.\nAdult.\nThe adult stage is usually short, its function is only to mate and lay eggs. The genitalia of male flies are rotated to a varying degree from the position found in other insects. In some flies, this is a temporary rotation during mating, but in others, it is a permanent torsion of the organs that occurs during the pupal stage. This torsion may lead to the anus being below the genitals, or, in the case of 360\u00b0 torsion, to the sperm duct being wrapped around the gut and the external organs being in their usual position. When flies mate, the male initially flies on top of the female, facing in the same direction, but then turns around to face in the opposite direction. This forces the male to lie on his back for his genitalia to remain engaged with those of the female, or the torsion of the male genitals allows the male to mate while remaining upright. This leads to flies having more reproduction abilities than most insects, and much quicker. Flies occur in large populations due to their ability to mate effectively and quickly during the mating season. More primitive groups mates in the air during swarming, but most of the more advanced species with a 360\u00b0 torsion mate on a substrate.\nEcology.\nTrophic levels.\nAs ubiquitous insects, dipterans play an important role at various trophic levels both as consumers and as prey. In some groups the larvae complete their development without feeding, and in others the adults do not feed. The larvae can be herbivores, scavengers, decomposers, predators or parasites, with the consumption of decaying organic matter being one of the most prevalent feeding behaviours. The fruit or detritus is consumed along with the associated micro-organisms, a sieve-like filter in the pharynx being used to concentrate the particles, while flesh-eating larvae have mouth-hooks to help shred their food. The larvae of some groups feed on or in the living tissues of plants and fungi, and some of these are serious pests of agricultural crops. Some aquatic larvae consume the films of algae that form underwater on rocks and plants. Many of the parasitoid larvae grow inside and eventually kill other arthropods, while parasitic larvae may attack vertebrate hosts.\nHabitats and ecological niches.\nWhereas many dipteran larvae are aquatic or live in enclosed terrestrial locations, the majority of adults live above ground and are capable of flight. Predominantly they feed on nectar or plant or animal exudates, such as honeydew, for which their lapping mouthparts are adapted. Some flies have functional mandibles that may be used for biting. The flies that feed on vertebrate blood have sharp stylets that pierce the skin, with some species having anticoagulant saliva that is regurgitated before absorbing the blood that flows; in this process, certain diseases can be transmitted. The bot flies (Oestridae) have evolved to parasitize mammals. Many species complete their life cycle inside the bodies of their hosts. The larvae of a few fly groups (Agromyzidae, Anthomyiidae, Cecidomyiidae) are capable of inducing plant galls. Some dipteran larvae are leaf-miners. The larvae of many brachyceran families are predaceous. In many dipteran groups, swarming is a feature of adult life, with clouds of insects gathering in certain locations; these insects are mostly males, and the swarm may serve the purpose of making their location more visible to females.\nMost adult diptera have their mouthparts modified to sponge up fluid. The adults of many species of flies (e.g. \"Anthomyia\" sp., \"Steganopsis melanogaster\") that feed on liquid food will regurgitate fluid in a behaviour termed as \"bubbling\" which has been thought to help the insects evaporate water and concentrate food or possibly to cool by evaporation. Some adult diptera are known for kleptoparasitism such as members of the Sarcophagidae. The miltogramminae are known as \"satellite flies\" for their habit of following wasps and stealing their stung prey or laying their eggs into them. Phorids, milichids and the genus \"Bengalia\" are known to steal food carried by ants. Adults of \"Ephydra hians\" forage underwater, and have special hydrophobic hairs that trap a bubble of air that lets them breathe underwater.\nAnti-predator adaptations.\nFlies are eaten by other animals at all stages of their development. The eggs and larvae are parasitised by other insects and are eaten by many creatures, some of which specialise in feeding on flies but most of which consume them as part of a mixed diet. Birds, bats, frogs, lizards, dragonflies and spiders are among the predators of flies. Many flies have evolved mimetic resemblances that aid their protection. Batesian mimicry is widespread with many hoverflies resembling bees and wasps, ants and some species of tephritid fruit fly resembling spiders. Some species of hoverfly are myrmecophilous\u2014their young live and grow within the nests of ants. They are protected from the ants by imitating chemical odours given by ant colony members. Bombyliid bee flies such as \"Bombylius major\" are short-bodied, round, furry, and distinctly bee-like as they visit flowers for nectar, and are likely also Batesian mimics of bees.\nIn contrast, \"Drosophila subobscura,\" a species of fly in the genus \"Drosophila\", lacks a category of hemocytes that are present in other studied species of \"Drosophila\", leading to an inability to defend against parasitic attacks, a form of innate immunodeficiency.\nHuman interaction and cultural depictions.\nSymbolism.\nFlies play a variety of symbolic roles in different cultures. These include both positive and negative roles in religion. In the traditional Navajo religion, Big Fly is an important spirit being. In Christian demonology, Beelzebub is a demonic fly, the \"Lord of the Flies\", and a god of the Philistines.\nFlies have appeared in literature since ancient Sumer. In a Sumerian poem, a fly helps the goddess Inanna when her husband Dumuzid is being chased by \"galla\" demons. In the Mesopotamian versions of the flood myth, the dead corpses floating on the waters are compared to flies. Later, the gods are said to swarm \"like flies\" around the hero Utnapishtim's offering. Flies appear on Old Babylonian seals as symbols of Nergal, the god of death. Fly-shaped lapis lazuli beads were often worn in ancient Mesopotamia, along with other kinds of fly-jewellery.\nIn Ancient Egypt, flies appear in amulets and as a military award for bravery and tenacity, due to the fact that they always come back when swatted at. It is thought that flies may have also been associated with the departing spirit of the dead, as they are often found near dead bodies. In modern Egypt, a similar belief persists in some areas to not swat at shiny green flies, as they may be carrying the soul of a recently deceased person.\nIn a little-known Greek myth, a very chatty and talkative maiden named Myia (meaning \"fly\") enraged the moon-goddess Selene by attempting to seduce her lover, the sleeping Endymion, and was thus turned by the angry goddess into a fly, who now always deprives people of their sleep in memory of her past life. In \"Prometheus Bound\", which is attributed to the Athenian tragic playwright Aeschylus, a gadfly sent by Zeus's wife Hera pursues and torments his mistress Io, who has been transformed into a cow and is watched constantly by the hundred eyes of the herdsman Argus: \"Io: Ah! Hah! Again the prick, the stab of gadfly-sting! O earth, earth, hide, the hollow shape\u2014Argus\u2014that evil thing\u2014the hundred-eyed.\" William Shakespeare, inspired by Aeschylus, has Tom o'Bedlam in \"King Lear\", \"Whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlpool, o'er bog and quagmire\", driven mad by the constant pursuit. In \"Antony and Cleopatra\", Shakespeare similarly likens Cleopatra's hasty departure from the Actium battlefield to that of a cow chased by a gadfly. More recently, in 1962 the biologist Vincent Dethier wrote \"To Know a Fly\", introducing the general reader to the behaviour and physiology of the fly.\n\"Musca depicta\" (\"painted fly\" in Latin) is a depiction of a fly as an inconspicuous element of various paintings. This feature was widespread in 15th and 16th centuries paintings and its presence may be explained by various reasons.\nFlies appear in popular culture in concepts such as fly-on-the-wall documentary-making in film and television production. The metaphoric name suggests that events are seen candidly, as a fly might see them. Flies have inspired the design of miniature flying robots. Steven Spielberg's 1993 film \"Jurassic Park\" relied on the idea that DNA could be preserved in the stomach contents of a blood-sucking fly fossilised in amber, though the mechanism has been discounted by scientists.\nEconomic importance.\nDipterans are an important group of insects and have a considerable impact on the environment. Some leaf-miner flies (Agromyzidae), fruit flies (Tephritidae and Drosophilidae) and gall midges (Cecidomyiidae) are pests of agricultural crops; others such as tsetse flies, screwworm and botflies (Oestridae) attack livestock, causing wounds, spreading disease, and creating significant economic harm. See article: Parasitic flies of domestic animals. A few can even cause myiasis in humans. Still others such as mosquitoes (Culicidae), blackflies (Simuliidae) and drain flies (Psychodidae) impact human health, acting as vectors of major tropical diseases.\nAmong these, \"Anopheles\" mosquitoes transmit malaria, filariasis, and arboviruses; \"Aedes aegypti\" mosquitoes carry dengue fever and the Zika virus; blackflies carry river blindness; sand flies carry leishmaniasis. Other dipterans are a nuisance to humans, especially when present in large numbers; these include houseflies, which contaminate food and spread food-borne illnesses; the biting midges and sandflies (Ceratopogonidae) and the houseflies and stable flies (Muscidae). In tropical regions, eye flies (Chloropidae) which visit the eye in search of fluids can be a nuisance in some seasons.\nMany dipterans serve roles that are useful to humans. Houseflies, blowflies and fungus gnats (Mycetophilidae) are scavengers and aid in decomposition. Robber flies (Asilidae), tachinids (Tachinidae) and dagger flies and balloon flies (Empididae) are predators and parasitoids of other insects, helping to control a variety of pests. Many dipterans such as bee flies (Bombyliidae) and hoverflies (Syrphidae) are pollinators of crop plants.\nUses.\n\"Drosophila melanogaster\", a fruit fly, has long been used as a model organism in research because of the ease with which it can be bred and reared in the laboratory, its small genome, and the fact that many of its genes have counterparts in higher eukaryotes. A large number of genetic studies have been undertaken based on this species; these have had a profound impact on the study of gene expression, gene regulatory mechanisms and mutation. Other studies have investigated physiology, microbial pathogenesis and development among other research topics. The studies on dipteran relationships by Willi Hennig helped in the development of cladistics, techniques that he applied to morphological characters but now adapted for use with molecular sequences in phylogenetics.\nMaggots found on corpses are useful to forensic entomologists. Maggot species can be identified by their anatomical features and by matching their DNA. Maggots of different species of flies visit corpses and carcases at fairly well-defined times after the death of the victim, and so do their predators, such as beetles in the family Histeridae. Thus, the presence or absence of particular species provides evidence for the time since death, and sometimes other details such as the place of death, when species are confined to particular habitats such as woodland.\nSome species of maggots such as blowfly larvae (gentles) and bluebottle larvae (casters) are bred commercially; they are sold as bait in angling, and as food for carnivorous animals (kept as pets, in zoos, or for research) such as some mammals, fishes, reptiles, and birds. It has been suggested that fly larvae could be used at a large scale as food for farmed chickens, pigs, and fish. However, consumers are opposed to the inclusion of insects in their food, and the use of insects in animal feed remains illegal in areas such as the European Union. \nFly larvae can be used as a biomedical tool for wound care and treatment. Maggot debridement therapy (MDT) is the use of blow fly larvae to remove the dead tissue from wounds, most commonly being amputations. Historically, this has been used for centuries, both intentional and unintentional, on battlefields and in early hospital settings. Removing the dead tissue promotes cell growth and healthy wound healing. The larvae also have biochemical properties such as antibacterial activity found in their secretions as they feed. These medicinal maggots are a safe and effective treatment for chronic wounds.\nThe Sardinian cheese casu marzu is exposed to flies known as cheese skippers such as \"Piophila casei\", members of the family Piophilidae. The digestive activities of the fly larvae soften the cheese and modify the aroma as part of the process of maturation. At one time European Union authorities banned sale of the cheese and it was becoming hard to find, but the ban has been lifted on the grounds that the cheese is a traditional local product made by traditional methods.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral\nAnatomy\nDescribers"}
{"id": "63664", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63664", "title": "Saint Joseph (disambiguation)", "text": "Saint Joseph is a New Testament figure, the husband of Mary and legal father of Jesus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSaint Joseph may also refer to:\nGeography.\nRivers.\nIn the United States:\nOther place names.\nIn the United States:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63665", "revid": "7609619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63665", "title": "Mickey Mantle", "text": "American baseball player (1931\u20131995)\nMickey Charles Mantle (October 20, 1931 \u2013 August 13, 1995), nicknamed \"the Mick\" and \"the Commerce Comet\", was an American professional baseball player who played his entire Major League Baseball (MLB) career (1951\u20131968) with the New York Yankees, primarily as a center fielder. Mantle is regarded by many as being one of the best players and sluggers of all time. He was an American League (AL) Most Valuable Player three times and was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974.\nBorn in Spavinaw, Oklahoma, Mantle was raised by his father to become a baseball player and was trained early on to become a switch hitter. Despite a career plagued with injuries, beginning with his knee injury in the 1951 World Series, he became one of the greatest offensive threats in baseball history, and was able to hit for both average and power. He is the only player to hit 150 home runs from each side of the plate. Mantle hit 536 career home runs while batting .300 or more ten times; he is 16th all-time in home runs per at-bat and 17th in on-base percentage.\nMantle won the Triple Crown in 1956, when he led the major leagues in batting average (.353), home runs (52), and runs batted in (RBI) (130). He was an All-Star for 16 seasons, playing in 16 of the 20 All-Star Games that he was selected for. He also had a solid .984 fielding percentage when playing center field, winning a Gold Glove in that position. He appeared in 12 World Series, winning seven championships, and holds World Series records for the most home runs (18), RBIs (40), extra-base hits (26), runs (42), walks (43), and total bases (123), and he has the highest World Series on-base and slugging percentages.\nAfter retirement, Mantle worked as sports commentator for NBC for a few years and had a brief stint as first base and hitting coach for the Yankees in the 1970 season. Despite being one of the best-paid athletes of his era, he was a poor businessman and suffered financial setbacks from business failures. His private life was plagued by tumult and tragedy. His marriage fell apart due to his alcoholism and infidelity, and three of his sons became alcoholics, one of them dying from it. Towards the end of his life, Mantle came to regret his hard lifestyle and the damage he had inflicted on his family. Before his final year, he was treated for alcoholism and became sober, afterwards warning others of the dangers of hard drinking. He died in Dallas, Texas, aged 63, from liver cancer brought on by years of alcohol abuse.\nEarly years.\nMantle was born on October 20, 1931, in Spavinaw, Oklahoma, the son of Lovell Thelma (n\u00e9e Richardson; previously Davis) (1904\u20131995) and Elvin Charles \"Mutt\" Mantle (1912\u20131952). He was of at least partial English ancestry; his great-grandfather George Mantle left Brierley Hill, a small town in England's Black Country, and immigrated to the United States in 1848.\nMantle had two older half-siblings, Ted and Anna Bae Davis, from his mother's first marriage, and four younger full siblings: twin brothers Ray and Roy, brother Larry, and sister Barbara. When he was four years old, Mantle's family moved to the nearby town of Commerce, Oklahoma, where his father worked in lead and zinc mines.\nA semi-pro player himself, Mutt Mantle decided that his eldest son would be a baseball player before Mantle was even born. He named his eldest son after Hall of Fame catcher Mickey Cochrane and, very early on, began training Mickey to become a switch-hitter: Mantle later recalled batting left-handed against his father, who pitched to him right-handed, and batting right-handed against his grandfather, Charles Mantle, who pitched to him left-handed.\nIn addition to baseball, Mantle was an all-around athlete at Commerce High School, playing basketball and football. He excelled in football, playing the halfback position. After graduating, Mantle was offered a football scholarship by the University of Oklahoma but declined it at his father's behest. However, in his sophomore year, he sustained an injury during a practice football game which nearly ended his athletic career. He was kicked in the left shin and developed osteomyelitis, an infectious disease incurable just a few years earlier, in his left leg. Mantle's parents drove him overnight to Oklahoma City, where he was treated at a children's hospital with the newly available penicillin. The treatment successfully reduced the infection and saved his leg from amputation.\nLater in life, Mantle confided in friends and family about how he suffered from sexual abuse as a child at the hands of his older half-sister Anna Bae, who often babysat her younger half-siblings when Mantle's parents were out, as well as by other adults, including Anna Bae's friends and older boys in the neighborhood. His wife Merlyn recalled later on that Mantle also had a sexual relationship with one of his high school teachers when he was still a minor. According to Merlyn, the teacher \"seduced\" him: \"She just laid over him.\"\nThe child sexual abuse he endured at the hands of family and adults likely contributed to Mantle's self-destructive behavior as an adult, with biographer Jane Leavy speculating that Mantle, like many childhood sexual abuse victims, likely suffered from complex post-traumatic stress disorder.\nProfessional baseball.\nMinor leagues (1948\u20131950).\nMantle began his professional baseball career in Kansas with the semi-professional Baxter Springs Whiz Kids. In 1948, Yankees scout Tom Greenwade came to Baxter Springs to watch Mantle's teammate, third baseman Willard \"Billy\" Johnson. During the game, Mantle hit three home runs. Greenwade returned in 1949, after Mantle's high school graduation, to sign Mantle to a minor league contract with the Yankees at $140 per month (), with a $1,500 signing bonus ().\nMantle was assigned to the Yankees' Class-D Independence Yankees of the Kansas\u2013Oklahoma\u2013Missouri League, where he played shortstop and hit .313. He hit his first professional home run on June 30, 1949, at Shulthis Stadium in Independence, Kansas. The ball went over the center field fence, which was 460 feet from home plate. In 1950, Mantle was promoted to the Class-C Joplin Miners of the Western Association, where he won the Western Association batting title with a .383 average. He hit 26 home runs and recorded 136 RBIs, but struggled defensively at shortstop.\nIn July 1950, after the start of the Korean War, Mantle was drafted for military service. The draft board rejected him as physically unqualified for military service due the osteomyelitic condition of his left leg and gave him a 4-F deferment, the first of three times he was rejected for military service.\nMajor leagues (1951\u20131968).\nRookie season: 1951.\nMantle was invited to the Yankees instructional camp before the 1951 season and proceeded to make a big impression during spring training. One famous incident was when he hit two home runs at Bovard Field against the USC Trojans baseball team, when the Yankees were on a thirteen-game spring training tour of the west coast. Both home runs, one from each side of the plate, reportedly traveled a distance of at least 500 feet. Impressed by the 19-year-old's power, Yankees manager Casey Stengel decided to promote Mantle to the majors as a right fielder instead of sending him to the minors; his salary for the 1951 season was $7,500. Mantle was assigned uniform No. 6, signifying the expectation from the Yankees front office that he would become the next Yankees star, following Babe Ruth (No. 3), Lou Gehrig (No. 4), and Joe DiMaggio (No. 5).\nAfter a brief slump, Mantle was sent down to the Yankees' top farm team, the Kansas City Blues. His struggles at the plate continued. Out of frustration, he called his father and told him: \"I don't think I can play baseball anymore.\" Mutt Mantle drove up to Kansas City that day. When he arrived, he started packing his son's clothes and, according to Mantle, said: \"I thought I raised a man. I see I raised a coward instead. You can come back to Oklahoma and work the mines with me.\" After his father's rebuke, Mantle gradually broke out of his slump and went on to hit .361 with 11 home runs and 50 RBIs during his stay in Kansas City.\nMantle was called up to the Yankees after 40 games with Kansas City, this time wearing uniform No. 7. He hit .267 with 13 home runs and 65 RBI in 96 games as the Yankees reached the World Series against the New York Giants. In the second game of the 1951 World Series, Giants rookie Willie Mays hit a fly ball to right-center field. Mantle, playing right field, raced for the ball together with center fielder DiMaggio. At the last moment, the latter called for the ball. In attempting to stay out of DiMaggio's way, Mantle's spikes got caught over an exposed drain pipe. His knee twisted awkwardly and he fell instantly, his right knee injured severely. Mantle had to be carried off the field on a stretcher. This was the first of numerous injuries that were to plague his eighteen-year career with the Yankees. He was to play the rest of his career with a torn anterior cruciate ligament (ACL).\nAccompanying his son to the hospital after the game, Mantle's father collapsed onto the sidewalk while trying to help his son into a taxi. The two were given hospital beds in the same room and watched the remainder of the World Series together. Mutt Mantle was diagnosed with Hodgkin's disease; he died a few months later at the age of 40, on May 7, 1952. Mantle, at the time away with the Yankees, was informed by manager Stengel of his father's death and was inconsolable.\nRise to stardom: 1952\u20131960.\nFollowing the 1951 World Series, DiMaggio retired from baseball. As a result, Mantle moved to center field before the start of the 1952 season. He played that position full-time for the Yankees until 1965, when he was moved to left field near the end of his career. That year, Mantle was selected as an All-Star for the first time but did not make an appearance in the rain-shortened All-Star Game. The Yankees won the pennant and faced the Brooklyn Dodgers in the World Series. Mantle performed well in the series, recording an on-base percentage above .400 and a slugging percentage above .600. In Game 6, he homered in a 3\u20132 win. In Game 7, he knocked in the winning runs in the 4\u20132 victory, with a home run in the sixth inning and an RBI single in the seventh.\nMantle's emergence as a star center fielder coincided with the Korean War. Due to his previous rejection, he was not amongst the baseball players who joined the Armed Forces, leading baseball fans and sportswriters to question his 4-F deferment. This led to newspapers even calling him a \"draft dodger\" and Mantle receiving threatening letters. In April 1951, Mantle was re-examined by the draft board and was once again rejected as being physically unfit for military service. A second highly publicized physical, brought on by his All-Star selection, was held in October 1952 and ended in a final rejection, this time due to the knee injury sustained in the 1951 World Series.\nMantle had a strong 1953 season, making the All-Star Game and helping the Yankees to another World Series, which they won against the Brooklyn Dodgers. He missed several weeks due to his previously injured knee which had been left untreated after the initial stay in hospital in 1951. After the season ended, a full two years after the injury he had picked up at the 1951 series, Mantle had surgery performed on his left knee in November 1953. The following season, Mantle recorded his first 100-RBI season while also hitting over .300 and leading the league in runs scored. He had a strong season in 1955 as well, leading the AL in home runs, triples, and walks, and recording a .306 batting average.\nThe 1956 season was, statistically, Mantle's greatest and was later described by him as his \"favorite summer.\" He led the majors with .353 batting average, 52 home runs, and 130 RBIs, winning the Triple Crown, the only switch hitter to do so. This was the first of three AL MVP Awards. He also hit his second All-Star Game home run that season. That year, the Yankees again faced the Brooklyn Dodgers in the World Series. In the fifth inning of Game 5, Mantle kept Don Larsen's perfect game alive by making a running catch of a deep fly ball off the bat of Gil Hodges. The inning before, he had scored the first of the Yankees' two runs with a home run off Brooklyn starter Sal Maglie. Mantle's overall performance in 1956 led to his being named Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year, and he was also awarded the Hickok Belt as the top American professional athlete of the year.\nMantle won his second consecutive MVP in 1957, leading the leagues in runs scored and walks and recording a career-high batting average of .365, second best in the AL. That season, Mantle reached base more times than he made outs (319 to 312), one of two seasons in which he achieved the feat. In the 1957 World Series, the Yankees faced the Milwaukee Braves. During Game 5, Mantle suffered a torn tendon in his left shoulder from a collision with Braves second baseman Red Schoendienst. The Braves won the series in seven games and the injury would lead to Mantle having struggles in his uppercut swing from the left side for the remainder of his career.\nStill recovering from his shoulder injury, Mantle's 1958 season started slowly; during the first half, he was hitting a modest .274. He eventually regained his form, hitting .330 in the second half of the season, finishing with .304 batting average and leading the league in home runs, runs scored, and walks. He led the Yankees back to a World Series rematch against the Braves, this time coming out victorious. Despite his strong season, the Yankees declined Mantle's request for a contract raise to $85,000, citing that his batting average was almost 61 points lower than the year before. After briefly holding out, Mantle eventually settled for their lower offer of $70,000.\nIn the 1959 season, as the Yankees finished third in the AL rankings, Mantle's overall numbers declined from the previous season. He recorded only 75 RBIs and also racked up a league-leading 126 strikeouts. Though he led the team in base stealing (23), runs scored (104), on-base percentage (.390), and fielding percentage (.995), Mantle agreed to take a salary cut of $10,000 at the end of the season. The 1959 season was also the first of four consecutive seasons when two All-Star games were played, with Mantle playing in seven of these games. Mantle made the All-Star team as a reserve player in 1959. In the first game, he was used as a pinch runner and as replacement right fielder. In the second game, Mantle was the starting center fielder, recording a single and a walk in four at-bats.\nMantle began the 1960 season slowly, with his batting average dropping as low as .228 in June. However, he regained his form and finished the season leading the AL in home runs and runs scored, as the Yankees won the pennant. That year, Mantle started in both All-Star games, getting two walks in the first and a single in the second. Although his batting average was the lowest since his rookie year, a league-leading 40 home runs and 94 RBIs saw him come a close second to teammate Roger Maris in the MVP race. In the 1960 World Series against the Pittsburgh Pirates, Mantle turned in his best performance in a single postseason. In seven games, he batted .400 (10-for-25) with 9 walks, hitting three home runs with 11 RBIs and recording an on-base percentage of .545. The Yankees lost the World Series in Game 7 on Bill Mazeroski's walk-off home run. Mantle was devastated by the loss, reportedly crying in the clubhouse afterwards. He would later call the loss in the 1960 World Series as one of the biggest disappointments of his career.\nM&amp;M Boys: 1961 home run chase.\nDuring the 1961 season, Mantle and teammate Roger Maris, known as the M&amp;M Boys, pursued Babe Ruth's 1927 single-season record of 60 home runs. Five years earlier, Mantle had challenged Ruth's record for most of the season, and the New York press had been protective of Ruth on that occasion. When Mantle finally fell short, finishing with 52 home runs, many reporters were relieved. The New York press was harsh in its treatment of Mantle in his early years with the Yankees, emphasizing that he struck out frequently, was injury-prone, was a rube from Oklahoma, and was perceived as inferior to DiMaggio. Over time, however, Mantle had learned to deal with the New York media and had gained the favor of the press, receiving help from teammate Whitey Ford, a native of Queens.\nUnlike Mantle, Maris was new to the New York scene, having been traded to the Yankees from the Kansas City Athletics before the 1960 season, and never managed to adjust to demands of the New York press, many of whom began to view him as surly and rude. During the 1961 season, the press pushed the notion of the Yankees being Mantle's team, with Maris often belittled and ostracized as an outsider and not a \"true Yankee\".\nLate in the season, Mantle was hospitalized with a severe abscessing septic infection on his hip, which had resulted from a \"miracle shot\" that he had received from physician Max Jacobson at the recommendation of Yankees broadcaster Mel Allen. It was discovered years later that Jacobson's so-called \"miracle shot\" was in fact laced with various substances, including amphetamines and methamphetamines, and resulted in at least one death. This revelation exposed Jacobson as a fraud and he was stripped of his medical license in 1975.\nWhile Maris went on to break the record on the last day of the season, Mantle finished with 54 home runs, setting a single-season record for a switch-hitter that stood until September 2025. He also led the AL in runs scored and walks. For the second consecutive year, he narrowly missed winning his third MVP award, finishing second to repeat winner Maris. Under new manager Ralph Houk, the Yankees won the World Series that year against the Cincinnati Reds. Neither Mantle nor Maris performed well in the series, recording between them three hits and two RBIs in twenty-five at-bats over five games.\nFinal seasons: 1962\u20131968.\nIn 1962, Mantle batted .321 in 121 games and was selected as an All-Star for the eleventh consecutive season. He played in the first game but, due to the recurrence of an old injury, sat out the second. Despite missing 41 games, he was selected as MVP for the third time, beating out teammate Bobby Richardson in the voting. With a .978 fielding percentage that season, he also received his only Gold Glove Award. In the 1962 World Series, the Yankees beat the San Francisco Giants in seven games. Mantle fared poorly in the series, hitting .120 with five strikeouts. After the 1962 season, the Yankees gave Mantle a contract of $100,000, making him the fifth player to reach that pinnacle, after Hank Greenberg, Joe DiMaggio, Ted Williams, and Stan Musial. Only Willie Mays, with a salary of $105,000, made more than Mantle in 1963. Having reached the $100,000 salary threshold, Mantle never asked for another raise.\nOn May 22, 1963, Mantle hit a long drive off the top of the right field facade at Yankee Stadium, the closest that anyone came to hitting a home run out of the old stadium. However, on June 5, he broke his foot while trying to prevent a home run by Brooks Robinson in Baltimore; his spikes had been caught in the center field chain-link fence as he came down after leaping against it. As a result, he did not play again until August 4, when he hit a pinch-hit home run against the Baltimore Orioles at Yankee Stadium. Mantle returned to the center field position on September 2 and finished the season batting .314 in 65 games. He was selected as an All-Star but, due to the foot injury, did not make the AL 25-man roster for the first time.\nThat year, the Yankees made the World Series and were favorites to win over the Los Angeles Dodgers. They were swept in four games for the first time in franchise history. In Game 1, Mantle struck out twice against Cy Young Award winner and National League MVP Sandy Koufax, who finished with a record-setting 15 strikeouts in a World Series game. In Game 4, he hit a home run off Koufax to tie Babe Ruth's record of 15 in the World Series. With the tying run on base in the ninth inning, he struck out against Koufax for the third time. He finished the series 1-for-15 with five strikeouts.\nIn 1964, Mantle hit .303 with 35 home runs and 111 RBIs, and played center field in the All-Star game. He finished in second place in the MVP voting. The Yankees faced the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1964 World Series. In the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 3, Mantle hit a walk-off home run into the right field stands at Yankee Stadium to win the game for his team by a score of 2\u20131. This was his 16th home run in the World Series, breaking Ruth's record of 15. He hit two more home runs in the series to set a new record of 18, including an opposite field shot off Cardinals star Bob Gibson in St. Louis, and hit .333 with 8 RBIs overall. Despite Mantle's performance, the Cardinals won the World Series in seven games behind Gibson's overall excellent pitching.\nOn April 9, 1965, the Houston Astros and the Yankees played an exhibition game to inaugurate the Astrodome, the world's first multi-purpose, domed sports stadium. In the sixth inning Mantle hit the park's first home run. By 1965, he and the aging Yankees were slowed by injuries, finishing sixth in the AL rankings. Mantle hit .255 with 19 home runs and 46 RBI in 361 plate appearances. He was again selected as an All-Star, this time as a reserve player, and did not make an appearance in the game.\nIn 1966, Mantle's batting average increased to .288 with 23 home runs and 56 RBI in 333 at-bats. This improvement was largely due to strong performances in June and July, when he returned to his normal form until sidelined with another injury. After the 1966 season, he was replaced by Joe Pepitone in the outfield, and spent his final two seasons at first base. On May 14, 1967, Mantle became the sixth member of the 500 home run club.\nMantle hit .237 with 18 home runs and 54 RBIs during his final season in 1968. As a result, his lifetime average was to dip below .300, which caused him a lot of anguish. That year, despite his lowly numbers, Mantle was selected as an All-Star and made an appearance as a pinch-hitter at the All-Star Game at the Astrodome.\nRetirement.\nMantle announced his retirement at the age of 37 on March 1, 1969. He delivered a farewell speech on Mickey Mantle Day, June 8, 1969, at Yankee Stadium. Mantle's wife, mother, and mother-in-law were in attendance and received recognition at the ceremony held in his honor. When he retired, Mantle was third on the all-time home-run list with 536, and he was the Yankees' all-time leader in games played with 2,401, a record that would be broken by Derek Jeter on August 29, 2011.\nCareer statistics.\nIn his career, Mantle batted .298 with an on-base percentage of .421 and an on-base plus slugging percentage of .977. He accumulated 2,415 hits, including 536 home runs, 344 doubles, and 72 triples. While Mantle led the league in strikeouts five times, holding the all-time record at the time of his retirement, he was also adept at drawing walks. He led the majors in walks five times and finished with at least 100 walks in a season ten times. As an outfielder, he recorded a career fielding percentage of .982.\nMantle was selected as an All-Star every season during his 18-year career except for 1951 and 1966. He was a seven-time World Series champion with the Yankees, playing in twelve overall. In the World Series, he hit .257 over 65 games and holds the all-time World Series records for home runs (18), runs scored (42), and RBIs (40).\nPlayer profile.\nHitting.\nMantle is considered to be one of the greatest switch hitters in baseball history, hitting both for average and for power from both sides of the plate. In particular, he was known for his power, hitting some of the longest home runs in Major League history. On September 10, 1960, he hit a ball left-handed that cleared the right-field roof at Tiger Stadium in Detroit. Based on where the ball was found, it was estimated years later by historian Mark Gallagher to have traveled 643 feet (196 m).\nAnother Mantle home run, hit right-handed off Chuck Stobbs at Griffith Stadium in Washington, D.C., on April 17, 1953, was measured by Yankees traveling secretary Red Patterson (hence the term tape-measure home run) to have traveled 565 feet (172 m). Deducting for bounces, there is no doubt that each of the above home runs landed well over 500 feet (152 m) from home plate.\nTwice in his career Mantle hit a home run off the third-deck facade at Yankee Stadium, nearly becoming the only player to hit a fair ball out of the stadium during a game. On May 22, 1963, against Kansas City's Bill Fischer, Mantle hit a home run against the high facade, before the ball caromed back onto the playing field. It was later estimated that the ball could have traveled had it not been blocked by the ornate and distinctive facade. On August 12, 1964, he hit one whose distance was undoubted: a center-field drive that cleared the batter's eye screen, some 75 feet beyond the marker at Yankee Stadium.\nAlthough Mantle was a feared power hitter from either side of the plate and hit more home runs batting left-handed than right, he was a better hitter overall right-handed: roughly 25% of his total at-bats were from the right side, producing a batting average of .330 as opposed to .281 when batting from the left side. His 372 (left) to 164 (right) home run disparity was due to Mantle having batted left-handed much more often, as a large majority of pitchers are right-handed. In spite of short foul pole dimensions of 296 feet (90 m) to left and 301 feet (92 m) to right in the original Yankee Stadium, Mantle gained no advantage there as his stroke both left and right-handed drove balls to power alleys of 344\u2013407 feet (right center) and 402\u2013457 feet (left center) from the plate. Overall, he hit slightly more home runs away (270) than home (266).\nDespite being known for power hitting, Mantle was also regarded as one of the best bunters for base hits. He is in 10th place in number of bases-empty bunt singles, with 80 in only 148 at-bats. He was also known for his remarkable ability to avoid grounding into double plays: for every 100 at-bats, Mantle grounded into 1.40 double plays, one of the lowest marks in history. In both 1953 and 1961, he hit into only two double plays over the course of 1,186 plate appearances.\nFielding.\nThough not a flashy fielder, Mantle was an overall solid center fielder, especially considering he did not play the position until after he had reached the Major Leagues. Manager Casey Stengel, unimpressed with him at shortstop, moved him to the outfield before his rookie year. Over time, Mantle developed one of the strongest outfield arms to compensate for weak points in his fielding. His outfield throws discouraged runners from taking an extra base. Possessed of good range in center field, his defensive skill was considered 'the less spectacular equal of his offensive genius'. Although he considered himself a better hitter than fielder, Mantle felt his running catch during Don Larsen's perfect game was the best play of his career. He later referred to it as \"probably the only good catch I ever made. I wasn't that good of a fielder.\"\nInjuries.\nMantle's career was plagued with injuries. Beginning in high school, he suffered both acute and chronic injuries to bones and cartilage in his legs. By the end of his career simply swinging a bat caused him to fall to one knee in pain. Baseball scholars often ponder \"what if\" had Mantle not been injured but able to enjoy a healthy career.\nIn particular, the torn cartilage Mantle sustained to his right knee during the 1951 World Series was a very serious injury. Witnesses say it looked \"like he had been shot.\" Dr. Stephen Haas, former medical director for the National Football League Players Association, has speculated that Mantle injured his ACL during that incident and played the rest of his career without having it properly treated, since an ACL could not be repaired with the surgical techniques available in that era. Surgery performed in 1953 removed torn cartilage to prevent further erosion to the joint but also left his knee unstable. In order to minimize the effect of that, Yankee trainers would later wrap up his knees tightly with athletic tape. After the injury, teammates noted a change in Mantle's gait and a loss of speed as a result. Despite his bad knee, Mantle was still known as the \"fastest man to first base\", once reportedly being recorded reaching first base in 3.1 seconds. However, he was forbidden by Yankee managers from base stealing over the worry that his \"delicate\" knees would break down faster.\nFurther, the shoulder injury Mantle suffered during the 1957 World Series, while not affecting his numbers, led to increasing difficulty in hitting from the left side over the next decade.\nLater years.\nAfter retiring from baseball, Mantle briefly served as a part-time color commentator for NBC on \"Game of the Week\". In 1969, he was the color commentator for the All-Star Game. He also served as a pre-game analyst for the 1969 and 1970 World Series. He was one of four color commentators used by the Expos during the 1972 season.\nDuring the 1970 season, Mantle briefly returned to the Yankees as their first base and hitting coach for a few weeks. He quickly came to dislike the job and left the post at the end of the season. It was his last official appearance in a Major League uniform.\nIn 1973, at the Old-Timers Game at Yankee Stadium, Mantle, batting right-handed, faced his old teammate Whitey Ford. He hit a long home run over the 402-foot sign by the bullpen, his last at Yankee Stadium.\nAlthough he was among the best-paid players of the pre-free-agency era, Mantle was a poor businessman and did not invest well and struggled financially for a while. Amongst his failed business ventures was his chain of \"Mickey Mantle's Country Cookin'\" restaurants in the early 1970s.\nHis financial situation improved after the sports memorabilia industry boomed in the 1980s. Mantle was a prized guest at baseball-card shows, and was paid considerable sums for his appearances and autographs. At the same time, he always insisted that the promoters of baseball-card shows include one of the lesser-known Yankees of his era, such as Bill Skowron or Hank Bauer, so that they could also earn money for their appearances.\nIn 1976, the Mantles were amongst the honorary guests invited to the White House when French President Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing came on a state visit to celebrate the American Bicentennial.\nIn 1983, Mantle accepted a position at the Claridge Resort and Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey, as a greeter and community representative. His job mostly involved representing the Claridge in golf tournaments and at other charity events. As a result, however, he was suspended from baseball by Commissioner Bowie Kuhn, who had taken a strong stance against gambling and viewed it as grounds for placement on the \"permanently ineligible\" list. Kuhn had already suspended Willie Mays, who had taken a position similar to Mantle's at Claridge. The commissioner warned Mantle before he accepted the position that he would be placed on the list if he took the job. Despite the warning, he accepted the position because he felt the rule was \"stupid.\" He and Mays were both reinstated on March 18, 1985, by Kuhn's successor Peter Ueberroth.\nIn 1988, Mantle opened \"Mickey Mantle's Restaurant &amp; Sports Bar\" in New York City, which proved to be a success. His original Yankee Stadium Monument Park plaque is displayed at the front entrance. While he made frequent appearances, he let others run the business.\nAfter the Oklahoma City bombing on April 19, 1995, Mantle joined with fellow Oklahoman and Yankee Bobby Murcer to raise money for the victims.\nPersonal life.\nOn December 23, 1951, Mantle married Merlyn Johnson (1932\u20132009) in Picher, Oklahoma. The couple had four sons together: Mickey Jr. (1953\u20132000), David (born 1955), Billy (1957\u20131994; named for Billy Martin, Mantle's Yankee teammate and best friend), and Danny (born 1960).\nIn his autobiography, Mantle said that he had married Merlyn not out of love but because he was told to by his father who was, at the time, terminally ill. While Mantle's drinking became public knowledge during his lifetime, the press kept quiet about his marital infidelity and philandering. He was indiscreet about them: at his retirement ceremony in 1969, he brought his mistress along with his wife. In 1980, Mantle separated from his wife, and while the two lived apart for the rest of Mantle's life, they never filed for divorce. During his final days, the two made peace and Merlyn was at his bedside when he died.\nDuring the last decade of his life, Mantle lived with his agent and live-in aide Greer Johnson. After Mantle's death, his family pursued a federal lawsuit against Johnson to prohibit her from auctioning many of Mantle's personal items, including a lock of hair, a neck brace, and expired credit cards. A settlement was reached allowing for the sale of some of Mantle's belongings for approximately $500,000.\nAt that time, Mantle purchased a condominium on Lake Oconee near Greensboro, Georgia, which was near Johnson's home, and stayed there for months at a time. He occasionally attended the local Methodist church, and sometimes ate Sunday dinner with members of the congregation. He was well liked by the citizens of Greensboro, who respected Mantle's privacy, refusing either to talk about him to outsiders or to direct fans to his home. In one interview, Mantle stated that the people of Greensboro had \"gone out of their way to make me feel welcome, and I've found something there I haven't enjoyed since I was a kid.\"\nMantle was the uncle of actor, musician, and reality television personality Kelly Mantle.\nAlcoholism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"If I'd known I was gonna live this long, I'd have taken a lot better care of myself.\"\n\u2014Mantle expressing regret about his self-destructive lifestyle later in life.\nAccording to Mantle's childhood friend Nick Ferguson, Mantle's father often took them both out and bought beer for his son while Mantle was still underaged. Additionally, alcoholism ran in his mother's family and a number of Mantle's maternal relatives died from the condition.\nMantle's own trouble with alcohol was aggravated by his lifestyle. Before he sought treatment for alcoholism, he admitted that his hard living had hurt both his playing and his family. His rationale was that the men in his family had all supposedly died young, so he expected to die young as well; his father and uncle both died of Hodgkin's disease while still in their forties and he presumed he would too. At the time, Mantle did not know that most of the men in his family had inhaled lead and zinc dust while working in the mines, which can cause Hodgkin's disease.\nLike Mantle, his wife and three of their sons also became alcoholics. Merlyn, Mickey Jr., and David all completed treatment for alcoholism and pleaded with Mantle to do the same. After being examined by a doctor, he was told that his liver was so badly damaged from almost 40 years of drinking that \"your next drink could be your last.\" In response, Mantle checked into the Betty Ford Clinic on January 7, 1994. Also helping Mantle decide to enter the clinic was his friend the sportscaster Pat Summerall, by then a recovering alcoholic, who had recently been treated there.\nShortly after Mantle had completed treatment, his son Billy died in police custody on March 12, 1994, at age 36, after years of substance abuse. Despite the fears of those who knew him that this tragedy would send Mantle back to drinking, he remained sober for the remainder of his life. Later on, Mickey Jr. himself suffered from cancer, and died on December 20, 2000, at age 47.\nIn a 1994 \"Sports Illustrated\" cover story, Mantle spoke with remorse about his drinking. He said that he was telling the same old stories: realizing how many of them involved being drunk, including at least one drunk-driving crash, he decided they were not funny anymore. He admitted that he had often been cruel and hurtful to family, friends, and fans because of his alcoholism, and sought to make amends. Mantle became a born-again Christian when former teammate Bobby Richardson, a Baptist minister, shared his faith with him.\nIllness and death.\nEarly in 1995, doctors discovered that Mantle's liver had been severely damaged by both alcohol-induced cirrhosis and hepatitis C, and that he had an inoperable liver cancer known as undifferentiated hepatocellular carcinoma, necessitating a liver transplant. He received the transplant at Baylor University Medical Center in Dallas on June 8, 1995. Mantle's popularity led to controversy over this transplant. Some felt that his fame had permitted him to receive a donor liver in just one day, bypassing patients who had been waiting much longer. His doctors insisted that the transplant was based solely on medical criteria, but acknowledged that the very short wait created the appearance of favoritism.\nIn July, Mantle had recovered enough to deliver a press conference at Baylor, and addressed fans that had looked to him as a role model: \"This is a role model: Don't be like me.\" He also established the Mickey Mantle Foundation to raise awareness for organ donations. He returned to the hospital in late July, and the cancer was found to have spread throughout his body. Doctors observed that it was among the most aggressive cancers that they had ever treated, and felt that the immunosuppressive drugs administered to Mantle for his liver transplant had helped the cancer spread so quickly.\nMantle died at 2:10\u00a0a.m. on August 13, 1995, at Baylor University Medical Center with his wife Merlyn and son David at his side, five months after his mother had died at age 91. He was 63 years old. The Yankees played the Indians that day and honored him with a tribute. The team played the rest of the season with black mourning bands topped by a number 7 on their left sleeves.\nMantle's funeral was held in Lovers Lane United Methodist Church in Dallas, with around 1,500 people attending. Bobby Richardson led the funeral service while six other former teammates served as honorary pallbearers: Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford, Bill Skowron, Hank Bauer, Johnny Blanchard and Bobby Murcer.\nEddie Layton played \"Somewhere Over the Rainbow\" on the Hammond organ because Mickey had once told him that it was his favorite song. Roy Clark sang and played \"Yesterday, When I Was Young\". Bob Costas eulogized Mantle, describing him as \"a fragile hero to whom we had an emotional attachment so strong and lasting that it defied logic\". He continued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the last year of his life, Mickey Mantle, always so hard on himself, finally came to accept and appreciate the distinction between a role model and a hero. The first, he often was not. The second, he always will be. And, in the end, people got it.\nAt Mantle's request made prior to his death, Richardson read the same poem he recited at Roger Maris's funeral \u2013 \"God's Hall of Fame\" (written by a baseball fan). He later described it as one of the most difficult things he had ever done.\nMantle was interred in his family mausoleum, in the St. Matthew section of the Sparkman-Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery in Dallas. As per his wishes, the phrase \"A Great Teammate\" was carved on the plaque marking his resting place.\nLegacy.\nMantle was inducted into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame in 1964. In 1969, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nOn Mickey Mantle Day at Yankee Stadium, June 8, 1969, Mantle's number 7 was retired and he was presented with a bronze plaque to be hung on the center field wall near the monuments to Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, and Miller Huggins. The plaque was officially presented to Mantle by Joe DiMaggio. Mantle gave a similar plaque to DiMaggio, telling the crowd: \"Joe DiMaggio's deserves to be higher.\" As per Mantle's request, DiMaggio's plaque was hung one inch higher than Mantle's. When Yankee Stadium was renovated and reopened in 1976, the plaques and monuments were moved to a newly created Monument Park behind the left-center field fence.\nOn August 25, 1996, Mantle's Monument Park plaque was replaced with a monument bearing the words \"A great teammate\" and keeping a phrase that had been included on the original plaque: \"A magnificent Yankee who left a legacy of unequaled courage.\" Since the opening of the current Yankee Stadium in 2009, Mantle's monument has stood at the current Monument Park.\nIn 1974, his first year of eligibility, Mantle was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame alongside his former teammate Whitey Ford.\nIn 1998, \"The Sporting News\" placed Mantle at 17th on its list of baseball's 100 greatest players. That same year, he was one of 30 players selected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2020, \"The Athletic\" ranked Mantle at number 11 on its \"Baseball 100\" list, compiled by sportswriter Joe Posnanski.\nA school for children with disabilities in Manhattan was renamed for Mantle on June 4, 2002.\nIn 2006, Mantle was featured on a United States postage stamp, one of a series of four including fellow baseball legends Mel Ott, Roy Campanella, and Hank Greenberg.\nA statue of Mantle was unveiled in Oklahoma City in 1998 and is located at Mickey Mantle Plaza at Chickasaw Bricktown Ballpark, the home stadium of the Triple-A Oklahoma City Comets, 2 South Mickey Mantle Drive. In 2010, Mantle's hometown of Commerce, Oklahoma unveiled a statue called \"The Commerce Comet\"; it stands outside the centerfield fence of the baseball field at Commerce High School. In 2025, the Oklahoma City franchise were renamed to the Oklahoma City Comets in honor of Mantle.\nIn August 2022, a 1952 Topps Mickey Mantle baseball card in mint condition (SGC Mint+ 9.5) sold for a record $12.6 million. It was originally purchased for $50,000 in 1991. The previous record for a sports card was $7.25 million, made by a 1909 T206 Honus Wagner card designed by the American Tobacco Company. At the time of the 2022 sale, the Mickey Mantle card was considered the most valuable card of the modern era. The Mickey Mantle baseball card was the first ever sports trading card sold at auction for eight figures.\nThere is a Mickey Mantle Drive in San Antonio, Texas.\nCultural portrayals.\nMantle portrayed himself a number of times on screen. He appeared as himself in the 1958 film \"Damn Yankees\" in an uncredited role. He and Roger Maris starred as themselves in the 1962 film \"Safe at Home!\", and also appeared, along with Yogi Berra, in a scene in the film \"That Touch of Mink\" (1962), sitting next to Doris Day and Cary Grant. Mantle appeared in Paul Simon's 1988 music video for \"Me and Julio Down By the Schoolyard.\"\nIn 2001, Mantle was portrayed by Thomas Jane in \"61*\", directed by actor and comedian Billy Crystal. The film chronicled Mantle's and Maris's (played by Barry Pepper) 1961 chase of Ruth's single-season home-run record. Mantle's son Danny and grandson Will appeared briefly as a father and son watching Mantle hit a home run.\nMantle has been referenced in a number of songs. The most notable song is \"I Love Mickey\" by Teresa Brewer which came out in 1956; Mantle also took part in the recording, in a speaking role. Another well-known song is \"Talkin' Baseball\" by Terry Cashman, released in 1981; the song refers heavily to the three New York City center fielders of the 1950s: Willie Mays, Mantle, and Duke Snider.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63667", "revid": "44144402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63667", "title": "Sharon", "text": " \nSharon ( 'plain'), also spelled Saron, is a given name as well as a Hebrew name.\nIn English-speaking areas, Sharon is now predominantly a feminine given name, but historically it was also used as a masculine given name. In Israel, it is used as both.\nEtymology.\nThe Hebrew word \u05e9\u05b8\u05c1\u05e8\u05d5\u05b9\u05df \"\u0161\u0101r\u00f4n\" simply means \"plain\", as in a flat area of land. But in the Hebrew Bible, \u05e9\u05b8\u05c1\u05e8\u05d5\u05b9\u05df \"\u0160\u0101r\u00f4n\" is the name specifically given to the fertile plain between the Samarian Hills and the coast, known (tautologically) as Sharon plain in English. The further etymology is difficult.\nThe phrase \"rose of Sharon\" (\u05d7\u05d1\u05e6\u05dc\u05ea \u05d4\u05e9\u05e8\u05d5\u05df \"\u1e25\u0103\u1e07a\u1e63\u1e63ele\u1e6f ha-sharon\") occurs in the KJV translation of the Song of Songs (\"I am the rose of Sharon, the lily of the valley\"), and has since been used in reference to a number of flowering plants.\nUnlike other unisex names that have come to be used almost exclusively as feminine (e.g. Evelyn), \"Sharon\" was never predominantly a masculine name. Usage before 1925 is very rare and was apparently inspired either by the Biblical toponym or one of the numerous places in the United States named after the Biblical plain.\nUsage history.\nUse as a feminine name began in the early 20th century, first entering the statistics of the 1,000 most common given names in the United States in 1925. Its inspiration was possibly the heroine of Adela Rogers St. Johns's serial novel \"The Skyrocket\", published in 1925 and made into a romantic drama film starring Peggy Hopkins Joyce in 1926.\nThe name's popularity in the U.S. steeply increased in the mid-1930s. \"Sharon\" peaked during the 1940s and remained a top-10 name for most of that decade. The variant \"Sharron\" is on record from the 1930s to the 1970s. Its peak popularity in the U.S. was in 1943. The more eccentric spelling \"Sharyn\" was popular for a brief time in the 1940s and peaked in 1945.\nThe name's popularity has steadily declined since the 1940s, except for a slight rise in the late 1950s. It fell out of the top 100 after 1977, out of the top 500 after 2001, and out of the top 1,000 names for American girls after 2016.\nIn the United Kingdom, its popularity peaked during the 1960s. It was the 10th most popular female name by 1964 and was still as high as 17th in 1974 (when it was 70th in the U.S.), but a sharp decline in popularity followed. Since the 1980s, the name has not been in the top 100. Names that rhyme with Sharon, such as Darren and Karen, were also popular in the Anglosphere during the same period.\nIn the 1980s, \"Sharon\" was stereotyped as a \"chav\" name in the United Kingdom, signifying a working-class teenage girl who works in a supermarket. By the 2010s, the name had become associated with memes poking fun at overbearing middle-aged women who complain to authority figures. The demeaning stereotype has been attributed to sexism and age discrimination and caused difficulty for women named Sharon.\nWhile appearing on the BBC's \"Celebrity Mastermind\", contestant Amanda Henderson was asked to name the Swedish teenage climate activist who wrote a book titled \"No One's Too Small to Make a Difference\". Henderson answered, \"Sharon\". After the broadcast, climate activist Greta Thunberg (the correct response to the question) changed her name to Sharon on her Twitter bio (which remained there for the day: 3 January 2020).\nPeople with the surname.\nSharon was adopted as a surname by Zionist emigrants in the context of the Hebrew revival in the early 20th century, and has since become a heritable Israeli surname.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name or the same family name. "}
{"id": "63670", "revid": "1450053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63670", "title": "Sherman (name)", "text": "Sherman is a surname that originated in the Anglo-Saxon language. It means a \"shearer of woolen garments\", being derived from the words \"scearra\", or \"shears\", and \"mann\", or \"man\". The name is cognate with Sharman, Shearman and Shurman. Sherman has also been regularly used as a given name in the United States. This was probably originally in honor of Roger Sherman, though after the Civil War William Tecumseh Sherman was also an influence. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname Sherman. "}
{"id": "63671", "revid": "37733714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63671", "title": "Shrewsbury (disambiguation)", "text": "Shrewsbury is the county town of Shropshire in the United Kingdom, founded c. 800. A number of people, places and other locations have their names deriving from this original place.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63672", "revid": "41977899", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63672", "title": "Plains (disambiguation)", "text": "Plains are flat, sweeping landmasses. \nPlains or The Plains may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63674", "revid": "532158843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63674", "title": "Transparent latch", "text": ""}
{"id": "63676", "revid": "30716804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63676", "title": "I puritani", "text": "Opera by Vincenzo Bellini\n (\"The Puritans\") is an 1835 opera by Vincenzo Bellini. It was originally written in two acts and changed to three acts before the premiere on the advice of Gioachino Rossini, with whom the young composer had become friends. The music was set to a libretto by Count Carlo Pepoli, an Italian \u00e9migr\u00e9 poet whom Bellini had met at a salon run by the exile Princess Belgiojoso, which became a meeting place for many Italian revolutionaries. The opera is based on \"T\u00eates Rondes et Cavaliers\" (\"Roundheads and Cavaliers\"), a historical play written by Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Ancelot and Joseph Xavier Saintine and set in the English Civil War. Except for its title, the opera is not in any way based on Walter Scott's 1816 novel \"Old Mortality\" (translated into Italian in 1825 as \"I Puritani di Scozia\"), despite some claims to the contrary.\nWhen Bellini arrived in Paris in mid-August 1833, he had intended to stay only about three weeks, the main aim being to continue the negotiations with the Paris Op\u00e9ra which he had begun on his way to London a few months earlier. These negotiations came to nothing, but by October he had decided to spend the winter in Paris, especially as both \"Il pirata\" and \"I Capuleti e i Montecchi\" were to be given by the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien that season. The offer from the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre came in January 1834; he accepted because \"the pay was richer than what I had received in Italy up to then, though only by a little; then because of so magnificent a company; and finally so as to remain in Paris at others' expense.\"\nTaking from April until its premiere the following January, Bellini had time to ensure that the opera was as close to perfection as possible. After the premiere, Bellini reported to his friend Francesco Florimo in Naples that:\nThe French had all gone mad; there were such noise and such shouts that they themselves were astonished at being so carried away ... In a word, my dear Florimo, it was an unheard of thing, and since Saturday, Paris has spoken of it in amazement\nIt was to be Bellini's final work; he died in September 1835 at the age of 33.\nComposition history.\nSearch for a suitable source for a libretto.\nUpon his arrival in Paris, Bellini quickly entered into the fashionable world of the Parisian salons, including that run by Princess Belgiojoso whom he had met in Milan. In addition to the many writers of the time, among the musical figures which he would have encountered were several Italians such as Michele Carafa and Luigi Cherubini, then in his seventies. Thus, for most of the remainder of 1833, Bellini's musical activity was very limited. He pleaded guilty in the letter to Florimo in March 1834 noting that the city's attractions were immense.\nThe contract to write a new opera for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien, which was signed in January 1834, called for it to be presented at the end of that year. Once it was signed, Bellini began to look around for a suitable subject and, in a letter to Florimo of 11 March 1834, he expresses some frustrations, noting: \"I am about to lose my mind over the plot of the opera for Paris, as it has been impossible to find a suitable subject for my purpose and adaptable to the company\".\nIn the same letter he tells of working towards finding a subject with the Italian \u00e9migr\u00e9, Count Pepoli, who had not written a libretto before. However, on 11 April he is able to say in a letter to Ferlito that he was well and that \"I have chosen the story for my Paris opera; it is of the times of Cromvello [Cromwell], after he had King Charles I of England beheaded.\" The chosen source of the libretto was identified as a play performed in Paris only six months before in September 1833. When first shown the play and other possible subjects by Pepoli, in the opinion of writer William Weaver, \"it was clearly the heroine's madness that attracted the composer and determined his choice.\nWorking with Pepoli.\nIn his letter to Ferlito of 11 April, Bellini provides a synopsis of the opera, indicating that his favourite singers, Giulia Grisi, Luigi Lablache, Giovanni Battista Rubini, and Antonio Tamburini, would all be available for the principal roles, and that he would begin to write the music by 15 April if he had received the verses. Before the collaboration had got underway and initially impressed by the quality of Pepoli's verses in general, Bellini had prepared the way for his librettist by providing him with a scenario of thirty-nine scenes (thus compressing the original drama into manageable proportions), reducing the number of characters from nine to seven and at the same time, giving them names of a more Italianate, singable quality.\nBut a month later, he comments to Florimo on what it takes working on the libretto with Pepoli: \"keeping [Pepoli] moving ahead costs me a lot of weariness; he lacks practice which is a great thing [to have].\" For Bellini, the process of both overseeing the writing of the libretto and working with Pepoli was a struggle, added to by a period of illness. But, to balance the situation, William Weaver comments that \"to some extent Bellini could compensate for Pepoli's deficiencies with his own first-hand theatrical experience\" and suggests that some of that experience had been \"acquired from Romani.\"\nContinuing to work on the yet-unnamed \"I puritani\", Bellini moved from central Paris, and at some time in the late Spring (specific date unknown) Bellini wrote to Pepoli to remind him that he should bring his work with him the following day \"so that we can finish discussing the first act, which...will be interesting, magnificent, and proper poetry for music in spite of you and all your absurd rules...\" At the same time, he laid out one basic rule for the librettist to follow:\nCarve into your head in adamantine letters: \"The opera must draw tears, terrify people, make them die through singing\"\nBy late June, there had been considerable progress and, in a letter copied into one written to Florimo on 25 July, Bellini writes in reply to Alessandro Lanari, now the director of the Royal Theatres of Naples, telling him that the first act of \"Puritani\" is finished and that he expects to complete the opera by September, in order that he may then have time to write a new opera for Naples for the following year. Finally, Bellini stated that he did not want \"to negotiate with anybody until I see what success my opera will have\". This included a proposal from the Op\u00e9ra-Comique in Paris for a new opera for that company.\nWhen nothing came of negotiations with Naples for a new opera, Bellini composed an alternative version intended for the famous Maria Malibran, who was to sing Amina (in \"La sonnambula\") at the Teatro di San Carlo in Naples in 1835. However, she died exactly a year to the day after the composer, and so this version was not performed on stage until 10 April 1986 at the Teatro Petruzzelli in Bari, with Katia Ricciarelli in the title role.\nCritical reaction to Pepoli's work on \"Puritani\".\nGiven Bellini's own expressions of frustration at working with a new librettist for the first time, one musicologist, Mary Ann Smart, provides a different point of view in regard to Pepoli's approach to writing a libretto. Firstly, she addresses the issue of Pepoli's inexperience:\nAn address that Pepoli delivered to prize-winning students in Bologna in 1830 reveals not only a surprisingly broad grasp of operatic repertoire but also some forceful ideas about how music could provoke political feeling. Pepoli adopts a modern aesthetic agenda, condemning vocal ornamentation as a dilution of dramatic sense and attacking imitation as cheapening music's inherent, nonverbal language. After touching on exemplary passages from operas by Francesco Morlacchi, Nicola Vaccai, and Vincenzo Bellini, Pepoli turns to the \"Marseillaise\", arguing that it melds music and poetry perfectly to arouse feeling and provoke action.\nQuoting Pepoli, Smart continues: \"for this song [the \"Marseillaise\"] the people fight, win, triumph: Europe and the world shouted \"Liberty!\"\". Smart then examines the relationship between Pepoli's 1830 views and how they appear to be manifested in what he wrote for \"I puritani\":\nThe Italian phrase Pepoli uses here, [i.e. in discussing the \"Marseillaise\"] \"gridavano Libert\u00e0\", strikingly anticipates the duet \"Suoni la tromba\" in \"I puritani\", in which the two basses step outside of the opera's dreamy and non teleological plot for an isolated moment of patriotic fervor. For their homeland they will take up arms and gladly face death: \"Suoni la tromba, e intrepido/ Io pugner\u00f2 da forte/ Bello \u00e8 affrontar la morte gridando \"Libert\u00e0\"\" (\"Let the trumpet sound, and fearless I'll fight with all my strength. It is beautiful to face death shouting 'liberty').\"\nThen she recounts how Bellini reacted to what she describes as Pepoli's \"hotheaded patriotism\" which appears in librettist's poetry. When he wrote to Pepoli that his \"liberal bent..terrifies me\", Bellini's other concern, which proved to be correct, was that words such as \"libert\u00e0\" would have to be removed if the opera was to be performed in Italy.\nNevertheless, the \"Suoni la tromba\" which Bellini described as his \"Hymn to Liberty\" and which had initially been placed in the opera's first act was enthusiastically received by the composer: \"My dear Pepoli, I hasten to express my great satisfaction with the duet I received by post this morning ... the whole is magnificent...\"\nPerceived competition from Donizetti.\nAround the middle of April 1834, Bellini became concerned when he learned that Gaetano Donizetti would be composing for the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien during the same season as the one for which he was writing. According to Weinstock, quoting letters sent to Florimo in Italy at around that time (and continuing almost up to \"I puritani\"'s premiere), Bellini perceived this to be a plot orchestrated by Rossini and expressed his frustrations in a long, rambling letter of 2,500 words to Florimo of 11 March 1834, he . As it transpired, Bellini's total success vastly outshone Donizetti's moderate one (\"Marin Faliero\", given in March 1835, two months after \"I puritani\").\nThe score is completed.\nBy September Bellini was writing to Florimo of being able to \"polish and re-polish\" in the three remaining months before rehearsals and he expresses happiness with Pepoli's verses (\"a very beautiful trio for the two basses and \"La Grisi\"\") and by around mid-December he had submitted the score for Rossini's approval.\nRossini is known to have recommended one change to the placement of the \"Hymn to Liberty\", which had initially appeared in the first act but which Bellini had already realised could not remain in its written form if the opera was to be given in Italy. Instead of two acts, with the \"Hymn\" appearing midway in the second act, Rossini proposed that it be a three-act opera with \"Suoni la tromba\" ending act 2, arguing that the effect would always be likely to create an ovation, something which he rightly foretold.\nThroughout his stay in Paris, Bellini had cultivated the older composer and had maintained a friendship with him: \"I have always adored Rossini, and I succeeded, and happily ... [having] tamed Rossini's [perceived] hatred, I no longer was frightened and finished that work of mine which won me so much honour\". Later, the successful dress rehearsal, he wrote: \"... my very dear Rossini ... now loves me as a son\".\nWith rehearsals planned for late December/early January, the dress rehearsal took place on 20 January 1835. It was attended by \"all of high society, all the great artists, and everyone most distinguished in Paris were in the theatre, enthusiastic.\" Bellini's ecstatic letter to Florimo which followed the dress rehearsal recounts the enthusiastic reception of many of the numbers throughout the performance, most especially the second act bass duet, so that, by its end:\nThe French had all gone mad; there were such noise and such shouts that they themselves were astonished at being so carried away ... In a word, my dear Florimo, it was an unheard of thing, and since Saturday, Paris has spoken of it in amazement ... I showed myself to the audience, which shouted as if insane ... How satisfied I am! [He concludes by noting the success of the singers]: \"Lablache sang like a god, Grisi like a little angel, Rubini and Tamburini the same.\"\nIt was upon Rossini's advice and after the dress rehearsal that the opera was changed from two acts to three, the second act ending after the \"Suoni la tromba\" duet for the two basses.\nThe premiere, postponed by two days, took place on 24 January 1835.\nPerformance history.\n19th century\nThe opera became \"the rage of Paris\" and was given 17 performances to end the season on 31 March.\nHerbert Weinstock's chapter on \"I puritani\" devotes four pages to details of performances which followed the premiere in Paris, although the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien gave it over 200 times up to 1909. In 1835, London saw it in May, La Scala (in what Weinstock thinks as being a \"pirate edition\") in December. In Palermo it was given as \"Elvira e Arturo\" during the following season and La Fenice presented it in April 1836 as \"I puritani e i cavalieri\" with Giuseppina Strepponi as Elvira. It took until January 1837 before it was seen at the San Carlo in Naples; Messina saw it in 1838. Weinstock recounts details of hundreds more, including being given in Rome in 1836 as \"Elvira Walton\", and during that year he details performances in Berlin, Vienna, Madrid, and Bologna (with Giulia Grisi as Elvira). Between 1836 and 1845 (with no details provided before 20th century performances are discussed), the opera was presented every year in different cities.\n20th century and beyond\nDetails from 1906 forward are provided by Weinstock. In that year the opera appeared at the Manhattan Opera House in New York, followed by stagings at the Metropolitan Opera in February 1917, but in New York it was not revived for many years. Various performances are reported to have taken place in 1921, 1933, 1935, and 1949 in different European cities, but it was not until 1955 in Chicago that \"Puritani\" re-appeared in America with Maria Callas and Giuseppe Di Stefano in the major roles. The 1960s saw a variety of performances in the years between 1960 (Glyndebourne Festival with Joan Sutherland which was recorded) and 1969 when Weinstock's account ends. However, he does include a section on performances from the 19th century forward at the Royal Opera House in London up to Joan Sutherland's 1964 assumption of the role of Elvira. The article's \"Recordings\" section indicates some other performances which may have been recordings of live performances, although the one DVD from the Metropolitan Opera in January 2007 came from a Metropolitan Opera Live in HD presentation.\nPlace: England during the English Civil War\nTime: 1640s\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\n\"Scene 1: A fortress near Plymouth, commanded by Lord Gualtiero Valton\"\nAt daybreak, the Puritan soldiers gather in anticipation of victory over the Royalists. Prayers are heard from within, and then shouts of joy as the ladies and gentlemen of the castle come out announcing news of Elvira's wedding. Left alone, Riccardo shares with Bruno his plight: Riccardo had been promised Elvira's hand in marriage by her father Lord Valton but, returning to Plymouth the previous evening, he has found that she is in love with Arturo (a Royalist), and will marry him instead. He confides in Bruno. (Aria: \"Ah! Per sempre\u00a0...Bel sogno beato\" / \"Ah! Forever have I lost you, flower of love, oh my hope; ah! life from now on will be full of sorrow\".) As he pours out his sorrows to Bruno, Riccardo is called upon by his soldiers to lead them but he declares \"I am aflame, but the flame is love, not glory\".\n\"Scene 2: Elvira's apartments\"\nElvira welcomes Giorgio, her uncle. He treats her with fatherly love, but when he tells her that she will soon be married, she is horror-struck. (Aria, then extended duet: \"Sai com'arde in petto mio / bella fiamma onnipossente\" / \"You know that my breast burns with overwhelming passion\".) She continues, stating a determination never to be married. But when Giorgio tells her that her cavalier, Arturo, will be coming, he reveals that it was he who persuaded her father, Lord Valton, to grant Elvira's wish. She is overjoyed. Then the sound of trumpets is heard announcing Arturo's arrival; he is welcomed by all.\n\"Scene 3: The Hall of Arms\"\nArturo and his squires come into the hall and are joined by Elvira, Valton, Giorgio and the ladies and gentlemen of the castle. After a general welcome from all assembled, Arturo expresses his new-found happiness. (Aria, Arturo; then Giorgio and Valton; then all assembled: \"A te, o cara / amore talora\" / \"In you beloved, love led me in secrecy and tears, now it guides me to your side\".)\nValton tells everyone that he will not be able to attend the wedding ceremony and he provides Arturo with a safe conduct pass. A mysterious lady appears, and Valton tells her that he will be escorting her to London to appear before Parliament. Arturo is curious. Giorgio tells him that she is suspected of being a Royalist spy. As Elvira leaves to prepare herself for the wedding and the others depart in various directions, Arturo hangs back and finds the mysterious lady alone. He discovers that she is Enrichetta (Henrietta Maria), widow of the executed King Charles I. Insisting that she not be concerned about Elvira, Arturo vows to save her: (Aria, Arturo; then Enrichetta; then together: \"Non parlar di lei che adoro, / di valor non mi spogliar\" / \"Do not speak of her whom I adore; do not take away my courage. You shall be saved, oh unhappy woman.\")\nObserved by Arturo and Enrichetta, Elvira appears singing a joyful polonaise (\"Son vergin vezzosa\" / \"I am a pretty maiden dressed for her wedding\"), but she engages the Queen in conversation asking for help with the ringlets of her hair. To allow that to happen, she removes her wedding veil and places it over Enrichetta's head. Both Arturo and Enrichetta realise that this may allow them to escape, and as they proceed, they are challenged by Riccardo who believes the woman to be Elvira. He almost provokes a fight with Arturo until he discovers that she is not Elvira; then, he is content to allow them to pass, swearing not to reveal any information.\nWhen the wedding party enters, they ask for Arturo, then learn, largely from Riccardo, that he has fled with Enrichetta. Pursuit is organised. Becoming increasingly distraught, Elvira believes that she sees Arturo: (Aria; then ensemble: \"Oh, vieni al tempio, fedele Arturo\" / \"Ah! come, ah! come! Oh! come to the church, faithful Arturo\".) It is increasingly clear that she has gone mad.\nAct 2.\n\"A room in the fortress\"\nAs the ladies and gentlemen of the castle are mournful for Elvira's totally downcast state of mind, Giorgio describes her madness: (Aria: \"Cinta di fiori\" / \"Garlanded with flowers and with her lovely hair disheveled, sometimes the beloved maiden wanders about...\") and he describes her flights into madness and her pleas for Arturo to return. Riccardo brings the news that Arturo is now a fugitive who has been condemned to death by Parliament for allowing Enrichetta to escape. Giorgio states that the only hope for Elvira will be a sudden joyous experience. Elvira is heard outside, still deranged but longing for Arturo: \"Either give me back hope, let me die\" she cries. As she enters, she expresses all her longing in a mad scene: Elvira, aria: \"Qui la voce\u00a0... Vien, diletto\" / \"Here his sweet voice called me...and then vanished. Here he swore to be true, here he swore it, and then, cruel man, he fled!\".\nEntering, she confronts her uncle and Riccardo, whom she fails to recognise, even in her moments of lucidity. She addresses him as if he were Arturo: (Elvira, cabaletta: \"Vien, diletto, \u00e8 in ciel la luna\" / \"Come, beloved, the moon is in the sky, Everything is silent, until the dawn breaks in the sky\"). The two men encourage Elvira to return to her room.\nFor Elvira's sake, Giorgio encourages Riccardo to help save his rival, advising that he will forever be pursued by their phantoms. Riccardo rejects the request: (Giorgio, then Riccardo, then duet: \"Il rival salvar tu d\u00e9i, / il rival salvar tu puoi\" / \"You must save your rival, you can save your rival\"), but gradually Riccardo comes around to accept that idea. However, he states that if in the following day's battle, Arturo appears, he will perish at his hand. The two men now have an agreement: (Finale: Giorgio, then Riccardo, then together: \"Suoni la tromba\" / \"Let the battle-cry be: country, victory, victory and honour. Let the trumpets sound, and I shall fight strongly, fearlessly.\"\nAct 3.\n\"A wooded area near the fortress, three months later\"\nArturo is still on the run. He is exhausted and has returned seeking Elvira. Suddenly he hears the sounds of singing coming through the woods: (Elvira, aria: \"A una fonte afflitto e solo / s'assideva un trovator\" / \"A troubadour sat sad and lonely by a fountain\"). He calls out, but gets no response and, recalling how the couple used to sing together in the woods, he also sings the troubadour melody until the sound of drumbeats and the shouting of soldiers silences him. He covers himself and hides as a group of soldiers passes, then emerges and decides to continue singing to the same melody: (Arturo, aria: \"Corre a valle, corre a monte / l'esiliato pellegrin\" / \"Through the valleys, over the mountains, hastens the exiled pilgrim\")\nUnseen, Elvira emerges from the trees and stops to listen. She is saddened when the singing stops, and she sorrowfully wonders where Arturo is. Suddenly, he is standing before her and they are reunited in a spirited duet in which they declare that they will always be together after the long months of being apart. Still a little confused, Elvira believes that Arturo has married the woman whom he escorted from the fortress; he assures Elvira that he has always loved her, that the lady who was in great danger was the queen: (Arturo; then Elvira; then together). Having determined that they love each other and that they will always remain together, they enter into an ecstatic duet. (Arturo: \"Vieni fra queste braccia\" / \"Come, come to my arms\"; Elvira: \"Caro, caro, non ho parole\" / \"Dearest, dearest, I cannot find the words to express my happiness\"; then together).\nAt the sound of drums being heard, Elvira appears to be returning to a state of madness, fearing that they will again be parted. Then soldiers' voices are heard close by and Riccardo, Giorgio, and the ladies and gentlemen of the fortress enter announcing Arturo's death sentence. With that, she finally comes to her senses.\nAn ensemble, beginning with Arturo (\"Credeasi, misera\" / \"Unhappy girl, she believed that I had betrayed her\") extends to all assembled, each expressing his or her anguish, with even Riccardo being moved by the plight of the lovers. For this extended piece, Bellini wrote a high F-natural above C5 for Arturo's \"... crudeli, crudeli! / Ella \u00e8 tremante, / ella \u00e8 spirante; / anime perfide, / sorde a piet\u00e0!\" / \"cruel men, cruel men! She is trembling, she is fainting, perfidious souls, deaf to pity!\"\nThe soldiers continue to demand Arturo's execution, but the sounds of a herald arriving are heard. He brings letters which are opened by Riccardo and Giorgio. They announce that although the Royalists have been defeated, Oliver Cromwell has pardoned all prisoners. The ensemble expresses its general and its personal joy.\nMusic.\nTwo specific examples of Bellini's distinctive musical style appear in this opera.\nIn act 3, an ensemble (\"Credeasi, misera\") develops, during which Bellini writes an in alt F-natural above C5 for Arturo. Most tenors would typically sing a D-flat instead of an F. However some tenors, like Nicolai Gedda, William Matteuzzi, Gregory Kunde, Lawrence Brownlee, Francesco Demuro and Alasdair Kent, did manage to tackle the challenging high F. In the seldom performed Malibran version, it is Elvira (i.e., the soprano) who sings, in a higher octave, the principal part of \"Credeasi, misera\".\nIn regard to the impact of the act 2 finale number and its significance in librettist Carlo Pepoli's work as well as in Bellini's music so far, Mary Ann Smart provides one explanation for the power of \"Suoni la tromba\" by referring to work of another musicologist, Mark Everist, who, she states \"has plausibly suggested that the frenzy was provoked more by the buzzing energy of the two bass voices combined, an unprecedented sonority at the time, than by the duet's political message\".\nBut, she continues to analyse other aspects of the duet:\nWe should also factor in the force of Pepoli's verses with their promotion of martyrdom and the utter regularity of the music's march-like phrasing, rare in Bellini's ethereal style. \"Suoni la tromba\" is a perplexing historical anomaly: an almost isolated example of an extroverted, overtly political statement heard at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien, and an equally rare link between Pepoli's political persona and his role as poet-for-hire. But such overt calls for revolution represent just one possible 'political' style. They are not necessarily the most forceful or influential variety of intervention.\nCultural references.\n\"I puritani\", to which she referred as \"dear Puritani\", was Queen Victoria's favourite opera and the first which she attended in the company of Prince Albert before their marriage. The 2009 film \"The Young Victoria\" includes an episode in which Albert and Victoria discuss the opera, as well as a scene showing Victoria attending a performance.\nIn the film \"Fitzcarraldo\", the cast of \"I puritani\" are being transported on Fitzcarraldo's boat. They perform parts of the opera in full costume and sing \"A te, o cara\" (from act 1, scene 3) as Fitzcarraldo makes his triumphal return to Iquitos.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources"}
{"id": "63677", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63677", "title": "336 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 336 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crassus and Duillius (or, less frequently, year 418 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 336 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMacedonia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63679", "revid": "1101750", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63679", "title": "Van", "text": "Covered transportation vehicle\nA van is a type of road vehicle used for transporting goods or people. There is some variation in the scope of the word across the different English-speaking countries. The smallest vans, microvans, are used for transporting either goods or people in tiny quantities. Mini MPVs, compact MPVs, and MPVs are all small vans usually used for transporting people in small quantities. Larger vans with passenger seats are used for institutional purposes, such as transporting students. Larger vans with only front seats are often used for business purposes, to carry goods and equipment. Specially equipped vans are used by television stations as mobile studios. Postal services and courier companies use large step vans to deliver packages.\nWord origin and usage.\nVan meaning a type of vehicle arose as a contraction of the word caravan. The earliest records of a van as a vehicle in English are in the mid-19th century, meaning a covered wagon for transporting goods; the earliest reported record of such was in 1829. The word caravan with the same meaning has been used since the 1670s. A caravan, meaning one wagon, had arisen as an extension, or corruption, of a caravan meaning a convoy of multiple wagons.\nThe word \"van\" has slightly different, but overlapping, meanings in different forms of English. While the word now applies everywhere to boxy cargo vans, other applications are found to a greater or lesser extent in different English-speaking countries; some examples follow:\nAustralia.\nIn Australian English, the term \"van\" is commonly used to describe a minivan, a passenger minibus, or an Australian panel van as manufactured by companies such as Holden and Ford at various times.\nA full-size van used for commercial purposes is also known as a \"van\" in Australia; however, a passenger vehicle with more than seven or eight seats is more likely to be called a \"minibus\".\nThe term \"van\" can also sometimes be used interchangeably with what Australians usually call a \"caravan\", which in the U.S. is referred to as a \"travel trailer\".\nThe British term \"people mover\" is also used in Australian English to describe a passenger van. The American usage of \"van\" which describes a cargo box trailer or semi-trailer is used rarely, if ever, in Australia.\nIndia.\nIn India, the van is one of the most common modes of transportation and is often used for taking children to and from schools, usually when parents, especially working parents, are too busy to pick their children up from school or when school buses are full and unable to accommodate other children. Vans are also used for commercial purposes and office cabs. Some of the popular vans include Maruti Suzuki Omni and the Maruti Suzuki Eeco.\nJapan.\nEarly Japanese vans include the Kurogane Baby, Mazda Bongo, and the Toyota LiteAce. The Japanese also produced many vans based on the American flat nose model, but also minivans which for the American market have generally evolved to the long-wheelbase front-wheel drive form. The Nissan Prairie and Mitsubishi Chariot as well as microvans that fulfill kei car regulations, are popular for small businesses. The term is also used to describe full-fledged station wagons (passenger car front sheet metal, flat-folding back seats, windows all around) and even hatchbacks with basic trim packages intended for commercial use. These are referred to as \"light vans\" (), with \"light\" referring to the glazing rather than the weight of the vehicle.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn British English, the word van refers to vehicles that carry goods only, either on roads or on rails. What would be called a \"minivan\" in American English is called a \"people-carrier\", \"MPV\" or multi-purpose vehicle, and larger passenger vehicles are called \"minibuses\". The \"Telegraph\" newspaper introduced the idea of the \"White Van Man\", a typical working-class man or small business owner who would have a white Ford Transit, Mercedes-Benz Sprinter, or similar panel van. Today the phrase \"man and van\" or \"man with a van\" refers to light removal firms normally operated by a sole business owner transporting anything from the contents of a whole house to just a few boxes. The word \"van\" also refers to railway covered goods wagons, called \"boxcars\" in the United States.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, a \"van\" can also refer to a box-shaped trailer or semi-trailer used to carry goods. In this case, there is a differentiation between a \"dry van\", used to carry most goods, and a refrigerated van, or \"reefer\", used for cold goods. A railway car used to carry baggage is also called a \"van\".\nA vehicle referred to in the US as a \"full-size van\" is usually a large, boxy vehicle that has a platform and powertrain similar to their light truck counterparts. These vans may be sold with the space behind the front seats empty for transporting goods (cargo van), furnished for passenger use by either the manufacturer (wagon), or another company for more personal comforts (conversion van). Full-size vans often have short hoods, with the engine placed under the passenger cabin.\nA cutaway van chassis is a variation of the full-size van that was developed for use by second stage manufacturers. Such a unit has a van front end and driver controls in a cab body that extends to a point behind the front seats, where the rest of the van body is cut off (leading to the terminology \"cutaway\"). From that point aft, only the chassis frame rails and running gear extend to the rear when the unit is shipped as an \"incomplete vehicle\". A second-stage manufacturer, commonly known as a bodybuilder, will complete the vehicle for uses such as recreational vehicles, small school buses, minibusses, type III ambulances, and delivery trucks. A large proportion of cutaway van chassis are equipped with dual rear wheels. Second-stage manufacturers sometimes add third weight-bearing single wheel \"tag axles\" for their larger minibus models.\nThe term \"van\" in the US may also refer to a minivan. Minivans are usually distinguished by their smaller size and front wheel drive powertrain, although some are equipped with four-wheel drive. Minivans typically offer seven- or eight-passenger seating capacity, and better fuel economy than full-sized vans, at the expense of power, cargo space, and towing capacity. Minivans are often equipped with sliding doors.\nHistory.\nThe precursor to American vans would be the sedan deliveries of the 1930s to late-1950s. The first generation of American vans were the 1960s compact vans, which were patterned in size after the Volkswagen Bus. The Corvair-based entry even imitated the rear-mounted, air-cooled engine design. The Ford Falcon-based first-generation Econoline had a flat nose, with the engine mounted between and behind the front seats. The Dodge A100 had a similar layout and could accommodate a V8 engine. Chevrolet also switched to this layout. The Ford, Dodge, and Corvair vans were also produced as pickup trucks.\nThe \"standard\" or \"full size\" vans appeared with Ford's innovation of moving the engine forward under a short hood and using pickup truck components. The engine cockpit housing is often called a \"dog house\". Over time, they evolved longer noses and sleeker shapes. The Dodge Sportsman was available with an extension to the rear of its long-wheelbase model to create a 15-passenger van. Vehicles have been sold as both cargo and passenger models, as well as in cutaway van chassis versions for second stage manufacturers to make box vans, ambulances, campers, and other vehicles. Second-stage manufacturers also modify the original manufacturer's body to create custom vans.\nUse.\nIn urban areas of the United States, full-size vans have been used as \"commuter vans\" since 1971, when Dodge introduced a van that could transport up to 15 passengers. Commuter vans are used as an alternative to carpooling and other ride-sharing arrangements.\nMany mobile businesses use a van to carry almost their entire business to various places where they work. For example, those who come to homes or places of business to perform various services, installations, or repairs. Vans are also used to shuttle people and their luggage between hotels and airports, to transport commuters between parking lots and their places of work, and along established routes as minibusses. Vans are also used to transport elderly and mobility-impaired worshipers to and from church services or to transport youth groups for outings to amusement parks, picnics, and visiting other churches. Vans are also used by schools to drive sports teams to intramural games. Vans have been used by touring music groups to haul equipment and people to music venues around the country.\nFull-size van.\n\"Full-size van\" is a marketing term used in North America for a van larger than a minivan, that is characterized by a large, boxy appearance, a short hood, and heavy cargo and passenger-hauling capability. \nThe first full-size van was the 1969 Ford Econoline, which used components from the Ford F-Series pickups. General Motors and the Dodge Ram Van followed with designs with the engines placed further forward, and succeeding generations of the Econoline introduced longer hoods.\nStep van.\nAnother type of van specific to North America is the \"step van,\" named because of the design to facilitate users to step in and out of the vehicle. Widely used by delivery services, courier companies, and the parcel division of the US Postal Service and Canada Post, they are often seen driven with the door open. Step vans have more boxy shapes, wider bodies, and higher rooftops than other vans, and are rarely employed for carrying passengers. \nMinivan.\nThe Minivan is a van which is smaller in size in length and height than a full-size van. Minivans are often used for personal use, as well as commercial passenger operations such as taxis and shuttles, and cargo operations like delivery of mail and packages. They offer more cargo space than traditional sedans and SUVs. Their lower center of gravity is also useful in handling and rollover prevention.\nRollover safety.\nA van is taller than a typical passenger car, resulting in a higher center of gravity. The suspension is also higher to accommodate the weight of 15 passengers, who can weigh over one ton alone. In the United States, it is common for only the front seat passengers to use their safety belts. The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has determined that belted passengers are about four times more likely to survive in rollover crashes.\nSafety can be improved by understanding the unique characteristics of 12- and 15-passenger vans and by following guidelines developed for their drivers, according to the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA).\nSafety equipment.\nMany commercial vans are fitted with cargo barriers behind the front seats (or rear seats, if fitted) to prevent injuries caused by unsecured cargo in the event of sudden deceleration, collision, or a rollover. Cargo barriers in vans are sometimes fitted with doors permitting the driver to pass through to the cargo compartment of the vehicle.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* List of vans\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63683", "revid": "85272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63683", "title": "Scottish country dance", "text": "Dance native to Scotland\n Scottish country dance (SCD) is the distinctively Scottish form of country dance, itself a form of social dance involving groups of couples of dancers tracing progressive patterns. A dance consists of a sequence of figures. These dances are set to musical forms (Jigs, Reels and Strathspey Reels) which come from the Gaelic tradition of Highland Scotland, as do the steps used in performing the dances. Traditionally a figure corresponds to an eight-bar phrase of music.\nCountry dancing, which is arguably a type of folk dancing, first appears in the historical record in 17th-century England. Scottish country dancing as we know it today has its roots in an 18th-century fusion of (English) country dance formations with Highland music and footwork. It has become the national ballroom dance form of Scotland, partly because \"Caledonian Country Dances\" became popular in upper-class London society in the decades after the Jacobite rising of 1745. As early as 1724 there was a published collection of Scottish dance tunes by John and William Neal \"A collection of the Most celebrated Scotch Tunes\". \nWhen it first became popular around the 18th century, it was as a shorter, quicker form of dance that was a light relief from the more courtly dances normally danced. Derived from early British forms of country dancing, SCD is related to English country dancing, contra dancing, C\u00e8ilidh dancing, Old time dancing and Irish set dancing (although most people in Scotland use the terms 'c\u00e8ilidh dancing' or 'country dancing' interchangeably, with 'country dancing' often being taught in schools and later used at 'c\u00e8ilidh' events). This is due to the combination of some of these dance forms in early country dance forms and later cross-over introduced by their overlapping influences via dancers and dance masters.\nScottish country dancing (a social form of dance with two or more couples of dancers) should not be confused with Scottish Highland dance (a solo form of dance). There is a certain amount of cross-over, in that there are Scottish country dances that include Highland elements as well as Highland-style performance dances which use formations otherwise seen in country dances, but these are relatively few when the two dance forms are considered each as a whole.\nDances.\nGeneral.\nScottish country dances are categorised as reels (including hornpipes), jigs, and strathspeys according to the type of music to which they are danced. The first two types (also called \"quick-time dances\") feature fast tempos, quick movements and a lively feel. The third type (strathspey) has a much slower tempo and a more tempered, stately feel. Although general guidelines are given below almost all elements of SCD have exceptions through the playfulness of the dance writers to the wide variety of influences and interpretations over the years; some exceptions include the Eightsome Reel (has two parts repeated as ABBBBBBBBA and is thus considerably longer than most other dances), The Wee Cooper of Fife (ten bar phrases\u2014with music to match), The Willowtree (often only repeated four times despite having eight couples because the dance is mirrored from both ends of the set).\nDancers and sets.\nScottish country dancing is generally danced in organised formations referred to as \"sets\". Sets consist of three or more couples, usually four but sometimes as many as eight. A couple is formed of two dancers referred to as the \"man\" and the \"lady\"; however, this is rarely restricted to the dancer's actual gender. Due to the much larger number of women dancing SCD compared to men, women often dance \"as the man\" (often the more experienced woman will dance as the man or, all else being equal, the taller woman will dance as the man as some figures are easier this way). \nThe usual set shape is \"longwise\" \u2013 each dancer opposite their partner with all the women in one line facing a similar line of men. The couple closest to the band (or other music source) are called the \"first\" or \"top\" couple. Other shapes of sets include triangular sets (three couples on the sides of a triangle, this is rare), square sets (four couples on the sides of a square) or square sets with extra couple(s) in the centre; these are much less common. However, some of the most popular dances in Scotland use these formations. When the set is not longwise, then the dancers stand beside their partner, with the woman on the right.\nPhrasing and formations.\nScottish country dances are made up of figures of varying length to suit the phrasing of Scottish country dance tunes. For the most part figures are 2, 4, or 8 bars of music long. There are various kinds of figures ranging from the very simple (e.g. a couple changing places across the set giving right hands) to fairly intricate convolutions involving three or four couples at the same time (e.g. three-couple rights and lefts). Dances are generally made up of eight bar phrases with a single \"time through\" lasting between 24 and 64 bars and repeated as many times as there are couples in the set. Some dances are only performed a single time through however these normally last between 96 and 160 bars (e.g. Bonnie Anne, MacDonald of Sleat).\nDances are described by their music type, length and number of repetitions. A strathspey which has a \"time through\" of 32 bars and is danced 8 times will be described as \"an eight by thirty-two Strathspey\", the written form will often be shortened to 8x32 S to fit on a dance card or programme.\nSteps and technique.\nUnlike C\u00e8ilidh dancing or English country dancing, which are usually done using walking or running steps, Scottish country dancing uses different steps according to a dance's choreography. \"Travelling steps\" include the \"skip-change of step\" in quick-time dances and the \"Strathspey travelling step\" in strathspey time, while \"setting steps\" include the \"pas de basque\" in quick time and the \"common schottische\"/\"Strathspey setting step\" in strathspey time. Some dances also involve setting steps from Highland dancing, such as the \"rocking step\", \"high cuts\", or \"Highland schottische\". In quick time, there is also the \"slip step\" for quick sideways movement, e.g. in circles.\nIn SCD classes there is often a certain focus on \"correct technique\", this applies especially to footwork and the positions of the feet at various points during the steps. Well-executed steps improve the look of a dance greatly, however their mastery involves quite some time and dedication and also a certain level of physical fitness. This does not mean a segregation of dancers is necessary, though segregation can emerge due to the social nature of the dance. In many places the main object of SCD is having fun, with or without the requirement for good footwork, in other places there is a preference for only those dancers with better footwork to join the dance. This is most prevalent in demonstration level classes and performances where the goal is to impress the audience.\nA much more important aspect of good SCD technique is for a dancer to ensure that they are at the proper location at the proper time. This is important because the figures often require many of the participants to be correctly positioned; it is difficult for the whole set to achieve the dance if some dancers are mislocated. \"Phrasing\" is the execution of figures appropriately timed to the music. \"Covering\", another common term, calls for moving dancers to progress in unison; this briefly forms lines, squares etc. which are clearly visible to the audience watching a dance (and often to the dancers themselves). Many SCD groups like putting on demonstrations to display the best dancing ability of the group.\nPrincipally SCD is a social dance and very much a team effort. Interaction with a partner and the other dancers (e.g. smiling, verbal cues, giving hands, encouragement) is an essential part of SCD. The importance of couples within this framework, the practice for correcting mistakes, the acceptance of embellishments, and the tolerance for differing choreography varies by SCD community and occasion. These differences are largely viewed as generating a healthy dialogue between communities.\nProgression.\nMost Scottish country dances are \"progressive\", i.e., after one repetition of the figure sequence the couples end up in a different place in the set. This serves to let every couple have a go as \"top couple\" (normally the active couple), and the number of repetitions is adjusted accordingly. For example, in a four-couple dance the order of couples at the beginning of each turn could be 1234, 2341, 3412, 4123, 1234 at which point the dance would stop. The most common arrangements are dances involving two or three couples dancing in four-couple sets for eight repetitions \u2013 this means that during some times through couples may be \"standing out\" to watch and have a rest. For example, the order of couples in a three-couple dance would be 1234 (top three couples dancing), 2134 (bottom three couples dancing), 2341 (top three couples dancing) etc. eight times through. There are also \"set dances\" which go through only once that often consist of a sequence of non-repeating figures that last much longer than normal times through (e.g. Bonnie Anne (96 bars), MacDonald of Sleat (128 bars)).\nIn fact, the figures and arrangement of modern Scottish country dances, while derived from a 300-year tradition, make it difficult to generalise. Many newer dances feature new ideas such as partner changes (you dance with a new partner on each new time through the dance, as in \"Nighean Donn\" (by Peter Hastings) or \"Caddam Wood\" (by John Mitchell)), palindromic structure (the sequence of figures is similar seen from the end to the beginning as it is seen from the beginning to the end, as in \"The White Heather Jig\" by Cosh), fugues (the sequence of figures for each couple is intricately intertwined to resemble the structure of a musical fugue), canons (a new couple begins their time through even though the couple before have not finished theirs yet) and others, such as John Drewry's \"Crossing the Line\", where the bottom of the set becomes the top for the next time through. Dance devisers seem to enjoy blending new ideas with the traditional though the results vary in popularity.\nHistory.\nModern.\nDuring the early 20th century, SCD still had a part in social entertainment especially in rural Scotland, even though the number of dances within the active repertoire was quite small. Scottish country dancing was in danger of dying out when, in 1923, the Scottish Country Dance Society (SCDS) was founded in Glasgow with the goal of preserving \"country dances \"as danced in Scotland\"\" (this was only recently changed to read \"Scottish country dances\"). The SCDS began to collect and publish the dances in the active repertoire as well as reconstruct (or reinterpret) from old sources dances that were no longer being danced. In the process, the dances and technique, which might differ considerably depending on where in Scotland a dance was collected, were strictly standardised. This compromised the strict historical preservation, but paved the way for universal \"compatibility\" among dancers from (eventually) all over the world. The efforts of the SCDS became quite popular, and its influence on the training of physical education teachers meant that most Scottish children learn at least a minimum of SCD during school. The Society achieved Royal patronage in 1947 and became known as the RSCDS (Royal Scottish Country Dance Society).\nFairly soon after the inception of the SCDS people started inventing new dances in the spirit of the older ones but also introducing new figures not part of the collected canon. Today there are over 11,000 dances catalogued, of which fewer than 1,000 can be considered \"traditional\". Many dances are only known regionally, though the most popular in a \"traditional\" vein are published by the RSCDS. The RSCDS does hold significant influence since they teach the majority of Scottish country dance teachers, administrate the official SCD teaching exam, run the largest number of internally publicised events, and have published the largest number of dances. The RSCDS publications encompass a large part of the repertoire of most dancers.\nModern SCD has evolved considerably from the early 18th century, with the constant devising of new dances, new concepts, informal variations and entirely new ideas appearing. As a pursuit, Scottish country dancing is no longer confined to Scotland. Active communities can be found throughout the world \u2013 in the rest of Britain, continental Europe, Canada, and the US as well as Australia, New Zealand and Japan, with occasional groups in places as diverse as Russia, South Africa, Argentina, and Hong Kong.\nGay and lesbian Scottish country dancing groups, first being organised in London and now in Manchester and Edinburgh aptly named The Gay Gordons offer same-sex Scottish country dancing. The London group has adopted the use of the terms \"leader\" and \"follower\" instead of \"man\" and \"lady\" (terms borrowed from swing dance).\nScottish country dancing is now recognised as a valuable activity for maintaining health and fitness. Researchers at the University of Strathclyde in August 2010 made a study of seventy women between the ages of 60 and 85 years; half were Scottish country dancers and the remainder participated in other physical activities such as swimming, walking, golf and keep fit classes. The women were assessed on their strength, stamina, flexibility and balance. They all compared favourably with average fitness levels for women in their age range, but the Scottish country dancers were shown to have more agility, stronger legs and to be able to walk more briskly than people who took part in other forms of exercise.\nIn Scotland, SCD is very common at both urban and rural ceilidh events. These are often informal, energetic, noisy events and the dancing is unrefined \u2013 also being aimed at beginners or at least those with very limited skills. Ceilidh dance events may present only a very small set of well known dances (particularly in urban settings). In these situations, there may be few other traditionally 'Scottish' or Gaelic features beyond the music and dance. (In some communities, SCD and other, the 'ceilidh' is not a dance party, but more of a 'talent show' or 'slam' where guests may present poems, songs, or skits for the enjoyment of all.)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63684", "revid": "16416757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63684", "title": "Ja\u00e9n, Spain", "text": "Ja\u00e9n () is a municipality of Spain and the capital of the province of Ja\u00e9n, in the autonomous community of Andalusia.\nThe city of Ja\u00e9n is the administrative and industrial centre for the province. Industrial establishments in the city include chemical works, tanneries, distilleries, cookie factories, textile factories, as well as agricultural and olive oil processing machinery industry.\nThe layout of Ja\u00e9n is determined by its position on the foothills of the Cerro de Santa Catalina, with steep, narrow streets, in the historic core.\nIts population is 112,757 (2020), about one-sixth of the population of the province. Ja\u00e9n had an increase in cultural tourism in the mid-2010s, having received 604,523 tourists in 2015, 10% more than in 2014.\nEtymology.\nThe name is most likely derived from the Roman name \"Villa Gaiena\" (Villa of Gaius). It was called Jayy\u0101n during the time of Al-Andalus.\nThe inhabitants of the city are known as \"Jienenses\".\nHistory.\nThe area was populated since ancient times, with remains of city walls in the Marroqu\u00edes Bajos site in the north of the city reportedly dating back in time to the Chalcolithic, roughly four millennia ago.\nKnown by Roman sources as \"Aurgi\" (avrgi), similar names such as avringi, oringi, are also identified as referring to the same place. The city was seized by Scipio Africanus away from Carthage by 207 BC, in the context of the Second Punic War. Following the Roman conquest, as former allies of the Punics, the city had the status of (required to pay tribute and under military rule), probably enduring harsh conditions in this period. During the Roman Empire, in the time of the Flavian dynasty, \"Aurgi\" became a \"municipium\", avrgi mvnicipivm flavivm.\nFollowing the Umayyad conquest of the Iberian Peninsula, the name of \"\u0176a\u012byy\u0101n\" (of unclear origin) was mentioned in Hispano-Arab sources already in the 8th century. Close to C\u00f3rdoba, the city became the head of an important \"k\u016bra\" in the emiral/caliphal period of Al-Andalus, extending across a territory with some similarities to the current province. During the turbulent 11th century, in the context of the Fitna of al-Andalus, the wider \"k\u016bra\" was territory in dispute between the most powerful neighbouring taifas, such as C\u00f3rdoba, Granada or Toledo, splitting up its territory. Ja\u00e9n was conquered by Habbus al-Muzaffar, leader of the Zirid Taifa of Granada. Decades after the final demise of the caliphate of C\u00f3rdoba, Ja\u00e9n was conquered by the Almoravids in 1091.\nTaken in 1159 by Ibn Mardan\u012b\u0161 (the \"Rey Lobo\", ruler of Valencia opposed to the spread of the Almohad Empire), his collaborator (and father-in-law) Ibn Hamu\u0161k surrendered and yielded Ja\u00e9n to the almohads in 1169.\nIn 1225, Ferdinand III of Castile unsuccessfully laid siege to the city (defended by strong walls built during the Almoravid period) with help from Al-Bayyasi, ruler of the Taifa of Baeza, that had just become a vassal state of the Kingdom of Castile. The city was besieged again in 1230 by Ferdinand, who lifted the siege after the news of the death of his father, Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n. Depleted from its defences and surrounding fields, the city was surrendered by Muhammad I of Granada to Ferdinand III on 28 February 1246. Also in 1246, the city was granted a \"fuero\" (charter) similar to that of Toledo, becoming in turn the model for the fueros granted to J\u00f3dar (1272), Arjona (1284), Alcal\u00e1 la Real (1341) and Priego (1341). Following the conquest, by 1248\u201349, the Diocese of Baeza was moved to Ja\u00e9n.\nFor the rest of the Middle Ages, the \"concejo\" or \"comunidad de villa y tierra\" of Ja\u00e9n controlled a land that ranged from 1000 to 1600\u00a0km2, roughly delimited by the Guadalquivir to the North, the Arroyovil to the East, the Arroyo Salado de los Villares to the West, and the Sierra Sur de Ja\u00e9n and Sierra M\u00e1gina mountain ranges to the South. Despite nominally featuring as the head of the Kingdom of Ja\u00e9n since the conquest, the importance of Ja\u00e9n within the demarcation was balanced by those of the cities of Baeza and \u00dabeda. It only began to stand out in relation to its growing strategic importance closer to the border with the Kingdom of Granada, consolidating its military and administrative functions. Unlike those cities, that developed an important textile craftmanship activity, Ja\u00e9n's economic activity remained nonetheless largely agricultural well entered the Early Modern period.\nIntitulation.\nThe intitulation of the city is: (Spanish) \"La Muy Noble y muy Leal Ciudad de Ja\u00e9n, Guarda y Defendimiento de los Reynos de Castilla\", (English) \"The Very Noble and very Loyal City of Ja\u00e9n, Guard and Defense of the Kingdoms of Castile,\" a title that was given to the city by King Enrique II of Castile to the city of Ja\u00e9n, due to the privileges that the city had, and to the role that the city was playing in the defense of the Kingdom of Castile against the Arabs.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nThe city lies at the foot of the Sierra de Jabalcuz, one of the subranges of the Subbaetic System, the inner system of the Baetic Mountains which leaves the Guadalquivir Valley to the North. The surroundings of the city are rich in small Mesozoic karstic aquifers. The Guadalbull\u00f3n river flows close to the city. Ja\u00e9n is approximately the antipode of Tauranga, New Zealand.\nClimate.\nJa\u00e9n has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), closely bordering on a cold semi-arid climate (\"BSk\") with dry, hot summers and mild, moderately wet winters. Ja\u00e9n has a July high of , and mean low of with a mean temperature of . This is slightly less than the daily mean of Seville which has the hottest daily summer mean in Western Europe with . Despite its inland location and altitude of around , in winter Ja\u00e9n averages only one snowy day and three days with lows under . Ja\u00e9n gets around 2800-3000 sunshine hours on average.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCulture.\nLandmarks.\n\"Saint Catherine's Castle\" (Castillo de Santa Catalina) sits on the top of a hill overlooking the city. Previously there had existed a fortress of Arabic origin (Abrehui's castle), of which some remains still exist. The current construction is of Christian origin, raised after the conquest of the city by Ferdinand III of Castile, called the Saint, in 1246.\nJa\u00e9n Cathedral is one of the most important Renaissance-style cathedrals. Construction began in 1570 and was completed in 1802. It is dedicated to the Assumption of the Virgin, and was built to shelter the relic of the Holy Face, or Veil of Veronica, lodged at the major chapel and exhibited to the public every Friday. Due to the length of time in its construction, different artistic styles can be appreciated, the most prominent being Renaissance; Andr\u00e9s de Vandelvira the most important architect. He is the greatest exponent of the Andalusian Renaissance. It aspires to be listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO.\nThe Arab Baths (\"Ba\u00f1os Arabes\") in Ja\u00e9n are among the largest Islamic bathhouses preserved in Spain. They can be visited under Villardompardo's Palace (another important landmark in the city). The baths function was the purification of all visitors to the city. Nowadays, the baths are not in use, though are a tourist and historical attraction.\nOther landmarks are the \"Museum of Arts and Popular Customs\", the \"International Museum of Na\u00eff Art\", \"San Andr\u00e9s's Chapel\", the \"Provincial Museum of Ja\u00e9n\" (which shelters an important collection of archaeological Iberian remains), \"Saint Ildefonso's church\", \"La Magdalena\" church, etc.\nMusic.\nThe most important event is the International Piano Competition Premio Ja\u00e9n (in Spanish: Concurso Internacional de Piano Premio Ja\u00e9n) that is the oldest and most important piano competition in Spain. It started in 1953 with Pablo Castillo Garc\u00eda-Negrete, an architect who began to donate the first cash prizes of only some thousands of pesetas. Nowadays the prize consist of \u20ac57,000 and the recording of classical music albums in professional studios. The last winner of this significant competition was the Chinese pianist Yin Yu Qin, in 2008, in the fiftieth competition.\nThere are other events such as the Ciclos de Rock and the Lagarto Rock Festival.\nLanguage.\nThe language spoken in Ja\u00e9n is the official language of Spain, Spanish. The variety of Spanish spoken in this province displays some of the characteristics of Andalusian speech, such as dropping of final -s in plural formation: \"gafa\" for gafas (and consequent final vowel opening) in the word \"glasses\", or dropping of /d/ in intervocalic position in regular participles of verbs: e.g. \"acabao\" for \"acabado\". Some of these variants can be consulted in the \"Diccionario de Vocabulario Andaluz\" compiled by the local lexicographer Alcal\u00e1 Venceslada, which was reprinted by the University of Ja\u00e9n some years ago. This dictionary also compiles some other variants of Andalusian present in other parts of the autonomous community.\nThere are different expressions typical of the area, namely the interjection \"\u00a1ea!\" (also present in other dialectal variants) which has no particular exact meaning or \"\u00a1lav\u00edstica!\" /la'vistika/, which is believed to be a contraction of the expression \"la V\u00edrgen de T\u00edscar\", a popular virgin of the province, although there are no exact data to confirm the origin of the last expression which is, nevertheless, widespread among speakers of the province.\nLeisure and entertainment.\nFestivals.\nFeria de San Lucas: On 18 October Ja\u00e9n celebrates its biggest festivity. It lasts more than a week where jienenses and visitors can enjoy music, Sevillanas dancing, gastronomy, culture and tradition.\nRomeria de Santa Catalina: Procession in the hill with the same name where the Castle is located to honour the Saint Patron of the City. It is typical to eat sardines and barbecue in the forest around the Castle.\nSan Anton: The 16 January it is celebrated the fires of San Anton. In the different neighbourhoods there are built bonfires and people eat and sing around them celebrating the beginning of the year. Also the International Urban Race of San Anton takes place that night, the fifth in the Spanish Ranking of Athleticism.\nVirgen de la Capilla: The 11 June Ja\u00e9n celebrates the appearance of the Virgin Mary in the city. A weekend where there are flower offerings and a Virgin procession, as well as traditional activities to show the culture of the city.\nHoly Week.\nThe tradition of celebrating the Holy Week in the city started in the Middle Ages, and nowadays it has been declared \"Bien de Inter\u00e9s Tur\u00edstico-Cultural Andaluz\" since 2006 and \"Fiesta de Inter\u00e9s Tur\u00edstico Nacional de Andaluc\u00eda\". From Palm Sunday until Resurrection Sunday 17 catholic brotherhoods carry out their processions through the streets of Ja\u00e9n. Its most well known procession features an image known as \"the grandfather\" , which parades around the city center during the early hours of good Friday, otherwise known as \"la madrug\u00e1\".\nGastronomy.\nJa\u00e9n's gastronomy is varied, emphasising local dishes such as the \"pipirrana\" (tomato, green peppers, breadcrumbs, garlic shoots, olive oil, vinegar, salt and hard-boiled egg); \"spinach a la Ja\u00e9n\" (garlic, cro\u00fbtons, spiced sausage, bayleaf, egg, orange zest and vinegar); \"rice a la Ja\u00e9n\" (very weak), \"veal with chopped garlic\", \"trout from the rivers of Ja\u00e9n\" (trout, butter, chunks of ham with bacon, parsley, white wine and salt), \"ajo blanco a la Ja\u00e9n\" (raw almond, olive oil, eggs, garlic, salt, vinegar and water).\nAmong the most well-known confectioneries of Ja\u00e9n is \"rice pudding\", \"gachas of Ja\u00e9n\" (a sort of porridge), \"pesti\u00f1os\", \"gusanillos\" and \"och\u00edos\".\nIn Ja\u00e9n, eating tapas is common; there are numerous bars where, when purchasing a beer, the customer also receives a free snack to accompany their drink. The tapas vary from place to place and in some bars it is possible to choose from a tapas menu, though this is not normally the case.\nTransport.\nPublic transport.\nBus.\nJa\u00e9n has 26 service lines that connect the various neighbourhoods of the capital, being able to use the metro card consortium. Buses are characterised by their yellow colour. Ja\u00e9n has frequent connections to Granada, M\u00e1laga, C\u00f3rdoba and other Spanish cities from its central bus station, placed in the city centre. Ja\u00e9n Bus Station has been declared \"Bien de Interes Cultural\" due to its modern representative arquitecture.\nTram.\nThe tram system in Ja\u00e9n opened in 2011 and within two weeks was stopped. The tranv\u00eda has yet to resume services, although there was talk of reinstalling the service in 2021, it is not yet underway.\nTrain.\nJa\u00e9n is served by the Ja\u00e9n railway station, terminal of the Madrid\u2013Ja\u00e9n high speed railway line. Ja\u00e9n is also connected to C\u00f3rdoba and Sevilla by train.\nAirport.\nJa\u00e9n does not have an airport. The closest airports to the city are Granada Airport (65\u00a0km) and M\u00e1laga Airport (136\u00a0km).\nEducation.\nThe University of Ja\u00e9n currently consists of approximately 18,000 students and 27 degree courses. This university is present in the city, in the Campus \"Las Lagunillas\", and also in \u00dabeda and Linares with some of the degree courses. It is a modern university, founded in 1993, and has large foreign student population. The university has signed international exchanges with The United States of America, Asia, several American countries and a great Erasmus experience within more than 15 European countries.\nSports.\nThe city's football team is Real Ja\u00e9n, who play in the Nuevo Estadio de La Victoria.\nThe city has two major sporting facilities: the Fuentezuelas and the Salobreja, together with the university sports facilities. Trekking and climbing associations also exist, such as El Lagarto and Jabalcuz.\nThe \"V\u00eda Verde del Aceite\" a former railway that ran from Ja\u00e9n to Puente Genil in the province of C\u00f3rdoba, is now used for recreational cycling walking and running.\nThere are various competitions which have a great international importance, for example, those related to chess and athletics. \nThe city has a futsal team, Ja\u00e9n FS, and the team plays in the main League Primera Divisi\u00f3n de Futsal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63685", "revid": "26301143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63685", "title": "Van, Turkey", "text": "City in eastern Turkey\nVan (; ; ) is a city in eastern Turkey's Van Province, on the eastern shore of Lake Van. It is the capital and largest city of Van Province.\nVan has a long history as a major urban area. It has been a large city since the first millennium BCE, initially as Tushpa, the capital of the kingdom of Urartu from the 9th century BCE to the 6th century BCE, and later as the center of the Armenian kingdom of Vaspurakan. Turkic presence in Van and in the rest of Anatolia started as a result of Seljuk victory at the Battle of Malazgirt (1071) against the Byzantine Empire.\nVan was densely populated by Armenians until the Armenian genocide in the 1910s. Today, it is mostly inhabited by Kurds.\nHistory.\nArchaeological excavations and surveys carried out in Van Province indicate that the history of human settlement in this region goes back at least as far as 5000 BCE. The Tilkitepe Mound, which is on the shores of Lake Van and a few kilometres to the south of Van Castle, is the only source of information about the oldest culture of Van.\nUrartu.\nUnder the ancient name of \"Tushpa\", Van was the capital of the Urartian kingdom in the 9th century BCE. The early settlement was centered on the steep-sided bluff now known as Van Castle (\"Van Kalesi\"), close to the edge of Lake Van and a few kilometers west of the modern city. Urartian cuneiform inscriptions dating to the 8th and 7th centuries BCE have been found here. The name 'Van' comes from the Urartian endonym \"Biaina\". A \"conservative\" estimate by Charles A. Burney put the population of Tushpa and its suburbs at 50,000.\nKingdom of Armenia.\nThe region came under the control of the Orontids in the 7th century BCE and quickly later the Persians in the mid 6th century BCE. Van Fortress, located outside Van city center, holds an inscribed stereotyped trilingual inscription of Xerxes the Great from the 5th century BCE upon a smoothed section of the rock face, some above the ground near the fortress. The inscription survives in near perfect condition and is divided into three columns of 27 lines written in (from left to right) Old Persian, Babylonian, and Elamite. In 331 BCE, Van was conquered by Alexander the Great and after his death became part of the Seleucid Empire. By the early 2nd century BCE it was part of the Kingdom of Armenia. It became an important center during the reign of the Armenian king, Tigranes II, who founded the city of Tigranakert in the 1st century BCE. In the early centuries BCE, it fell to the emerging Arsacid dynasty of Parthia until the 3rd century CE. However, it also fell once to the Arsacid dynasty of Armenia in this timespan. In the \"History of Armenia\" attributed to Movses Khorenatsi, the city is called \"Tosp\", from Urartian \"Tushpa\".\nByzantines, Sassanids, and the Artsrunis.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Urartu 832 BC\u2013590 BC\n Satrapy of Armenia 570 BC\u2013321 BC\nKingdom of Armenia \n321 BC\u2013428 AD\nArmenian Marzbanate 428\u2013646\n Arminiya 654\u2013884\nBagratid Armenia 884\u20131024 \n\u21b3Kingdom of Vaspurakan 908\u20131024\nByzantine Empire 1024\u20131071\nSeljuk Empire 1071\u20131100s\nMongol Empire 1240s\u20131330s\n Safavid Empire 1502\u20131515, 1520\u20131548, 1604\u20131639\n Ottomans 1515\u20131520, 1548\u20131604, 1639\u20131916\n Republic of Armenia 1918\u20131920\n Turkey 1922\u2013Present\nFollowing the fall of the Parthians and the emergence of the Neo-Persian Empire, better known as the Sassanian Empire, the town fell into the possession of the latter. During the over 700 years-long Roman-Persian Wars, some of the wars were waged at and around the location of modern-day Van. The Byzantine Empire briefly held the region from 628 to 640, following the victory in the climactic Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628, after which it was invaded by the Muslim Arabs, who consolidated their conquests as the province of Arminiya. Decline in Arab power eventually allowed local Armenian rulers to re-emerge, with the Artsruni dynasty soon becoming the most powerful. Initially dependent on the rulers of the Kingdom of Ani, they declared their independence in 908, founding the Armenian Kingdom of Vaspurakan. The kingdom had no specific capital: the court would move as the king transferred his residence from place to place, such as Van city, Vostan, Aghtamar, etc. In 1021 the last king of Vaspurakan, John-Senekerim Artsruni, ceded his entire kingdom to the Byzantine empire, who established the Vaspurakan theme on the former Artsruni territories. Van was called Eua or Eva () during Byzantine rule.\nSeljuk Empire and Rum.\nIncursions by the Seljuk Turks into Vaspurakan started in the 1050s. After their victory in 1071 at the battle of Manzikert the entire region fell under their control. After them, local Muslim rulers emerged, such as the Ahlatshahs and the Kurdish Ayyubids (1207). For a 20-year period, Van was held by the Anatolian Seljuk Sultanate until the 1240s when it was conquered by the Mongols. In the 14th century, Van was held by the Timurids, followed subsequently by the Turkoman Kara Koyunlu and Ak Koyunlu confederations.\nTurco-Iranian rivalry and the Ottoman era.\nThe first half of the 15th century saw the Van region become a land of conflict as it was disputed by the Ottoman Empire and the neighboring Persian Safavid Empire. The Safavids captured Van in 1502, as it went naturally with all former territories of the Ak Koyunlu. The Ottomans took the city in 1515 following the climactic Battle of Chaldiran and held it for a short period. The Safavids retook it again in 1520 but the Ottomans gained an almost definite hold of it in 1548 during another Ottoman-Safavid War. Ottoman control over the town was confirmed in the 1555 Peace of Amasya which came as a result after the end of the war. They first made Van into a sanjak dependent on the Erzurum eyalet, and later into a separate Van eyalet in about 1570. In 1604, the Safavids under king Abbas the Great recaptured Van alongside other swaths of lost territories in Eastern Anatolia. However, Ottoman control over it was at last now made final and definite in 1639 with the Treaty of Zuhab.\nDuring the early 1900s, the city of Van had eleven Armenian schools and ten Turkish schools. Towards the second half of the 19th century Van began to play an increased role in the politics of the Ottoman Empire due to its location near the borders of the Persian, Russian and Ottoman Empire, as well as its proximity to Mosul. During the period leading up to the breakup of the Ottoman Empire, Armenians were well represented in the local administration.\nOttoman Era demographics.\nThe demographics of Ottoman Van are a debated and contentious point as they relate directly to claims of ownership by either side prior to the outbreak of World War I. For the city of Van itself it has been estimated that it had around 50,000 inhabitants prior to World War I, of whom 30,000 were Armenian and 20,000 were Muslims. Based on the official 1914 Ottoman census, the population of Van province consisted of 179,422 Muslims and 67,797 Armenians. The Ottoman census figures include only male citizens, excluding women and children, and according to more recent research, an estimate for Van province (including women and children) is that it had 313,000 Muslims, 130,000 Armenians, and 65,000 others, including Assyrians.\nThe demographics of Van are a greatly debated point also given the changing provincial borders. For example, in 1875 the province was divided; Van and Hakkari were separated, only to be rejoined in 1888, drastically changing the census numbers. Some writers argue that this merging was done to keep the Armenians from forming a majority. In 1862 it was estimated that in Van there were 90,100 Christians (including Syriac Christians) and 95,100 Muslims. The French Consul in Van reported that in Van and Bitlis 51.46% were Kurds, 32.70% were Armenians and 5.53% were Turks. On the other hand, the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople estimated 185,000 Armenians in Van, 18,000 Assyrians, 72,000 Kurds, 47,000 Turks, 25,000 Yezidis, 5,000 Zazas and 3,000 Gypsies. Both sides have been accused of over-counting the numbers at the time given the Armenian genocide and population statistics became important during the Berlin Conference.\nThe Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u20131878.\nDuring this war the Kurdish Sheikh Jelaludin led thousands of soldiers to massacre Armenians of the province and destroyed and plundered many of their villages. These events are described in \"Armenia and the Campaign of 1877\" by British war correspondent Charles B. Norman and in the fictional novella \"Jalaleddin\" by the Armenian novelist Raffi in very similar terms.\nWorld War I and Armenian genocide.\nThe Armenian genocide in Van Province started in late 1914 with attacks by the Ottoman Empire's Special Organization and affiliated paramilitaries. The regional Albanian administrator, Djevdet Bey, was reported to have said that \"We have cleansed the Armenians and Syriac Christians from Azarbaijan, and we will do the same in Van\". Numerous reports from Ottoman officials, such as a parliament deputy, the governor of Aleppo as well as the German consul in Van, suggested that deliberate provocations against the Armenians were being orchestrated by the local government. In mid-April 1915, Cevdet Bey ordered the execution of four Armenian leaders, and he demanded that all Armenian males of military age gather before him, which drove the Armenians to take up arms in self-defense. On the other hand, historian and sociologist Taner Ak\u00e7am acknowledges that in the case of Van, the deportations may have been driven by military necessity and states the resistance in Van should be examined as a separate case, although this is very similar to official turkish positions denying the Armenian Genocide.\nIn April 1915, as slaughter was being inflicted upon the rural populations surrounding Van, the Armenian residents of the city launched a rebellion hoping to avoid the same fate, defending themselves in the Armenian quarters of the city against the Turks. The Russians finally relieved the Armenian defenders of Van in late May 1915 and local Armenians gave the keys of the city to Russian general Nikolai Yudenich on May 21. In August, a victory over the Russian army allowed the Ottoman army to retake Van. In September 1915, the Russians forced the Turks out of Van for the second time. Russian forces began to leave the area after the October Revolution in Russia in 1917, and by April 1918, it was recaptured by the Ottoman army again. According to Taner Ak\u00e7am, citing the \"Osmanli Belgelerinde Ermeniler 1915\u20131920\" (Armenians in Ottoman Documents, 1915\u20131920), after the Turks took back the city from the Russians, they killed the Armenian population in the city. Clarence Ussher, an American physician and missionary in Van, and an eye-witness to the events, reported that 55,000 Armenians had been killed. The end of World War I forced the Ottoman army to surrender its claim to Van.\nTurkish War of Independence and Republic.\nIn the Treaty of S\u00e8vres, the Entente Powers decided to cede the city to the First Republic of Armenia. Turkish revolutionaries, led by Mustafa Kemal Atat\u00fcrk, rejected the terms of the treaty and instead waged the Turkish War of Independence. However, the idea of ceding Van to the Armenians was floated, and \u0130smet \u0130n\u00f6n\u00fc was said to have surveyed army officers on 14 October 1919 on the issue of ceding Van and Bitlis. However, the parliament in Ankara rejected any compromise on this issue. By 1920, Van fell under Turkish control again and its remaining Armenian inhabitants were expelled in a final round of ethnic cleansing. With the Treaty of Lausanne and Treaty of Kars, the Treaty of S\u00e8vres was annulled and Van remained de facto under Turkish sovereignty.\nBy the end of the conflicts, the town of Van was empty and in ruins. The city was rebuilt after the war a few kilometers east of the ancient citadel, which is now known as Van Castle (\"Van Kalesi\"). The city now lies at about above sea level.\nTourism.\nThe main places with tourism potential in Van are Ho\u015fap Castle, Muradiye Fall, Akdamar Island, Van Castle, Lake Turna, Lake Akg\u00f6l and Van Museum.\nPolitics.\nIn the 2019 municipal elections, Bedia \u00d6zg\u00f6k\u00e7e Ertan of the HDP party was elected mayor of Van. In August 2019 she was dismissed and subsequently sentenced to 30 years imprisonment accused of supporting terrorism as part of a government crackdown against politicians of the Kurdish HDP party; the Turkish state appointed an unelected state-trustee, Mehmet Emin Bilmez, in her place. Many other Kurdish mayors in other Kurdish cities across the region also suffered a similar fate. Protests against the decision arose which were suppressed by the Turkish police with the use of water cannons; some protestors were killed.\nDemographics.\nAt the end of 2024 the population figure for the city of Van was 522 885 (Ipekyolu, Tusba), but former Mayor Burhan Yengun is quoted as saying it may be as high as 600,000. The former Van Central (\"Merkez\") District stretched over 1,938.14\u00a0km2, but has subsequently been split into two new districts (\u0130pekyolu and Tu\u015fba). Today, Van has a Kurdish majority and Turkish minority.\nGeography.\nThe city of Van is located at the western foot of Mount Erek.\nClimate.\nVan has a Mediterranean-influenced humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dsa,\" Trewartha\": Dc\") with cold, snowy winters and very warm, dry summers. Precipitation can be observed for the majority of the year, with a slight peak during spring and autumn, and a brief dry summer from July to September.\nLandmarks.\nThe modern city is located on the plain extending from the Lake Van, at a distance of from the lake shore. Reports have appeared over the years of a certain Lake Van Monster said to live in the lake. Lake Er\u00e7ek is the second largest lake in the region and lies just east of Lake Van.\nVan has often been called \"The Pearl of the East\" because of the beauty of its surrounding landscape. An old Armenian proverb in the same sense is \"Van in this world, paradise in the next\". This phrase has been slightly modified in Turkish as \"D\u00fcnyada Van, ahirette iman\" or \"Van for this world, faith for the next\".\nThe city is home to Van Y\u00fcz\u00fcnc\u00fc Y\u0131l \u00dcniversitesi (\"Van 100th Year University\") and recently came to the headlines for two highly publicized investigations initiated by the Prosecutor of Van, one of which was focused on accusations against the university's rector, Hasan Ceylan, who was kept in custody for a time. He was finally acquitted but lost his rectorate. He is a grandson of Agop Vartovyan, an Ottoman Armenian who is accepted as the founder of modern Turkish theatre. Hasan Ceylan is also the department chairman of Environmental Engineering at Van Y\u00fcz\u00fcnc\u00fc Y\u0131l University.\nEarthquakes.\nIn 1941, Van suffered a destructive 5.9 Mw earthquake. A more severe 7.2 Mw earthquake occurred on 23 October 2011. On the 9 November 2011, another earthquake caused several buildings to collapse.\nCuisine.\nIn culinary terms, as some cities in Turkey became renowned for their kebab culture or other types of traditional local dishes, Van has distinguished itself with its breakfast culture.\nTransport.\nVan stands on Highway D300, which runs from the Iranian border 100\u00a0km east at Kapikoy through Van then along the south lake shore to Tatvan (100\u00a0km), and westwards to the rest of Turkey. Highway D975 runs north to Dogubeyazit and south towards Hakkari. Frequent buses and dolmuses ply these highways.\nVan is the western terminus of the railway line from Iran, with freight and passenger trains (suspended between 2015 and 2018). There is a train ferry (upgraded in 2015) across the lake to Tatvan. There is no railway around the lake; it is intended eventually to build one but to date there are no plans. This would actually create an unbroken rail link between Europe and the Indian subcontinent, as Tatvan is the terminus of the line to Ankara and Istanbul.\nVan has daily flights to Istanbul, Ankara and other major Turkish cities from Ferit Melen Airport.\nMedia.\nNear Van, there is a longwave broadcasting station with a guyed mast. It went in service in 1990 and operates on 225\u00a0kHz with 600\u00a0kW. It has also local news outlets like \"Van Gazetesi\" or \"Gazete Van.\"\nVan cat.\nThe Van cat is a breed of cat native to this town and named after it. It is noted for its white fur, and for having differently colored eyes.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nVan is twinned with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63687", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63687", "title": "Tramp", "text": "Long-term homeless person\nA tramp is a long-term homeless person who travels from place to place as a vagrant, traditionally walking all year round.\nEtymology.\nTramp is derived from a Middle English verb meaning to \"walk with heavy footsteps\" (\"cf.\" modern English \"trample\") and \"to go hiking\".\nIn Britain, the term was widely used to refer to vagrants in the early Victorian period. The social reporter Henry Mayhew refers to it in his writings of the 1840s and 1850s. By 1850, the word was well established. In that year, Mayhew described \"the different kinds of vagrants or tramps\" to be found in Britain, along with the \"different trampers' houses in London or the country\". He distinguished several types of tramps, ranging from young people fleeing from abusive families, through to people who made their living as wandering beggars and prostitutes.\nIn the United States, the word became frequently used during the American Civil War, to describe the widely shared experience of undertaking long marches, often with heavy packs. Use of the word as a noun is thought to have begun shortly after the war. A few veterans had developed a liking for the \"call of the road\". Others may have been too traumatised by war time experience to return to settled life.\nHistory.\nWanderers have existed since ancient times. The modern concept of the \"tramp\" emerges with the expansion of industrial towns in the early nineteenth century, with the consequent increase in migrant labor and pressure on housing. The common lodging house or \"doss house\" developed to accommodate transients. Urbanisation also led to an increase in forms of highly marginalized casual labor. Mayhew identifies the problem of \"tramping\" as a particular product of the economic crisis of the 1840s known as the Hungry Forties. John Burnett argues that in earlier periods of economic stability \"tramping\" involved a wandering existence, moving from job to job which was a cheap way of experiencing adventures beyond the \"boredom and bondage of village life\". \nThe number of transient homeless people increased markedly in the U.S. after the industrial recession of the early 1870s. Initially, the term \"tramp\" had a broad meaning, and was often used to refer to migrant workers who were looking for permanent work and lodgings. Later the term acquired a narrower meaning, to refer only to those who prefer the transient way of life. Writing in 1877 Allan Pinkerton said:\nThe tramp has always existed in some form or other, and he will continue on his wanderings until the end of time; but there is no question that he has come into public notice, particularly in America, to a greater extent during the present decade than ever before.\nFrom 1896 to the last issue in 1953, the cover page of the British comic \"Illustrated Chips\" featured a comic strip of the tramps Weary Willie and Tired Tim, with its readers including a young Charlie Chaplin (who would become famous as the Tramp).\nAuthor Bart Kennedy, a self-described tramp of 1900 America, once said \"I listen to the tramp, tramp of my feet, and wonder where I was going, and why I was going.\" John Sutherland (1989) said that Kennedy \"is one of the early advocates of 'tramping', as the source of literary inspiration.\"\nThe tramp became a character trope in vaudeville performance in the late 19th century in the United States. Lew Bloom claimed he was \"the first stage tramp in the business\".\nMeaning promiscuous woman.\nPerhaps because female tramps were often regarded as prostitutes, in the United States the term \"tramp\" also came to refer to a promiscuous woman. However, this is not a global usage. According to Australian linguist Kate Burridge, the term shifted towards this meaning in the 1920s, having previously predominantly referred to men, it followed the path of other similar gender neutral words (such as \"slag\") to having specific reference to female sexual laxity.\nThe word is also used, with ambiguous irony, in the classic 1937 Rodgers and Hart song \"The Lady Is a Tramp\", which is about a wealthy member of New York high society who chooses a vagabond life in \"hobohemia\". Other songs with implicit or explicit reference to this usage include \"The Son of Hickory Holler's Tramp\" and \"Gypsys, Tramps &amp; Thieves\".\nCountry specific definitions.\nThe US State of Mississippi, until 2018, had a specific definition for \"tramps\", which was a criminal offense: Any male person over 16 years of age, and not blind, who shall go about from place to place begging and asking subsistence by charity, and all who stroll over the country without lawful occasion, and can give no account of their conduct consistent with good citizenship, shall be held to be tramps. Every person, on conviction of being a tramp, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50, or imprisonment in the county jail not more than one month, or both.\nIn other languages.\nIn French, \"clochard\" is a term for the homeless, especially in French cities. The term is often associated with the romanticizing image of a person who has given up his bourgeois existence for a free life under the Seine bridges in Paris.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63688", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63688", "title": "Rings of Power", "text": "Artefacts in Tolkien's legendarium\nThe Rings of Power are magical artefacts in J. R. R. Tolkien's legendarium, most prominently in his high fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\". The One Ring first appeared as a plot device, a magic ring in Tolkien's children's fantasy novel, \"The Hobbit\". Tolkien later gave it a backstory and much greater power: he added nineteen other Great Rings which also conferred powers such as invisibility, and which the One Ring could control. These were the Three Rings of the Elves, the Seven Rings for the Dwarves, and the Nine for Men. He stated that there were in addition many lesser rings with minor powers. A key story element in \"The Lord of the Rings\" is the addictive power of the One Ring, made secretly by the Dark Lord Sauron; the Nine Rings enslave their bearers as the Nazg\u00fbl (Ringwraiths), Sauron's most deadly servants.\nProposed sources of inspiration for the Rings of Power range from Germanic legend with the ring Andvaranaut and eventually Richard Wagner's \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\", to fairy tales such as Snow White, which features both a magic ring and seven dwarfs. One experience that may have been pivotal was Tolkien's professional work on a Latin inscription at the temple of Nodens; he was a god-hero linked to the Irish hero \"Nuada Airgetl\u00e1m\", whose epithet is \"Silver-Hand\", or in Elvish \"Celebrimbor\", the name of the Elven-smith who made the Rings of Power. The inscription contained a curse upon a ring, and the site was called Dwarf's Hill.\nThe Rings of Power have been described as symbolising the way that power conflicts with moral behaviour; Tolkien explores the way that different characters, from the humble gardener Sam Gamgee to the powerful Elf ruler Galadriel, the proud warrior Boromir to the Ring-addicted monster Gollum, interact with the One Ring. Tolkien stated that \"The Lord of the Rings\" was an examination of \"placing power in external objects\".\nFictional history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \"Annatar\" convinces Celebrimbor to forge the Rings of Power\n \"But wherefore should Middle-earth remain for ever desolate and dark, whereas the Elves could make it as fair as Eress\u00eba, nay even as Valinor? And since you have not returned thither, as you might, I perceive that you love this Middle-earth, as do I. Is it not then our task to labour together for its enrichment, and for the raising of all the Elven-kindreds that wander here untaught to the height of that power and knowledge which those have who are beyond the Sea?\"\n \u2014 J.R.R. Tolkien\n , \"The Silmarillion\", \"The Rings of Power and the Third Age\"\nThe Rings of Power were forged by the Elven-smiths of the Noldorin settlement of Eregion. Best-known were the twenty Great Rings, which conferred powers including invisibility, but many lesser rings with minor powers were also created at that time. The smiths were led by Celebrimbor, the grandson of F\u00ebanor, the greatest craftsman of the Noldor, working with Dwarves from Khazad-d\u00fbm (Moria) led by his friend Narvi. Sauron, powerful and ambitious, but humiliated by the fall of his evil master Morgoth at the end of the First Age, had evaded the summons of the godlike Valar to surrender and face judgment; he chose to remain in Middle-earth and seek dominion over its people. In the Second Age, he arrived disguised as a handsome emissary of the Valar named Annatar, the Lord of Gifts, offering the knowledge to transform Middle-earth with the light of Valinor, the home of the Valar. He was shunned by the Elven leaders Gil-galad and Elrond in Lindon, but managed to persuade the Noldorin Elves of Eregion. With Sauron's help, they learnt to forge Rings of Power, first creating many lesser ring as an essay of their skill. Then they created the Seven and the Nine, and Celebrimbor himself forged the Three Great Rings. In Mordor Sauron then invested much of his power in forging the One Ring in the fires of Mount Doom, to serve as a master ring to control all the others.\nWhen the One Ring was made using the Black Speech, the Elves immediately became aware of Sauron's true motive to control the other Rings. When Sauron set the completed One Ring upon his finger, the Elves quickly hid their rings. Celebrimbor entrusted one of the Three to Galadriel and sent the other Two to Gil-galad and C\u00edrdan. In an attempt to seize all the Rings of Power for himself, Sauron waged an assault upon the Elves. He destroyed Eregion and captured the Nine. Under torture, Celebrimbor revealed where the Seven were, but refused to reveal the Three.\nToward the end of the Second Age, the N\u00famen\u00f3reans took Sauron prisoner. Sauron however managed to corrupt the Men of N\u00famenor, leading to their civilisation's eventual downfall. The exiled N\u00famen\u00f3reans who survived, led by Elendil and his sons Isildur and An\u00e1rion, established the realms of Arnor and Gondor. Together with the Elves of Lindon, they formed the last alliance against Sauron and emerged victorious. Isildur cut the One Ring from Sauron's hand and kept it, refusing to destroy it; he was later killed in an ambush, and the Ring was lost for centuries. During this time, the Elves were able to use the Three Rings, while the Nine given to the leaders of Men corrupted their wearers and turned them into the Nazg\u00fbl. The Seven given to the Dwarves failed to subject them directly to Sauron's will but ignited a sense of avarice within them. Over the years, Sauron sought to recapture the Rings, primarily the One, but was only successful in recovering the Nine and three of the Seven. \nDuring the Third Age, the One Ring is discovered by Bilbo Baggins (in \"The Hobbit\"). At the start of \"The Lord of the Rings\", the Wizard Gandalf explains the One Ring's history to Bilbo's heir Frodo, and recites the Rhyme of the Rings. A Fellowship is formed to destroy it, led by Frodo. Following the successful destruction of the One Ring and the fall of Sauron, the power of the rings fades. While the Nine are destroyed, the Three are rendered powerless; their bearers leave Middle-earth for Valinor at the end of the Third Age, inaugurating the Dominion of Men.\nDescription.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Ring Verse\n &lt;poem&gt;\n\"Three Rings for the Elven-kings under the sky,\"\n\"Seven for the Dwarf-lords in their halls of stone,\"\n\"Nine for Mortal Men doomed to die,\"\n\"One for the Dark Lord on his dark throne;\"\n\"In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.\"\n\"One Ring to rule them all, one Ring to find them,\"\n\"One Ring to bring them all, and in the darkness bind them;\"\n\"In the Land of Mordor where the Shadows lie.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n \u2014 J.R.R. Tolkien\n , \"The Lord of the Rings\", Epigraph\nAs observed by Saruman, each one of the Great Rings of Power, in contrast to the lesser rings, was adorned with its \"proper gem\", except for the One Ring, which was unadorned.\nThe One.\nUnlike the other great rings, the One was created as an unadorned gold band similar in appearance to the lesser rings, though it bore Sauron's incantation, the Ring Verse, in the Black Speech; it became visible only when heated, whether by fire or by Sauron's hand. As the other Rings were made under the influence of Sauron, the power of all the Rings depended on the One Ring's survival. To make the One Ring, Sauron had to put almost all his power into it\u2014when worn, it enhanced his power; unworn, it remained aligned to him unless another seized it and took control of it. A prospective possessor could, if sufficiently strong, overthrow Sauron and usurp his place; but they would become as evil as he. As the One was made in the fires of Mount Doom, it could only be unmade there. Sauron, being evil, never imagined that anyone might try to destroy the One Ring, as he imagined that anyone bearing it would be corrupted by it.\nThe Three.\nNamed after the three elements of fire, water, and air, the Three were the last to be made before Sauron's solo creation of the One. Although Celebrimbor forged the Three Rings alone in Eregion, they were moulded by Sauron's craft and were bound to the One. Only after Sauron's defeat, when the One Ring was cut from his finger at the end of the Second Age, did the Elves begin to actively use the Three to ward off the decay brought by time. Even then, the Rings could be worn without being seen. After the One Ring, they are the most powerful of the twenty Rings of Power. They are:\nThe Seven.\nSauron recovered the Seven Rings from information provided by Celebrimbor, and gave them to the leaders of the seven kindreds of the Dwarves: Durin's Folk (Longbeards), Firebeards, Broadbeams, Ironfists, Stiffbeards, Blacklocks, and Stonefoots, though a tradition of Durin's Folk claimed that Durin received his ring from the Elven-smiths. Over the years, Sauron was able to recover only three of the Seven rings from the Dwarves. The last of the three was seized from Thr\u00e1in II during his captivity in Dol Guldur. Gandalf recounts to Frodo that the remaining four were consumed by dragons. Before the outbreak of the War of the Ring, an envoy from Sauron attempted to bribe Dain II Ironfoot of the Lonely Mountain with the three surviving rings and the lost realm of Moria in exchange for information leading to the recovery of the One Ring, but Dain refused.\nThe Nine.\nSauron gave Nine of the Rings of Power to leaders of Men, who became \"mighty in their day, kings, sorcerers, and warriors of old\". They gained unending lifespans, and the ability to see things in worlds invisible to mortal Men. One by one, the Men fell to the power of the One Ring; by the end of the Second Age, all nine had become invisible ring-wraiths \u2013 the Nazg\u00fbl, Sauron's most terrible servants. In particular, they helped him search for the One Ring, to which they were powerfully attracted.\nSaruman's Ring.\nIn the chapter \u2018The Council of Elrond\u2019, Gandalf had mentioned that during his conversation with Saruman, the White Wizard wore a ring on his finger and declared himself the 'Ring-maker'. Possibly, Saruman indeed forged a magical ring comparable in power to the lesser rings. If so, his ring most likely lost its power after the destruction of the One Ring too. Whatever the case, however, Saruman's ring was never mentioned again later in the book.\nPowers.\nThe Rings of Power were made using the craft taught by Sauron to give their wearers \"wealth and dominion over others\". Each Ring enhances the \"natural power\" of its possessor, thus approaching its \"magical aspect\", which can be \"easily corruptible to evil and lust of domination\". Gandalf explains that a Ring of Power is self-serving and can \"look after itself\": the One Ring, in particular, can \"slip off treacherously\" to return to its master Sauron, betraying its bearer when an opportunity arrives. As the Ruling Ring, the One enables a sufficiently powerful bearer to perceive what is done using the other rings and to govern the thoughts of their bearers. To use the One Ring to its full extent, the bearer needs to be strong and train their will to the domination of others.\nA mortal Man or Hobbit who takes possession of a Ring of Power can manifest its power, becoming invisible and able to see things that are normally invisible, as the bearer is partly transported into the spirit world. However, they also \"fade\"; the Rings unnaturally extend their life-spans, but gradually transform them into permanently invisible wraiths. The Rings affect other beings differently. The Seven are used by their Dwarven bearers to increase their treasure hoards, but they do not gain invisibility, and Sauron was unable to bend the Dwarves to his will, instead only amplifying their greed and anger. Tom Bombadil, the only being unaffected by the power of the One Ring, could both see its wearer and remained visible when he wore it.\nUnlike the other Rings, the main purpose of the Three is to \"heal and preserve\", as when Galadriel used Nenya to preserve her realm of Lothl\u00f3rien over long periods. The Elves made the Three Rings to try to halt the passage of time, or as Tolkien had Elrond say, \"to preserve all things unstained\". This was seen most clearly in Lothl\u00f3rien, which was free of both evil and the passage of time.\nThe Three do not make their wearers invisible. The Three had other powers: Narya could rekindle hearts with its fire and inspire others to resist tyranny, domination, and despair; Nenya had a secret power in its water that protected from evil; while Vilya healed and preserved wisdom in its element of air.\nInspiration.\nNodens.\nThe Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey thought that Tolkien's work on a Latin inscription at a Roman temple at Lydney Park was a \"pivotal\" influence, combining as it did a god-hero, a ring, dwarves, and a silver hand. The god-hero was Nodens, whom Tolkien traced to the Irish hero \"Nuada Airgetl\u00e1m\", \"Nuada of the Silver-Hand\", and the inscription carried a curse on a stolen ring. \"Silver-Hand\" is the English translation of \"Celebrimbor\", the Elven-smith who made the Rings of Power, in association with the Dwarven-smith Narvi. The temple was at a place called Dwarf's Hill.\nRing of Gyges.\nMagical rings occur in classical legend, in the form of the Ring of Gyges in Plato's \"Republic\". It grants the power of invisibility to its wearer, creating a moral dilemma, enabling people to commit injustices without fearing they would be caught. In contrast, Tolkien's One Ring actively exerts an evil force that destroys the morality of the wearer.\nScholars including Frederick A. de Armas note parallels between Plato's and Tolkien's rings. De Armas suggests that both Bilbo and Gyges, going into deep dark places to find hidden treasure, may have \"undergone a Catabasis\", a psychological journey to the Underworld.\nThe Tolkien scholar Eric Katz writes that \"Plato \"argues\" that such [moral] corruption will occur, but Tolkien \"shows\" us this corruption through the thoughts and actions of his characters\". Plato argues that immoral life is no good as it corrupts one's soul. So, Katz states, according to Plato a moral person has peace and happiness, and would not use a Ring of Power. In Katz's view, Tolkien's story \"demonstrate[s] various responses to the question posed by Plato: would a just person be corrupted by the possibility of almost unlimited power?\" The question is answered in different ways: the monster Gollum is weak, quickly corrupted, and finally destroyed; Boromir, son of the Steward of Gondor, begins virtuous but like Plato's Gyges is corrupted \"by the temptation of power\" from the Ring, even if he wants to use it for good, but redeems himself by defending the hobbits to his own death; the \"strong and virtuous\" Galadriel, who sees clearly what she would become if she accepted the ring, and rejects it; the immortal Tom Bombadil, exempt from the Ring's corrupting power and from its gift of invisibility; Sam who in a moment of need faithfully uses the ring, but is not seduced by its vision of \"Samwise the Strong, Hero of the Age\"; and finally Frodo who is gradually corrupted, but is saved by his earlier mercy to Gollum, and Gollum's desperation for the Ring. Katz concludes that Tolkien's answer to Plato's \"Why be moral?\" is \"to be yourself\".\nGermanic legend and fairy tale.\nTolkien was certainly influenced by the Germanic legend: Andvaranaut is a magical ring that can give its wielder wealth, while Draupnir is a self-multiplying ring that holds dominion over all the rings it creates. Richard Wagner's opera series \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" adapted Norse mythology to provide a magical but cursed golden ring. Tolkien denied any connection, but scholars agreed that Wagner's \"Ring\" powerfully influenced Tolkien. The scholar of religion Stefan Arvidsson writes that Tolkien's ring differs from Wagner's in being concerned with power for its own sake and that he turned one ring into many, an echo of the self-multiplying ring.\n\"Magic rings are a frequent motif in fairy tales; they confer powers such as invisibility or flight; they can summon wish-granting djinns and dwarves\", writes the Tolkien and feminist scholar Melanie Rawls. She adds that they \"identify the enchanted princess, hold the tiny golden key to the secret room, give one the power to transform oneself into any form \u2014 animal, vegetable, or mineral: duck, lake, rock or tree on a plain, and so escape the ogre.\" As Tolkien was well acquainted with fairy tales like The Brothers Grimm's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Jeanette White from \"Comic Book Resources\" suggested that his choice \"to gift seven rings of power to the Dwarf Lords of the seven kingdoms is probably no accident\". \nThe nine rings for Mortal Men match the number of the Nazg\u00fbl. Edward Pettit, in \"Mallorn\", states that nine is \"the commonest 'mystic' number in Germanic lore\". He quotes the \"Nine Herbs Charm\" from the \"Lacnunga\", an Old English book of spells, suggesting that Tolkien may have made multiple uses of such spells to derive attributes of the Nazg\u00fbl:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nagainst venom and vile things\nand all the loathly ones,\nthat through the land rove, \nagainst nine fugitives from glory, \nagainst nine poisons and \nagainst nine flying diseases.&lt;/poem&gt;\nAnalysis.\nPlot device to core element.\nThe One Ring first appeared in Tolkien's children's fantasy \"The Hobbit\" in 1937 as a plot device, a mysterious magic ring that the titular character had stumbled upon, but its origin was left unexplained. Following the novel's success, Tolkien was persuaded by his publishers Allen &amp; Unwin to write a sequel. Intending to give Bilbo another adventure, he instead devised a background story around the Ring with its power of invisibility, forming a framework for the new work. He tied the Ring to mythical elements from the unfinished manuscripts for \"The Silmarillion\" to create an impression of depth in \"The Lord of the Rings\". Gollum's characterisation in \"The Hobbit\" was revised for the second edition to bring it into line with his portrayal in \"The Lord of the Rings\" as a being addicted to the One Ring.\nTolkien's conception of Ring-lore was closely linked to his development of the One Ring. He initially made Sauron instrumental in forging the Rings. He then briefly considered having F\u00ebanor, creator of the Silmarils, forge the Rings of Power, under the influence of Morgoth, the first Dark Lord. He settled on Celebrimbor, a descendant of F\u00ebanor, as the Ring's principal maker, under the tutelage of Sauron, Morgoth's chief servant. While writing the lore behind the One Ring, Tolkien struggled with giving the Elven rings a \"special status\" \u2013 somehow linked to the One, and thus endangered by it, but also \"unsullied\", having no direct connection with Sauron. By the time he was writing the chapter \"The Mirror of Galadriel\", Tolkien had decided that the Seven and the Nine were made by the Elven-smiths of Eregion under Sauron's guidance and that the Three were made by Celebrimbor alone. He considered setting the Three free from the One when it was destroyed but dropped the idea. Tolkien's posthumous works, including \"The Silmarillion\", \"Unfinished Tales\" and \"The History of Middle-earth\" offer further glimpses of the creation of the Rings.\nJason Fisher, writing in \"Tolkien Studies\", notes that Tolkien developed the names, descriptions and powers of the Three Rings late and slowly through many drafts of his narratives. In Fisher's view, Tolkien found it difficult to work these Rings both into the existing story of the One Ring, and into the enormous but Ring-free legendarium. Some of the descriptions, such as that Vilya was the mightiest of the Three, and that Narya was called \"The Great\", were added at the galley proof stage, just before printing. The Rings had earlier been named Kemen, \u00cbar, and Menel, meaning the Rings of Earth, Sea, and Heaven.\nAccording to Johann K\u00f6berl, Tolkien struggled with the notion of a \"special status\" for the Elven-Rings, and considered having The Three set free when the One Ring was destroyed. In an unused draft by Tolkien, Galadriel counselled Celebrimbor to destroy all the Rings when Sauron's deception was revealed, but when he could not bear to ruin them, she suggested that the Three be hidden. According to \"Unfinished Tales\", at the start of the War of the Elves and Sauron, Celebrimbor gave both Narya and Vilya to Gil-galad, High King of the Noldor. Gil-galad later entrusted Vilya to his lieutenant Elrond, and Narya to C\u00edrdan the Shipwright, Lord of the Havens of Mithlond and leader of the Falathrim or \"People of the Shore\". Tolkien suggested that Sauron did not discover where the Three were hidden, though he guessed that they were given to Gil-galad and Galadriel. In the published \"The Lord of the Rings\", Gil-galad received only Vilya, while C\u00edrdan was the direct recipient of Narya from Celebrimbor. \nTolkien noted in his letters that the primary power of the Three was to \"the prevention and slowing of \"decay\"\", which appealed to the Elves in their pursuit of preserving what they loved in Middle-earth. As changeless beings in a changing world, the Elves who remained in Middle-earth relied on the Three to delay the inevitable rise of the Dominion of Men. Tolkien explained that the Elves can only be immortal as long as the world endures, leading them to be concerned with burdens of deathlessness in time and change. Since they wanted the bliss and perfect memory of Valinor, yet to remain in Middle-earth with their prestige as the fairest, as opposed to being at the bottom of the hierarchy in the Undying Lands, they became obsessed with \"fading\".\nPower and morality.\nAccording to the scholars of philosophy Gregory Bassham and Eric Bronson, the Rings of Power can be seen as a modern representation of the relationship between power and morality, since it portrays an idea that \"absolute power is in conflict with behaviour that respects the wishes and needs of others\". They also observed that several of Tolkien's characters have responded in different ways when faced with the possibility of possessing the One Ring\u2014characters such as Samwise Gamgee and Galadriel have rejected it; Boromir and Gollum, were seduced by its power; and Frodo Baggins, though in limited use, ultimately succumbs to it; while Tom Bombadil can transcend its power entirely. They also noted that for Tolkien, the crucial moment of each character in the story is the moment in which they are tempted to use a Ring, a choice that will determine their fate. The science fiction author Isaac Asimov described the Rings of Power as symbols of industrial technology. While Tolkien denied that \"The Lord of the Rings\" was an allegory, he stated that it could be applied to situations and described it as an examination of \"placing power in external objects\".\nCatholicism.\nGwyneth Hood, writing in \"Mythlore\", explores two Catholic elements in the story of the Three Rings: the angelic and sacrificial aspects of the Elves in the War of the Ring. To the Hobbits of the Fellowship of the Ring, the bearers of the Elven-Rings appear as angelic messengers, offering wise counsel. To save Middle-earth, they have to accept the plan to destroy the One Ring, and with it, the power of the Three Rings, which embody much of their own power. Hood notes that while Gandalf, as one of the supernatural Maiar sent from Valinor, is \"remarkably unlike an elf\", he is the character who most closely combines the angelic and the sacrificial among the wielders of the Three Rings. The poet W. H. Auden, an early supporter of \"Lord of the Rings\", wrote in the \"Tolkien Journal\" that good triumphs over evil in the War of the Ring, but the Three Rings lose their power, as Galadriel had prophesied: \"Yet if you succeed, then our power is diminished, and Lothl\u00f3rien will fade, and the tides of time will sweep it away\". Hood further writes that Tolkien was suggesting technology, such as the making of Rings of Power, is in itself neither good nor evil; both the Elves and Sauron (with his armies of orcs) use that technology, as they also both make and wear swords and mail armour, and shoot with bows.\nIn adaptations.\nRalph Bakshi's 1978 animated film \"The Lord of the Rings\" begins with the forging of the Rings of Power and the events of the War of the Last Alliance against Sauron, all of which are animated in a silhouette against a red background using rotoscoping.\nThe forging of the Rings of Power opens the prologue of Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" film series in the 2001 '. The Three Elven Rings are shown being cast using a cuttlebone mould, an ancient casting technique. These were given to Gil-galad (portrayed by Mark Ferguson), C\u00edrdan (Michael Elsworth), and Galadriel (Cate Blanchett). The Tolkien illustrator Alan Lee, employed as a conceptual designer for the films, had a cameo as one of the nine human Ring-bearers who later became the Nazg\u00fbl. Sauron (Sala Baker) is seen forging the One Ring at the chamber of Mount Doom. The One Ring was shown to have the ability to adjust in size to the finger of its wearer, such as when it became smaller to fit Isildur (Harry Sinclair). In the extended version, Galadriel properly introduces Nenya, the Ring of Adamant, to Frodo. In the concluding film, ' (2003), the final wearers of the Three Rings\u2014Gandalf (Ian McKellen), Elrond (Hugo Weaving), and Galadriel, appear openly at the Grey Havens wearing the Three, with Galadriel proclaiming the end of its power and the beginning of the Dominion of Men.\nFour Rings of Power appeared in Jackson's \"The Hobbit\" film series. In ' (2012), the One Ring was found by Bilbo Baggins (portrayed by Martin Freeman). In the extended version of the succeeding film ' (2013), Gandalf discovers that Sauron took the Ring of Thr\u00f3r (a Dwarf-Lord) from Thr\u00e1in (Antony Sher), who revealed in a flashback scene his possession of the Ring during a siege of Moria. In the concluding film \"\" (2014), Galadriel (Blanchett) reveals Nenya in rescuing Gandalf (McKellen) from Sauron (Benedict Cumberbatch), aided by Saruman (Christopher Lee) and Elrond (Weaving), who is wearing Vilya, the Ring of Air.\nIn the 2014 video game ', the wraith-like spirit of Celebrimbor (fused with the body of the Ranger Talion) recalls how Sauron had deceived him into forging the Rings of Power. In the sequel, ', Celebrimbor forges a new Ring of Power unsullied by Sauron's influence.\nThe 2022 television series \"\" depicts the forging of the Rings of Power.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63689", "revid": "34662868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63689", "title": "Patricia Highsmith", "text": "American novelist and short story writer (1921\u20131995)\nPatricia Highsmith (born Mary Patricia Plangman; January 19, 1921 \u2013 February 4, 1995) was an American novelist and short story writer widely known for her psychological thrillers, including her series of five novels featuring the character Tom Ripley. She wrote 22 novels and numerous short stories in a career spanning nearly five decades, and her work has led to more than two dozen film adaptations. Her writing was influenced by existentialist literature and questioned notions of identity and popular morality. She was dubbed \"the poet of apprehension\" by novelist Graham Greene.\nBorn in Fort Worth, Texas, and mostly raised in her infancy by her maternal grandmother, Highsmith was taken to New York City at the age of six to live with her mother and stepfather. After graduating from Barnard College in 1942, she worked as a writer for comic books while writing her own short stories and novels in her spare time. Her literary breakthrough came with the publication of her first novel \"Strangers on a Train\" (1950) which was adapted into a 1951 film directed by Alfred Hitchcock. Her 1955 novel \"The Talented Mr. Ripley\" was well received in the United States and Europe, cementing her reputation as a major writer of psychological thrillers.\nIn 1963, Highsmith moved to England where her critical reputation continued to grow. Following the breakdown of her relationship with a married Englishwoman, she moved to France in 1967 to try to rebuild her life. Her sales were now higher in Europe than in the United States which her agent attributed to her subversion of the conventions of American crime fiction. She moved to Switzerland in 1982 where she continued to publish new work that increasingly divided critics. The last years of her life were marked by ill health and she died of aplastic anemia and lung cancer in Switzerland in 1995.\n\"The Times\" said of Highsmith: \"she puts the suspense story in a toweringly high place in the hierarchy of fiction.\"180 Her second novel, \"The Price of Salt,\" published under a pseudonym in 1952, was ground breaking for its positive depiction of lesbian relationships and optimistic ending.1 She remains controversial for her antisemitic, racist and misanthropic statements.\nEarly life.\nHighsmith was born Mary Patricia Plangman in Fort Worth, Texas on January 19, 1921. She was the only child of commercial artists Jay Bernard Plangman (1889\u20131975) and Mary Plangman (\"n\u00e9e\" Coates; September 13, 1895 \u2013 March 12, 1991). Her father had not wanted a child and had persuaded her mother to have an abortion. Her mother, after a failed attempt to abort her by drinking turpentine, decided to leave Plangman. The couple divorced nine days before their daughter's birth.\nIn 1927 Highsmith moved to New York City to live with her mother and her stepfather, commercial artist Stanley Highsmith, whom her mother had married in 1924.565 Patricia excelled at school and read widely, including works by Jack London, Louisa May Alcott, Robert Louis Stevenson, Bram Stoker, and John Ruskin. At the age of nine, she became fascinated by the case histories of abnormal psychology in \"The Human Mind\" by Karl Menninger, a popularizer of Freudian analysis.92\nIn the summer of 1933, Highsmith attended a girls' camp and the letters she wrote home were published as a story two years later in \"Woman's World\" magazine. She received $25 for the story. After returning from camp, she was sent to Fort Worth and lived with her maternal grandmother for a year. She called this the \"saddest year\" of her life and felt \"abandoned\" by her mother. In 1934 she returned to New York to live with her mother and stepfather in Greenwich Village, Manhattan. She was unhappy at home. She hated her stepfather and developed a life-long love\u2013hate relationship with her mother, which she later fictionalized in stories such as \"The Terrapin\", about a young boy who stabs his mother to death.55\nShe attended the all-girl Julia Richman High School where she achieved a B minus average grade.112 She continued to read widely\u2014Edgar Allan Poe was a favorite\u2014and began writing short stories and a journal. Her story \"Primroses Are Pink\" was published in the school literary magazine.\nIn 1938 Highsmith entered Barnard College where her studies included English literature, playwriting and short story composition. Fellow students considered her a loner who guarded her privacy but she formed a life-long friendship with fellow student Kate Kingsley Skattebol. She continued to read voraciously, kept diaries and notebooks, and developed an interest in eastern philosophy, Marx and Freud. She also read Thomas Wolfe, Marcel Proust and Julien Green with admiration. She published nine stories in the college literary magazine and became its editor in her senior year.\nApprentice writer.\nAfter graduating in 1942, Highsmith, despite endorsements from \"highly placed professionals,\" applied without success for a job at publications such as \"Harper's Bazaar\", \"Vogue\", \"Mademoiselle\", \"Good Housekeeping\", \"Time\", \"Fortune\", and \"The New Yorker\".130 She eventually found work with FFF Publishers which provided copy for various Jewish publications. The job, which paid $20 per week, lasted only six months but gave her experience in researching stories.\nIn December 1942 Highsmith found employment with comic book publisher Sangor\u2013Pines where she earned up to $50 per week. She wrote \"Sergeant Bill King\" stories, contributed to Black Terror and Fighting Yank comics, and wrote profiles such as Catherine the Great, Barney Ross, and Capt. Eddie Rickenbacker for the \"Real Life Comics\" series. After a year, she realized she could make more money and have more flexibility for travel and serious writing by working freelance for comics and she did so until 1949. From 1943 to 1946, under editor Vincent Fago at Timely Comics, she contributed to its \"U.S.A. Comics\" wartime series, writing scenarios for characters such as \"Jap Buster Johnson\" and The Destroyer. For Fawcett Publications she scripted characters including \"Crisco and Jasper.\" She also wrote for \"True Comics\", \"Captain Midnight\" and \"Western Comics\". Working for comics was the only long-term job Highsmith ever held.\nHighsmith considered comics boring \"hack work\" and was determined to become a novelist. In the evenings she wrote short stories which she submitted, unsuccessfully, to publications such as \"The New Yorker.\" In 1944 she spent five months in Mexico where she worked on an unfinished novel \"The Click of the Shutting\". On her return to Manhattan she worked on another unfinished novel \"The Dove Descending\".\nThe following year, \"The Heroine,\" a story about a pyromaniac nanny that she had written in 1941, was published by \"Harper's Bazaar\". The publishers Knopf wrote her that they were interested in publishing any novels she might have. Nothing, however, came from their subsequent meeting. Highsmith's agents advised her that her stories needed to be more \"upbeat\" to be marketable but she wanted to write stories that reflected her vision of the world.\nIn 1946, Highsmith read Albert Camus' \"The Stranger\" and was impressed by his absurdist vision. The following year she commenced writing \"Strangers on a Train\", and her new agent submitted an early draft to a publisher's reader who recommended major revisions. Based on the recommendation of Truman Capote, Highsmith was accepted by the Yaddo artist's retreat during the summer of 1948, where she worked on the novel.\n\"Strangers on a Train\" was accepted for publication by Harper &amp; Brothers in May 1949. The following month, Highsmith sailed to Europe where she spent three months in England, France and Italy. In Italy, she visited Positano which would later become the major setting for her novel \"The Talented Mr. Ripley\". She read an anthology of Kierkegaard on the trip and declared him her new \"master\".\nEstablished writer.\nHighsmith returned to New York in October 1949 and began writing \"The Price of Salt\", a novel about a lesbian relationship. \"Strangers on a Train\" was published in March 1950 and received favorable reviews in \"The\" \"New Yorker\", \"New York Herald Tribune\" and \"New York Times.\" The novel was shortlisted for the Edgar Allan Poe Prize and Alfred Hitchcock secured the film rights for $6,000. Sales increased after the release of the film.\nIn February 1951, she left for Europe for the publication of the novel in England and France. She stayed for two years, traveling and working on an unfinished novel, \"The Traffic of Jacob's Ladder,\" which is now lost. She wrote Skattebol, \"I can imagine living mostly in Europe the rest of my life.\"149\nHighsmith was back in New York in May 1953. \"The Price of Salt\" had been published in hardback under a pseudonym the previous May, and sold well in paperback in 1953. It was praised in the \"New York Times Book Review\" for \"sincerity and good taste\" but the reviewer found the characters underdeveloped. The novel made Highsmith a respected figure in the New York lesbian community, but as she did not publicly acknowledge authorship, it did not further her literary reputation.172128\nIn September 1953, Highsmith traveled to Fort Worth where she completed a fair copy of \"The Blunderer\" which was published the following year. In 1954 she worked on a new novel, \"The Talented Mr. Ripley,\" about a young American who kills a rich compatriot in Italy and assumes his identity. She completed the novel in six months in Lenox, Santa Fe, and Mexico.\n\"The Talented Mr. Ripley\" was published in December 1955 to favorable reviews in the \"New York Times Book Review\" and \"The New Yorker\", their critics praising Highsmith's convincing portrait of a psychopath.351118 The novel went on to win the Edgar Allan Poe Scroll of the Mystery Writers of America.Highsmith biographer Richard Bradford states that the novel \"forged the basis for her long term reputation as a writer.\"110\nHighsmith moved to the affluent hamlet of Palisades, New York State, in 1956 and lived there for over two years. In March 1957, her story \"A Perfect Alibi\" was published in \"Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine,\" beginning a long-term association with the publication.206She also completed two further novels, \"Deep Water\" (published in 1957) and \"A Game for the Living\" (1958), and a children's book, \"Miranda the Panda is on the Veranda\" (1958), that she co-authored with Doris Sanders.\nIn December 1958, Highsmith moved back to Manhattan where she wrote \"This Sweet Sickness\". The novel was published in February 1960 to generally favorable reviews. From September 1960, she lived near New Hope, Pennsylvania. There she saw Ren\u00e9 Clement's \"Plein Soleil\" (1960), the French film adaptation of \"The Talented Mr. Ripley,\" but she was disappointed by its moralistic ending.224 She also wrote \"The Cry of the Owl\" which she completed in February 1962. Although Highsmith considered it one of her worst novels, novelist Brigid Brophy later rated it, along with \"Lolita\", as one of the best since World War II.\nHighsmith spent 1962 shuttling between New Hope and Europe and finishing the novel \"The Two Faces of January\". She had fallen in love with a married English woman and wanted to live closer to her. In February 1963, she moved permanently to Europe.\nEngland and France.\nHighsmith rented an apartment in Positano where she worked on her prison novel \"The Glass Cell.\" She then traveled to London where she promoted \"The Cry of the Owl\", newly published in Britain. In November 1963 she moved to the festival town of Aldeburgh, Suffolk, and the following year she bought a home in the nearby village of Earl Soham where she lived for three years.\nDuring this time, Highsmith's critical reputation in the United Kingdom grew. Francis Wyndham wrote a long article on Highsmith for the \"New Statesman\" in 1963 which introduced her work to many readers.577 Brigid Brophy, also writing in the \"New Statesman\", praised \"The Two Faces of January\" (1964) stating that Highsmith had made the crime story literature. Julian Simmons in \"The Sunday Times\" commended Highsmith's subtle characterization. The novel won the Silver Dagger Award of the British Crime Writers' Association for best foreign novel of 1964.\nHighsmith was quarreling with her mother and under severe emotional strain due to her difficult relationship with her English lover. She was drinking heavily and her private and public behavior was becoming more eccentric and antisocial. When her love affair ended in late 1966, she decided to move to France.\nAfter a brief visit to Tunisia, Highsmith moved to the \u00cele-de-France in 1967 and eventually settled at Montmachoux in April 1968. Her novels of this period include \"The Tremor of Forgery\" (1969), which Graham Greene considered her finest work, and \"Ripley Under Ground\" (1970) which gained generally positive reviews. Her books, however, were selling poorly in America which her agent suggested was because they were \"too subtle\".\nIn 1970, Highsmith flew to the United States, where she visited New York and her family in Fort Worth. She drew on her trip for her novel \"A Dog's Ransom\" (1972), which is set in Manhattan. In November 1970, she moved to the village of Moncourt, in the Moselle region of France. The novels she wrote there include \"Ripley's Game\" (1974), \"Edith's Diary\" (1977), and \"The Boy Who Followed Ripley\" (1980). In 1977, she saw Wim Wenders's \"The American Friend\", a loose adaptation of \"Ripley's Game.\" She praised the film but was displeased with Dennis Hopper's performance as Ripley. The next year, she was elected chair of the jury for the Berlin Film Festival.584\nIn 1980, Highsmith underwent bypass surgery to correct uncontrolled bleeding and serious cardiovascular problems. Soon thereafter, the French authorities fined her for taxation irregularities, prompting her to comment, \"How appropriate, to be bleeding in two places.\" Disillusioned with France, she bought a house in Aurigeno, Switzerland, and in 1982 moved there permanently.\nSwitzerland and final years.\nIn 1981, Highsmith moved into her Swiss home and began writing a new novel, \"People who Knock on the Door\" (1983), about the influence of Christian fundamentalism in America. This and her next novel, \"Found in the Street\" (1986)\",\" were partly based on a research trip to America in early 1981. Her biographer Joan Schenkar writes that by this time Highsmith had been living in Europe so long she \"began to make errors of American fact and understanding in her novels.\" Highsmith described \"People who Knock on the Door\" as \"a flat book, but popular in France, Germany and E[ast] Germany.\"\nIn 1986, Highsmith had a successful operation for lung cancer. Shortly thereafter, she commissioned a new home in Tegna, Switzerland. The home was in the brutalist style and her friends called it \"the bunker\". There she completed her last two novels, \"Ripley Under Water\" (1991) and \"\" (1995). In 1990 she was made an Officer of the Order of Arts and Letters of France.589 In 1993 her health deteriorated and she required the help of a home carer.\nHighsmith died on February 4, 1995, at 74, from aplastic anemia and lung cancer at Carita Hospital in Locarno, Switzerland, near Tegna. She was cremated at the cemetery in Bellinzona; a memorial service was conducted in the Chiesa di Tegna in Tegna and her ashes were interred in its columbarium.590\nShe left her estate, worth an estimated $3 million, and the promise of any future royalties, to the Yaddo colony, where she spent two months in 1948 writing the draft of \"Strangers on a Train\".139 Highsmith bequeathed her literary estate to the Swiss Literary Archives at the Swiss National Library in Bern, Switzerland. Her Swiss publisher, Diogenes Verlag, which had principal rights to her work, was appointed literary executor of the estate.579\nHighsmith's last novel, \"Small g: a Summer Idyll\", was rejected by Knopf (her most recent U.S. publisher) several months before her death.243 It was published in the United Kingdom by Bloomsbury Publishing in March 1995, and nine years later in the U.S. by W. W. Norton. It sold 50,000 copies in France within six weeks of her death.243\nHighsmith's literary estate included 8,000 pages of handwritten notebooks and diaries.\nPersonal life.\nHealth.\nHighsmith had anorexia as a teenager and episodes of depression throughout her life. Despite literary success, she wrote in her diary in January 1970: \"am now cynical, fairly rich ... lonely, depressed, and totally pessimistic.\"462 She was an alcoholic who by middle age drank from breakfast till bedtime. She smoked 40 Gauloises cigarettes a day and rarely ate fruit or vegetables. In 1973 her doctor advised her that if she did not change her lifestyle she might not live past 55.\nHighsmith underwent surgery in May 1980 for blockages in two arteries of her right leg, and in April 1986 she had successful surgery for lung cancer (of a type not related to smoking). In January 1992 she had a procedure to widen her left femoral artery, and in September 1993 she had surgery to remove a non-cancerous tumor in her lower intestine. Later in 1993 she was diagnosed with the aplastic anemia and lung cancer that would kill her.\nPersonality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo all the devils, lusts, passions, greeds, envies, loves, hates, strange desires, enemies ghostly and real, the army of memories, with which I do battle\u2014may they never give me peace.\n\u2013 Patricia Highsmith, \"My New Year's Toast\", journal entry, 1947\n Highsmith was ambitious and socially active in the 1940s but always preferred smaller gatherings to large crowds and public functions. Despite her reputation as a recluse in her later years, she had a circle of friends, neighbors, and admirers she regularly saw in France and Switzerland, and she frequently corresponded with friends in Europe and America.\nHighsmith's biographers, friends, and acquaintances describe her public and private behavior, especially from the 1960s, as often eccentric, rude, difficult and antisocial. She brought her pet snails to one dinner party in the 1960s and let them wander over the mahogany.429At a dinner party in 1968 she deliberately lowered her head to a candle and set her hair on fire. She had two friends as houseguests in 1971 and threw a dead rat into their room. She often made racist or insensitive comments that offended and embarrassed those present. Those who knew her suggested this behavior might have resulted from depression, alcoholism, Asperger syndrome,294 or a personality disorder. A psychiatrist who observed her at a hotel in 1963 said to the owner, \"You do realize you have a psychopath in the hall.\"\nMany who knew her said she could also be funny and good company, but difficult. Her oldest friend, Kate Skattebol, said that at college she was \"fun to be with and her sense of humour was great. She loved to shock people.\"75 British journalist Francis Wyndham, who met her in 1963, said, \"I liked her immediately...I could tell that she was shy and reticent, a woman with deep feelings, someone who was affectionate but also difficult.\"247 Gary Fisketjon, her American editor in the 1980s, said, \"She was very rough, very difficult ... But she was also plainspoken, dryly funny, and great fun to be around.\"\nHighsmith lived alone for most of her adult life, saying in a 1991 interview, \"I choose to live alone because my imagination functions better when I don't have to speak with people.\" Although she preferred her personal life to remain private, she took no steps to avoid the posthumous availability of her diaries and notebooks in which she recorded the motivations of her behavior.\nInterests.\nHighsmith began keeping snails as pets in 1946 or 1949 as she was fascinated by their sexuality. Pet snails appear in her 1957 novel \"Deep Water,\" and her story \"The Snail Watcher\" is about pet snails who kill their owner. She kept 300 snails at her home in Earl Soham and occasionally took some with her on social outings. She said that when she moved to France she smuggled her snails into the country in her bra. Schenkar, however, believes this is only an amusing story and that she smuggled her snails in cottage cheese cartons.\nHer other hobbies included woodworking, painting and gardening. Diogenes Verlag published a book of her drawings in 1995.She was an accomplished gardener, but in her later years her friends and neighbors did most of the work on her gardens.\nSexuality.\nHighsmith's sexual relationships were predominantly with women. She occasionally engaged in sex with men without physical desire for them, writing in her diary in 1948: \"The male face doesn't attract me, isn't \"beautiful\" to me.\"257 In a 1970 letter to her stepfather, Highsmith described sex with men as like \"steel wool in the face, a sensation of being raped in the wrong place\u2014leading to a sensation of having to have, pretty soon, a boewl [\"sic\"] movement.\"148 Phyllis Nagy called Highsmith \"a lesbian who did not very much enjoy being around other women\" whose few affairs with men occurred just to \"see if she could be into men in that way because she so much more preferred their company.\"\nHighsmith called herself \"basically polygamous\"166 and was consistently unfaithful to her lovers.29 She noted in her 1949 diary that she could sustain a relationship no longer than two to three years. In 1943, she wrote, \"there is something perverted within me, that I don't love a girl anymore if she loves me more than I love her.\" According to biographer Andrew Wilson, \"She would be forever prone to falling in love but always happiest when alone.\"89\nHighsmith held varying views about her sexuality throughout her life. In 1942, she wrote that lesbians were inferior to gay men because they never sought their equals. Later she told author Marijane Meaker: \"the only difference between us and heterosexuals is what we do in bed.\"24 In 1970 she wrote to a friend: \"We all become reconciled to being queer and prefer life that way.\"307\nHighsmith refused to speak publicly about her sexuality, repeatedly telling interviewers: \"I don't answer personal questions about myself or other people.\"xiv When she finally agreed, in 1990, to have \"The Price of Salt\" republished under her own name as \"Carol\" she was still reluctant to discuss her sexuality. But in 1978, she wrote a friend that after her death a future biographer must discuss her love life and \"everyone must know I am queer or gay.\"9\nRelationships.\nSchenkar calls Highsmith's mother, Mary, \"the great love of Pat Highsmith's life\u2014and, certainly, her greatest hate.\"64 In 1967 Highsmith wrote: \"I adored my mother, and could see no wrong in her, until I was near 17.\"18 But she felt her mother had abandoned her at the age of 12, when she had left her in Fort Worth so she could attempt a reconciliation with Stanley Highsmith in New York. She later blamed her mother for her failed relationships, writing: \"I never got over it. Thus I seek out women who will hurt me in a similar manner, and avoid the women who are\u2014good eggs.\"48 Highsmith also blamed her mother for her introverted personality, saying that when she was 14 her mother had asked her whether she was a lesbian in a way that made her feel \"like a cripple on the street.\"52\nRelations between the two were often difficult.18 When Highsmith's mother stayed with her in England for six days in 1965 it ended in a physical altercation and Highsmith had to call her doctor, who sedated both women. Highsmith blamed her tense adult relationship with her mother on Mary's jealousy over her female friends and lovers. Her mother broke off relations with Highsmith by letter in 1974, and lived in a nursing home from 1975 until her death in 1991. During this time, Highsmith and her mother did not communicate with each other.\nBradford argues that Highsmith's love life represented a combination of romantic fantasies and a desire for social advancement: \"throughout her life, Highsmith looked for women whom she could worship.\"Her partner Ellen Hill told her she was in love only with fantasy figures: \"She [Hill] says, I fit the person to my wishes, find they don't fit, and proceed to break it off.\"291 According to Bradford, until her middle age, \"She only truly desired women who came from the kind of social, cultural and intellectual ranking to which she aspired. More significantly, she seemed particularly attracted to women who had been born into privilege.\"\nIn 1941 Highsmith met Rosalind Constable, a 34-year-old British journalist and literary consultant. Wilson describes Constable as a \"blond\", \"elegant\" \"cultured sophisticate.\" Highsmith fell in love with Constable but the relationship was not sexual. Constable promoted her career, introducing her to cultural figures and later recommending her to the Yaddo community.\nIn 1943 Highsmith had a brief affair with artist Allela Cornell, who killed herself three years later over another failed relationship. Highsmith nevertheless felt guilty over her death and prominently displayed Cornell's oil portrait of her in all her homes. Cornell was the inspiration for the artist Derwatt in \"Ripley Under Ground\".\nHighsmith began a year-long affair with the rich socialite Virginia Kent Catherwood in June 1946. Catherwood was one of the models for Carol Aird in \"The Price of Salt.\"\nDuring her stay at Yaddo in 1948, Highsmith met writer Marc Brandel, son of author J. D. Beresford. Even though she told him she was homosexual, they soon began a relationship. In November Highsmith underwent six months of psychoanalysis in an effort \"to regularize herself sexually\" so she could marry him. They became engaged in May 1949, just before her first trip to Europe. Their relationship ended in the fall of 1950.\nHighsmith and Brandel had other sexual partners during their relationship. In 1948 she started an intermittent relationship with Ann Smith, a painter and designer. The relationship ended in 1950 but the two remained friends. While in Europe in 1949, Highsmith had an affair with psychoanalyst Kathryn Hamill Cohen, the wife of British publisher Dennis Cohen and founder of Cresset Press, which later published \"Strangers on a Train\". Kathryn ended the affair by letter in April 1950.\nTo help pay for her therapy sessions, in December 1948 Highsmith took a sales job in the toy section of Bloomingdale's department store. One day she served an elegant blonde woman in a mink coat who left her delivery details. Her name was Kathleen Senn and the encounter inspired Highsmith to begin writing \"The Price of Salt\". She twice went to Senn's home to secretly observe her and, though they never met, Highsmith wrote that Senn \"almost made me love her.\"\nWhile in Munich In September 1951, Highsmith met the German sociologist Ellen Hill, who, according to Schenkar, \"had the longest, strongest influence on Pat's life (after mother Mary)\".291 They lived and traveled together in Europe and America until July 1953, when Hill attempted suicide after Highsmith threatened to end their relationship. They resumed their relationship in September 1954 and it lasted until December 1955. They established a difficult friendship after this, which endured until Highsmith broke with her in 1988.\nIn March 1956, Highsmith began a relationship with Doris Sanders, an advertising illustrator and copywriter. They lived together in Palisades, New York, and traveled to Mexico, where Highsmith set her novel \"A Game for the Living\". Highsmith left Sanders in December 1958 after initiating an affair with another woman.\nIn the spring of 1959, Highsmith met writer Marijane Meaker. They began a relationship, and when Highsmith returned from a publicity tour of Europe in 1960 they lived together near New Hope, Pennsylvania. The relationship was stormy, and after six months Highsmith moved to another house in New Hope. When their relationship collapsed in 1961, Meaker included a character based on Highsmith in her novel \"Intimate Victims\" (1962). Highsmith did likewise in her novel \"The Cry of the Owl\".\nWhile in Europe in the summer of 1962, Highsmith met an Englishwoman who was married to a wealthy businessman and who had a child. Highsmith had an affair with her and fell in love. Highsmith's Swiss editor, Anna von Planta, calls the anonymous Englishwoman the \"love of her life\". Highsmith moved to England in 1963 to be closer to her lover and eventually settled in Earl Soham, Suffolk, in 1964. Her lover, whose husband knew of the affair, visited Highsmith on weekends and they had occasional holidays in Europe. When it became clear to Highsmith that the woman would not leave her husband for her, she became increasingly jealous of the time her lover spent with her family. Her lover, in turn, was jealous of the time Highsmith spent with former lovers, including Ellen Hill. The affair ended in October 1966 and Highsmith called the breakup \"the very worst time of my entire life.\"\nAfter Highsmith moved to France in 1967 she had several affairs with women who were 20 to 30 years younger. After moving to Switzerland in 1982 she was celibate for the rest of her life.\nViews.\nPolitics.\nInfluenced by the Spanish Civil War, Highsmith became a member of the Young Communist League while at Barnard in 1939. She left the party in November 1941. Over the following decades, she consistently opposed war and big business and was concerned about environmental issues.374 She was a swing voter, voting for the Democrat Walter Mondale in 1984,406 Republican George H. W. Bush in 1988, and independent Ross Perot in 1992.543 She described herself as a liberal or social democrat but admired Margaret Thatcher because of her policy of tax cuts and wrote that she would not sacrifice any of her money to help the poor. She believed that people were responsible for their destiny and that society was not to blame for the problems of individuals.\nHighsmith supported Palestinian self-determination. As a member of Amnesty International, she felt duty-bound to express publicly her opposition to the displacement of Palestinians. Highsmith prohibited her books from being published in Israel after the election of Menachem Begin as prime minister in 1977. She dedicated her 1983 novel \"People Who Knock on the Door\" to the Palestinian people:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the courage of the Palestinian people and their leaders in the struggle to regain a part of their homeland. This book has nothing to do with their problem.\nHighsmith donated money to the Jewish Committee on the Middle East, an organization that represented American Jews who supported Palestinian self-determination. She wrote in an August 1993 letter to Meaker: \"USA could save 11 million per day if they would cut the dough to Israel. The Jewish vote is 1%.\"205\nHighsmith's support of Palestinian rights, according to Nagy, \"often teetered into outright antisemitism.\"\nHighsmith was an avowed antisemite; she called herself a \"Jew hater\" and described The Holocaust as \"the semicaust\" and \"Holocaust, Inc.\"25 While living in Switzerland in the 1980s, she used nearly 40 aliases when writing to government bodies and newspapers deploring the Israeli state and the influence of the Jews.\nHighsmith also expressed racist and prejudiced views about other social groups, including black Americans. She said black people were responsible for a welfare crisis in America and spoke of their \"animal-like breeding habits\". Skattebol called her an \"equal opportunity offender...You name the group, she hated them.\"\nWomen.\nHighsmith was called a misogynist by some critics and some of those who knew her. In 1942 she wrote: \"A woman's stupidity, absence of imagination, her childlike, retarded cruelty, cannot be equalled in the animal kingdom. Men's energies are naturally more constructive and healthy.\"300 Wilson argues that Highsmith was a misanthrope rather than a misogynist. In 1969, she said she was becoming \"increasingly misanthropic.\"\nIn 1984 she said she had suffered no injustices because of her sex and that she disliked feminists because they were always \"whining, always complaining about something. Instead of doing something.\" But in a 1992 interview she said: \"I can be in favour of women's causes, but I don't join them. If it's a matter of donating a little money, or signing something, I might, but not extra work.\"\nReligion.\nWhen young, Highsmith was influenced by the religious views of her mother, who was a Christian Scientist. She rejected Christian Science at 21 but still believed in God. At 28 she wrote, \"A certain calm is essential in order to live. Relief from anxiety. I myself can never have this without belief in the power of God which is greater than man and all the power in the universe.\"31 She often wrote about God and Jesus in her journals, and she sang in a church choir until she was 37. In 1977 she said she no longer believed in God either as an abstract power or as a presence in the human soul.364 In 1985 she said she disliked \"people who believe that some god or other really has control over everything but is not exercising that control just now.\"587Bruno Sager, who was her home carer in 1993, discussed religion with her and said she \"was one of these persons searching for some kind of god or soul but she never could stand the cages of Catholicism or any of the other religions. She was not an atheist, not at all.\"550\nAnimals.\nHighsmith was outraged at human cruelty to animals, such as battery chicken farming. Her story collection \"The Animal Lovers Book of Beastly Murder\" (1975) features mistreated animals that take revenge on humans. Skatterbol says that Highsmith saw animals as \"individual personalities often better behaved, and endowed with more dignity and honesty than humans.\" She was particularly fond of cats, saying they \"provide something for writers that humans cannot: companionship that makes no demands or intrusions.\"331 In 1991 Highsmith said that if she came across a starving kitten and a starving baby she would feed the kitten.\nSeveral of her friends attested to her kindness to animals, but some visitors to Highsmith's homes in France and Switzerland said she mistreated her cats, including swinging one around in a towel to make it dizzy for her guests' amusement . She also disliked dogs and admitted to secretly kicking a neighbor's dog she thought was misbehaving. Bradford argues that her animal stories anthropomorphize them and give them the worst human characteristics.191\nMajor works.\n\"Strangers on a Train\".\nSchenkar557and Bradfordxii consider Highsmith's first novel, \"Strangers on a Train\", one of her finest works. Bradford writes that the book \"made her name as a writer capable of evoking the horrific and the grotesque.\"46 Her agent, Patricia Schartle, said that the basic idea of two strangers exchanging murders was one of \"two almost perfect flashes of brilliance in her career.\"219\nThe novel introduces major themes in Highsmith's work, including the complementary nature of good and evil, an implied homoerotic attraction between male antagonists, and shifting identities.258 On the novel's release, a \"New York Herald Tribune\" critic praised its suspenseful plotting and perceptive portrayal of a psychopath.168 A critic for \"The Times Literary Supplement\" criticized it as a confected thriller with a preposterous plot.10\n\"The Price of Salt\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHow was it possible to be afraid and in love, Therese thought. The two things did not go together. How was it possible to be afraid, when the two of them grew stronger together every day? And every night. Every night was different, and every morning. Together they possessed a miracle.\n\u2013\"The Price of Salt\", chapter eighteen (Coward-McCann, 1952)\nHighsmith's second novel, \"The Price of Salt\", was published in 1952 under the pen name Claire Morgan. Highsmith partly based the character Therese on herself.49 The novel broke new ground in American lesbian fiction because of its hopeful ending1 and departure from lesbian stereotypes. In what BBC 2's \"The Late Show\" presenter Sarah Dunant called a \"literary coming out\" after 38 years of denial,441\u2013442 Highsmith acknowledged authorship of the novel publicly when she agreed, in 1990, to its republication by Bloomsbury under the title \"Carol\". Highsmith wrote in the \"Afterword\" to the new edition: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The paperback version of the novel sold nearly one million copies before its 1990 reissue. \"The Price of Salt\" is the only Highsmith novel in which no violent crime takes place and, according to Harrison, the only one in which sexual relations are portrayed openly and positively.104\nThe \"Ripliad\".\nWilson calls Highsmith's first Tom Ripley novel, \"The Talented Mr. Ripley\", \"One of her most powerful and celebrated novels.\"191 She went on to write four sequels (in the series sometimes called the \"Ripliad\"238) and by 1989, according to Bradford, \"Ripley had become for her the equivalent of Conan Doyle's Holmes, even Shakespeare's Hamlet, the figure who defined her as a writer.\"95 Critic Anthony Hilfer sees Ripley as an exemplar of the \"protean or perpetually self-inventing man\" who can transform himself into anyone by mimicking their external traits.\nHighsmith wrote that in her first Ripley novel she was showing, \"the unequivocal triumph of evil over good and rejoicing in it. I shall make my readers rejoice in it too.\"161 Bradford argues that one of the strengths of the first Ripley novel is that it implicates its readers in an amoral world: \"There was a general consensus that while the main character was vile and immoral Highsmith had somehow insulated him from the reader's inclination to judge.\"118\nTom Ripley has been variously described by commentators as \"repellent and fascinating,\"118 \"a cold blooded killer with a taste for the finer things in life,\" and \"an amoral but charming psychopath.\" A critic for \"The\" \"Times Literary Supplement\" noted that in the second Ripley novel, \"Ripley Under Ground\" (1970), Ripley's new wealth had not made him more normal, but had turned him into \"a contented psychopath.\"293 Ripley is a serial killer who always gets away with his crimes. Shenkar believes \"Ripley becomes more successful (and less interesting) with each new Ripley novel.\"164 Critic Noel Mawer argues that in the later novels Ripley becomes less a \"psychotic in his world of delusion\" and more an \"amoral, unfeeling sociopath who feels that murder is simply a necessity to protect what...[he] feels he has earned and deserved.\"20\nReception of work.\nHighsmith's critical reputation was divided in her lifetime. Marghanita Laski denounced her work as immoral and lacking human decency. Other commentators, most notably Graham Greene, considered the moral ambiguity of her work a strength. Although her novels were often critically acclaimed in the U.S. and Britain, they sold more poorly there than in continental Europe, where her critical and popular reputation was higher. Peak U.S. sales for her novels on initial publication were under 8,000 each. \"The Tremor of Forgery\" and \"Ripley Under Ground\" (1970) sold just under 7,000 in their first year in Britain. \"Found in the Street\" (1987) sold 4,000 copies in the U.S. and 40,000 in Germany.319, 386, 429\nSince Highsmith's death, her novels of the 1950s and 1960s have attracted the most critical acclaim.1 Bradford considers \"Strangers on a Train\", \"The Price of Salt\", and \"The Talented Mr. Ripley\" her most accomplished novels, writing, \"Highsmith has done more than anyone to erode the boundaries between crime writing as a recreational sub-genre and literature as high art.\"\nThemes, style and genre.\nThemes.\nHighsmith's themes were influenced by Dostoevsky, Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, Kafka, and the existentialism of Sartre and Camus. Wilson argues that her work presents an amoral world view in which murderers go unpunished or are only punished by chance. In 1966, Highsmith wrote: \"neither life nor nature cares whether justice is ever done or not.\"\nIrrational behavior, abnormal psychology and extreme emotional states are recurrent themes. Bradford writes, \"Issues such as guilt, hatred, self-loathing and unfulfilled longing which Highsmith endlessly contemplated without resolution became the cocktail for her fictional narratives and characters.\"49 Critic Russell Harrison states that Highsmith's protagonists often act irrationally because of self-imposed emotional constraints.6 According to Graham Greene, \"Her characters are irrational and they leap to life in the very lack of reason; suddenly we realize how unbelievably rational most fictional characters are.\"5\nHighsmith explored issues of double, splintered and shifting identities. Wilson states that many of her novels involve a struggle between two men who search out an opposite but defining doppelg\u00e4nger. Critic Fiona Peters points out that \"The Talented Mr. Ripley\" and \"This Sweet Sickness\" involve protagonists who create false identities. Harrison argues: \"the theme of an individual transforming himself or herself, of the willed construction of a personality, once again suggest[s] existentialism's emphasis on individual choice free of any hint of determinism through history or genetics.\"20\nCritic David Cochran sees Highsmith's work as a critique of suburban America: \"According to the dominant vision, a family, house in the suburbs and successful job equalled mental health and happiness, whereas the absence of these things led to sickness. But Highsmith consistently worked to break down these oppositions too. Especially in her view of American men, Highsmith subverted many of the ideological bases of the suburban ideal.\"45\nMale homosexual desire was a subtext of many of Highsmith's early works. Biographer Joan Schenkar states that the typical Highsmith situation is \"two men bound together psychologically by the stalker-like fixation of one upon the other, a fixation that always involves a disturbing, implicitly homoerotic fantasy.\"xiv Highsmith explored lesbian relationships in \"The Price of Salt\". Homosexuality was an important theme in later novels such as \"Found in the Street\" (1986) and \"Small g: a Summer Idyll\" (1995).97\nStyle.\nHighsmith mostly wrote in the third-person singular from the point of view of the main character who is usually male. In several novels she alternates the point of view of two leading male characters.96 In 1966, she explained that a single point of view \"increased the intensity of a story\" whereas a double point of view brings a \"change of pace and mood.\"\nWilson calls Highsmith's prose style crisp, compact and near transparent.79 Schenkar describes her narrative tone as a \"low, flat compellingly psychotic murmur.\" Wilson describes her tone as amoral, adding: \"The mundane and the trivial are described in the same pitch as the horrific and the sinister and it is this unsettling juxtaposition that gives her work such power.\"\nCommentators have variously described the atmosphere evoked by Highsmith's work as one of suspense, apprehension or unease. Graham Greene called her \"the poet of apprehension.\"7 Peters states: \"Highsmith's forte is anxiety: rather than merely turning the page to discover what happens next \u2013 in other words to be held in a state of suspense \u2013 her readers are suspended in a haze of dread, anxiety and apprehension.\"18 Wilson argues that Highsmith disturbs her readers by manipulating them into identifying with unconventional psychologies: \"Highsmith's world is seen through the distorted perspective of an 'abnormal' man, but the style of writing is so transparent and flat that by the end the reader aligns himself with a point of view that is clearly unbalanced and disturbed.\"89\nGenre.\nHighsmith was usually classified as a crime, suspense or mystery writer in the U.S.; in Europe she was considered a psychological or literary novelist. Peters argues that she does not fit comfortably within accepted genres. Bradford considers \"The Talented Mr. Ripley\" a precursor to gothic realism.113 Harrison argues that psychological realism is not prominent in her work and considers \"The Price of Salt\" one of her most social realist novels. Some of her short stories, such as \"The Snail-Watcher,\" have been classified as horror.267\nNovels.\nThe following list of Highsmith's novels is taken from Wilson.ii The novels featuring Tom Ripley are listed separately as the \"Ripliad\".238\nAdaptations of Highsmith works.\nSeveral of Highsmith's works have been adapted for other media, some more than once.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63690", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63690", "title": "Palant\u00edr", "text": "Fictional magical artefact\nA palant\u00edr (; pl.\u2009palant\u00edri) is one of several indestructible crystal balls from J. R. R. Tolkien's epic-fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\". The word comes from Quenya 'far', and 'watch over'. The palant\u00edrs were used for communication and to see events in other parts of Arda, or in the past.\nThe palant\u00edrs were made by the Elves of Valinor in the First Age, as told in \"The Silmarillion\". By the time of \"The Lord of the Rings\" at the end of the Third Age, a few palant\u00edrs remained in use. They are used in some climactic scenes by major characters: Sauron, Saruman, Denethor the Steward of Gondor, and two members of the Company of the Ring: Aragorn and Pippin.\nA major theme of palant\u00edr usage is that while the stones show real objects or events, those using the stones had to \"possess great strength of will and of mind\" to direct the stone's gaze to its full capability. The stones were an unreliable guide to action, since what was not shown could be more important than what was selectively presented. A risk lay in the fact that users with sufficient power could choose what to show and what to conceal to other stones: in \"The Lord of the Rings\", a palant\u00edr has fallen into the Enemy's hands, making the usefulness of all other existing stones questionable. \nCommentators such as the Tolkien scholar Paul Kocher note the hand of providence in their usage, while Joseph Pearce compares Sauron's use of the stones to broadcast wartime propaganda. Tom Shippey suggests that the message is that \"speculation\", looking into any sort of magic mirror (Latin: \"speculum\") or stone to see the future, rather than trusting in providence, leads to error.\nFictional artifact.\nOrigins.\nIn Tolkien's fantasy \"The Lord of the Rings\", the palant\u00edrs were made by the Elves of Valinor in the Uttermost West, by the Noldor, apparently by F\u00ebanor himself from \"silima\", \"that which shines\". The number that he made is not stated, but there were at least eight of them. Seven of the stones given to Amandil of N\u00famenor during the Second Age were saved by his son Elendil; he took them with him to Middle-earth, while at least the Master-stone remained behind.\nFour were taken to Gondor, while three stayed in Arnor. Originally, the stones of Arnor were at Elostirion in the Tower Hills, Amon Sul (Weathertop), and Annuminas: the Elostirion stone, Elendil's own, looked only Westwards from Middle-earth across the ocean to the Master-stone at the Tower of Avallon\u00eb upon Eress\u00eba, an island off Valinor. The stones of Gondor were in Orthanc, Minas Tirith, Osgiliath, and Minas Ithil.\nBy the time of \"The Lord of the Rings\", the stone of Orthanc was in the hands of the wizard Saruman, while the stone of Minas Ithil (by then Minas Morgul, the city of the Nazg\u00fbl) had been taken by the dark lord Sauron. That of Minas Tirith remained in the hands of the Steward of Gondor, Denethor. The stone of Osgiliath had been lost in the Anduin when the city was sacked. Gandalf names two of these as the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Orthanc-stone and the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Ithil-stone.\nCharacteristics.\nA single palant\u00edr enabled its user to see places far off, or events in the past. A person could look into a palant\u00edr to communicate with anyone looking into another palant\u00edr. They could then see \"visions of the things in the mind\" of the person looking into the other stone.\nThe stones were made of a dark crystal, indestructible by any normal means, except perhaps the fire of Orodruin. They ranged in size from a diameter of about a foot (30 cm) to much larger stones that could not be lifted by one person. The Stone of Osgiliath had power over other stones including the ability to eavesdrop. The minor stones required the user to move around them, thereby changing the viewpoint of its vision, whereas the major stones could be turned on their axis.\nAnalysis.\nA wielder of great power such as Sauron could dominate a weaker user through the stone, which was the experience of Pippin Took and Saruman. Even one as powerful as Sauron could not make the palant\u00edrs \"lie\", or create false images; the most he could do was to selectively display truthful images to create a false impression in the viewer's mind. In \"The Lord of the Rings\", three such uses of the stones are described, and in each case, a true image is shown, but the viewer draws a false conclusion from the facts. This applies to Sauron when he sees Pippin in Saruman's stone and assumes that Pippin has the One Ring, and that Saruman has therefore captured it. Denethor, too, is deceived through his use of a palant\u00edr, this time by Sauron, who drives Denethor to suicide by truthfully showing him the Black Fleet approaching Gondor, without telling him that the ships are crewed by Aragorn's troops, coming to Gondor's rescue. Shippey suggests that this consistent pattern is Tolkien's way of telling the reader that one should not \"speculate\" \u2013 the word meaning both to try to double-guess the future, and to look into a mirror (Latin: \"speculum\" 'glass or mirror') or crystal ball \u2013 but should trust in one's luck and make one's own mind up, courageously facing one's duty in each situation. \nThe English literature scholar Paul Kocher similarly noted the hand of providence: Wormtongue's throwing of the stone providentially leads to Pippin's foolish look into the stone, which deceives Sauron; and it allows Aragorn to claim the stone and use it to deceive Sauron further. This leads him to assume that Aragorn has the One Ring. That in turn provokes Sauron into a whole series of what turn out to be disastrous actions: a premature attack on Minas Tirith; a rushed exit of the army of Minas Morgul, thus letting the hobbits through the pass of Cirith Ungol with the One Ring, and so on until the quest to destroy the ring succeeds against all odds.\nThe Tolkien scholar Jane Chance writes that Saruman's sin, in Christian terms, is to seek Godlike knowledge by gazing in a short-sighted way into the Orthanc palant\u00edr in the hope of rivalling Sauron. She quotes Tolkien's description in \"The Two Towers\", which states that Saruman explored \"all those arts and subtle devices, for which he forsook his former wisdom\". She explains that he is in this way giving up actual wisdom for \"mere knowledge\", imagining the arts were his own but in fact coming from Sauron. This prideful self-aggrandisement leads to his fall. She notes that it is ironic in this context that palant\u00edr means \"far-sighted\".\nJoseph Pearce compares Sauron's use of the seeing stones to \"broadcast propaganda and sow the seeds of despair among his enemies\" with the communications technologies used to spread propaganda in the Second World War and then the Cold War, when Tolkien was writing.\nIn film.\nA palant\u00edr appears in the film director Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" films. The Tolkien critic Allison Harl compares Jackson to Saruman, and his camera to a palant\u00edr, writing that \"Jackson chooses to look through the perilous lens, putting his camera to use to exert control over the [original Tolkien] text.\" Harl cites Laura Mulvey's essay \"Visual Pleasure and the Narrative Cinema\" which describes \"scopophilia\", the voyeuristic pleasure of looking, based on Sigmund Freud's writings on sexuality. Harl gives as an example the sequence in \"The Two Towers\" where Jackson's camera \"like the Evil Eye of Sauron\" travels towards Saruman's tower, Isengard and \"zooms into the dangerous palant\u00edr\", in her opinion giving the cinema viewer \"an omniscient and privileged perspective\" consisting of a Sauron-like power to observe the whole of Middle-earth. The sequence ends fittingly, in her opinion, with Mordor and the Eye of Sauron, bringing the viewer, like Saruman, to meet the Enemy's gaze. As a consequence of Jackson's exclusion of The Scouring of the Shire, Saruman is killed by Wormtongue much earlier (at the beginning of the extended edition of \"\"), while Gandalf acquires the Orthanc palant\u00edr after Pippin retrieves it from Saruman's corpse, instead of having Wormtongue throw it from a window of the tower. Further, Sauron uses the Palant\u00edr to show Aragorn a dying Arwen, (a scene from the future) in the hope of weakening his resolve.\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63692", "revid": "21678789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63692", "title": "\u0391-Methyltryptamine", "text": "Chemical compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u03b1-Methyltryptamine (\u03b1MT, AMT) is a psychedelic, stimulant, and entactogen drug of the tryptamine and \u03b1-alkyltryptamine families. It was originally developed as an antidepressant at Upjohn in the 1960s, and was used briefly as an antidepressant in the Soviet Union under the brand name Indopan or Indopane before being discontinued.\nSide effects of \u03b1MT include agitation, restlessness, confusion, lethargy, pupil dilation, jaw clenching, and rapid heart rate, among others. \u03b1MT acts as a releasing agent of serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, as a serotonin receptor agonist, and as a weak monoamine oxidase inhibitor. \u03b1MT is a substituted tryptamine and is closely related to \u03b1-ethyltryptamine (\u03b1ET) and other \u03b1-alkylated tryptamines.\n\u03b1MT appears to have first been described by at least 1929. It started being more studied in the late 1950s and was briefly used as an antidepressant in the Soviet Union in the 1960s. The drug started being used recreationally in the 1960s, with use increasing in the 1990s, and cases of death have been reported. \u03b1MT is a controlled substance in various countries, including the United States.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUse and effects.\nUnder the brand name Indopan or Indopane, \u03b1MT at doses of 5 to 10mg was used for an antidepressant effect.\nAt a dose of 20 mg, it produces euphoria, while doses above 30 mg result in strong hallucinogenic effects. At doses over 30 mg, the compound may cause several side effects, including anxiety, muscle tightness, vomiting, and hyperthermia. A dose exceeding 40mg is generally considered strong. In rare cases or extreme doses, the duration of effects might exceed 24hours. Users report that \u03b1MT in freebase form is smoked, with doses between and 2 and 5mg.\nA dose of 20mg of \u03b1MT is said to be equivalent to 50\u03bcg of LSD. However, its onset of action is delayed, with effects appearing after only 3 to 4hours, and it is longer-lasting. In addition, \u03b1MT is described as unpleasant compared to LSD, with symptoms of nervousness, irritability, restlessness, and inability to relax. It is also said to not have prominent visual effects.\nSide effects.\nNeurologic side effects of \u03b1MT include agitation, restlessness, confusion, and lethargy. Physical manifestations including vomiting, mydriasis (pupillary dilation), jaw clenching, tachycardia, salivation, diaphoresis (sweating), and elevations in blood pressure, temperature, and respiratory rate.\nSide effects self-reported by recreational users include anxiety, muscle tension, jaw tightness, pupil dilation, tachycardia, headaches, nausea, and vomiting, as well as psychedelic effects including visual hallucinations and an altered state of mind.\n\u03b1MT is capable of causing life-threatening side effects including hyperthermia, hypertension, and tachycardia. Fatalities have been reported in association with high doses or concomitant use of other drugs. \nFatalities verified with toxicology and autopsy include those of a 22-year-old man in Miami-Dade County, Florida and a British teenager, both of whom died after consuming 1g of \u03b1MT.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\n\u03b1MT acts as a relatively balanced reuptake inhibitor and releasing agent of the main three monoamines; serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine, and as a non-selective serotonin receptor agonist. It has relatively weak psychedelic-like effects in animals compared to other psychedelic substituted tryptamines, for instance in terms of the head-twitch response in rodents.\nMonoamine oxidase inhibition.\n\u03b1MT has been shown as a reversible inhibitor of the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO) \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\". In rats, the potency of \u03b1MT as an MAO-A inhibitor in the brain was approximately equal to that of harmaline at equimolar doses. Dextroamphetamine did not enhance the 5-hydroxytryptophan-induced rise of serotonin at any level. The IC50Tooltip half-maximal inhibitory concentration of \u03b1MT for inhibition of MAO-A has been found to be 380nM. This is similar to that of agents like \"para\"-methoxyamphetamine (PMA) and 4-methylthioamphetamine (4-MTA).\nSerotonergic neurotoxicity.\nA close analogue of \u03b1MT, \u03b1-ethyltryptamine (\u03b1ET), is known to be a serotonergic neurotoxin similarly to MDMA and \"para\"-chloroamphetamine (PCA).\nPharmacokinetics.\n2-Oxo-\u03b1MT, 6-hydroxy-\u03b1MT, 7-hydroxy-\u03b1MT, and 1\u2032-hydroxy-\u03b1MT were detected as metabolites of \u03b1MT in male Wistar rats.\nChemistry.\n\u03b1MT is a synthetic substituted tryptamine with a methyl substituent at the alpha carbon. This alpha substitution makes it a relatively poor substrate for monoamine oxidase A, thereby prolonging \u03b1MT's half-life, allowing it to reach the brain and enter the central nervous system. Its chemical relation to tryptamine is analogous to that of amphetamine to phenethylamine, amphetamine being \u03b1-methylphenethylamine. \u03b1MT is closely related to the neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) which partially explains its mechanism of action.\nSynthesis.\nThe chemical synthesis of \u03b1MT has been described. Its synthesis can be accomplished through several different routes, there's two \"common\" routes mainly via the Henry reaction aka Nitroadol condensation between indole-3-carboxaldehyde and nitroethane under amine salt or ionic liquid catalysis which produces 1-(3-indolyl)-2-nitropropene-1, 1-(3-indolyl)-2-nitropropene-1 can subsequently be reduced via a reducing agent such as lithium aluminum hydride The alternative synthesis is the condensation between indole-3-acetone and hydroxylamine, followed by reduction of the obtained ketoxime with lithium aluminum hydride.\nAnalogues.\nMany analogues of \u03b1MT are known, including \u03b1-ethyltryptamine (\u03b1ET), \u03b1-propyltryptamine (\u03b1PT), 4-methyl-\u03b1MT, 5-chloro-\u03b1MT (PAL-542), 5-fluoro-\u03b1MT (PAL-544), 5-fluoro-\u03b1ET (PAL-545), 5-methoxy-\u03b1MT (5-MeO-\u03b1MT), \u03b1,\"N\"-dimethyltryptamine (\u03b1,\"N\"-DMT; \"N\"-methyl-\u03b1MT), \u03b1,\"N\",\"N\"-trimethyltryptamine (\u03b1,\"N\",\"N\"-TMT; \"N\"-dimethyl-\u03b1MT), \u03b1-methylserotonin (\u03b1-methyl-5-HT; 5-hydroxy-\u03b1MT), and indolylpropylaminopentane (IPAP; \u03b1,\"N\"-dipropyltryptamine or \u03b1,\"N\"-DPT), among others. Another analogue of \u03b1MT is the \u03b2-keto and \"N\"-methylated derivative BK-NM-AMT.\n\u03b1-Methyltryptophan, a prodrug of \u03b1-methylserotonin, also metabolizes into \u03b1MT, but only in small amounts.\nThere are seven possible positional isomers of aminopropylindole (API; IT), wherein the side chain is located at different positions of the indole ring system. These positional isomers include 1-API (\u03b1-methylisotryptamine; isoAMT; PAL-569), 2-API, 3-API (3-IT; \u03b1-methyltryptamine; AMT; PAL-17), 4-API, 5-API (5-IT; 3,4-pyrrolo[b]amphetamine; PAL-571), 6-API, and 7-API. 3-API or AMT is an \u03b1-alkyltryptamine, 1-API or isoAMT is an isotryptamine, and 4-API, 5-API, 6-API, and 7-API are all amphetamines.\nThe analogue of AMT without the benzene part of the indole ring is 3-pyrrolylpropylamine.\nHistory.\n\u03b1MT has been said to have been first synthesized in 1947, alongside \u03b1-ethyltryptamine (\u03b1ET). However, other sources suggest that \u03b1MT was first described in the scientific literature by at least 1929. It was specifically described as an antagonist of ergotamine at this time.\n\u03b1MT started to be more intensively studied, along with \u03b1ET, in the late 1950s and early 1960s. It was researched by Upjohn (code name U-14,164E) and Sandoz (code name IT-290) as a possible pharmaceutical drug and was simultaneously marketed in the Soviet Union as an antidepressant under the brand name Indopan or Indopane in the 1960s. However, the drug was used clinically for only a short period of time before being withdrawn.\n\u03b1MT started being used as a recreational drug in the 1960s and use as a designer drug increased in the 1990s. It became a controlled substance in the United States in 2003.\nSociety and culture.\nNames.\n\u03b1MT never received a formal generic name. In the scientific literature, it has been referred to as \"\u03b1-methyltryptamine\" or \"alpha-methyltryptamine\" (abbreviated as \"\u03b1-MT\", \"\u03b1MT\", or \"AMT\"). \u03b1MT has also been referred to by developmental code names including \"IT-290\" (Sandoz), \"NSC-97069\", \"PAL-17\", \"Ro 3-0926\", and \"U-14,164E\" (Upjohn). In the Soviet Union, the drug was merely referred to by its brand name \"Indopan\" or \"Indopane\". Other synonyms of \u03b1MT include \"3-(2-aminopropyl)indole\" and \"3-IT\". (+)-\u03b1MT has been referred to by the code name \"IT-403\".\nLegal status.\nAustralia.\nThe 5-methoxy analogue, 5-MeO-\u03b1MT is schedule 9 in Australia and \u03b1MT would be controlled as an analogue of this.\nAustria.\n\u03b1MT is placed under Austrian law (NPSG) Group 6.\nCanada.\nCanada has no mention of \u03b1MT in the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.\nChina.\nAs of October 2015 \u03b1MT is a controlled substance in China.\nDenmark.\nIn Denmark (2010), the Danish Minister for the Interior and Health placed \u03b1MT to their lists of controlled substances (List B).\nFinland.\nAMT, alfa-methyltryptamine, is a controlled drug in Finland.\nGermany.\n\u03b1MT is listed under the Narcotics Act in schedule 1 (narcotics not eligible for trade and medical prescriptions) in Germany.\nHungary.\n\u03b1MT was controlled on the Schedule C list in Hungary in 2013.\nLithuania.\nIn Lithuania (2012), \u03b1MT is controlled as a tryptamine derivative put under control in the 1st list of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances which use is prohibited for medical purposes.\nSlovakia.\n\u03b1MT was placed in 2013 on the List of Hazardous Substances in Annex, \u00a7 2 in Slovakia.\nSlovenia.\n\u03b1MT appeared on the Decree on Classification of Illicit Drugs in Slovenia (2013).\nSpain.\n\u03b1MT is legal in Spain.\nSweden.\n\"Sveriges riksdags\" health ministry classified \u03b1MT as \"health hazard\" under the act (translated \"Act on the Prohibition of Certain Goods Dangerous to Health\") as of Mar 1, 2005, in their regulation SFS 2005:26 listed as alfa-metyltryptamin (AMT), making it illegal to sell or possess.\nUnited Kingdom.\n\u03b1MT was made illegal in the United Kingdom as of 7 January 2015, along with 5-MeO-DALT.\nThis was following the events of 10 June 2014 when the Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs recommended that \u03b1MT be scheduled as a class A drug by updating the blanket ban clause on tryptamines.\nUnited States.\nThe Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) placed \u03b1MT temporarily in schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) on April 4, 2003, pursuant to the temporary scheduling provisions of the CSA (68 FR16427). On September 29, 2004, \u03b1MT was permanently controlled as a schedule I substance under the CSA (69FR 58050).\nResearch.\nBesides depression, \u03b1MT has been studied in people with schizophrenia and other conditions.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63693", "revid": "42316734", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63693", "title": "Soaring", "text": "Soaring may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63694", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63694", "title": "E\u00e4rendil and Elwing", "text": "Characters in J. R. R. Tolkien's The Silmarillion\nE\u00e4rendil () the Mariner and his wife Elwing are characters in J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth legendarium. They are depicted in \"The Silmarillion\" as Half-elven, the children of Men and Elves. He is a great seafarer who, on his brow, carried the Morning Star, a jewel called a Silmaril, across the sky. The jewel had been saved by Elwing from the destruction of the Havens of Sirion. The Morning Star and the Silmarils are elements of the symbolism of light, for divine creativity, continually splintered as history progresses. Tolkien took E\u00e4rendil's name from the Old English name Earendel, found in the poem \"Crist 1\", which hailed him as \"brightest of angels\"; this was the beginning of Tolkien's Middle-earth mythology. Elwing is the granddaughter of L\u00fathien and Beren, and is descended from Melian the Maia, while Earendil is the son of Tuor and Idril. Through their progeny, E\u00e4rendil and Elwing became the ancestors of the N\u00famenorean, and later D\u00fanedain, royal bloodline.\nE\u00e4rendil is the subject, too, of the song in \"The Lord of the Rings\" sung and supposedly composed by Bilbo in Rivendell, described by Tom Shippey as exemplifying \"an elvish streak... signalled... by barely-precedented intricacies\" of poetry.\nEtymology.\n\"E\u00e4rendil\" means 'Lover of the Sea' in Tolkien's invented language of Quenya. However, Tolkien borrowed the name from Old English literature, in particular from the line \"\" (Hail, Earendel, brightest of angels) of the poem \"Crist 1\". Tolkien stated that the name came from the Old English name \"\u0112arendel\"; he was struck by its \"great beauty\" c. 1913, which he perceived as \"entirely coherent with the normal style of A-S, but euphonic to a peculiar degree in that pleasing but not 'delectable' language.\". Elwing means \"Star-spray\" in the Elvish language Sindarin. \"E\u00e4rendil\" was originally spelled by Tolkien as \"E\u00e4rendel\", before being modified.\nFictional history.\nBackground.\nMiddle-earth was peopled in the First Age by immortal Elves, later followed by Men. The Elves became divided on their migrations, some settling in the Northwestern region called Beleriand. F\u00ebanor, son of Finw\u00eb, the King of the Noldor, one branch of the Elves, had unique skill in craftsmanship, and forged three brilliant and highly prized jewels, the Silmarils, that shone like bright stars. The Dark Lord Morgoth desired the Silmarils for himself, and managed to seize them to put in his crown. There was enmity between Morgoth and the free peoples, Elves and Men.\nE\u00e4rendil.\nE\u00e4rendil was the half-elven son of a Man, Tuor, and an Elf, Idril, daughter of Turgon, the King of the hidden Elvish city of Gondolin. He was raised in Gondolin; when he was seven years old, he escaped the sacking of Gondolin with his parents. E\u00e4rendil was almost killed by his mother's treacherous cousin Maeglin, who had betrayed Gondolin to Morgoth; he was saved when his father killed Maeglin. E\u00e4rendil and his parents lived afterwards in Arvernien by the mouth of Sirion.\nE\u00e4rendil became the leader of the people who lived there, and married Elwing, the half-elven daughter of Dior and the Sindar elf-maid Nimloth. Another alliance between Man and Elf, the hero Beren and his Elvish bride L\u00fathien, were Elwing's paternal grandparents. E\u00e4rendil and Elwing had two sons, Elrond and Elros.\nWith the aid of C\u00edrdan the Shipwright, E\u00e4rendil built a ship, \"Vingil\u00f3t\u00eb\" (Quenya for \"foam-flower\"). He often sailed the seas west of Middle-earth, leaving his wife behind in Arvernien. At this time Elwing had in her possession the Silmaril that Beren had wrested from Morgoth. When F\u00ebanor's sons, who wanted the Silmarils back, heard about this, they attacked Arvernien and killed most of the people living there. Elwing, rather than be captured, threw herself with the Silmaril into the sea. Next, according to \"The Silmarillion\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For Ulmo bore up Elwing out of the waves, and he gave her the likeness of a great white bird, and upon her breast there shone as a star the Silmaril, as she flew over the water to seek E\u00e4rendil her beloved. On a time of night E\u00e4rendil at the helm of his ship saw her come towards him, as a white cloud exceeding swift beneath the moon, as a star over the sea moving in strange courses, a pale flame on wings of storm. And it is sung that she fell from the air upon the timbers of Vingilot, in a swoon, nigh unto death for the urgency of her speed, and E\u00e4rendil took her to his bosom; but in the morning with marvelling eyes he beheld his wife in her own form beside him with her hair upon his face, and she slept.\nHearing of the tragedy that had befallen Arvernien, E\u00e4rendil then sought after the home of the godlike and immortal Valar, Valinor, aboard the \"Vingilot\", and he and Elwing found their way there at last. E\u00e4rendil thus became the first of all mortals to set foot on Valinor. E\u00e4rendil then went before the Valar, and asked them for aid for Men and Elves in Middle-earth, to fight against Morgoth; the Valar accepted his plea.\nBecause E\u00e4rendil had undertaken this errand on behalf of Men and Elves, and not for his own sake, Manw\u00eb, King of the Valar, refrained from dealing out the punishment of death that was due for entering Valinor. Also, because both E\u00e4rendil and Elwing descended from a union of Elves and Men, Manw\u00eb granted to them and their sons the gift to choose to which race they would be joined. Elwing chose to be one of the Elves. E\u00e4rendil would have rather been one of the Men; however, for the sake of his wife, he chose to be one of the Elves also. His ship, Vingilot (Quenya: \"Vingil\u00f3t\u00eb\"), was placed in the heavens, and he sailed it \"even into the starless voids\", but he returned at sunrise or sunset, glimmering in the sky as the Morning Star.\nE\u00e4rendil's son Elrond too chose elvish immortality, becoming known as Half-elven, and in the Third Age played an important role in The War of the Ring, as narrated in \"The Lord of the Rings\". Elros chose mortality, the gift of Men, founding the line of the Kings of N\u00famenor; his descendant at the time of The War of the Ring was Aragorn, one of the Fellowship of the Ring, who married Elrond's daughter, Arwen.\nThe Valar marched into the north of Middle-earth and attacked the Throne of Morgoth in the War of Wrath. Morgoth set loose a fleet of winged dragons, which drove the Valar back. E\u00e4rendil in Vingilot attacked, with Thorondor and his great eagles, and killed Ancalagon the Black, greatest of the dragons. Ancalagon fell on to Thangorodrim and broke its towers. The Valar won the battle, destroying the dragons and the pits of Angband, captured Morgoth, and took the two remaining Silmarils from his crown.\nConcept and creation.\nHumphrey Carpenter, in his biography of Tolkien, remarked that E\u00e4rendil \"was in fact the beginning of Tolkien's own mythology\". In 1914, Tolkien wrote a poem \"The Voyage of Earendel the Evening Star\", inspired by the \"Crist I\" poem. While studying at Oxford, Tolkien developed a constructed language that later became known as Quenya. Already around 1915 he had the idea that this language needed an internal history and was spoken by Elves whom his invented character E\u00e4rendil meets during his journeys. The next step in the creation of the underlying mythology was the \"Lay of Earendel\", a work composed of several poems that describes the mariner Earendel and his voyages and how his ship is turned into a star. The mysterious land of Valinor and its Two Trees shining gold and silver across the land were first described in this cycle. The poem was published in \"The Book of Lost Tales 2\".\nTolkien was aware of the name's Germanic cognates (Old Norse \"Aurvandill\", Lombardic \"Auriwandalo\"); the question why the Old English rather than the Lombardic or Proto-Germanic form should be taken up in the mythology is alluded to in \"The Notion Club Papers\". The Old Norse together with the Old English evidence point to an astronomical myth, the name referring to a star, or a group of stars; the Old English in particular points to the morning star as the herald of the rising Sun, Christianized to refer to John the Baptist. Tolkien stated in a 1967 letter that the Old English uses of \"seem plainly to indicate that it was a star presaging the dawn... that is what we now call \"Venus\": the morning star as it may be seen shining brilliantly in the dawn, before the actual rising of the sun. That is at any rate how I took it [when creating E\u00e4rendil as a mariner and \"a herald star\"].\"\nTolkien was particularly inspired by the \"Crist\" lines:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"\u00e9ala \u00e9arendel engla beorhtast / ofer middangeard monnum sended\"Hail Earendel, brightest of angels, over Middle-earth to men sent\nThe first of the \"Crist\" lines is parallelled by Frodo Baggins's exclamation in \"The Two Towers\", \"Aiya E\u00e4rendil Elenion Ancalima!\", which in Tolkien's invented language of Quenya means, \"Hail E\u00e4rendil, brightest of stars!\" Frodo's exclamation was in reference to the \"Star-glass\" he carried, the Phial of Galadriel, which contained a little of the light of E\u00e4rendil's star, the Silmaril.\nThese lines from \"Crist\" can be taken as the inspiration not only for the role of E\u00e4rendil in Tolkien's work from as early as 1914, but for the term Middle-earth (translating Old English \"Middangeard\") for the inhabitable lands (cf. Midgard). Accordingly, the medievalists Stuart D. Lee and Elizabeth Solopova state that \"Crist A\" was \"the catalyst for Tolkien's mythology\".\nAnalysis.\nSplintered light.\nThe Tolkien scholar Verlyn Flieger writes in her 1983 book \"Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien's World\" that a central theme of Tolkien's writing is the progressive fragmentation of the light from the moment of the creation; light symbolises both the divine creation and the author's subcreation.\nThe light begins in \"The Silmarillion\" as a unity, and in accordance with the splintering of creation is divided into more and more fragments as the myth progresses. Middle-earth is peopled by the angelic Valar and lit by two great lamps; when these are destroyed by the fallen Vala Melkor, the world is fragmented, and the Valar retreat to Valinor, which is lit by The Two Trees. When these too are destroyed, their last fragment of light is made into the Silmarils, and a sapling too is rescued, leading to the White Tree of N\u00famenor, the living symbol of the Kingdom of Gondor. Wars are fought over the Silmarils, and they are lost to the Earth, the Sea, and the Sky.\nThe last of the Silmarils, carried by E\u00e4rendil the Mariner, becomes the Morning Star as he sails across the sky with the shining jewel in his ship Vingilot. By the time of \"The Lord of the Rings\", in the Third Age, that is all that is left of the light. Some of the star's light is captured in Galadriel's Mirror, the magic fountain that allows her to see past, present, and future; and some of that light is, finally, trapped in the Phial of Galadriel, her parting gift to Frodo, the counterbalance to Sauron's evil and powerful Ring that Frodo is also carrying. At each stage, the fragmentation increases and the power decreases. Thus the theme of light as Divine power, fragmented and refracted through the works of created beings, is central to the whole mythology.\nWade.\nThe Tolkien scholar Tibor Tarcsay writes that E\u00e4rendil is based not only on Old English but also Indo-European and universal myths. Wade has power over the sea and superhuman strength, while numerous other mythical Indo-European figures share E\u00e4rendil's conjunction of water, boat or horse, and herald or star, such as Surya, the sun-god of the Vedas, or Apollo with his horse-drawn chariot which pulls the sun across the sky. Vingilot is mentioned in Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Merchant's Tale\" as the name of Wade's ship; Wade is in turn mentioned in the Old English poem \"Widsith\", while Sir Gawain's horse has a name similar to Vingilot, Gryngolet. \nChristopher Tolkien, too, noted the matching boat-names, Guingelot for Wade and Wingelot for Earendel, and stated that the link between Wade and Tuor was \"not casual\", which Flieger takes to mean, certainly intentional. Flieger notes further that in \"Parma Eldalamberon\" 15, Tolkien unambiguously wrote \"Wade = Earendel\".\nEchoes of other legends.\nTolkien's legend of E\u00e4rendil has elements resembling the \"Mabinogion\" or the Christian legend of St. Brendan the Navigator.\nThe long-suffering woman.\nElwing's staying at home waiting for her husband to return from his vain voyages across the ocean echoes the literary motif of the \"long-suffering woman\". The choice of fate offered by the Valar to E\u00e4rendil and Elwing, resulting in both of them becoming immortal Elves, has been interpreted as a move of Tolkien to solve \"several untidy plot points in one fell swoop\": being Half-elven, neither of the two would have been allowed to set foot in the land of the Valar, nor was their eventual fate determined since in Tolkien's legendarium Men are mortal, while Elves will live until the world is undone. The metamorphosis of the couple continues as E\u00e4rendil's ship is transformed into a flying vessel, so he can continue his journeys in the sky rather than at sea. Still now, Elwing will remain at home, but she is granted a white tower to dwell in.\n\"Song of E\u00e4rendil\".\nThe longest poem in \"The Lord of the Rings\" is the \"Song of E\u00e4rendil\" which Bilbo sings, and supposedly composed, at Rivendell. This poem has an extraordinarily complex history, deriving through many versions from his light-hearted poem \"Errantry\". The \"Song of E\u00e4rendil\" is described by Tom Shippey as exemplifying \"an elvish streak .. signalled .. by barely-precedented intricacies\" of poetry, an approach derived from the Middle English poem \"Pearl\". The song was recorded by The Tolkien Ensemble on their 2005 CD \"Leaving Rivendell\".\nReferences.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63695", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63695", "title": "Norwegian", "text": "Norwegian, Norwayan, or Norsk may refer to:\nNorwegian or may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63696", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63696", "title": "Metals", "text": ""}
{"id": "63701", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63701", "title": "Gimli (Lord of the Rings)", "text": ""}
{"id": "63702", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63702", "title": "Promiscuous", "text": ""}
{"id": "63703", "revid": "15135172", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63703", "title": "Tarsus", "text": "Tarsus may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "63704", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63704", "title": "Carpal bones", "text": "Eight small bones that make up the wrist (or carpus) that connects the hand to the forearm\nThe carpal bones are the eight small bones that make up the wrist (carpus) that connects the hand to the forearm. The terms \"carpus\" and \"carpal\" are derived from the Latin carpus and the Greek \u03ba\u03b1\u03c1\u03c0\u03cc\u03c2 (karp\u00f3s), meaning \"wrist\". In human anatomy, the main role of the carpal bones is to articulate with the radial and ulnar heads to form a highly mobile condyloid joint (i.e. wrist joint), to provide attachments for thenar and hypothenar muscles, and to form part of the rigid carpal tunnel which allows the median nerve and tendons of the anterior forearm muscles to be transmitted to the hand and fingers.\nIn tetrapods, the carpus is the sole cluster of bones in the wrist between the radius and ulna and the metacarpus. The bones of the carpus do not belong to individual fingers (or toes in quadrupeds), whereas those of the metacarpus do. The corresponding part of the foot is the tarsus. The carpal bones allow the wrist to move and rotate vertically.\nStructure.\nBones.\nThe eight carpal bones may be conceptually organized as either two transverse rows, or three longitudinal columns.\nWhen considered as paired rows, each row forms an arch which is convex proximally and concave distally. On the palmar side, the carpus is concave and forms the carpal tunnel, which is covered by the flexor retinaculum. The proximal row comprises the scaphoid, lunate, triquetral, and pisiform bones which articulate with the surfaces of the radius and distal carpal row, and thus constantly adapts to these mobile surfaces. Within the proximal row, each carpal bone has slight independent mobility. For example, the scaphoid contributes to midcarpal stability by articulating distally with the trapezium and the trapezoid. In contrast, the distal row is more rigid as its transverse arch moves with the metacarpals.\nBiomechanically and clinically, the carpal bones are better conceptualized as three longitudinal columns:\nIn this context the pisiform is regarded as a sesamoid bone embedded in the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris. The ulnar column leaves a gap between the ulna and the triquetrum, and therefore, only the radial or scaphoid and central or capitate columns articulate with the radius. The wrist is more stable in flexion than in extension, mainly because of the strength of various capsules and ligaments than the interlocking parts of the skeleton.\nAlmost all carpals (except the pisiform) have six surfaces. Of these the \"palmar\" or \"anterior\" and the \"dorsal\" or \"posterior surfaces\" are rough, for ligamentous attachment; the dorsal surfaces being the broader, except in the lunate.\nThe \"superior\" or \"proximal,\" and \"inferior\" or \"distal surfaces\" are articular, the superior generally convex, the inferior concave; the \"medial\" and \"lateral surfaces\" are also articular where they are in contact with contiguous bones, otherwise they are rough and tuberculated.\nThe structure in all is similar: cancellous tissue enclosed in a layer of compact bone.\nJoints.\nPhalanges\nDistal\nMiddle\nProximal\nDIP\nPIP\nMCP\nCMC\nWrist\nMetacarpus\nI\nII\nIII\nIV\nV\nCarpus\nTrapezium\nTrapezoid\nCapitate\nHamate\nPisiform\nTriquetral\nLunate\nScaphoid\nRadius\nUlna\n Carpal bones and their articulations. Carpal bones are shown in violet. Human left hand, anterior (palmar) view.\nAccessory bones.\nOccasionally accessory bones are found in the carpus, but of more than 20 such described bones, only four (the central, styloid, secondary trapezoid, and secondary pisiform bones) are considered to be proven accessory bones. Sometimes the scaphoid, triquetrum, and pisiform bones are divided into two.\nDevelopment.\nThe carpal bones are ossified endochondrally (from within the cartilage) and the ossific centers appear only after birth.\nThe formation of these centers roughly follows a chronological spiral pattern starting in the capitate and hamate during the first year of life. The ulnar bones are then ossified before the radial bones, while the sesamoid pisiform arises in the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris after more than ten years.\n The commencement of ossification for each bone occurs over period like other bones. This is useful in forensic age estimation.\nFunction.\nLigaments.\nThere are four groups of ligaments in the region of the wrist:\nMovements.\nThe hand is said to be in straight position when the third finger runs over the capitate bone and is in a straight line with the forearm. This should not be confused with the midposition of the hand which corresponds to an ulnar deviation of 12\u00a0degrees. From the straight position two pairs of movements of the hand are possible: abduction (movement towards the radius, so called radial deviation or abduction) of 15\u00a0degrees and adduction (movement towards the ulna, so called ulnar deviation or adduction) of 40\u00a0degrees when the arm is in strict supination and slightly greater in strict pronation.\nFlexion (tilting towards the palm, so called palmar flexion) and extension (tilting towards the back of the hand, so called dorsiflexion) is possible with a total range of 170\u00a0degrees.\nRadial abduction/ulnar adduction.\nDuring radial abduction the scaphoid is tilted towards the palmar side which allows the trapezium and trapezoid to approach the radius. Because the trapezoid is rigidly attached to the second metacarpal bone to which also the flexor carpi radialis and extensor carpi radialis are attached, radial abduction effectively pulls this combined structure towards the radius. During radial abduction the pisiform traverses the greatest path of all carpal bones.\nRadial abduction is produced by (in order of importance) extensor carpi radialis longus, abductor pollicis longus, extensor pollicis longus, flexor carpi radialis, and flexor pollicis longus.\nUlnar adduction causes a tilting or dorsal shifting of the proximal row of carpal bones.\nIt is produced by extensor carpi ulnaris, flexor carpi ulnaris, extensor digitorum, and extensor digiti minimi.\nBoth radial abduction and ulnar adduction occurs around a dorsopalmar axis running through the head of the capitate bone.\nPalmar flexion/dorsiflexion.\nDuring palmar flexion the proximal carpal bones are displaced towards the \"dorsal\" side and towards the \"palmar\" side during dorsiflexion. While flexion and extension consist of movements around a pair of transverse axes \u2014 passing through the lunate bone for the proximal row and through the capitate bone for the distal row \u2014 palmar flexion occurs mainly in the radiocarpal joint and dorsiflexion in the midcarpal joint.\nDorsiflexion is produced by (in order of importance) extensor digitorum, extensor carpi radialis longus, extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor indicis, extensor pollicis longus, and extensor digiti minimi. Palmar flexion is produced by (in order of importance) flexor digitorum superficialis, flexor digitorum profundus, flexor carpi ulnaris, flexor pollicis longus, flexor carpi radialis, and abductor pollicis longus.\nCombined movements.\nCombined with movements in both the elbow and shoulder joints, intermediate or combined movements in the wrist approximate those of a ball-and-socket joint with some necessary restrictions, such as maximum palmar flexion blocking abduction.\nAccessory movements.\nAnteroposterior gliding movements between adjacent carpal bones or along the midcarpal joint can be achieved by stabilizing individual bones while moving another (i.e. gripping the bone between the thumb and index finger).\nOther animals.\nThe structure of the carpus varies widely between different groups of tetrapods, even among those that retain the full set of five digits. In primitive fossil amphibians, such as \"Eryops\", the carpus consists of three rows of bones; a proximal row of three carpals, a second row of four bones, and a distal row of five bones. The proximal carpals are referred to as the radiale, intermedium, and ulnare, after their proximal articulations, and are homologous with the scaphoid, lunate, and triquetral bones respectively. The remaining bones are simply numbered, as the first to fourth centralia (singular: centrale), and the first to fifth distal carpals. Primitively, each of the distal bones appears to have articulated with a single metacarpal.\nHowever, the vast majority of later vertebrates, including modern amphibians, have undergone varying degrees of loss and fusion of these primitive bones, resulting in a smaller number of carpals. Almost all mammals and reptiles, for example, have lost the fifth distal carpal, and have only a single centrale - and even this is missing in humans. The pisiform bone is somewhat unusual, in that it first appears in primitive reptiles, and is never found in amphibians.\nBecause many tetrapods have fewer than five digits on the forelimb, even greater degrees of fusion are common, and a huge array of different possible combinations are found. The wing of a modern bird, for example, has only two remaining carpals; the radiale (the scaphoid of mammals) and a bone formed from the fusion of four of the distal carpals.\nThe carpus and tarsus are both described as podial elements or (clusters of) podial bones.\nIn some macropods, the scaphoid and lunar bones are fused into the scapholunar bone.\nIn crustaceans, \"carpus\" is the scientific term for the claws or \"pincers\" present on some legs. (See Decapod anatomy)\nEtymology.\nThe Latin word \"carpus\" is derived from Greek meaning \"wrist\". The root \"carp-\" translates to \"pluck\", an action performed by the wrist.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63705", "revid": "108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63705", "title": "Augustus DeMorgan", "text": ""}
{"id": "63706", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63706", "title": "Principality of Liechtenstein", "text": ""}
{"id": "63708", "revid": "15816808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63708", "title": "W. H. R. Rivers", "text": "English psychiatrist and anthropologist (1864\u20131922)\nWilliam Halse Rivers Rivers (12 March 1864 \u2013 4 June 1922) was an English anthropologist, neurologist, ethnologist and psychiatrist known for treatment of First World War officers suffering shell shock. Rivers' most famous patient was the war poet Siegfried Sassoon, with whom he remained close friends until his own sudden death.\nDuring the early years of the 20th century, Rivers developed new lines of psychological research. He was the first to use a double-blind procedure in investigating physical and psychological effects of consumption of tea, coffee, alcohol and drugs. For a time he directed centres for psychological studies at two colleges, and he was made a Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. He also participated in the Torres Strait Islands expedition of 1898 and his consequent seminal work on the subject of kinship.\nFamily background.\nW. H. R. Rivers was born in 1864 at Constitution Hill, Chatham, Kent, son of Elizabeth (n\u00e9e Hunt) and Henry Frederick Rivers.\nRecords from the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries show the Rivers family to be solidly middle-class, with many Cambridge, Church of England and Royal Navy associations. Notable members were Gunner William Rivers and his son, Midshipman William Rivers, both of whom served aboard HMS \"Victory\", Nelson's flagship.\nThe senior Rivers was the master gunner aboard the \"Victory\". He kept a commonplace book (now held in the Royal Naval Museum library in Portsmouth); it has revealed and preserved the thoughts of many of the sailors aboard the \"Victory.\"\nHis son Midshipman Rivers, who claimed to be \"the man who shot the man who fatally wounded Lord Nelson\", was a model of heroism in the Battle of Trafalgar. The seventeen-year-old midshipman nearly lost his foot when it was struck by a grenade; it was attached to him only \"by a Piece of Skin abought 4\u00a0inch above the ankle\". Rivers asked first for his shoes, then told the gunner's mate to look after the guns, and told Captain Hardy that he was going down to the cockpit. He endured the amputation of his leg four inches below the knee, without anaesthetic. According to legend, he did not cry out once during that nor during the consequent sealing of the wound with hot tar. When Gunner Rivers, anxious about his son's welfare, went to the cockpit to ask after him, his son called out, \"Here I am, Father, nothing is the matter with me; only lost my leg and that in a good cause.\"\nAfter the battle, the senior Rivers wrote a poem about his remarkable son, entitled \"Lines on a Young Gentleman that lost his leg onboard the Victory in the Glorious action at Trafalgar\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBorn to Lieutenant William Rivers, R.N., and his wife, stationed at Deptford, Henry Frederick Rivers followed many family traditions in being educated at Trinity College, Cambridge and entering the church. Having earned his Bachelor of Arts in 1857, he was ordained as a Church of England priest in 1858, and had a career that would span almost 50 years. In 1904, he was forced to tender his resignation due to \"infirmities of sight and memory\".\nIn 1863, having obtained a curacy at Chatham in addition to a chaplaincy of the Medway Union, Henry Rivers was sufficiently established to marry Elizabeth Hunt, who was living with her brother James in Hastings, not far from Chatham. He was later appointed to curacies in Kent at St Mary's, Chatham (1863\u20131869), Tudeley (1877\u20131880) and Offham (1880\u20131889), and subsequently as Vicar of St Faith's, Maidstone from 1889 to 1904.\nThe Hunts, like the Rivers family, were established with naval and Church of England connections. One of those destined for the pulpit was Thomas, but some quirk of originality set him off into an unusual career. While an undergraduate at Cambridge, Thomas Hunt had a friend who stammered badly and his efforts to aid the affected student led him to leave the university without taking a degree in order to make a thorough study of speech and its defects. He built up a good practice as a speech therapist and was patronised by Sir John Forbes MD FRS. Forbes referred pupils to him for twenty-four years. Hunt's most famous case came about in 1842. George Pearson, the chief witness in a case related to an attempted attack on Queen Victoria by John Francis, was brought into court but was incapable of giving his evidence. After a fortnight's instruction from Hunt, he spoke easily, a fact certified by the sitting magistrate. Hunt died in 1851, survived by his wife Mary and their two children. His practice was passed on to his son, James.\nJames Hunt was an exuberant character, giving to each of his ventures his boundless energy and self-confidence. Taking up his father's legacy with great zeal, by the age of 21 Hunt had published his compendious work \"Stammering and Stuttering, Their Nature and Treatment\". This went into six editions during his lifetime and was reprinted again in 1870, just after his death, and for an eighth time in 1967 as a landmark in the history of speech therapy. In the introduction to the 1967 edition of the book, Elliot Schaffer notes that in his short lifetime, James Hunt is said to have treated over 1,700 cases of speech impediment, firstly in his father's practice and later at his own institute, Ore House near Hastings. He set up the latter with the aid of a doctorate he had purchased in 1856 from the University of Giessen in Germany.\nIn later, expanded editions, \"Stammering and Stuttering\" begins to reflect Hunt's growing passion for anthropology, exploring the nature of language usage and speech disorders in non-European peoples. In 1856, Hunt had joined the Ethnological Society of London and by 1859 he was its joint secretary. But many of the members disliked his attacks on the religious and humanitarian agencies represented by missionaries and the anti-slavery movement.\nAs a result of the antagonism, Hunt founded the Anthropological Society and became its president. Nearly 60 years later, his nephew W. He. R. Rivers was selected for this position. Hunt's efforts were integral to the British Association for the Advancement of Science (BAAS) accepting anthropology in 1866 as a discipline.\nEven by Victorian standards, Hunt was a decided racist. His paper \"On a Negro's Place in Nature\", delivered before the BAAS in 1863, was met with hisses and catcalls. What Hunt considered \"a statement of the simple facts\" was thought by others to be a defence of the subjection and slavery of Africans in the Americas, and support of the belief in the plurality of human species.\nIn addition to his extremist views, Hunt led the society to incur heavy debts. The controversies surrounding his conduct told on his health and, on 29 August 1869, Hunt died of \"inflammation of the brain\". He was survived by his widow, Henrietta Maria, and five children.\nHis speech therapy practice was passed onto Hunt's brother-in-law, Henry Rivers, who had been working with him for some time. Rivers inherited many of Hunt's established patients, most notably The Reverend Charles L. Dodgson (better known as Lewis Carroll), who had been a regular visitor to Ore House.\nHunt left his books to his nephew William Rivers, who refused them, thinking that they would be of no use to him.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Halse Rivers Rivers was the oldest of four children, with his siblings being brother Charles Hay (29 August 1865 \u2013 8 November 1939) and sisters Ethel Marian (30 October 1867 \u2013 4 February 1943) and Katharine Elizabeth (1871\u20131939).\nWilliam, known as \"Willie\" throughout his childhood, appears to have been named after his famous uncle of \"Victory\" fame; there was also a longstanding family tradition whereby the eldest son of every line would be baptised by that name. The origin of \"Halse\" is unclear. There may be some naval connection, as it has been suggested that it could have been the name of someone serving alongside his uncle. Slobodin states that it is probable that the second \"Rivers\" entered his name as a result of a clerical error on the baptismal certificate, but since the register is filled in by his father's hand, and his father performed the ceremony, this seems unlikely. Slobodin notes a mistake on the registry of his birth, but it is that his name was changed from the mistaken \"William False Rivers Rivers\" to its later form, with \"Halse\" as the second name. This suggests that \"Rivers\" was intended as a given name as well as a surname.\nRivers had a stammer that he never fully conquered. He had no sensory memory, although he was able to visualise to an extent if dreaming, in a half-waking, half-sleeping state, or when feverish. Rivers noted that in his early life- specifically before the age of five- his visual imagery was far more definite than it became in later life. He thought it was perhaps as good as that of the average child.\nAt first, Rivers had concluded that his loss of visual imagery had resulted from his lack of attention and interest in it. But, as he later came to realise, while images from his later life frequently faded into obscurity, those from his infancy still remained vivid.\nAs Rivers notes in \"Instinct and the Unconscious\", he was unable to visualise any part of the upper floor of the house he lived in until he was five. By contrast, Rivers was able to describe the lower floors of that particular house with far more accuracy than he had been able to with any house since. Although images of later houses were faded and incomplete, no memory since had been as inaccessible as that of the upper floor of his early home. Given evidence, Rivers came to conclude that something had happened to him on the upper floor of that house, the memory of which was entirely suppressed because it \"interfered with [his] comfort and happiness\". In addition to that specific memory being inaccessible, his sensory memory in general appears to have been severely disabled from that moment.\nAuthor Pat Barker, in the second novel of her \"Regeneration Trilogy\" related to Rivers and his work, \"The Eye in the Door\", suggested through her character Billy Prior, that Rivers's experience was traumatic enough to cause him to \"put his mind's eye out\".\nRivers was a highly able child. Educated first at a Brighton preparatory school and, from the age of thirteen, as a dayboy at the prestigious Tonbridge School, his academic abilities were noted from an early age. At the age of 14, he was placed a year above others of his age at school and even within this older group he was seen to excel, winning prizes for Classics and all around attainment. Rivers's younger brother Charles was also a high achiever at the school; he too was awarded with the Good Work prize. He studied and became a civil engineer. After a bad bout of malaria contracted whilst in the Torres Straits with his brother, he was encouraged by the elder Rivers to take up outdoor work.\nThe teenage Rivers, whilst scholarly, was also involved in other aspects of school life. As the programme for the Tonbridge School sports day notes, on 12 March 1880 \u2013 Rivers's sixteenth birthday \u2013 he ran in the mile race. The year before this he had been elected as a member of the school debating society, no mean feat for a boy who at this time had a speech impediment which was almost paralytic.\nRivers was set to follow family tradition and take his University of Cambridge entrance exam, possibly with the aim of studying classics. But at the age of sixteen, he contracted typhoid fever and was forced to miss his final year of school. Without the scholarship, his family could not afford to send him to Cambridge. With his typical resilience, Rivers did not dwell on the disappointment.\nHis illness had been severe, entailing long convalescence and leaving him with effects which at times severely disabled him. As L. E. Shore notes: \"he was not a strong man, and was often obliged to take a few days rest in bed and subsist on a milk diet\". The severity of the sickness and the shattering of dreams might have broken lesser men but for Rivers in many ways the illness was the making of him. Whilst recovering from the fever, Rivers had formed a friendship with one of his father's speech therapy students, a young Army surgeon. His plan was formed: he would study medicine and apply for training in the Army Medical Department, later to become the Royal Army Medical Corps.\nInspired by this new resolve, Rivers studied medicine at the University of London, where he matriculated in 1882, and St Bartholomew's Hospital in London. He graduated at age 22, the youngest person to do so until recent times.\nLife as a ship's surgeon.\nAfter qualifying, Rivers sought to join the army but was not passed fit. This was a byproduct of typhoid fever. As Elliot Smith was later to write, as quoted in a biography of Rivers: \"Rivers always had to fight against ill health: heart and blood vessels.\" Along with the health problems noted by Shore and Smith, Rivers struggled with \"tiring easily\".\nHis sister Katharine wrote that when he came to visit the family, he would often sleep for the first day or two. Considering the volume of work that Rivers completed in his relatively short lifetime, Seligman wrote in 1922 that \"for many years he seldom worked for more than four hours a day\". Rivers's biographer Richard Slobodin says that \"among persons of extraordinary achievement, only Descartes seems to have put in as short a working day\".\nRivers did not allow his drawbacks to dishearten him, and he chose to serve several terms as a ship's surgeon, travelling to Japan and North America in 1887. This was the first of many voyages; for, besides his great expeditions for work in the Torres Straits Islands, Melanesia, Egypt, India and the Solomon Islands, he took holiday voyages twice to the West Indies, three times to the Canary Islands and Madeira, to the United States, Norway, and Lisbon, as well as making numerous visits to France, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland, and lengthy ones to visit family in Australia.\nSuch voyages helped to improve his health, and possibly to prolong his life. He also took a great deal of pleasure from his experiences aboard ship. On one voyage he spent a month in the company of playwright George Bernard Shaw; he later described how he spent \"many hours every day talking \u2013 the greatest treat of my life\".\nBeginnings of career in psychology.\nBack in England, Rivers earned an M.D. (London) and was elected a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians. Soon after, he became house surgeon at the Chichester Infirmary (1887\u20131889). Although he enjoyed the town and the company of his colleagues, an appointment at Bart's and the opportunity to return to working in research in medicine was more appealing. He became house physician at St Bartholomew's in 1889 and remained there until 1890.\nAt Bart's, Rivers had been a physician to Samuel Gee. Those under Gee were conscious of his indifference towards, if not outright dislike of, the psychological aspects of medicine. Walter Langdon-Brown surmises that Rivers and his fellow Charles S. Myers devoted themselves to these aspects in reaction to Gee.\nRivers's interests in neurology and psychology became evident in this period. Reports and papers given by Rivers at the Abernethian Society of St Bart's indicate a growing specialisation in these fields: \"Delirium and its allied conditions\" (1889), \"Hysteria\" (1891) and \"Neurasthenia\" (1893).\nFollowing the direction of his passion for the workings of the mind as it correlates with the workings of the body, in 1891 Rivers became house physician at the National Hospital for the Paralysed and Epileptic. Here he and Henry Head met and formed a lasting friendship.\nRivers's interest in the physiology of the nervous system and in \"the mind\", that is, in sensory phenomena and mental states, was further stimulated by work in 1891. He was chosen to be one of Victor Horsley's assistants in a series of investigations at University College London that explored the existence and nature of electrical currents in the mammalian brain. His selection for this work demonstrated his growing reputation as a researcher.\nIn the same year, Rivers joined the Neurological Society of London and presented \"A Case of Treadler's Cramp\" to a meeting of the society. The case demonstrated the ill effects of what is understood as repetitive motion injury. Such injuries sustained by factory workers, against which they had little protection or compensation, were part of the cost for millions of people of Britain's industrial supremacy.\nResigning from the National Hospital in 1892, Rivers travelled to Jena to expand his knowledge of experimental psychology. Whilst in Jena, Rivers became fluent in German and attended lectures on both psychology and philosophy. He also became deeply immersed in the culture; in a diary he kept of the journey he comments on the buildings, picture galleries, church services, and education system, showing his wide interests and critical judgement. In this diary he also wrote that: \"I have during the last three weeks come to the conclusion that I should go in for insanity when I return to England and work as much as possible at psychology.\"\nAfter his return to England, he became a Clinical Assistant at the Bethlem Royal Hospital. In 1893, at the request of G. H Savage, he began assisting with lectures in mental diseases at Guy's Hospital, emphasising their psychological aspect. At about the same time, invited by Professor Sully, he began to lecture on experimental psychology at University College, London.\nBy 1893, when he was unexpectedly invited to lecture in Cambridge on the functions of the sense organs, he was already deeply read in the subject. He had been captivated by Head's accounts of the works of Ewald Hering, and had avidly absorbed his views on colour vision and the nature of vital processes in living matter. He also prepared for this project by spending the summer working in Heidelberg with Emil Kraepelin on measuring the effects of fatigue.\nThe offer of a Cambridge lectureship resulted from continuing evolution within the university's Natural Science Tripos. Earlier in 1893, Professor McKendrick, of Glasgow, had examined subject and reported unfavourably on the scant knowledge of the special senses that was displayed by the candidates; to correct this, Sir Michael Foster appointed Rivers as a lecturer. He became Fellow Commoner at St John's College. He was made a Fellow of the college in 1902.\nRivers was stretched in his work, as he still had ongoing teaching commitments at Guy's hospital and at University College. In addition to these mounting responsibilities, in 1897 he was put in temporary charge of the new psychological laboratory at University College. That year Foster had assigned him a room in the Physiology Department at Cambridge for use in psychological research. As a result, Rivers is listed in the histories of experimental psychology as simultaneously the director of the first two psychological laboratories in Britain.\nRivers's work has been considered to have profound influence on Cambridge and in the scientific world in general. But, at the time, the Cambridge University Senate were wary of his appointment. Bartlett wrote: \"how many times have I heard Rivers, spectacles waving in the air, his face lit by his transforming smile, tell how, in Senatorial discussion, an ancient orator described him as a 'Ridiculous Superfluity'!\"\nThe opposition of the Senate resulted in limited support for Rivers's work in its early years. It was not until 1901, eight years after his appointment, that he was allowed the use of a small cottage for the laboratory, and budgeted thirty-five pounds annually (later increased to fifty) for purchase and upkeep of equipment. For several years Rivers continued in this way until the Moral Science Board increased support; in 1903, Rivers and his assistants and students moved to another small building in St Tibbs Row. These working spaces were characterised as \"dismal\", \"damp, dark and ill-ventilated\" but they did not discourage the Cambridge psychologists. Psychology began to thrive: \"perhaps, in the early days of scientific progress, a subject often grows all the more surely if its workers have to meet difficulties, improvise their apparatus, and rub very close shoulders one with another.\" In 1912 a well-equipped laboratory was finally built under the directorship of Charles S. Myers, one of Rivers's earliest and ablest pupils. A wealthy man, he supplemented the university grant with his own funds.\nThe Cambridge psychologists and Rivers were initially most interested in the special senses: colour vision, optical illusions, sound-reactions, and perceptual processes. In these fields, Rivers was rapidly becoming eminent. He was invited to write a chapter on vision for Sch\u00e4fer's \"Handbook of Physiology\". According to Bartlett, Rivers's chapter \"still remains, from a psychological point of view, one of the best in the English Language\". Rivers reviewed the work of previous investigators, incorporated his own, and critically examined the rival theories of colour vision. He noted clearly the significance of psychological factors in, for instance, the phenomena of contrast.\nFor his own experiments on vision, Rivers worked with graduate medical students Charles S. Myers and William McDougall. They assisted him and developed close friendships in the process of working together. Rivers also collaborated with Sir Horace Darwin, a pioneer instrument maker, to improve apparatus for recording sensations, especially those involved in vision. This collaboration also resulted in a lifelong friendship between the two men.\nIn this period, Rivers also investigated the influence of stimulants: tea, coffee, alcohol, tobacco, and a number of other drugs, on a person's capacity for both physical and mental work. His work under Kraepelin at Heidelberg had prepared him for this work. Rivers conducted some experiments on himself, for instance for two years giving up alcoholic beverages and tobacco, neither of which he liked, but also giving up all tea, coffee and cocoa as well. Initially he intended to explore physiological incentives for consuming these products, but he quickly realized that a strong psychological influence contributed to taking the substances.\nRivers realised that part of the effects \u2013 mental and physical \u2013 that substances had were caused psychologically by the excitement of knowing that one is indulging. In order, to eliminate \"all possible effects of suggestion, sensory stimulation and interest\", Rivers ensured that the substances were disguised so that he could not ascertain, in any instance, whether he was taking a drug or a control substance. This was the first experiment of its kind to use this double-blind procedure. As a result of the importance attached to the study, Rivers was appointed in 1906 as Croonian Lecturer to the Royal College of Physicians.\nIn December 1897 Rivers's achievements were recognised by the University of Cambridge who honoured him with the degree of M.A. \"honoris causa\" and, in 1904 with the assistance of Professor James Ward, Rivers made a further mark on the world of psychological sciences, founding and subsequently editing the British Journal of Psychology.\nDespite his many successes, Rivers was still a markedly reticent man in mixed company, hampered as he was by his stammer and innate shyness. In 1897, Langdon-Brown invited Rivers to come and address the Abernethian Society. The occasion was not an unqualified success. He chose \"Fatigue\" as his subject, and before he had finished his title was writ large on the faces of his audience. In the Cambridge physiological laboratory too he had to lecture to a large elementary class. He was rather nervous about it, and did not like it, his hesitation of speech made his style dry and he had not yet acquired the art of expressing his original ideas in an attractive form, except in private conversation.\nAmong two or three friends, however, the picture of Rivers is quite different. His conversations were full of interest and illumination; \"he was always out to elicit the truth, entirely sincere, and disdainful of mere dialect.\" His insistence on veracity made him a formidable researcher, as Haddon puts it, \"the keynote of Rivers was thoroughness. Keenness of thought and precision marked all his work.\" His research was distinguished by a fidelity to the demands of experimental method very rare in the realms which he was exploring and, although often overlooked, the work that Rivers did in this early period is of immense import as it formed the foundation of all that came later.\nTorres Straits expedition.\nRivers recognised in himself \"the desire for change and novelty, which is one of the strongest aspects of my mental makeup\" and, while fond of St John's, the staid lifestyle of his Cambridge existence showed in signs of nervous strain and led him to experience periods of depression.\nThe turning point came in 1898 when Alfred Cort Haddon seduced \"Rivers from the path of virtue... (for psychology then was a chaste science)... into that of anthropology:\" He made Rivers first choice to head an expedition to the Torres Straits. Rivers's first reaction was to decline, but he soon agreed on learning that C. S. Myers and William McDougall, two of his best former students, would participate. The other members were Sidney Ray, C. G. Seligman, and a young Cambridge graduate named Anthony Wilkin, who was asked to accompany the expedition as photographer. In April 1898, the Europeans were transported with gear and apparatus to the Torres Straits. Rivers was said to pack only a small handbag of personal effects for such field trips.\nFrom Thursday Island, several of the party found passage, soaked by rain and waves, on the deck of a crowded 47-foot ketch. In addition to sea sickness, Rivers had been badly sunburnt on his shins and for many days had been quite ill. On 5 May, in a bad storm nearing their first destination of Murray Island, the ship dragged anchor on the Barrier Reef and the expedition almost met disaster Later Rivers recalled the palliative effect of near shipwreck.\nWhen the ketch dropped anchor, Rivers and Ray were at first too ill to go ashore. However the others set up a surgery to treat the native islanders and Rivers, lying in bed next-door tested the patients for colour vision: Haddon's diary noted \"He is getting some interesting results.\" The warmth shown to the sickly Rivers by the Islanders contributed to strong positive feelings for the work and a deep concern for the welfare of Melanesians during the remainder of his life.\nRivers's first task was to examine the colour vision of the islanders and compare it to that of Europeans. In the course of his examinations of the visual acuity of the natives, Rivers showed that colour-blindness did not exist or was very rare, but that the colour vision of Papuans was not the same type as that of Europeans; they possessed no word for blue, and an intelligent native found nothing unnatural in applying the same name to the brilliant blue sea or sky and to the deepest black. \"Moreover\", Head goes on to state in Rivers's obituary notice, he was able to explode the old fallacy that the 'noble savage' was endowed with powers of vision far exceeding that of civilised natives. Errors of refraction are, it is true, less common, especially myopia. But, altogether the feats of the Torres Straits islanders equalled those reported by travellers from other parts of the world, they were due to the power of attending to minute details in familiar and strictly limited surrounding, and not to supernormal visual acuity.\nIt was at this point that Rivers began collecting family histories and constructing genealogical tables but his purpose appears to have been more biological than ethnological since such tables seem to have originated as a means of determining whether certain sensory talents or disabilities were hereditary. However, these simple tables soon took on a new prospective.\nIt was at once evident to Rivers that the names applied to the various forms of blood relationship did not correspond to those used by Europeans, but belonged to what is known as a 'classificatory system'; a man's 'brothers' or 'sisters' might include individuals we should call cousins and the key to this nomenclature is to be found in forms of social organisation especially in varieties of the institution of marriage. Rivers found that relationship terms were used to imply definite duties, privileges and mutual restrictions in conduct, rather than being biologically based as Europeans' are. As Head puts it: \"all these facts were clearly demonstrable by the genealogical method, a triumphant generalisation which has revolutionised ethnology.\"\nThe Torres Straits expedition was \"revolutionary\" in many other respects as well. For the first time, British anthropology had been removed from its \"armchair\" and placed into a sound empirical basis, providing the model for future anthropologists to follow. In 1916, Sir Arthur Keith stated in an address to the Royal Anthropological Institute, that the expedition had engendered \"the most progressive and profitable movement in the history of British anthropology.\"\nWhile the expedition was clearly productive and, in many ways, arduous for its members, it was also the foundation of lasting friendships. The team would reunite at many points and their paths would frequently converge. Of particular note is the relationship between Rivers and Haddon, the latter of whom regarded the fact he had induced Rivers to come to the Torres Straits as his claim to fame. Both Rivers and Haddon were serious about their work but at the same time they were imbued with a keen sense of humour and fun. Haddon's diary from Tuesday 16 August reads thus: Our friends and acquaintances would often be very much amused if they could see us at some of our occupations and I am afraid these would sometimes give occasion to the enemy to blaspheme \u2013 so trivial would they appear ... for example one week we were mad on cat's cradle \u2013 at least Rivers, Ray and I were \u2013 McDougall soon fell victim and even Myers eventually succumbed. It may seem to be a bizarre occupation for a group of highly qualified men of science, indeed, as Haddon states: \"I can imagine that some people would think we were demented \u2013 or at least wasting our time.\" However, both Haddon and Rivers were to use the string trick to scientific ends and they are also credited as inventing a system of nomenclature that enabled them to be able to schematise the steps required and teach a variety of string tricks to European audiences.\nThe expedition ended in October 1898 and Rivers returned to England. In 1900, Rivers joined Myers and Wilkin in Egypt to run tests on the colour vision of the Egyptians; this was the last time he saw Wilkin, who died of dysentery in May 1901, aged 24.\nTodas.\nRivers had already formed a career in physiology and psychology. But now he moved more definitively into anthropology. He wanted a demographically small, fairly isolated people, comparable to the island societies of the Torres Strait, where he might be able to get genealogical data on each and every individual. The Todas in the Nilgiri Hills of Southern India, with their population then about 700 plus, suited Rivers's criteria. And they had specific features of social organization, such as polyandrous marriage and a bifurcation of their society into so-called moieties that had interested historical evolutionists. Whether his fieldwork was initially so single-minded is questionable, however, since at first Rivers looked at other local communities and studied their visual perception before fixing all his attention on the Todas.\nRivers worked among the Todas for less than six months during 1901\u201302, communicating with his Toda informants only through interpreters and lodged in an Ootacamund hotel. Yet he assembled a stunning collection of data on the ritual and social lives of the Toda people. Almost all who have subsequently studied the Todas have been amazed at the richness and the accuracy of Rivers's data. His book \"The Todas\", which came out in 1906, is still an outstanding contribution to Indian ethnography, \"indispensable: still only to be supplemented rather than superseded\", as Murray Emeneau wrote in 1971. And it is little wonder that so famous a champion of anthropological fieldwork as Dr Bronislaw Malinowski declared Rivers to be his \"patron saint of field work\".\nIn the preface to this book Rivers wrote that his work was \"not merely the record of the customs and beliefs of a people, but also the demonstration of anthropological method\". That method is the collection of genealogical materials for the purpose of more fully investigating other aspects of social life, notably ritual. \nThe first eleven chapters of \"The Todas\" represented in 1906 a novel approach to the presentation of ethnographic data, one that, under the influence of Malinowski, would later become a standard practice in British social anthropology. This is the analysis of a people's society and culture by presentation of a detailed description of a particularly significant institution. In the Toda case, it is the sacred dairy cult. But Rivers is unable to sustain this focus throughout the work, so after a brilliant opening, the book tails off somewhat. We get a good idea of the Toda dairies and the ideas of ritual purity that protect them; but then the author returns to the ready-made categories of the day: gods, magic, kinship, clanship, crime and so on, and says no more about the dairies. Moreover, he failed to discover the existence of matrilineal clans alongside the patrilineal ones. A second, and more important, limitation of his study is its failure to view Toda society as a local and specialized variant of\u2014as A. L. Kroeber wrote\u2014\"higher Indian culture\". Rivers's book has been largely responsible for the view (now not infrequently held by educated Todas themselves) that these are a people quite distinct from other South Indians.\nWhen, in 1902, Rivers left the Nilgiri Hills and India too, he would never return. Moreover, after the publication of \"The Todas\" he wrote very little more about them.\n\"A Human Experiment in Nerve Division\".\nUpon his return to England from the Torres Strait, Rivers became aware of a series of experiments being conducted by his old friend Henry Head in conjunction with James Sherren, a surgeon at the London Hospital where they both worked. Since 1901, the pair had been forming a systematic study of nerve injuries among patients attending the hospital. Rivers, who had long been interested in the physiological consequences of nerve division, was quick to take on the role of \"guide and counsellor\".\nIt quickly became clear to Rivers, looking in on the experiment from a psycho-physical aspect, that the only way accurate results could be obtained from introspection on behalf of the patient is if the subject under investigation was himself a trained observer, sufficiently discriminative to realise if his introspection was being prejudiced by external irrelevancies or moulded by the form of the experimenter's questions, and sufficiently detached to lead a life of detachment throughout the entire course of the tests. It was in the belief that he could fulfil these requirements, that Head himself volunteered to act, as Langham puts it, \"as Rivers's experimental guinea-pig\".\nSo it was that, on 25 April 1903, the radial and external cutaneous nerves of Henry Head's arm were severed and sutured. Rivers was then to take on the role of examiner and chart the regeneration of the nerves, considering the structure and functions of the nervous system from an evolutionary standpoint through a series of \"precise and untiring observations\" over a period of five years.\nAt first observation, the day after the operation, the back of Head's hand and the dorsal surface of his thumb were seen to be \"completely insensitive to stimulation with cotton wool, to pricking with a pin, and to all degrees of heat and cold.\" While cutaneous sensibility had ceased, deep sensibility was maintained so that pressure with a finger, a pencil or with any blunt object was appreciated without hesitation.\nSo that the distractions of a busy life should not interfere with Head's introspective analysis, it was decided that the experimentation should take place in Rivers's rooms. Here, as Head states, \"for five happy years we worked together on week-ends and holidays in the quiet atmosphere of his rooms at St John's College.\" In the normal course of events, Head would travel to Cambridge on Saturday, after spending several hours on the outpatient department of the London Hospital. On these occasions, however, he would find that he was simply too exhausted to work on the Saturday evening so experimentation would have to be withheld until the Sunday. If, therefore, a long series of tests were to be carried out, Head would come to Cambridge on the Friday, returning to London on Monday morning. At some points, usually during Rivers's vacation period, longer periods could be devoted to the observations. Between the date of the operation and their last sitting on 13 December 1907, 167\u00a0days were devoted to the investigation.\nSince Head was simultaneously collaborator and experimental subject, extensive precautions were taken to make sure that no outside factors influenced his subjective appreciation of what he was perceiving: No questions were asked until the termination of a series of events; for we found it was scarcely possible... to ask even simple questions without giving a suggestion either for or against the right answer... The clinking of ice against the glass, the removal of the kettle from the hob, tended to prejudice his answers... [Rivers] was therefore particularly careful to make all his preparations beforehand; the iced tubes were filled and jugs of hot and cold water ranged within easy reach of his hand, so that the water of the temperature required might be mixed silently.\nMoreover, although before each series of tests Head and Rivers would discuss their plan of action, Rivers was careful to vary this order to such an extent during the actual testing that Head would be unable to tell what was coming next.\nGradually during the course of the investigation, certain isolated spots of cutaneous sensibility began to appear; these spots were sensitive to heat, cold and pressure. However, the spaces between these spots remained insensitive at first, unless sensations- such as heat or cold- reached above a certain threshold at which point the feeling evoked was unpleasant and usually perceived as being \"more painful\" than it was if the same stimulus was applied to Head's unaffected arm. Also, although the sensitive spots were quite definitely localised, Head, who sat through the tests with his eyes closed, was unable to gain any exact appreciation of the locus of stimulation. Quite the contrary, the sensations radiated widely, and Head tended to refer them to places remote from the actual point of stimulation.\nThis was the first stage of the recovery process and Head and Rivers dubbed it the \"protopathic\", taking its origins from the Middle Greek word \"protopathes\", meaning \"first affected\". This protopathic stage seemed to be marked by an \"all-or-nothing\" aspect since there was either an inordinate response to sensation when compared with normal reaction or no reaction whatever if the stimulation was below the threshold.\nFinally, when Head was able to distinguish between different temperatures and sensations below the threshold, and when he could recognise when two compass points were applied simultaneously to the skin, Head's arm began to enter the second stage of recovery. They named this stage the \"epicritic\", from the Greek \"epikritikos\", meaning \"determinative\".\nFrom an evolutionary perspective, it soon became clear to Rivers that the epicritic nervous reaction was the superior, as it suppressed and abolished all protopathic sensibility. This, Rivers found, was the case in all parts of the skin of the male anatomy except one area where protopathic sensibility is unimpeded by epicritic impulses: the glans penis. As Langham points out, with special references to \"Rivers's reputed sexual proclivities\", it is at this point that the experiment takes on an almost farcical aspect to the casual reader. However, the investigations, bizarre as they may seem, did have a sound scientific basis since Rivers especially was looking at the protopathic and epicritic from an evolutionary perspective. From this standpoint it is intensely interesting to note that the male anatomy maintains one area which is \"unevolved\" in so much as it is \"associated with a more primitive form of sensibility\". Using this information about the protopathic areas of the human body, Rivers and Head then began to explore elements of man's psyche. One way in which they did this was to examine the \"pilomotor reflex\" (the erection of hairs). Head and Rivers noted that the thrill evoked by aesthetic pleasure is \"accompanied by the erection of hairs\" and they noted that this reaction was no greater in the area of skin with protopathic sensibility than it was in the area of the more evolved epicritic, making it a purely psychologically based phenomena. As Langham puts it: \"The image of a man reading a poem to evoke aesthetic pleasure while a close friend meticulously studies the erection of his hairs may seem ludicrous. However, it provides a neat encapsulation of Rivers's desire to subject possibly protopathic phenomena to the discipline of rigorous investigation.\"\nPre-war psychological work.\nIn 1904, with Professor James Ward and some others, Rivers founded the \"British Journal of Psychology\" of which he was at first joint editor.\nFrom 1908 until the outbreak of the war Rivers was mainly preoccupied with ethnological and sociological problems. Already he had relinquished his official post as lecturer in Experimental Psychology in favour of Charles Samuel Myers, and now held only a lectureship on the physiology of the special senses. By degrees he became more absorbed in anthropological research. But though he was now an ethnologist rather than a psychologist he always maintained that what was of value in his work was due directly to his training in the psychological laboratory. In the laboratory he had learnt the importance of exact method; in the field he now gained vigour and vitality by his constant contact with the actual daily behaviour of human beings.\nDuring 1907\u20138 Rivers travelled to the Solomon Islands, and other areas of Melanesia and Polynesia. His two-volume \"History of Melanesian Society\" (1914), which he dedicated to St Johns, presented a diffusionist thesis for the development of culture in the south-west Pacific. In the year of publication he made a second journey to Melanesia, returning to England in March 1915, to find that war had broken out.\nGreat War.\nWhen Rivers returned to England in spring 1915, he had trouble at first finding a place for himself in the war effort. Following the footsteps of his former student\u2014the current director of the Cambridge Psychology Laboratory\u2014C. S. Myers, the 51-year-old Rivers signed up to serve as a civilian physician at the Maghull Military Hospital near Liverpool. Upon his arrival in July 1915, Rivers was appointed as a psychiatrist and thus he re-entered into the study of \"insanity\".\n\"Insanity\" in this case entailed working with soldiers who had been diagnosed with any of a wide range of symptoms, which were collectively referred to as \"shell shock\". These soldiers were known to demonstrate symptoms such as temporary blindness, memory loss, paralysis, and uncontrollable crying. As such, by the time Rivers was assigned to Maghull War Hospital, it was known as the \"centre for abnormal psychology\", and many of its physicians were employing techniques such as dream interpretation, psychoanalysis and hypnosis to treat shell shock, also known as the war neuroses.\nRivers himself was a well-read psychologist and so was already quite familiar with Freud, Jung, and other psychoanalysts. In fact, Rivers was quite sympathetic to some of Freud's ideas. As such, Rivers joined the band of doctors at Maghull who devoted themselves to understanding the origins and treatment of the \"war neuroses\" under the guidance of R. G. Rows.\nAfter about a year of service at Maghull War Hospital, Rivers was appointed a captain in the Royal Army Medical Corps, and his two youthful dreams\u2014to be an army doctor and to \"go in for insanity\"\u2014were realized when he was transferred to Craiglockhart War Hospital near Edinburgh, Scotland in order to help \"clean house\" following a scandal. There, Rivers treated officers who had been diagnosed with \"shell shock\", and he also began formulating his theory regarding the origin and treatment of the war neuroses. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rivers, by pursuing a course of humane treatment, had established two principles that would be embraced by American military psychiatrists in the next war. He had demonstrated, first, that men of unquestioned bravery could succumb to overwhelming fear and, second, that the most effective motivation to overcome that fear was something stronger than patriotism, abstract principles, or hatred of the enemy. It was the love of soldiers for one another.\nRivers's methodology for treating the war neuroses are often, and somewhat unfairly, said to have stemmed from Sigmund Freud. While it is true that Rivers was aware of and was influenced by Freud's theories and by the practice of psychoanalysis, he did not blindly subscribe to all of Freud's premises. Most importantly, Rivers saw the instinct of self-preservation rather than the sexual instinct, as the driving force behind war neuroses. \nIt is on this belief regarding the origins of the war neuroses that he formed his \"talking cure\". Rivers' \"talking cure\" was primarily based on the ancient belief of catharsis: the idea that bringing repressed memories into the light of consciousness rids memories and thoughts of their power. As a result, Rivers spent most of his days talking with the officers at Craiglockhart, guiding them through a process Rivers referred to as autognosis. Rivers' autognosis consisted of two parts. The first part included \"re-education\", or educating the patient about the basics of psychology and physiology. River's method also consisted of helping a soldier comprehend that the illness he was experiencing was not \"strange\" nor permanent. To Rivers, the war neuroses developed from ingrained ways of reacting, feeling, or thinking: namely, the attempt to wittingly repress all memories of traumatic experiences or unacceptable emotions. Once a patient could understand the source(s) of his troubles (which could be conscious, unconscious, environmental, or a combination), Rivers could then help him contrive ways to overcome these patterns and thus free himself from, or at least adjust to, the illness.\nRivers' approach to treating the war neuroses made him a pioneer in his day; while he was not the first to advocate humane treatment methods for the war neuroses, he was one of the few to do so in a time when there was much debate over the cause and thus the \"correct\" treatment for shell shock. Furthermore, Rivers encouraged his patients to express their emotions in a time when society encouraged men to keep a \"stiff upper-lip\". River's method, and his deep concern for every individual he treated, made him famous among his clients. Both Siegfried Sassoon and Robert Graves wrote highly of him during this time.\nRivers and Sassoon.\nSassoon came to Rivers in 1917 after publicly protesting against the war and refusing to return to his regiment, but was treated with sympathy and given much leeway until he voluntarily returned to France. For Rivers, there was a considerable dilemma involved in \"curing\" his patients simply in order that they could be sent back to the Western Front to die. Rivers's feelings of guilt are clearly portrayed both in fiction and in fact. Through Pat Barker's novels and in Rivers's works (particularly \"Conflict and Dream\") we get a sense of the turmoil the doctor went through. As Sassoon wrote in a letter to Robert Graves (24 July 1918):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRivers did not wish to \"break\" his patients, but at the same time he knew that it was their duty to return to the front and his duty to send them. There is also an implication (given the pun on Rivers's name along with other factors) that Rivers was more to Sassoon than just a friend. Sassoon called him \"father confessor\", a point that Jean Moorcroft Wilson picks up on in her biography of Sassoon; however, Rivers's tight morals would have probably prevented a closer relationship from progressing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rivers's uniform was not the only constraint in their relationship. He was almost certainly homosexual by inclination and it must quickly have become clear to him that Sassoon was too. Yet neither is likely to have referred to it, though we know that Sassoon was already finding his sexuality a problem. At the same time, as an experienced psychologist Rivers could reasonably expect Sassoon to experience \"transference\" and become extremely fond of him. Paul Fussell suggests in \"The Great War and Modern Memory\" () that Rivers became the embodiment of the male \"dream friend\" who had been the companion of Sassoon's boyhood fantasies. Sassoon publicly acknowledged that \"there was never any doubt about my liking [Rivers]. He made me feel safe at once, and seemed to know all about me\".\nBut Sassoon's description of the doctor in \"Sherston's Progress\", lingering as it does on Rivers's warm smile and endearing habits \u2013 he often sat, spectacles pushed up on forehead, with his hands clasped around one knee \u2013 suggests that it was more than liking he felt. And privately he was rather franker, telling Marsh, whom he knew would understand, that he \"loved [Rivers] at first sight\".\nNot only Sassoon, but his patients as a whole, loved him and his colleague Frederic Bartlett wrote of him \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rivers was intolerant and sympathetic. He was once compared to Moses laying down the law. The comparison was an apt one, and one side of the truth. The other side of him was his sympathy. It was a sort of power of getting into another man's life and treating it as if it were his own. And yet all the time he made you feel that your life was your own to guide, and above everything that you could if you cared make something important out of it.\nSassoon described Rivers's bedside manner in his letter to Graves, written as he lay in hospital after being shot (a head wound that he had hoped would kill him \u2013 he was bitterly disappointed when it did not):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRivers was well known for his compassionate, effective and pioneering treatments; as Sassoon's testimony reveals, he treated his patients very much as individuals.\n\"Instinct and the Unconscious: A Contribution to a Biological Theory of the Psycho-Neuroses\".\nFollowing his appointment at Craiglockhart War Hospital, Rivers published the results of his experimental treatment of patients in \"The Lancet\", \"On the Repression of War Experience\", and began to record interesting cases in his book \"Conflict and Dream,\" which was published a year after his death by his close friend Grafton Elliot Smith.\nIn the same year he published his findings in \"The Lancet\", Rivers also composed an article on the various types of \"psycho-therapeutics\" in practice at the time. Rivers' personal and complete theory on the origin of the \"psycho-neuroses\", including the war neuroses, was not to be published until 1920 with the publication of \"Instinct and the Unconscious: A Contribution to a Biological Theory of the Psycho-Neuroses\".\nRiver's theory of the neuroses incorporates everything he had researched up until this point and was designed to \"consider the general biological function of the process by which experience passes into the region of the unconscious\". In attempting to construct such an umbrella theory, Rivers accepted that the unconscious exists and that the contents of the unconscious are entirely inaccessible to a person except through the processes of hypnosis, dreaming, or psychoanalysis. Rivers further defined the unconscious as a repository of instincts and associated experiences (i.e. memories) which are painful or not useful to the organism.\n\"Instincts\", in this regard, are actions which an organism performs without learning and which are executed without the mediating influence of thought. As such, the action has an \"all-or-none\" aspect to it: it either does not occur at all or it occurs with all of its force. To this end, Rivers included the protopathic sensations, mass-reflex actions (as observed in spinal-cord injury patients), and basic emotions (i.e. anger, fear) as instincts.\nRivers further asserted that all painful or un-useful instincts are naturally kept out of conscious awareness (i.e. in the unconscious) by suppression. Suppression\u2014in this view\u2014is a natural and \"unwitting\" (unintentional) method for removing painful instincts from consciousness and confining them in the unconscious. Neuroses, therefore, develop when something in the natural process of suppression is disrupted so that a suppressed instinct and its associated emotion are released from the unconscious. Rivers cites two possible reasons for the \"escape\" of such instincts from the unconscious: either the instinct became too strong to contain, or the normal reserves which typically suppress it were weakened. It is important to note, however, that the etiology of war neuroses is not simply the escape of instincts from the unconscious and the ensuing conflict. More often than not, Rivers believed that the way in which such conflict is resolved (or is attempted to be resolved) also greatly influences the manifestation of the neuroses.\nIn regards to the war neuroses, Rivers believed that the disease's manifestation stems from the escape of the \"self-preservation\" or \"danger instincts\" from the unconscious. These \"danger instincts\", as Rivers conceives of them, include at least five types of reflexive reactions to danger: (i) fear as manifested by flight, (ii) aggression as manifested by fighting, (iii) the suppression of all emotion in order to complete complex tasks which leads to safety, (iv) terror as manifested by immobility, and (v) the suppression of all physical resources as manifested by collapsing. Typically, reactions i, ii, iv, and v are suppressed so that humans can remain calm in the face of fear and can complete complex actions which lead to safety. When all five \"self-preservation\" instincts are repeatedly aroused for long periods of time, such as during exposure to war, the instincts gain power and eventually \"escape\" from the unconscious. As such, the emotions of fear, aggression, and terror arise into consciousness, as do their associated responses. These emotions and their suggested actions create great conflict in the consciousness, however: \"fear\" and \"terror\" are far from socially acceptable in war. In order to deal with the conflict created by the \"escaped\" instincts, Rivers posited that the mind must do something to provide immediate relief. It is this attempt to achieve relief from mental conflicts that leads to war neuroses.\nFor example, Rivers proposed that officers and soldiers who have night terrors do so because they are trying to wittingly repress emotions and their associated instincts back into the unconscious. Repression, according to Rivers, is never adequate for removing conflict; it is only fruitful when a person can exert a conscious effort to do so. As a result, the repressed instincts, along with their associated emotions and memories, seep into consciousness when soldiers are sleeping. The result is night terrors.\nIn an alternative scenario, wartime hysteria can be explained as the body's suppression of normal physiological functioning in order to avoid the scenario which activates the danger instincts and releases the associated emotion of fear into consciousness. Hysterical soldiers often presented with symptoms of paralysis and diminished or lost sensory capacities, even in the absence of anxiety or depression. These physiological symptoms, although distressing in themselves, make it impossible for a soldier to be returned to the front line. Thus, the body compensates for its inability to suppress the danger instincts in the face of war by making it so that the soldier must avoid warfare altogether.\nOverall, Rivers attributed the neuroses to both (i) the escape of painful instincts and their associated emotions from the unconscious and (ii) the mind's unsuccessful efforts to force such instincts and their emotions back into the conscious. While Rivers' theory contains some Freudian elements, it is not simply a restatement of psychoanalytic theory; Rivers' theory of the neuroses draws heavily on the neurological observations and conclusions Rivers and Henry Head drew from their work on nerve regeneration.\nIn retrospect, Rivers' particular method of treating the war neuroses and his theory of the origin of neuroses\u2014while pioneering in their day\u2014have failed to leave a huge mark on the history of psychology. However, the \"general\" contributions of psychiatrists treating war neuroses, in combination with the overwhelming prevalence of the neuroses during the Great War, led to a revolution in the British perspective of mental illness and its treatment.\nPost war.\nAfter the war, Rivers became \"another and far happier man \u2013 diffidence gave place to confidence, reticence to outspokenness, a somewhat laboured literary style to one remarkable for ease and charm\". He is quoted as saying \"I have finished my serious work and I shall just let myself go.\" In those post war years, his personality seemed to change dramatically. The man who had been most at home in his study, the laboratory, or the field now dined out a good deal, had joined clubs, went yachting and appeared to welcome rather than shun opportunities for public speaking. Always having been a voracious reader, he now began reading in philosophy, as he had not done for some years, and also in imaginative literature. Not all of his friends from former years welcomed these changes; some felt that, along with his shyness, his scientific caution and good sense may have deserted him to a degree but most people who saw how happy Rivers had become agreed that the slight alterations to his character were for the better.\nRivers had visited his college frequently during the war although, having resigned his position as lecturer, he held no official post. However, upon his return from the Royal Air Force in 1919, the college created a new office for him \u2013 \"Praelector of Natural Science Studies\" \u2013 and he was given a free rein to do as he pleased. As Leonard E. Shore recalled in 1923: \"when I asked him if he would undertake that work... his eyes shone with a new light I had not seen before, and he paced his rooms for several minutes full of delight.\" He took his new position to be a mandate to get to know every science student and indeed every other student at St John's, and at other colleges. He would arrange \"At Homes\" in his rooms on Sunday evenings, as well as Sunday morning breakfast meetings; he also organised informal discussions and formal lectures (many of which he gave himself) in the College Hall. He formed a group called \"The Socratics\" and brought to it some of his most influential friends, including H. G. Wells, Arnold Bennett, Bertrand Russell and Sassoon. Sassoon (Patient B in \"Conflict and Dream\") remained particularly friendly with Rivers and regarded him as a mentor. They shared Socialist sympathies.\nHaving already been made president of the anthropological section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science in 1911, after the war he became president of The Folklore Society (1920), and the Royal Anthropological Institute (1921\u20131922). He was also awarded honorary degrees from the universities of Manchester, St Andrews and Cambridge in 1919.\nRivers died of a strangulated hernia in the summer of 1922, shortly after being named as a Labour candidate for the 1922 general election. He had agreed to run for parliament, as he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;because the times are so ominous, the outlook for our own country and the world so black, that if others think I can be of service in political life, I cannot refuse.\nHe had been taken ill suddenly in his rooms at St John's on the evening of Friday 3 June, having sent his servant home to enjoy the summer festivities. By the time he was found in the morning, it was too late and he knew it. Typically for this man who, throughout his life \"displayed a complete disregard for personal gain\", he was selfless to the last. There is a document granting approval for the diploma in anthropology to be awarded as of Easter term, 1922, to an undergraduate student from India. It is signed by Haddon and Rivers dated 4 June 1922. At the bottom is a notation in Haddon's handwriting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dr. Rivers signed the report on this examination on the morning of the day he died. It was his last official act. A.C.H\nRivers signed the papers as he lay dying in the Evelyn Nursing Home following an unsuccessful emergency operation. He had an extravagant funeral at St John's in accordance with his wishes as he was an expert on funeral rites and his cremated remains were interred in Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in a grave with a large stone cross. Sassoon was deeply saddened by the death of his father figure and collapsed at his funeral. His loss prompted him to write two poignant poems about the man he had grown to love: \"\" and \"Revisitation\".\nOthers' opinions of Rivers.\nIn the poem \"The Red Ribbon Dream\", written by Robert Graves not long after Rivers's death, he touches on the peace and security he felt in Rivers's rooms:\nFor that was the place where I longed to be\nAnd past all hope where the kind lamp shone.\nAn anonymously written poem \"Anthropological Thoughts\" can be found in the Rivers collection of the Haddon archives at Cambridge. There is a reference that indicates that these lines were written by Charles Elliot Fox, missionary and ethnographer friend of Rivers.\nIn Sassoon's autobiography (under the guise of \"The Memoirs of George Sherston\") Rivers is one of the few characters to retain their original names. There is a whole chapter devoted to Rivers and he is immortalised by Sassoon as a near demi-god who saved his life and his soul. Sassoon wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would very much like to meet Rivers in the next life. It is difficult to believe that such a man as he could be extinguished.\u2014\u200a\nBartlett wrote of his experiences of Rivers in one of his obituaries, as well as in many other articles, as the man had a profound influence on his life:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On June 3 last year I was walking through the grounds of St John's College, here in Cambridge, when I met Dr. Rivers returning from a stroll. He was full of energy and enthusiasm, and began at once to talk about certain new courses of lectures which he proposed to deliver at the Psychological Laboratory during the present year. On the evening of the next day I heard that he was dangerously ill. As I approached the College on the morning of June 5 I saw the flag at half mast. He had, in fact, died in the early afternoon of the preceding day. Never have I known so deep a gloom settle upon the College as fell upon it at that time. There was hardly a man \u2013 young or old \u2013 who did not seem to be intimately and personally affected. Rivers knew nearly everybody. As Praelector of Natural Sciences at St John's he interviewed all the science freshmen when they came first into residence and, in an amazing number of cases, he kept in close touch with them throughout their Cambridge career. Everybody who came into contact with him was stimulated and helped to a degree which those who are acquainted only with his published works can never fully realise... it is of Rivers as a man that we think; of his eager and unconquerable optimism, and of his belief in the possible greatness of all things human. Whatever may be the verdict of the years upon his published works, the influence of his vivid personality will remain for all who knew him as one of the best things that have ever entered their lives.\nRivers's legacy continues even today in the form of The Rivers Centre, which treats patients with posttraumatic stress disorder using the same famously humane methods as Rivers had. There is also a Rivers Memorial Medal, founded in 1923, which is rewarded each year to an anthropologist who has made a significant impact in his or her field. Appropriately, Haddon was the first to receive this award in 1924.\nIn fiction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was a very humane, a very compassionate person who was tormented really by the suffering he saw, and very sceptical about the war, but at the same time he didn't feel he could go the whole way and say no, stop.\u2014\u200a\nSassoon writes about Rivers in the third part of \"The Memoirs of George Sherston\", \"Sherston's Progress\". There is a chapter named after the doctor and Rivers appears in the book as the only character to retain his factual name, giving him a position as a sort of demi-god in Sassoon's semi-fictitious memoirs.\nThe life of W. H. R. Rivers and his encounter with Sassoon was fictionalised by Pat Barker in the \"Regeneration Trilogy\", a series of three books including \"Regeneration\" (1991), \"The Eye in the Door\" (1993) and \"The Ghost Road\" (1995). The trilogy was greeted with considerable acclaim, with \"The Ghost Road\" being awarded the Booker Prize in the year of its publication. \"Regeneration\" was filmed in 1997 with Jonathan Pryce in the role of Rivers.\nThe first book, \"Regeneration\" deals primarily with Rivers's treatment of Sassoon at Craiglockhart. In the novel we are introduced to Rivers as a doctor for whom healing patients comes at price. The dilemmas faced by Rivers are brought to the fore and the strain leads him to become ill; on sick leave he visits his brother and the Heads and we learn more about his relationships outside of hospital life. We are also introduced in the course of the novel to the Canadian doctor Lewis Yealland, another factual figure who used electric shock treatment to \"cure\" his patients. The juxtaposition of the two very different doctors highlights the unique, or at least unconventional, nature of Rivers' methods and the humane way in which he treated his patients (even though Yealland's words, and his own guilt and modesty lead him to think otherwise).\n\"The Eye in the Door\" concentrates, for the most part, on Rivers' treatment of the fictional character of Prior. Although Prior's character may not have existed, the facts that he makes Rivers face up to did \u2013 that something happened to him on the first floor of his house that caused him to block all visual memory and begin to stammer. We also learn of Rivers' treatment of officers in the airforce and of his work with Head. Sassoon too plays a role in the book- Rivers visits him in hospital where he finds him to be a different, if not broken, man, his attempt at 'suicide' having failed. This second novel in the trilogy, both implicitly and directly, addresses the issue of Rivers' possible homosexuality and attraction to Sassoon. From Rivers' reaction to finding out that Sassoon is in hospital to the song playing in the background ('You Made Me Love You') and Ruth Head's question to her husband, \"Do you think he's in love with him?\" we get a strong impression of the author's opinions on Rivers' sexuality.\n\"The Ghost Road\", the final part of the trilogy, shows a side of Rivers not previously seen in the novels. As well as his relationship with his sisters and father, we also learn of his feelings for Charles Dodgson- or Lewis Carroll. Carroll was the first adult Rivers met who stammered as badly as he did and yet he cruelly rejected him, preferring to lavish attention on his pretty young sisters. In this novel the reader also learns of Rivers' visit to Melanesia; feverish with Spanish Flu, the doctor is able to recount the expedition and we are provided with insight both into the culture of the island and into Rivers' very different \"field trip persona\".\nRivers appears briefly in \"The God of the Hive,\" the tenth novel in the Mary Russell and Sherlock Holmes series by mystery writer Laurie R. King, in which he is the author of a medical letter, written during the war, concerning one of that novel's characters.\nRivers appears in Francois Smith's 2014 Afrikaans novel \"Kamphoer\" (published in English as \"The Camp Whore\"), based on a true story during the Anglo-Boer War . The protagonist, a teenage Afrikaans girl, is raped by British soldiers; Rivers offers her inspiration, through his humane supportive treatment of soldiers. In adulthood, she becomes a psychiatric nurse to overcome her own trauma. In a twist of events, she treats one of the soldiers who had attacked her years earlier.\nRivers appears in the film \"Benediction,\" played by Ben Daniels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63709", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63709", "title": "Parsley Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "63711", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63711", "title": "Shire (Middle Earth)", "text": ""}
{"id": "63714", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63714", "title": "Denis Gaultier", "text": "French lutenist and composer\nDenis Gaultier (\"Gautier\", \"Gaulthier\"; also known as Gaultier le jeune and Gaultier de Paris) (1597 or 1602/3 \u2013 1672) was a French lutenist and composer. He was a cousin of Ennemond Gaultier.\nLife.\nGaultier was born in Paris; two conflicting sources point to either 1597 or 1603 as the year of birth. The former can be deduced from an account by Thorian, who claimed that Gaultier died in 1672 at the age of seventy-five. However, an archival document from the H\u00f4tel-Dieu de Paris hospital states that Gaultier was twenty-three at the time of his convalescence in the hospital, which was from 24 October 1626 to 12 December 1626.\nVery little is known about Gaultier's career. He may have studied under Charles Racquet, since he commemorated the lutenist's death with a tombeau. Until at least 1631 Denis's career was closely linked to that of his older cousin, Ennemond; so much that contemporary writers referred to either composer by surname only, making no attempt to distinguish between them. Both lutenists had connections with Blancrocher and Henri de L'Enclos, and both secured a high reputation comparable to that of Fran\u00e7ois Dufaut, Jacques Gallot, or Charles Mouton. In 1635 Denis married Fran\u00e7oise Daucourt. Their son Philippe Emmanuel would later become advisor to the king, but there is no evidence that Gaultier himself ever held a court position, even though his cousin did. Denis most probably gained fame and income through salon playing.\nWorks.\nDenis and Ennemond are confused in many contemporary manuscripts and prints, leading to numerous attribution problems. A number of pieces are signed simply with the surname, some are attributed to Denis in one collection and to Ennemond in another, and still others are now known to have been be misattributed. Gaultier's output, as is to be expected from a 17th-century French lutenist, consists mainly of dance suites for the lute. In general, Gaultier was a masterful melodist, effortlessly writing graceful melodic lines with clear phrase structures, but his music is less inventive harmonically than that of some other French lutenists of the era, such as Ren\u00e9 Mesangeau or Pierre Dubut.\nThree published collections of Gaultier's music have come down to us, all from his late years. \"La Rh\u00e9torique des dieux\" (1652) contains twelve parts, each named after one of the Greek modes, but the actual harmonic procedures of the pieces are not connected to the modes. Many of the pieces reference Greek mythology. The collection, compiled under the patronage of Anne de Chambr\u00e9, also contains engravings after Le Sueur, Abraham Bosse and Robert de Nanteuil. Two other collections, \"Pi\u00e8ces de luth sur trois diff\u00e9rens modes nouveaux\" (c.1669) and \"Livre de tablature [...] de Mr. Gaultier Sr. de N\u00e8ve et de Mr. Gaultier son cousin\" (c.1672) both begin with basic instructions on lute playing. All three manuscripts consist principally of dances. The one other genre Gaultier made an important contribution to is the tombeau.\nAn adequate assessment of Gaultier's music and influence is difficult, owing to attribution problems. According to recent research, \"La Rh\u00e9torique des dieux\" may consist of works not composed by Denis Gaultier, or original works by him changed by unknown scribes. The 1672 collection was completed after Gaultier's death by his pupil Montarcis, and contains music by two different Gaultiers. Other pieces, found in various manuscripts, also pose numerous attribution problems. Nevertheless, Gaultier was an important exponent of the French \"style bris\u00e9\", and as such an influence on harpsichordists such as Johann Jakob Froberger. Around 1680 a few of Gaultier's works were included in anthologies by Perrine, a French theorist who experimented with the writing of lute music in staff notation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63716", "revid": "50384978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63716", "title": "Zinf", "text": "Open source audio player\n \nZinf is a free audio player for Unix-like and Windows operating systems. Zinf is released under the GNU General Public License.\nZinf is a continuation of the FreeAmp project and uses the same source code.\nTechnical features.\nZinf can play sound files in MP3, Vorbis, and WAV formats, among others. It supports skins and is part of the MusicBrainz network. The player features an optimized version of the Xing MPEG decoder, a powerful music browser and playlist editor, and a built in download manager which supports downloading files from sites using the RMP (RealJukebox) download process. Zinf was also notable for handling all audio files based on their metadata (Author, Album, Song Title), and hiding more-technical details like actual locations and file names (but these features are now standard in many players).\nNaming.\nZinf is a recursive acronym that stands for \"Zinf Is Not FreeAmp!\" Use of the name FreeAmp had to be discontinued due to trademark issues, as \"AMP\" is a trademark of PlayMedia Systems, Inc.\nHistory/Funding.\nThe FreeAmp project was originally funded by EMusic, who paid the salaries of 3 developers working on the player. Later, Relatable joined EMusic to help support continued development.\nIn January 2001, after 2 years of funding the project EMusic pulled their support, and subsequently fired the developers. The Zinf project was unable to find another sponsor, and development slowed greatly. The most recent release was made in early 2004. As of 2008, nearly all development of Zinf has ceased.\nAdoption.\nZinf was once among the better-known open-source audio players, but development has been largely inactive since the early 2000s, and contemporary reviews describe it as basic compared with newer players.\nIn 2010 the zinf.com website was bought by a domain squatter for the purpose of capitalizing on the site's traffic for monetary gains. A new link called \"QnA\" and \"Ads\" are now visible on the zinf.com website that is a redirect to the squatter's site.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63717", "revid": "17", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63717", "title": "Freeamp", "text": ""}
{"id": "63719", "revid": "32292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63719", "title": "\u00c5rhus", "text": ""}
{"id": "63721", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63721", "title": "Hero (name)", "text": ""}
{"id": "63726", "revid": "50535771", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63726", "title": "Hero and Leander", "text": "Greek myth about tragic lovers\nHero and Leander (, ) is the Greek myth relating the story of Hero (, \"H\u0113r\u1e53\"; ), a priestess of Aphrodite (Venus in Roman mythology) who dwelt in a tower in Sestos on the European side of the Hellespont, and Leander (, \"L\u00e9andros\"; or \u039b\u03b5\u03af\u03b1\u03bd\u03b4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2), a young man from Abydos on the opposite side of the strait.\nMyth.\nLeander falls in love with Hero and swims every night across the Hellespont to spend time with her. Hero lights a lamp at the top of her tower to guide his way. Leander's soft words and charms\u2014and his argument that Aphrodite, as the goddess of love and sex, would scorn the worship of a virgin\u2014convince Hero, and they make love. Their secret love affair lasts through a warm summer, but when winter and its rougher weather looms, they agree to part for the season and resume in the spring. One stormy winter night, however, Leander sees the torch at the top of Hero's tower. He attempts to go to her, but halfway through his swim, a strong winter wind blows out Hero's light, and Leander loses his way and drowns. When Hero sees his dead body, she throws herself off the tower to join him in death. Their bodies wash up on shore together, locked in embrace, and are then subsequently buried in a lovers\u2019 tomb.\nAttestations.\nScholarship indicates that the myth is attested in Ovid's \"Heroides\" and in poet Mousaios' (or Musaeus') epic poem.\nThe \"Double Heroides\" (attributed to Ovid) treats the narrative in 18 and 19, an exchange of letters between the lovers. Leander has been unable to swim across to Hero in her tower because of bad weather; her summons to him to make the effort will prove fatal to her lover.\nCultural references.\nThe myth of Hero and Leander has been used extensively in literature and the arts:\nIn literature.\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 2em\"&gt;\n\"Both robbed of air, we both lie in one ground,\"\n\"Both whom one fire had burnt, one water drowned\".&lt;/poem&gt;\nVALENTINE: And on a love-book pray for my success?\nPROTEUS: Upon some book I love I'll pray for thee.\nVALENTINE: That's on some shallow story of deep love: How young Leander cross'd the Hellespont.\nPROTEUS: That's a deep story of a deeper love: For he was more than over shoes in love.\nVALENTINE: 'Tis true; for you are over boots in love, And yet you never swum the Hellespont.\nIn theatre.\n\"Leander, he would have lived many a fair year, though Hero had turned nun, if it had not been for a hot midsummer night; for, good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the Hellespont and being taken with the cramp was drowned and the foolish coroners of that age found it was 'Hero of Sestos.' But these are all lies: men have died from time to time and worms have eaten them, but not for love.\"\nIn folkloristics.\nIn folkloristics, the myth of lovers Hero and Leander becomes the Aarne-Thompson-Uther tale type ATU 666*, \"Hero and Leander\".\nVariants of the tale are also attested in Japan, where they appear as a local legends. In Hiroko Ikeda's index of Japanese folktales, the type is known as \"Tarai-bune no Momoyo Gayoi\". Philologist and folklorist Julian Krzy\u017canowski, establisher of the Polish Folktale Catalogue according to the international index, located variants of the lovers' myth in Poland, which he classified as T 667, \"Hero i Leander\" (\"Hero and Leander\").\nThe myth seems to have inspired a literary version by Italian author Giovanni Francesco Straparola in his work \"The Facetious Nights of Straparola\".\nChild ballad number 216 can be read as a variant.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63727", "revid": "637", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63727", "title": "Alan Shepard", "text": "American astronaut and lunar explorer (1923\u20131998)\nAlan Bartlett Shepard Jr. (November 18, 1923\u00a0\u2013 July 21, 1998) was an American astronaut. In 1961, he became the second person and the first American to travel into space and, in 1971, he became the fifth and oldest person to walk on the Moon, at age 47.\nA graduate of the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Shepard saw action with the surface navy during World War II. He became a naval aviator in 1947, and a test pilot in 1950. He was selected as one of NASA's original Mercury Seven astronauts in 1959, and in May 1961 he made the first crewed Project Mercury flight, Mercury-Redstone 3, in a spacecraft he named \"Freedom 7\". His craft entered space, but was not capable of achieving orbit. He became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B \"Freedom 7 II\" in honor of his first spacecraft, but the mission was canceled.\nShepard was designated as the commander of the first crewed Project Gemini mission, but was grounded in October 1963 due to M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's disease, an inner-ear ailment that caused episodes of extreme dizziness and nausea. This was surgically corrected in 1968, and in 1971, Shepard commanded the Apollo 14 mission, piloting the Apollo Lunar Module \"Antares\". He was the only one of the Mercury Seven astronauts to walk on the Moon. During the mission, he hit two golf balls on the lunar surface.\nShepard was Chief of the Astronaut Office from November 1963 to August 1969 (the approximate period of his grounding), and from June 1971 until April 30, 1974. On August 25, 1971, he was promoted to rear admiral, the first astronaut to reach that rank. He retired from the United States Navy and NASA on July 31, 1974.\nEarly life.\nAlan Bartlett Shepard Jr. was born on November 18, 1923, at 64 East Derry Road in Derry, New Hampshire, to Alan Bartlett Shepard Sr. and Pauline Renza Shepard (n\u00e9e\u00a0Emerson). He had a younger sister, Pauline, who was known as Polly. The two were descendants of \"Mayflower\" passenger Richard Warren, and were related to Scottish emigrants from Berneray in the Outer Hebrides, through the Shepard line. Their grandmother, Annie Bartlett Shepard, served as the State Regent of the New Hampshire Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution. Alan Bartlett Shepard Sr., known as Bart, worked in the Derry National Bank, owned by Shepard's grandfather. Bart joined the National Guard in 1915 and served in France with the American Expeditionary Force during World War I. He remained in the National Guard between the wars, and was recalled to active duty during World War II, rising to the rank of lieutenant colonel.\nShepard attended Adams School in Derry, where his academic performance impressed his teachers. He skipped the sixth grade and proceeded to middle school at Oak Street School in Derry, where he also skipped the eighth grade. He achieved the Boy Scouts of America rank of First Class Scout. In 1936, he went to the Pinkerton Academy, a private school in Derry that his father had attended and where his grandfather had been a trustee. He completed grades 9 to 12 there. Fascinated by flight, he created a model airplane club at the academy and his Christmas present in 1938 was a flight in a Douglas DC-3. The following year he began cycling to Manchester Airfield, where he would do odd jobs in exchange for the occasional ride in an airplane or informal flying lesson.\nShepard graduated from Pinkerton Academy in 1940. Because World War II was already raging in Europe, his father wanted him to join the Army. Shepard chose the Navy instead. He easily passed the entrance exam to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis in 1940 but at sixteen was too young to enter that year. The Navy sent him to the Admiral Farragut Academy, a prep school for the Naval Academy from which he graduated with the Class of 1941. Tests administered at Farragut indicated an IQ of 145 but his grades were mediocre.\nAt the Naval Academy, Shepard enjoyed aquatic sports. He was a keen and competitive sailor, winning several races, including a regatta held by the Annapolis Yacht Club. He learned to sail all the types of boats the academy owned, up to and including , a schooner. He also participated in swimming and rowed with the eight. During his Christmas break in 1942, he went to Principia College to be with his sister, who was unable to go home owing to wartime travel restrictions. There he met Louise Brewer, whose parents were pensioners on the du Pont family estate and like Renza Shepard, were devout Christian Scientists. Owing to the war, the usual four-year course at Annapolis was cut short by a year. He graduated with the Class of 1945 on June 6, 1944, ranked 463rd out of 915, and was commissioned as an ensign and awarded a Bachelor of Science degree. The following month he became secretly engaged to Louise.\nNaval service.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"You know, being a test pilot isn't always the healthiest business in the world.\"\n\u2014Shepard quoted at the New Mexico Museum of Space History\nAfter a month of classroom instruction in aviation, Shepard was posted to a destroyer, , in August 1944; it was US Navy policy that aviation candidates should first have some service at sea. At the time the destroyer was deployed on active service in the Pacific Ocean. Shepard joined it when it returned to the naval base at Ulithi on October 30. After just two days at sea \"Cogswell\" helped rescue 172 sailors from the cruiser , which had been torpedoed by a Japanese submarine, then escorted the crippled ship back to Ulithi. The ship was buffeted by Typhoon Cobra in December 1944, a storm in which three other destroyers went down, and battled kamikazes in the invasion of Lingayen Gulf in January 1945.\n\"Cogswell\" returned to the United States for an overhaul in February 1945. Shepard was given three weeks' leave, in which time he and Louise decided to marry. The ceremony took place on March 3, 1945, in St. Stephen's Lutheran Church in Wilmington, Delaware. His father, Bart, served as his best man. The newlyweds had only a brief time together before Shepard rejoined \"Cogswell\" at the Long Beach Navy Yard on April 5, 1945. After the war, they had two children, both daughters: Laura, born in 1947, and Julie, born in 1951. Following the death of Louise's sister in 1956, they raised her five-year-old niece, Judith Williams\u2014whom they renamed Alice to avoid confusion with Julie\u2014as their own, although they never adopted her. They eventually had six grandchildren.\nOn Shepard's second cruise with \"Cogswell\", he was appointed a gunnery officer, responsible for the 20\u00a0mm and 40\u00a0mm antiaircraft guns on the ship's bow. They engaged kamikazes in the Battle of Okinawa, where the ship served in the dangerous role of a radar picket. The job of the radar pickets was to warn the fleet of incoming kamikazes, but because they were often the first ships sighted by incoming Japanese aircraft, they were also the most likely ships to be attacked. \"Cogswell\" performed this duty from May 27 until June 26, 1945, when it rejoined Task Force 38. The ship also participated in the Allied naval bombardments of Japan, and was present in Tokyo Bay for the Surrender of Japan in September 1945. Shepard returned to the United States later that month.\nIn November 1945, Shepard arrived at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi in Texas, where he commenced basic flight training on January 7, 1946. He was an average student, and for a time faced being \"bilged\" (dropped) from flight training and reassigned to the surface navy. To make up for this, he took private lessons at a local civilian flying school\u2014something the Navy frowned on\u2014earning a civil pilot's license. His flying skills gradually improved, and by early 1947 his instructors rated him above average. He was sent to Naval Air Station Pensacola in Florida for advanced training. His final test was six perfect landings on the carrier . The following day, he received his naval aviator wings, which his father pinned on his chest.\nShepard was assigned to Fighter Squadron 42 (VF-42), flying the Vought F4U Corsair. The squadron was nominally based on the aircraft carrier , but the ship was being overhauled at the time Shepard arrived, and in the meantime the squadron was based at Naval Air Station Norfolk in Virginia. He departed on his first cruise, of the Caribbean, on \"Franklin D. Roosevelt\" with VF-42 in 1948. Most of the aviators were, like Shepard, on their first assignment. Those who were not were given the opportunity to qualify for night landings on a carrier, a dangerous maneuver, especially in a Corsair, which had to bank sharply on approach. Shepard managed to persuade his squadron commander to allow him to qualify as well. After briefly returning to Norfolk, the carrier set out on a nine-month tour of the Mediterranean Sea. He earned a reputation for carousing and chasing women. He also instituted a ritual of, whenever he could, calling Louise at 17:00 (her time) each day.\nNormally sea duty alternated with periods of duty ashore. In 1950, Shepard was selected to attend the United States Naval Test Pilot School at Naval Air Station Patuxent River in Maryland with class five, graduating in January 1951. As a test pilot he conducted high-altitude tests to obtain information about the light and air masses at different altitudes over North America; carrier suitability certification of the McDonnell F2H Banshee; experiments with the Navy's new in-flight refueling system; and tests of the angled flight deck. He narrowly avoided being court-martialed by the station commander, Rear Admiral Alfred M. Pride, after looping the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and making low passes over the beach at Ocean City, Maryland, and the base; but Shepard's superiors, John Hyland and Robert M. Elder, interceded on his behalf.\nShepard's next assignment was to VF-193, a night fighter squadron flying the Banshee, that was based at Naval Air Station Moffett Field, California. The squadron was part of Commander James D. \"Jig Dog\" Ramage's Air Group 19. Naval aviators with experience in jet aircraft were still relatively rare, and Ramage specifically requested Shepard's assignment on the advice of Elder, who commanded VF-193's sister squadron, VF-191. Ramage made Shepard his own wingman, a decision that would save Ramage's life in 1954, when his oxygen system failed and Shepard talked him through a landing. As squadron operations officer, Shepard's most important task was imparting his knowledge of flying jets to his fellow aviators to keep them alive. He served two tours on the aircraft carrier in the western Pacific. It set out on a combat tour off Korea in 1953, during the Korean War, but the Korean Armistice Agreement ended the fighting in July 1953, and Shepard did not see combat.\nRear Admiral John P. Whitney requested Shepard's services as an aide de camp, but Shepard wanted to fly. Therefore, at Shepard's request, Ramage spoke to the admiral on his behalf, and Shepard was instead sent back to Patuxent. He flight tested the McDonnell F3H Demon, Vought F-8 Crusader, Douglas F4D Skyray and Grumman F-11 Tiger. The Vought F7U Cutlass tended to go into an inverted spin during a snap roll. This was not unusual; many aircraft did this, but normally if the pilot let go of the stick the aircraft would correct itself. When he attempted this in the F7U, Shepard found this was not the case. He was unable to break out of the spin and was forced to eject. In 1957, he was project test pilot on the Douglas F5D Skylancer. Shepard did not like the plane, and gave it an unfavorable report. The Navy canceled orders for it, buying the F8U instead. He also filed an unfavorable report on the F11F after a harrowing incident in which the engine failed on him during a high-speed dive. He managed to restart the engine and avoid a fatal crash.\nShepard was an instructor at the Test Pilot School, and then entered the Naval War College at Newport, Rhode Island. He graduated in 1957, and became an Aircraft Readiness Officer on the staff of the Commander-in-Chief, Atlantic Fleet. By this time he had logged more than 3,600 hours of flying time, including 1,700 hours in jets.\nNASA career.\nMercury Seven.\nOn October 4, 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first artificial satellite. This shattered American confidence in its technological superiority, creating a wave of anxiety known as the Sputnik crisis. Among his responses, President Dwight D. Eisenhower launched the Space Race. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was established on October 1, 1958, as a civilian agency to develop space technology. One of its first initiatives was publicly announced on December 17, 1958. This was Project Mercury, which aimed to launch a man into Earth orbit, return him safely to the Earth, and evaluate his capabilities in space.\nNASA received permission from Eisenhower to recruit its first astronauts from the ranks of military test pilots. The service records of 508 graduates of test pilot schools were obtained from the United States Department of Defense. From these, 110 were found that matched the minimum standards: the candidates had to be younger than 40, possess a bachelor's degree or equivalent and to be or less. While these were not all strictly enforced, the height requirement was firm, owing to the size of the Project Mercury spacecraft. The 110 were then split into three groups, with the most promising in the first group.\nThe first group of 35, which included Shepard, assembled at the Pentagon on February 2, 1959. The Navy and Marine Corps officers were welcomed by the Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Arleigh Burke, while the United States Air Force officers were addressed by the Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, General Thomas D. White. Both pledged their support to the Space Program, and promised that the careers of volunteers would not be adversely affected. NASA officials then briefed them on Project Mercury. They conceded that it would be a hazardous undertaking, but emphasized that it was of great national importance. That evening, Shepard discussed the day's events with fellow naval aviators Jim Lovell, Pete Conrad and Wally Schirra, all of whom would eventually become astronauts. They were concerned about their careers, but decided to volunteer.\nThe briefing process was repeated with a second group of 34 candidates a week later. Of the 69, six were found to be over the height limit, 15 were eliminated for other reasons, and 16 declined. This left NASA with 32 candidates. Since this was more than expected, NASA decided not to bother with the remaining 41 candidates, as 32 candidates seemed a more than adequate number from which to select 12 astronauts as planned. The degree of interest also indicated that far fewer would drop out during training than anticipated, which would result in training astronauts who would not be required to fly Project Mercury missions. It was therefore decided to cut the number of astronauts selected to just six. Then came a grueling series of physical and psychological tests at the Lovelace Clinic and the Wright Aerospace Medical Laboratory. Only one candidate, Lovell, was eliminated on medical grounds at this stage, and the diagnosis was later found to be in error; thirteen others were recommended with reservations. The director of the NASA Space Task Group, Robert R. Gilruth, found himself unable to select only six from the remaining eighteen, and ultimately seven were chosen.\nShepard was informed of his selection on April 1, 1959. Two days later he traveled to Boston with Louise for the wedding of his cousin Anne, and was able to break the news to his parents and sister. The identities of the seven were announced at a press conference at Dolley Madison House in Washington, D.C., on April 9, 1959: Scott Carpenter, Gordon Cooper, John Glenn, Gus Grissom, Wally Schirra, Alan Shepard, and Deke Slayton. The magnitude of the challenge ahead of them was made clear a few weeks later, on the night of May 18, 1959, when the seven astronauts gathered at Cape Canaveral to watch their first rocket launch, of an SM-65D Atlas, which was similar to the one that was to carry them into orbit. A few minutes after liftoff, it spectacularly exploded, lighting up the night sky. The astronauts were stunned. Shepard turned to Glenn and said: \"Well, I'm glad they got that out of the way.\"\n\"Freedom 7\".\nFaced with intense competition from the other astronauts, particularly John Glenn, Shepard quit smoking and adopted Glenn's habit of taking a morning jog. On January 19, 1961, Gilruth informed the seven astronauts that Shepard had been chosen for the first American crewed mission into space. Shepard later recalled Louise's response when he told her that she had her arms around the man who would be the first man in space: \"Who let a Russian in here?\" During training he flew 120 simulated flights. Although this flight was originally scheduled for April 26, 1960, it was postponed several times by unplanned preparatory work, initially to December 5, 1960, then mid-January 1961, March 6, 1961, April 25, 1961, May 2, 1961, and finally to May 5, 1961. On April 12, 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person in space, and the first to orbit the Earth. It was another body blow to American pride. When Shepard heard the news he slammed his fist down on a table so hard a NASA public relations officer feared he might have broken his hand.\nOn May 5, 1961, Shepard piloted the Mercury-Redstone 3 mission and became the second person, and the first American, to travel into space. He named his spacecraft, Mercury Spacecraft 7, \"Freedom 7\". He awoke at 01:10, and had breakfast consisting of orange juice, a filet mignon wrapped in bacon, and scrambled eggs with his backup, John Glenn, and flight surgeon William K. Douglas. He was helped into his space suit by suit technician Joseph W. Schmitt, and boarded the transfer van at 03:55. He ascended the gantry at 05:15, and entered the spacecraft five minutes later. It was expected that liftoff would occur in another two hours and five minutes, so Shepard's suit did not have any provision for elimination of bodily wastes, but after being strapped into the capsule's seat, launch delays kept him in that suit for over four hours. Shepard's endurance gave out before launch, and he was forced to empty his bladder into the suit. Medical sensors attached to it to track the astronaut's condition in flight were turned off to avoid shorting them out. The urine pooled in the small of his back, where it was absorbed by his undergarment. After Shepard's flight, the space suit was modified, and by the time of Gus Grissom's Mercury-Redstone 4 suborbital flight in July, a liquid waste collection feature had been built into the suit.\nUnlike Gagarin's 108-minute orbital flight in a Vostok spacecraft three times the size of \"Freedom 7\", Shepard stayed on a suborbital trajectory for the 15-minute flight, which reached an altitude of , and then fell to a splashdown down the Atlantic Missile Range. Unlike Gagarin, whose flight was strictly automatic, Shepard had some control of \"Freedom 7\", spacecraft attitude in particular. Shepard's launch was seen live on television by millions. It was launched atop a Redstone rocket. According to Gene Kranz in his 2000 book \"Failure Is Not an Option\", \"When reporters asked Shepard what he thought about as he sat atop the Redstone rocket, waiting for liftoff, he had replied, 'The fact that every part of this ship was built by the lowest bidder.'\"\nAfter a dramatic Atlantic Ocean recovery, Shepard observed that he \"didn't really feel the flight was a success until the recovery had been successfully completed. It's not the fall that hurts; it's the sudden stop.\" Splashdown occurred with an impact comparable to landing a jet aircraft on an aircraft carrier. A recovery helicopter arrived after a few minutes, and the capsule was lifted partly out of the water to allow Shepard to leave by the main hatch. He squeezed out of the door and into a sling hoist, and was pulled into the helicopter, which flew both the astronaut and spacecraft to the aircraft carrier . The whole recovery process took just eleven minutes. Shepard was celebrated as a national hero, honored with ticker-tape parades in Washington, New York and Los Angeles, and received the NASA Distinguished Service Medal from President John F. Kennedy. He was also awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross.\nShepard served as capsule communicator (CAPCOM) for Glenn's Mercury-Atlas 6 orbital flight, which he had also been considered for, and Carpenter's Mercury-Atlas 7. He was the backup pilot for Cooper for the Mercury-Atlas 9 mission, nearly replacing Cooper after Cooper flew low over the NASA administration building at Cape Canaveral in an F-102. In the final stages of Project Mercury, Shepard was scheduled to pilot the Mercury-Atlas 10 (MA-10), which was planned as a three-day mission. He named Mercury Spacecraft 15B \"Freedom 7 II\" in honor of his first spacecraft, and had the name painted on it, but on June 12, 1963, NASA Administrator James E. Webb announced that Mercury had accomplished all its goals and no more missions would be flown. Shepard went as far as making a personal appeal to President Kennedy, but to no avail.\nProject Gemini; chief astronaut.\nProject Gemini, with a crew of two, followed on from Project Mercury. After the Mercury-Atlas 10 mission was canceled, Shepard was designated as the commander of the first crewed Gemini mission, with Thomas P. Stafford chosen as his pilot. In late 1963, Shepard began to experience episodes of extreme dizziness and nausea, accompanied by a loud, clanging noise in the left ear. He tried to keep it secret, fearing that he would lose his flight status, but was aware that if an episode occurred in the air or in space it could be fatal. Following an episode during a lecture in Houston, where he had recently moved from Virginia Beach, Virginia, Shepard was forced to confess his ailment to Slayton, who was now Director of Flight Operations, and seek help from NASA's doctors.\nThe doctors diagnosed M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's disease, a condition in which fluid pressure builds up in the inner ear. This syndrome causes the semicircular canals and motion detectors to become extremely sensitive, resulting in disorientation, dizziness, and nausea. There was no known cure, but in about 20 percent of cases the condition goes away by itself. They prescribed diuretics in an attempt to drain the fluid from the ear. They also diagnosed glaucoma. An X-ray found a lump on his thyroid, and on January 17, 1964, surgeons at Hermann Hospital made an incision on his throat and removed 20 percent of his thyroid. The condition caused Shepard to be removed from flight status. Grissom and John Young flew Gemini 3 instead.\nShepard was designated Chief of the Astronaut Office in November 1963, receiving the title of Chief Astronaut. He thereby became responsible for NASA astronaut training. This involved the development of appropriate training programs for all astronauts and the scheduling of training of individual astronauts for specific missions and roles. He provided and coordinated astronaut input into mission planning and the design of spacecraft and other equipment to be used by astronauts on space missions. He also was on the selection panel for the NASA Astronaut Group 5 in 1966. He spent much of his time investing in banks, wildcatting, and real estate. He became part owner and vice president of Baytown National Bank and would spend hours on the phone in his NASA office overseeing it. He also bought a partnership in a ranch in Weatherford, Texas, that raised horses and cattle. During this period, his secretary Gaye Alford had two \"mood-of-the-day\" photographs taken of Shepard, one of a smiling \"Al\" Shepard, and the other of a grim-looking \"Commander\" Shepard. To warn visitors of Shepard's mood, she would hang the appropriate photograph on the door of her boss's private office. Tom Wolfe characterized Shepard's dual personalities as \"Smilin' Al\" and the \"Icy Commander\".\nApollo program.\nIn 1968, Stafford went to Shepard's office and told him that an otologist in Los Angeles had developed a cure for M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's disease. Shepard flew to Los Angeles, where he met with William F. House. House proposed to open Shepard's mastoid bone and make a tiny hole in the endolymphatic sac. A small tube (endolymphatic-subarachnoid shunt) was inserted to drain excess fluid. The surgery was conducted on May 14, 1968, at St. Vincent's Hospital in Los Angeles, where Shepard checked in under the pseudonym of Victor Poulos. The surgery was successful, and he was restored to full flight status on May 7, 1969.\nSlayton put Shepard down to command the next available Moon mission, which was Apollo 13 in 1970. Under normal circumstances, this assignment would have gone to Cooper, as the backup commander of Apollo 10, but Cooper was not given it. A rookie, Stuart Roosa, was designated the Command Module Pilot. Shepard asked for Jim McDivitt as his Lunar Module Pilot, but McDivitt, who had already commanded the Apollo 9 mission, balked at the prospect, arguing that Shepard did not have sufficient Apollo training to command a Moon mission. A rookie, Edgar Mitchell, was designated the Lunar Module Pilot instead.\nWhen Slayton submitted the proposed crew assignments to NASA headquarters, George Mueller turned them down on the grounds that the crew was too inexperienced. So Slayton asked Jim Lovell, who had been the backup commander for Apollo 11, and was slated to command Apollo 14, if his crew would be willing to fly Apollo 13 instead. He agreed to do so, and Shepard's crew was assigned to Apollo 14.\nNeither Shepard nor Lovell expected there would be much difference between Apollo 13 and Apollo 14, but Apollo 13 went disastrously wrong. An oxygen tank explosion caused the Moon landing to be aborted and nearly resulted in the loss of the crew. It became a joke between Shepard and Lovell, who would offer to give Shepard back the mission each time they bumped into each other. The failure of Apollo 13 delayed Apollo 14 until 1971 so that modifications could be made to the spacecraft. The target of the Apollo 14 mission was switched to the Fra Mauro formation, the intended destination of Apollo 13.\nShepard made his second space flight as commander of Apollo 14 from January 31 to February 9, 1971. It was America's third successful lunar landing mission. Shepard piloted the Lunar Module \"Antares\". He became the fifth and, at the age of 47, the oldest man to walk on the Moon, and the only one of the Mercury Seven astronauts to do so.\nThis was the first mission to broadcast extensive color television coverage from the lunar surface, using the Westinghouse Lunar Color Camera. (The same color camera model was used on Apollo 12 and provided about 30 minutes of color telecasting before it was inadvertently pointed at the Sun, ending its usefulness.) While on the Moon, Shepard used a Wilson six-iron head attached to a lunar sample scoop handle to drive golf balls. Despite thick gloves and a stiff space suit, which forced him to swing the club with one hand, Shepard struck two golf balls, driving the second, as he jokingly put it, \"miles and miles and miles\". Analysis of high-resolution film scans of the event determined the distance to be about for the first shot and for the second.\nFor this mission Shepard was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal and the Navy Distinguished Service Medal. His citation read:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Captain Alan Bartlett Shepard, Jr. (NSN: 0-389998), United States Navy, for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished service in a position of great responsibility to the Government of the United States, as Spacecraft Commander for the Apollo 14 flight to the Fra-Mauro area of the Moon during the period 31 January 1971 to 9 February 1971. Responsible for the on-board control of the spacecraft command module \"Kittyhawk\" and the lunar module \"Antares\" in the gathering of scientific data involving complex and difficult instrumentation positing and sample gathering, including a hazardous two-mile traverse of the lunar surface, Captain Shepard, by his brilliant performance, contributed essentially to the success of this vital scientific Moon mission. As a result of his skillful leadership, professional competence and dedication, the Apollo 14 mission, with its numerous tasks and vital scientific experiments, was accomplished in an outstanding manner, enabling scientists to determine more precisely the Moon's original formation and further forecast man's proper role in the exploration of his Universe. By his courageous and determined devotion to duty, Captain Shepard rendered valuable and distinguished service and contributed greatly to the success of the United States Space Program, thereby upholding the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service.\nFollowing Apollo 14, Shepard returned to his position as Chief of the Astronaut Office in June 1971. In July 1971 President Richard Nixon appointed him as a delegate to the 26th United Nations General Assembly, a position in which he served from September to December 1971. He was promoted to rear admiral by Nixon on August 26, 1971, the first astronaut to reach this rank. He was succeeded as Chief of the Astronaut Office by John Young on April 30, 1974. Shepard retired from both NASA and the Navy on July 31, 1974.\nLater years.\nShepard was devoted to his children. Frequently, Julie, Laura and Alice were the only astronauts' children at NASA events. He taught them to ski and took them skiing in Colorado. He once rented a small plane to fly them and their friends from Texas to a summer camp in Maine. He doted on his six grandchildren as well. After Apollo 14, he began to spend more time with Louise and started taking her with him on trips to the Paris Air Show every other year and to Asia. Louise heard rumors of his affairs. The publication of Tom Wolfe's 1979 book \"The Right Stuff\" made them public knowledge but she never confronted him about it nor did she ever contemplate leaving him.\nAfter Shepard left NASA, he served on the boards of many corporations. He also served as president of his umbrella company for several business enterprises, Seven Fourteen Enterprises, Inc. (named for his two flights, \"Freedom 7\" and Apollo 14). He made a fortune in banking and real estate. He was a fellow of the American Astronautical Society and the Society of Experimental Test Pilots, a member of Rotary, Kiwanis, the Mayflower Society, the Order of the Cincinnati and the American Fighter Aces, an honorary member of the board of directors for the Houston School for Deaf Children, and a director of the National Space Institute and the Los Angeles Ear Research Institute. In 1984, together with the other surviving Mercury astronauts and Betty Grissom, Gus Grissom's widow, Shepard founded the Mercury Seven Foundation, which raises money to provide college scholarships to science and engineering students. It was renamed the Astronaut Scholarship Foundation in 1995. Shepard was elected its first president and chairman, positions he held until October 1997, when he was succeeded by former astronaut Jim Lovell.\nIn 1994, he published a book with two journalists, Jay Barbree and Howard Benedict, called \"\". Fellow Mercury astronaut Deke Slayton is also named as an author. The book included a composite photograph showing Shepard hitting a golf ball on the Moon. There are no still images of this event, the only record is TV footage. The book was turned into a TV miniseries in 1994.\nShepard was diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in 1996 and died from complications of the disease in Pebble Beach, California, on July 21, 1998. Following his death, President Bill Clinton issued a statement of condolences stating \"he [Shepard] led our country and all humanity beyond the bounds of our planet, across a truly new frontier, into the new era of space exploration\" and \"his service will always loom large in America's history\". Shepard's widow Louise had planned to cremate his remains and scatter the ashes, but before she was able to do that, she died from a heart attack\u2014on August 25, 1998, at 17:00, which, coincidentally, was the same time of day at which he had always phoned her when they were apart. They had been married for 53 years. Their family decided to cremate them both so their ashes were scattered, together, from a Navy helicopter over Stillwater Cove in front of their Pebble Beach home.\nOn December 11, 2021, twenty-three years after his death, Shepard's daughter, Laura Shepard Churchley, also flew in space (suborbitally, above the Karman line) aboard the non-NASA Blue Origin's New Shepard spacecraft on the NS-19 mission.\nAwards and honors.\nShepard was awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor by President Jimmy Carter on October 1, 1978. He also received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement in 1981; the Langley Gold Medal on May 5, 1964; the John J. Montgomery Award in 1963; the Lambert trophy; the SETP Iven C. Kincheloe Award; the Cabot Award; the Collier Trophy; and the City of New York City Gold Medal for 1971. He was awarded honorary degrees of Master of Arts from Dartmouth College in 1962, D.Sc. from Miami University in 1971, and Doctorate of Humanities from Franklin Pierce College in 1972. He was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1977, the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981, and the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame on May 11, 1990.\nThe Navy named a supply ship, , for him in 2006. The McAuliffe-Shepard Discovery Center in Concord, New Hampshire, is named after Shepard and Christa McAuliffe. In 1996, the entirety of I-565 (which passes in front of the U.S. Space &amp; Rocket Center, home to both the Saturn V Dynamic Test Vehicle and a full-scale vertical Saturn V replica) was designated the \"Admiral Alan B. Shepard Highway\" in his honor. Interstate 93 in New Hampshire, from the Massachusetts border to Hooksett, is designated the Alan B. Shepard Highway, and in Hampton, Virginia, a road is named Commander Shepard Boulevard in his honor. His hometown of Derry has the nickname Space Town in honor of his career as an astronaut. Following an act of Congress, the post office in Derry was designated the Alan B. Shepard Jr. Post Office Building. Alan Shepard Park in Cocoa Beach, Florida, a beach-side park south of Cape Canaveral, is named in his honor. The City of Virginia Beach renamed its convention center, with its integral geodesic dome, the \"Alan B. Shepard Convention Center\". The building was later renamed the \"Alan B. Shepard Civic Center\", and was razed in 1994. At the time of the \"Freedom 7\" launch, Shepard lived in Virginia Beach.\nShepard's high school alma mater in Derry, Pinkerton Academy, has a building named after him, and the school team is called the Astros after his career as an astronaut. Alan B. Shepard Middle School, which opened in 1961 in Deerfield, Illinois was the first building named in his honor. Alan B. Shepard High School, in Palos Heights, Illinois, which opened in 1976, was named in his honor. Framed newspapers throughout the school depict various accomplishments and milestones in Shepard's life. Additionally, an autographed plaque commemorates the dedication of the building. The school newspaper is named \"Freedom 7\" and the yearbook is entitled \"Odyssey\". Blue Origin's suborbital space tourism rocket, the New Shepard, is named after Shepard.\nIn a 2010 Space Foundation survey, Shepard was ranked as the ninth most popular space hero (tied with astronauts Buzz Aldrin and Gus Grissom). In 2011, NASA honored Shepard with an Ambassador of Exploration Award, consisting of a Moon rock encased in Lucite, for his contributions to the U.S. space program. His family members accepted the award on his behalf during a ceremony on April 28 at the United States Naval Academy Museum in Annapolis, Maryland, where it is on permanent display. On May 4, 2011, the U.S. Postal Service issued a first-class stamp in Shepard's honor, the first U.S. stamp to depict a specific astronaut. The first day of issue ceremony was held at NASA's Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex.\nEach year, the Space Foundation, in partnership with the Astronauts Memorial Foundation and NASA, present the for outstanding contributions by K\u201312 educators or district-level administrators to educational technology. The award recognizes excellence in the development and application of technology in the classroom or to the professional development of teachers. The recipient demonstrates exemplary use of technology either to foster lifelong learners or to make the learning process easier.\nIn popular culture.\nAs he was a key figure in the American space program, Shepard's life has been depicted in many biographical and historical works of fiction. In film, Shepard's selection for the Mercury program was covered in 1983's \"The Right Stuff\" (where he was played by Scott Glenn), while 2002's \"Race to Space\" and 2016's \"Hidden Figures\" feature him in a minor role, played by Mark Moses, and Dane Davenport, respectively. The HBO miniseries \"From the Earth to the Moon\" starred Ted Levine as Shepard and covered not only his Mercury training but also his involvement in the Apollo missions. Jake McDorman played Shepard in the 2020 TV adaptation of \"The Right Stuff\", while Desmond Harrington played him in the 2015 period drama \"The Astronaut Wives Club\".\nArchive footage of Shepard is used in the opening credits montage of \"\",as part of a sequence displaying the history of human exploration, while other science fiction works have named characters in a tribute to Shepard \u2013 including both the character of Alan Tracy, in the 1960s British series \"Thunderbirds\", and Commander Shepard, the main protagonist of the 2007\u20132012 BioWare video game series \"Mass Effect\".\nBritish singer-songwriter Darren Hayman's concept album \"12 Astronauts\" includes a song for each man who has walked on the Moon. The lyrics of \"Don't Clip My Wings (Alan Shepard)\", sung in the first person, reflect on how Shepard \"feared he would never fly again\" after his M\u00e9ni\u00e8re's diagnosis.\n\"Shepard's Prayer\" is attributed to Shepard, with the phrase supposed to have been uttered by him while he awaited liftoff aboard the \"Freedom 7\". It is usually quoted as \"Dear Lord, please don't let me fuck up\", although Shepard claimed the words to be \"Don't fuck up, Shepard\".\nAlan Shepard was featured in the 1982 EPCOT Center: The Opening Celebration to celebrate the opening of EPCOT Center in the Walt Disney World Resort. He was a guest alongside Danny Kaye and Drew Barrymore.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63731", "revid": "50953778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63731", "title": "Thai script", "text": "Abugida script for languages spoken in Thailand\nThe Thai script (, RTGS:\u00a0, ) is the abugida used to write Thai, Southern Thai and many other languages spoken in Thailand. The Thai script itself (as used to write Thai) has 44 consonant symbols (, ), 16 vowel symbols (, ) that combine into at least 32 vowel forms, four tone diacritics ( or , or ), and other diacritics.\nAlthough commonly referred to as the \"Thai alphabet\", the script is not a true alphabet but an abugida, a writing system in which the full characters represent consonants with diacritical marks for vowels; the absence of a vowel diacritic gives an implied 'a' or 'o'. Consonants are written horizontally from left to right, and vowels following a consonant in speech are written above, below, to the left or to the right of it, or a combination of those.\nHistory.\nThe Thai script is derived from the Old Khmer script (, \"akson khom\"), a sophisticated writing system rooted in the South Indian Pallava alphabet () and a southern branch of the ancient Brahmi tradition. The Sukhothai script was the earliest Thai script developed from the Old Khmer script. The Ram Khamhaeng Inscription dated to 1292 is often cited as the script's first appearance, yet many scholars question its authenticity and reliability as historical evidence. However, according to the Wat Bang Sanuk Inscription (C.107) in Phrae province, several scholars proposed that the earliest Thai script could be dated back to 1219.\nThe introduction of tone markers in the Thai script was an adaptation to record tonal features absent in the source languages such as Dravidian languages, Indo-Aryan languages and the Mon-Khmer (Austroasiatic languages) family. Although Chinese and other Sino-Tibetan languages have distinctive tones in their phonological system, no tone marker is found in their orthographies. Another addition was consonant clusters that were written horizontally and contiguously, rather than writing the second consonant below the first one. The vowel marks were written on the main line. However, the practices fell out of use not long after.\nOrthography.\nThere is a fairly complex relationship between spelling and sound. There are various issues:\nThai letters do not have upper- and lower-case forms like Latin letters do. Spaces between words are not used, except in certain linguistically motivated cases.\nPunctuation.\nMinor pauses in sentences \"may\" be marked by a comma ( or , or ), and major pauses by a period ( or , or ), but most often are marked by a blank space (, ). Thai writing also uses quotation marks (, ) and parentheses (round brackets) (, or , ), but not square brackets or braces.\nA () is used for abbreviation. A () is the same as \"etc.\" in English.\nSeveral obsolete characters indicated the beginning or ending of sections. A bird's eye (, , officially called , ) formerly indicated paragraphs. An () was formerly used to mark the end of a chapter. A () was formerly used to mark the end of a document, but is now obsolete.\nAlphabet listing.\nThai (along with its sister system, Lao) lacks conjunct consonants and independent vowels, while both designs are common among Brahmic scripts (e.g., Burmese and Balinese). In scripts with conjunct consonants, each consonant has two forms: base and conjoined. Consonant clusters are represented with the two styles of consonants. The two styles may form typographical ligatures, as in Devanagari. Independent vowels are used when a syllable starts with a vowel sign.\nConsonants.\nThere are 44 consonant letters representing 21 distinct consonant sounds. Duplicate consonants either correspond to sounds that existed in Old Thai at the time the alphabet was created but no longer exist (in particular, voiced obstruents such as \"d\"), or different Sanskrit and Pali consonants pronounced identically in Thai. There are in addition four consonant-vowel combination characters not included in the tally of 44.\nConsonants are divided into three classes\u2014in alphabetical order these are middle (, ), high (, ), and low (, ) class\u2014as shown in the table below. These class designations reflect phonetic qualities of the sounds to which the letters originally corresponded in Old Thai. In particular, \"middle\" sounds were voiceless unaspirated stops; \"high\" sounds, voiceless aspirated stops or voiceless fricatives; \"low\" sounds, voiced. Subsequent sound changes have obscured the phonetic nature of these classes. Today, the class of a consonant without a tone mark, along with the short or long length of the accompanying vowel, determine the base accent (, ). Middle class consonants with a long vowel spell an additional four tones with one of four tone marks over the controlling consonant: , , , and . High and low class consonants are limited to and , as shown in the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. Differing interpretations of the two marks or their absence allow low class consonants to spell tones not allowed for the corresponding high class consonant. In the case of digraphs where a low class follows a higher class consonant, often the higher class rules apply, but the marker, if used, goes over the low class one; accordingly, and may be considered to be digraphs as such, as explained below the Tone table. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo aid learning, each consonant is traditionally associated with an acrophonic Thai word that either starts with the same sound, or features it prominently. For example, the name of the letter is \"kho khai\" (), in which \"kho\" is the sound it represents, and \"khai\" () is a word which starts with the same sound and means \"egg\".\nTwo of the consonants, (\"kho khuat\") and (\"kho khon\"), are no longer used in written Thai, but still appear on many keyboards and in character sets. When the first Thai typewriter was developed by Edwin Hunter McFarland in 1892, there was simply no space for all characters, thus two had to be left out. Also, neither of these two letters correspond to a Sanskrit or Pali letter, and each of them, being a modified form of the letter that precedes it (compare and ), has the same pronunciation and the same consonant class as the preceding letter, thus making them redundant. They used to represent the sound in Old Thai, but it has merged with in Modern Thai.\nEquivalents for romanisation are shown in the table below. Many consonants are pronounced differently at the beginning and at the end of a syllable. The entries in columns \"initial\" and \"final\" indicate the pronunciation for that consonant in the corresponding positions in a syllable. Where the entry is '-', the consonant may not be used to close a syllable. Where a combination of consonants ends a written syllable, only the first is pronounced; possible closing consonant sounds are limited to 'k', 'm', 'n', 'ng', 'p' and 't'.\nAlthough official standards for romanisation are the Royal Thai General System of Transcription (RTGS) defined by the Royal Thai Institute, and the almost identical ISO 11940-2 defined by the International Organization for Standardization, many publications use different romanisation systems. In daily practice, a bewildering variety of romanisations are used, making it difficult to know how to pronounce a word, or to judge if two words (e.g. on a map and a street sign) are actually the same. For more precise information, an equivalent from the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) is given as well.\nAlphabetic.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhonetic.\nThe consonants can be organised by place and manner of articulation according to principles of the International Phonetic Association.\nThai distinguishes among three voice/aspiration patterns for plosive consonants:\nWhere English has only a distinction between the voiced, unaspirated and the unvoiced, aspirated , Thai distinguishes a third sound which is neither voiced nor aspirated, which occurs in English only as an allophone of , approximately the sound of the \"p\" in \"spin\". There is similarly a laminal denti-alveolar , , triplet. In the velar series there is a , pair and in the postalveolar series the , pair.\nIn each cell below, the first line indicates (IPA), the second indicates the Thai characters in initial position (several letters appearing in the same box have identical pronunciation). The conventional alphabetic order shown in the table above follows roughly the table below, reading the coloured blocks from right to left and top to bottom.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough the overall 44 Thai consonants provide 21 sounds in case of initials, the case for finals is different. The consonant sounds in the table for initials collapse in the table for final sounds. At the end of a syllable, all plosives are unvoiced, unaspirated, and have no audible release. Initial affricates and fricatives become final plosives. The initial trill (), approximant (), and lateral approximants (, ) are realized as a final nasal .\nOnly 8 ending consonant sounds, as well as no ending consonant sound, are available in Thai pronunciation. Among these consonants, excluding the disused and , six (, , , , , ) cannot be used as a final. The remaining 36 are grouped as following.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVowels.\nThai vowel sounds and diphthongs are written using a mixture of vowel symbols on a consonant base. Each vowel is shown in its correct position relative to a base consonant and sometimes a final consonant as well. Vowels can go above, below, left of or right of the consonant, or combinations of these places. If a vowel has parts before and after the initial consonant, and the syllable starts with a consonant cluster, the split will go around the whole cluster.\nTwenty-one vowel symbol elements are traditionally named, which may appear alone or in combination to form compound symbols.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe inherent vowels are in open syllables (CV) and in closed syllables (CVC). For example, \u0e16\u0e19\u0e19 transcribes \"road\". There are a few exceptions in Pali loanwords, where the inherent vowel of an open syllable is . The circumfix vowels, such as \u0e40\u2013\u0e32\u0e30 , encompass a preceding consonant with an inherent vowel. For example, is written \u0e40\u0e1e\u0e32\u0e30, and \"only\" is written \u0e40\u0e09\u0e1e\u0e32\u0e30.\nThe characters \u0e24 \u0e24\u0e45 (plus \u0e26 \u0e26\u0e45, which are obsolete) are usually considered as vowels, the first being a short vowel sound, and the latter, long. The letters are based on vocalic consonants used in Sanskrit, given the one-to-one letter correspondence of Thai to Sanskrit, although the last two letters are quite rare, as their equivalent Sanskrit sounds only occur in a few, ancient words and thus are functionally obsolete in Thai. The first symbol '\u0e24' is common in many Sanskrit and Pali words and '\u0e24\u0e45' less so, but does occur as the primary spelling for the Thai adaptation of Sanskrit 'rishi' and \"treu\" ( or ), a very rare Khmer loan word for 'fish' only found in ancient poetry. As alphabetical entries, \u0e24 \u0e24\u0e45 follow \u0e23, and themselves can be read as a combination of consonant and vowel, equivalent to \u0e23\u0e36 (short), and \u0e23\u0e37\u0e2d (long) (and the obsolete pair as \u0e25\u0e36, \u0e25\u0e37\u0e2d), respectively. Moreover, \u0e24 can act as \u0e23\u0e34 as an integral part in many words mostly borrowed from Sanskrit such as \u0e01\u0e24\u0e29\u0e13\u0e30 (\"kritsana\", not \"kruetsana\"), \u0e24\u0e17\u0e18\u0e34\u0e4c (\"rit\", not \"ruet\"), and \u0e01\u0e24\u0e29\u0e14\u0e32 (\"kritsada\", not \"kruetsada\"), for example. It is also used to spell \u0e2d\u0e31\u0e07\u0e01\u0e24\u0e29 \"angkrit\" England/English. The word \u0e24\u0e01\u0e29\u0e4c (\"roek\") is a unique case where \u0e24 is pronounced like \u0e40\u0e23\u0e2d. In the past, prior to the turn of the twentieth century, it was common for writers to substitute these letters in native vocabulary that contained similar sounds as a shorthand that was acceptable in writing at the time. For example, the conjunction 'or' ( \"rue\", cf. \"lu\") was often written . This practice has become obsolete, but can still be seen in Thai literature.\nThe pronunciation below is indicated by the International Phonetic Alphabet and the Romanisation according to the Royal Thai Institute as well as several variant Romanisations often encountered. A very approximate equivalent is given for various regions of English speakers and surrounding areas. Dotted circles represent the positions of consonants or consonant clusters. The first one represents the initial consonant and the latter (if it exists) represents the final.\n\"Ro han\" (\u0e23 \u0e2b\u0e31\u0e19) is not usually considered a vowel and is not included in the following table. It represents the \"sara a\" vowel in certain Sanskrit loanwords and appears as \u25cc\u0e23\u0e23\u25cc. When used without a final consonant (\u25cc\u0e23\u0e23), is implied as the final consonant, giving .\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTone.\nCentral Thai.\nCentral Thai is a tonal language, and the script gives full information on the tones. Tones are realised in the vowels, but indicated in the script by a combination of the class of the initial consonant (high, mid or low), vowel length (long or short), closing consonant (plosive or sonorant, called \"dead\" or \"live\") and, if present, one of four tone marks, whose names derive from the names of the digits 1\u20134 borrowed from Pali or Sanskrit. The rules for denoting tones are shown in the following chart:\n\"None\", that is, no tone marker, is used with the base accent (\u0e1e\u0e37\u0e49\u0e19\u0e40\u0e2a\u0e35\u0e22\u0e07, ). \"Mai tri\" and \"mai chattawa\" are only used with mid-class consonants.\nTwo consonant characters (not diacritics) are used to modify the tone:\nIn some dialects there are words which are spelled with one tone but pronounced with another and often occur in informal conversation (notably the pronouns \u0e09\u0e31\u0e19 \"chan\" and \u0e40\u0e02\u0e32 \"khao\", which are both pronounced with a high tone rather than the rising tone indicated by the script). Generally, when such words are recited or read in public, they are pronounced as spelled.\nSouthern Thai.\nAlthough the Southern Thai writing form also gives full information on the tones as does Central Thai, the language itself is a pitch-accent language, whose spoken form can have up to seven tones. When Southern Thai is written in Thai script, there are different rules for indicating spoken tone. \nDiacritics.\nOther diacritics are used to indicate short vowels and silent letters:\n\"Fan nu\" means \"rat teeth\" and is thought as being placed in combination with short \"sara i\" and \"fong man\" to form other characters.\nNumerals.\nFor numerals, mostly the standard Hindu-Arabic numerals (, \"lek hindu arabik\") are used, but Thai also has its own set of Thai numerals that are based on the Hindu-Arabic numeral system (, \"lek thai\"), which are mostly limited to government documents, election posters, license plates of military vehicles, and special entry prices for Thai nationals.\nOther symbols.\n\"Pai-yan noi\" and \"angkhan diao\" share the same character. \"Sara a\" (\u2013\u0e30) used in combination with other characters is called \"wisanchani\".\nSome of the characters can mark the beginning or end of a sentence, chapter, or episode of a story or of a stanza in a poem. These have changed use over time and are becoming uncommon.\nSanskrit and Pali.\nThe Thai script (like all Indic scripts) uses a number of modifications to write Sanskrit and related languages (in particular, Pali). Pali is very closely related to Sanskrit and is the liturgical language of Thai Buddhism. In Thailand, Pali is written and studied using a slightly modified Thai script. The main difference is that each consonant is followed by an implied short a (\u0e2d\u0e30), not the 'o', or '\u0259' of Thai: this short a is never omitted in pronunciation, and if the vowel is not to be pronounced, then a specific symbol must be used, the \u0e2d\u0e3a (a solid dot under the consonant). This means that \"sara a\" (\u0e2d\u0e30) is never used when writing Pali, because it is always implied. For example, \"namo\" is written \u0e19\u0e30\u0e42\u0e21 in Thai, but in Pali it is written as \u0e19\u0e42\u0e21, because the \u0e2d\u0e30 is redundant. The Sanskrit word 'mantra' is written \u0e21\u0e19\u0e15\u0e23\u0e4c in Thai (and therefore pronounced \"mon\"), but is written \u0e21\u0e19\u0e3a\u0e15\u0e3a\u0e23 in Sanskrit (and therefore pronounced \"mantra\"). When writing Pali, only 33 consonants and 12 vowels are used.\nThis is an example of a Pali text written using the Thai Sanskrit orthography: \u0e2d\u0e23\u0e2b\u0e4d \u0e2a\u0e21\u0e3a\u0e21\u0e32\u0e2a\u0e21\u0e3a\u0e1e\u0e38\u0e17\u0e3a\u0e42\u0e18 \u0e20\u0e04\u0e27\u0e32 . Written in modern Thai orthography, this becomes \u0e2d\u0e30\u0e23\u0e30\u0e2b\u0e31\u0e07 \u0e2a\u0e31\u0e21\u0e21\u0e32\u0e2a\u0e31\u0e21\u0e1e\u0e38\u0e17\u0e42\u0e18 \u0e20\u0e30\u0e04\u0e30\u0e27\u0e32 \"arahang sammasamphuttho phakhawa\".\nIn Thailand, Sanskrit is read out using the Thai values for all the consonants (so \u0e04 is read as \"kha\" and not [ga]), which makes Thai spoken Sanskrit incomprehensible to sanskritists not trained in Thailand. The Sanskrit values are used in transliteration (without the diacritics), but these values are never actually used when Sanskrit is read out loud in Thailand. The vowels used in Thai are identical to Sanskrit, with the exception of \u0e24, \u0e24\u0e45, \u0e26, and \u0e26\u0e45, which are read using their Thai values, not their Sanskrit values. Sanskrit and Pali are not tonal languages, but in Thailand, the Thai tones are used when reading these languages out loud.\nIn the tables of this section, the Thai value (transliterated according to the Royal Thai system) of each letter is listed first, followed by the IAST value of each letter in square brackets. The IAST values are never used in pronunciation, but sometimes in transcriptions (with the diacritics omitted). This disjoint between transcription and spoken value explains the romanisation for Sanskrit names in Thailand that many foreigners find confusing. For example, \u0e2a\u0e38\u0e27\u0e23\u0e23\u0e13\u0e20\u0e39\u0e21\u0e34 is romanised as Suvarnabhumi, but pronounced \"su-wan-na-phum\". \u0e28\u0e23\u0e35\u0e19\u0e04\u0e23\u0e34\u0e19\u0e17\u0e23\u0e4c is romanised as Srinagarindra but pronounced \"si-nakha-rin\".\nPlosives (varga\u1e25).\nPlosives (also called stops) are listed in their traditional Sanskrit order, which corresponds to Thai alphabetical order from \u0e01 to \u0e21 with three exceptions: in Thai, high-class \u0e02 is followed by two obsolete characters with no Sanskrit equivalent, high-class \u0e03 and low-class \u0e05; low-class \u0e0a is followed by sibilant \u0e0b (low-class equivalent of high-class sibilant \u0e2a that follows \u0e28 and \u0e29.) The table gives the Thai value first, and then the IAST (International Alphabet of Sanskrit Transliteration) value.\nNone of the Sanskrit plosives are pronounced as the Thai voiced plosives, so these are not represented in the table. While letters are listed here according to their class in Sanskrit, Thai has lost the distinction between many of the consonants. So, while there is a clear distinction between \u0e0a and \u0e0c in Sanskrit, in Thai these two consonants are pronounced identically (including tone). Likewise, the Thai phonemes do not differentiate between the retroflex and dental classes, since Thai has no retroflex consonants. The equivalents of all the retroflex consonants are pronounced identically to their dental counterparts: thus \u0e0f is pronounced like \u0e15, \u0e10 is pronounced like \u0e16, \u0e11 is pronounced like \u0e17, \u0e12 is pronounced like \u0e18, and \u0e13 is pronounced like \u0e19.\nThe Sanskrit unaspirated unvoiced plosives are pronounced as unaspirated unvoiced, whereas Sanskrit aspirated voiced plosives are pronounced as aspirated unvoiced.\nNon-plosives (avarga\u1e25).\n\"Semivowels\" (\u0e01\u0e36\u0e48\u0e07\u0e2a\u0e23\u0e30 \"kueng sara\") \"and liquids\" come in Thai alphabetical order after \u0e21, the last of the plosives. The term \u0e2d\u0e27\u0e23\u0e23\u0e04 \"awak\" means \"without a break\"; that is, without a plosive.\nSibilants.\n\"Inserted sounds\" (\u0e40\u0e2a\u0e35\u0e22\u0e14\u0e41\u0e17\u0e23\u0e01 \"siat saek\") follow the semi-vowel \u0e27 in alphabetical order.\nLike Sanskrit, Thai has no voiced sibilant (so no 'z' or 'zh'). In modern Thai, the distinction between the three high-class consonants has been lost and all three are pronounced 's\u00e0'; however, foreign words with a sh-sound may still be transcribed as if the Sanskrit values still hold (e.g., \"ang-grit\" \u0e2d\u0e31\u0e07\u0e01\u0e24\u0e29 for \"English\" instead of \u0e2d\u0e31\u0e07\u0e01\u0e24\u0e2a).\nVoiced h.\n\u0e2b, a high-class consonant, comes next in alphabetical order, but its low-class equivalent, \u0e2e, follows similar-appearing \u0e2d as the last letter of the Thai alphabet. Like modern Hindi, the voicing has disappeared, and the letter is now pronounced like English 'h'. Like Sanskrit, this letter may only be used to start a syllable, but may not end it. (A popular beer is romanized as Singha, but in Thai is \u0e2a\u0e34\u0e07\u0e2b\u0e4c, with a \"karan\" on the \u0e2b; correct pronunciation is \"sing\", but foreigners to Thailand typically say \"sing-ha\".)\nRetroflex lla.\nThis represents the retroflex liquid of Pali and Vedic Sanskrit, which does not exist in Classical Sanskrit.\nVowels.\nAll consonants have an inherent 'a' sound, and therefore there is no need to use the \u0e30 symbol when writing Sanskrit. The Thai vowels \u0e2d\u0e37, \u0e43\u0e2d, and so forth, are not used in Sanskrit. The zero consonant, \u0e2d, is unique to the Indic alphabets descended from Khmer. When it occurs in Sanskrit, it is always the zero consonant and never the vowel \"o\" . Its use in Sanskrit is therefore to write vowels that cannot be otherwise written alone: e.g., \u0e2d\u0e32 or \u0e2d\u0e35. When \u0e2d is written on its own, then it is a carrier for the implied vowel, \"a\" (equivalent to \u0e2d\u0e30 in Thai).\nThe vowel sign \u0e2d\u0e33 occurs in Sanskrit, but only as the combination of the pure vowels \"sara a\" \u0e2d\u0e32 with \"nikkhahit\" \u0e2d\u0e4d.\nOther non-Thai symbols.\nThere are a number of additional symbols only used to write Sanskrit or Pali, and not used in writing Thai.\nNikkhahit (anusv\u0101ra).\nIn Sanskrit, the anusv\u0101ra indicates a certain kind of nasal sound. In Thai this is written as an open circle above the consonant, known as \"nikkhahit\" (), from Pali \"niggah\u012bta\". Nasalisation does not occur in Thai, therefore, a nasal stop is always substituted: e.g. \u0e15\u0e4d , is pronounced as \u0e15\u0e31\u0e07 \"tang\" by Thai Sanskritists. If nikkhahit occurs before a consonant, then Thai uses a nasal stop of the same class: e.g. \u0e2a\u0e4d\u0e2a\u0e3a\u0e01\u0e24\u0e15\u0e32 is read as \u0e2a\u0e31\u0e19\u0e2a\u0e01\u0e24\u0e15\u0e32 \"san-sa-krit-ta\" (The \u0e2a following the nikkhahit is a dental-class consonant, therefore the dental-class nasal stop \u0e19 is used). For this reason, it has been suggested that in Thai, nikkhahit should be listed as a consonant. Also, traditional Pali grammars describe nikkhahit as a consonant. \"Nikkhahit\" \u0e19\u0e34\u0e04\u0e2b\u0e34\u0e15 occurs as part of the Thai vowels \"sara am\" \u0e2d\u0e33 and \"sara ue\" \u0e2d\u0e36.\nPhinthu (vir\u0101ma).\n\u0e2d\u0e3a\nBecause the Thai script is an abugida, a symbol (equivalent to vir\u0101ma in devanagari) needs to be added to indicate that the implied vowel is not to be pronounced. This is the , which is a solid dot (also called 'Bindu' in Sanskrit) below the consonant.\nThe phinthu is also used for languages that use the Thai script, such as Urak Lawoi\u02bc, to transcribe sounds that do not exist in Thai phonology. For example, \u0e22\u0e3a (yo yak with phinthu) is used to transcribe the phoneme [\u025f].\nYamakkan.\n\u0e2d\u0e4e\nYamakkan () is an obsolete symbol used to mark the beginning of consonant clusters: e.g. \u0e1e\u0e4e\u0e23\u0e32\u0e2b\u0e4e\u0e21\u0e13 \"phramana\" . Without the yamakkan, this word would be pronounced instead. This is a feature unique to the Thai script (other Indic scripts use a combination of ligatures, conjuncts or vir\u0101ma to convey the same information). The symbol is obsolete because may be used to achieve the same effect: \u0e1e\u0e3a\u0e23\u0e32\u0e2b\u0e3a\u0e21\u0e13.\nVisarga.\nThe means of recording visarga (final voiceless 'h') in Thai has reportedly been lost, although the character \u25cc\u0e30 which is used to transcribe a short /a/ or to add a glottal stop after a vowel is the closest equivalent and can be seen used as a visarga in some Thai-script Sanskrit text.\nSukhothai.\nThe Thai script is derived from the Sukhothai script. \nUnicode.\nThai script was added to the Unicode Standard in October 1991 with the release of version 1.0.\nThe Unicode block for Thai is U+0E00\u2013U+0E7F.\nIt is a verbatim copy of the older TIS-620 character set which encodes the vowels \u0e40, \u0e41, \u0e42, \u0e43 and \u0e44 before the consonants they follow, and thus Thai, Lao, Tai Viet and New Tai Lue are the only Brahmic scripts in Unicode that use visual order instead of logical order.\nKeyboard layouts.\nThai characters can be typed using the Kedmanee layout and the Pattachote layout.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63733", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63733", "title": "Peter Claver", "text": "Spanish Jesuit missionary\nPeter Claver (; 26 June 1580 \u2013 8 September 1654) was a Spanish Jesuit priest and missionary born in Verd\u00fa, Spain, who, due to his life and work, became the patron saint of slaves, Colombia, and ministry to African Americans. \nDuring the 40 years of his ministry in the New Kingdom of Granada, it is estimated he personally baptized around 300,000 people and heard the confessions of over 5,000 people per year. He is also patron saint for seafarers. He is considered a heroic example of what should be the Christian praxis of love and of the exercise of human rights. \nThe Congress of Colombia declared September 9 as the National Day of Human Rights in his honor.\nEarly life.\nClaver was born in 1580 into a devoutly Catholic and prosperous farming family in the Spanish village of Verd\u00fa, Urgell, located in the Province of Lleida, Spain about from Barcelona. He was born 70 years after King Ferdinand of Spain set the colonial slavery culture into motion by authorizing the purchase of 250 African slaves in Lisbon for his territories in New Spain.\nLater, as a student at the University of Barcelona, Claver was noted for his intelligence and piety. After two years of study there, Claver wrote these words in the notebook he kept throughout his life: \"I must dedicate myself to the service of God until death, on the understanding that I am like a slave.\"\nFormation and Work in the New World.\nAfter he had completed his studies, Claver entered the Society of Jesus in Tarragona at the age of 20. When he had completed the novitiate, he was sent to study philosophy at Palma, Mallorca. While there, he came to know the porter of the college, St. Alphonsus Rodriguez, a laybrother known for his holiness and gift of prophecy. Rodriguez felt that he had been told by God that Claver was to spend his life in service in the colonies of New Spain, and he frequently urged the young student to accept that calling.\nClaver volunteered for the Spanish colonies and was sent to the New Kingdom of Granada, where he arrived in the port city of Cartagena in 1610. Required to spend six years studying theology before being ordained a priest, he lived in Jesuit houses at Tunja and Bogot\u00e1. During those preparatory years, he was deeply disturbed by the harsh treatment and living conditions of the black slaves who were brought from Africa.\nBy this time, the slave trade had been established in the Americas for about a century. Local Native Americans were considered physically ill-suited to work in the gold and silver mines. Mine owners met their labor requirements by importing blacks from Angola and Congo, whom they purchased in West Africa for four crowns a head or bartered for goods and sold in America for an average two hundred crowns apiece. Others were captured at random, especially able-bodied males and females deemed suitable for labor.\nCartagena was a slave-trading hub and 10,000 slaves poured into the port yearly, crossing the Atlantic from West Africa under conditions so foul that an estimated one-third died in transit. Although the slave trade was condemned by Pope Paul III and Urban VIII had issued a papal decree prohibiting slavery, (later called \"supreme villainy\" by Pope Pius IX), it was a lucrative business and continued to flourish.\nClaver's predecessor in his eventual lifelong mission, Alonso de Sandoval, was his mentor and inspiration. Sandoval devoted himself to serving the slaves for 40 years before Claver arrived to continue his work. Sandoval attempted to learn about their customs and languages; he was so successful that, when he returned to Seville, he wrote a book in 1627 about the nature, customs, rites and beliefs of the Africans. Sandoval found Claver an apt pupil. When he was solemnly professed in 1622, Claver signed his final profession document in Latin as: \"Petrus Claver, aethiopum semper servus\" (Peter Claver, servant of the Ethiopians [i.e. Africans] forever).\nMinistry to the enslaved.\nWhereas Sandoval had visited the slaves where they worked, Claver preferred to head for the wharf as soon as a slave ship entered the port. Boarding the ship, he entered the filthy and diseased holds to treat and minister to their badly treated, terrified human cargo, who had survived a voyage of several months under miserable conditions. It was difficult to move around on the ships, because those trafficking in slaves filled them to capacity. The slaves were often told they were being taken to a land where they would be eaten. Claver wore a cloak, which he would lend to anyone in need. A legend arose that whoever wore the cloak received lifetime health and was cured of all disease. After the slaves were herded from the ship and penned in nearby yards to be scrutinized by crowds of buyers, Claver joined them with medicine, food, bread, and lemons. With the help of interpreters and pictures which he carried with him, he gave basic instructions.\nOnce baptized, Claver saw the slaves as fellow Christians, and encouraged others to treat them as such. During the season when slavers were not accustomed to arrive, he traveled the country, visiting plantation after plantation, to give spiritual consolation to the slaves. During his 40 years of ministry it is estimated that he personally catechized and baptized 300,000 slaves. He would then follow up on them to ensure that as Christians they received their Christian and civil rights. His mission extended beyond caring for the slaves, however. He preached in the city square, to sailors and traders and conducted country missions, returning every spring to visit those he had baptized, ensuring that they were treated humanely. During these missions, whenever possible he avoided the hospitality of planters and overseers; instead, he would lodge in the same quarters as the slaves.\nClaver's work on behalf of the enslaved did not prevent him from ministering to the souls of well-to-do members of society, traders and visitors to Cartagena (including Muslims and English Protestants) and condemned criminals, many of whom he spiritually prepared for death; he was also a frequent visitor at the city's hospitals. Through years of unremitting toil and the force of his own unique personality, the slaves' condition slowly improved. In time he became a moral force, the Apostle of Cartagena.\nIllness, and death.\nIn the last years of his life Peter was too ill to leave his room. He lingered for four years, largely forgotten and neglected, physically abused and starved by an ex-slave who had been hired by the Superior of the house to care for him. He never complained about his treatment, accepting it as a just punishment for his sins. He died on 8 September 1654.\nWhen the news of his death spread throughout Cartagena many came to his room to pay their last respects. Such was his reputation for holiness that the room was stripped bare of anything that might serve as a relic.\nThe city magistrates, who had previously considered him a nuisance for his persistent advocacy on behalf of the slaves, ordered a public funeral and he was buried with pomp and ceremony. The scope of Claver's ministry, which was prodigious even before considering the astronomical number of people he baptized, was realized only after his death.\nLegacy.\nClaver was canonized in 1888 by Pope Leo XIII, along with the Jesuit porter, Alphonsus Rodriguez. In 1896, Pope Leo also declared Claver the patron of missionary work among all African peoples. His body is preserved and venerated in the church of the Jesuit residence, now renamed in his honor as \"Iglesia de San Pedro Claver\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"No life, except the life of Christ, has moved me so deeply as that of Peter Claver\".\n Pope Leo XIII, on the occasion of the canonization of Peter Claver\nMany organizations, missions, parishes, religious congregations, schools and hospitals bear the name of St. Peter Claver and also claim to continue the Mission of Claver as the following:\nThe Congress of the Republic of Colombia declared September 9 as the Human Rights national Day in his honor.\nControversy.\nHis canonization has caused angst among some due to his own slaveholding and treatment of slaves (including corporal punishment), and it is alleged that these matters may have initially stalled his canonization. Dr. Katie Grimes has gone so far as to call Claver a \"antiblackness Supremacist\" and has accused the Catholic Church of \"antiblackness supremacism\" for championing him.\nThat said, the sources cited by Grimes' in her criticism stated that Claver allowed uncommon freedom for the slaves he purchased (using them in his ministry rather than for hard labor), and resorted to physical punishment solely to prevent what he saw as immoral behavior.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63734", "revid": "27189827", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63734", "title": "Northampton", "text": "County town of Northamptonshire, England\nNorthampton ( ) is a town and civil parish in Northamptonshire, England. It is the county town of Northamptonshire and the administrative centre of the unitary authority of West Northamptonshire. The town is situated on the River Nene, north-west of London and south-east of Birmingham. Northampton is one of the largest towns in England; the population of its overall urban area was recorded as 249,093 in the 2021 census. The parish of Northampton alone had 137,387.\nArchaeological evidence of settlement in the area dates to the Bronze Age, Romans and Anglo-Saxons. In the Middle Ages, the town rose to national significance with the establishment of Northampton Castle, an occasional royal residence which regularly hosted the Parliament of England. Medieval Northampton had many churches, monasteries and the University of Northampton, all enclosed by the town walls. It was granted a town charter by Richard I in 1189 and a mayor was appointed by King John in 1215. The town was also the site of two medieval battles, in 1264 and 1460.\nThe town largely supported the Parliamentary Roundheads during the English Civil War, which prompted Charles II to order the destruction of the town walls and most of the castle. The Great Fire of Northampton in 1675 also destroyed much of the historic town. Northampton was soon rebuilt and grew rapidly with the industrial development of the 18th century. The town continued to expand with the arrival of the Grand Union Canal and the railways in the 19th century, becoming a centre for footwear and leather manufacture.\nGrowth was limited following the World Wars until it was designated a New Town in 1968, accelerating development which has continued into the 21st century. Northampton unsuccessfully applied for city status four times; in 1992, 2000, 2002 and 2022.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nThe earliest reference to Northampton in writing occurred in 914 under the name \"Ham tune\". The prefix \"North\" was added later to distinguish it from other towns called Hampton, most prominently Southampton. The \"Domesday Book\" (1086) records the town as \"Northantone\", which evolved into \"Norhamptone\" by the 13th century and later \"Northampton\" by the 17th century.\nAncient.\nPresent-day Northampton is the latest in a series of settlements that began in the Bronze Age. Remains found in the Briar Hill district show evidence of a Neolithic encampment within a large circular earthwork where local farmers assembled for tribal ceremonies and seasonal events from approximately 3500\u00a0BC to 2000\u00a0BC.\nDuring the British Iron Age, people typically lived in protected hill forts. Present-day Hunsbury Hill is an example of this settlement; a circular ditch and a bank faced with a wall of timber and enclosing an area of which dates to around 400\u00a0BC. In the Roman period, a small rural settlement is thought to have existed in the present-day district of Duston; remains of Roman pottery were found there.\nFollowing a Danish invasion, the central area of the town was turned into a stronghold called a \"burh\" probably by the Anglo-Saxons. By the time of the Peace of Wedmore in 878 the Burgh was in possession of the Danes and became the base for one of the Danish armies. A ditch was dug around the settlement and it was fortified with earth ramparts. Having conquered Mercia, the Danes turned the settlement into a centre for military and administrative purposes, which was part of the Danelaw. The Danish army of Northampton however submitted to Edward the Elder, Saxon King of Wessex (who controlled the southern and western part of the English Kingdom of Mercia) in 921\nIn the 9th century \"Regenhere of Northampton\", an East Anglian Saint with localised veneration, was buried in Northampton. By 918, Northampton had an earl and an army dependent upon it, whose territory extended to the River Welland.\nEdward the Elder turned Northampton into the centre of one of the new shires, and it prospered as a river port and trading centre. In 940, it resisted the invading forces of Danish opposition in Northumbria when the Mercians successfully defended the town in a siege by King Olaf of York, but was burnt in 1010 by a Danish army, and again in 1065 by the rebellious northern earls Edwin and Morcar. Despite this, the \"Domesday Book\" records \"Northantone\" as possessing 316 houses with a population of 2000 people, ranking between Warwick and Leicester in size.\nMedieval.\nWith the Norman Conquest of England in 1066, the town rose to national significance; its geographical location in the centre of England made Northampton a valuable strategical point for government and as a convenient meeting place for political, social, ecclesiastical and military events.\nNorthampton Castle is thought to have been built by Simon de Senlis, who became the first Earl of Northampton, circa 1084. It was originally an earth and timber stockaded construction which was later rebuilt in stone. The castle became an occasional royal residence from the reign of King Henry I in 1130, until that of King Richard II. King John regularly stayed at the castle and moved The Treasury there in 1205. Some 32 Parliaments were held there. The last Parliament at Northampton was held in 1380. Significant events in the castle's history include the trial of Thomas Becket in 1164, the publication of the Assize of Northampton in 1176, the declaration of peace with Scotland in the Treaty of Edinburgh\u2013Northampton, the passage of the Statute of Northampton in 1328 and the imposition of poll tax in 1380. Royal tournaments and feasts were also held at the castle.\nSimon de Senlis is also thought to have built the medieval town walls, which enclosed about and had four main gates. Since demolished, the circular pattern of the main roads surrounding the town centre marks the original position of the walls. de Senlis founded the Cluniac Priory of St Andrew's in the area of Semilong, and built The Church of the Holy Sepulchre \u2013 one of four remaining round churches in England \u2013 and All Hallows' Church on the current site of All Saints' Church. His son, Simon II de Senlis, built St Peter's Church on a site between a former Anglo-Saxon palace and Northampton Castle. Simon II de Senlis also founded Delapr\u00e9 Abbey \u2013 another Cluniac priory \u2013 which still stands today. Other priories in medieval Northampton include St James' Abbey, Graye Friers, Blackfriars and Whitefriars. St. John's, a medieval hospital, was situated east of Bridge Street. Medieval tunnels remain under the centre of Northampton around All Saints' Church and the Market Square but their purpose, extent and significance have been disputed.\nThe town was originally controlled by officials acting for the King who collected taxes and upheld the law. This changed on 18 November 1189, when King Richard I granted the town its first charter in exchange for money to fund his crusades. The charter allowed the townspeople certain rights and independence in legal and administrative matters. In 1215, King John authorised the appointment of William Tilly as the town's first Mayor and ordered that \"twelve of the better and more discreet [residents] of your town\" join him as a council to assist him. The importance of Northampton at this time is underlined by the fact that only London, York and King's Lynn had mayors by this date. The mayor later ruled with 24 councillors and 48 freemen in a closed body until 1835.\nIn 1261, the medieval University of Northampton was established by royal charter from King Henry III. Had it survived, it would have been the third oldest university founded in England after Oxford and Cambridge. However, after members of the university sided with supporters of Simon de Montfort (who was rebelling against the King) and advisors to The Crown said that Northampton was a threat to Oxford's scholastic hegemony, Henry III dissolved the university in 1265.\nMarkets and fairs were a key element in the town's economy in medieval times. The Market Square came to prominence in 1235, when Henry III ordered that the selling of goods in the churchyard of All Saints should be relocated to the Market Square. Street names in the town give an indication of trades and market centres; The Drapery,Woolmonger Street, Mercers Row, Gold Street, Sheep Street and Horse Market. Cloth and wool were very important but these industries declined. In the 13th century, Northampton had a large Jewish population centred on Gold Street. In 1277, two years after Edward I passed the Statute of the Jewry, some Jewish residents were executed while the remainder were driven out of town. Archaeological sites include a medieval Jewish cemetery and the Northampton Medieval Synagogue.\nThe First Barons' War caused significant destruction to Northampton. The barons besieged Northampton Castle in protest at King John's oppression of his subjects. In retaliation, royalist forces destroyed a large part of the town. When the forces of King Henry III overran the supporters of Simon de Montfort, the Second Barons' War broke out. The First Battle of Northampton took place in 1264 near and at the site of Northampton Castle where King Henry III and his son Prince Edward attacked with a large army, pillaged the town and took prisoners.\nIn 1349, the Black Death pandemic killed more than half the population of Northampton. In 1377, the population was 2,200. The town was rapidly losing its wealth and its importance as a national centre. In 1460, the Second Battle of Northampton took place during the War of the Roses in the meadows between the River Nene and Delapr\u00e9 Abbey. The Yorkists defeated the Lancastrians and King Henry VI was taken prisoner. In 1484, the Mayor declared that Northampton was \"in great desolation and ruin\". The Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1538 led to further destruction of what remained of the medieval town. Northampton was severely affected by Plague between March and September 1638 when 665 people died.\nEarly modern.\nThe royal connection to Northampton Castle became less significant and, by the time of the English Civil War, Northampton was decidedly pro-Parliament. Though Spencer Compton, Earl of Northampton, was a royalist (Cavalier) and backed King Charles I, the people of Northampton supported Parliament and Oliver Cromwell's Roundhead army. The town had a long history of religious dissent from the Lollards and Puritanism gained a strong hold on the town. The corporation of the town, having already refused to provide troops to the King in 1632 or to pay the notorious ship money tax in 1636, petitioned Parliament in 1642 against papists and bishops.\nWhen war broke out in 1642, the town willingly became the main Parliamentarian garrison for the south-east Midlands area with the former royal castle as its headquarters. In 1643, Prince Rupert attacked Northampton with approximately 2,000 men, but was beaten back at the North Gate of the town. Oliver Cromwell visited in 1645 and General Fairfax marched from the town to Naseby, where Charles I's Royalist army was decisively defeated. Over 4,000 pairs of leather shoes and 600 pairs of cavalry jack-boots for the Parliamentary armies were manufactured in Northampton during the Civil War, and a further 2,000 for Cromwell's New Model Army in 1648. Until well into the 19th century, the shoe industry boomed in and around the town with small manufacturing workshops set up in the surrounding areas.\nThe war ended with a Parliamentary victory, resulting in England becoming a Commonwealth, which lasted a decade. Following the restoration of King Charles II in 1660, he took revenge on the town by ordering the destruction of its walls and partial demolition of its castle in 1662, since it did not support his father Charles I and his cavaliers. From then on, the castle was used as a court and a jail, but its physical condition worsened. The new council of the town had to pay \u00a3200 to have its charter renewed and also required all officials to swear the oath of allegiance and some confirmed by the Crown.\nThe town centre was further destroyed by the Great Fire of Northampton in 1675, caused by sparks from an open fire in a thatched cottage by the castle. The fire spread eastwards by strong westerly winds and consumed three-quarters of the town centre in 24 hours. Matters were worsened because most buildings were chiefly made of wood and covered with thatch. An estimated 600 buildings were destroyed, amounting to \u00a3150,000 lost. Very little survived the fire, apart from buildings made of stone; these included the Welsh House on Market Square, built in 1595, and Hazelrigg House in Mare Fair, built in 1662.\nThe devastation led to an Act of Parliament for the rebuilding the town. Local people and businesses helped to raise around \u00a325,000 towards the rebuilding of the town centre based around the Market Square. Streets were widened and buildings made of brick and stone and tiled to prevent such devastation again. In an act of reconciliation, King Charles II donated timber from the royal forests of Salcey and Whittlebury to help with the rebuild. In 1678, the Sessions House and what is now County Hall were amongst the first buildings to be completed. A Georgian town with new houses, shops and workshops eventually grew out of the old medieval town destroyed by the fire. In 1742, Edward Cave opened Marvel's Mill, the world's first cotton mill to be driven by a water wheel, on the River Nene.\nA permanent military presence was established in the town with the completion of Gibraltar Barracks in 1797.\nBy the end of the 18th century, Northampton had become a major centre of footwear and leather manufacture. In 1801, the population was 7,020; it more than doubled to 15,351 in 1831, attributed to the fact that there was great demand for footwear caused by the Napoleonic Wars of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. A third of the adult males alone were shoemakers at the time. Northampton grew beyond the old town walls and industry grew rapidly with the mechanisation of factories by the middle of the 19th century.\nTransport improvements.\nThe Nene Navigation Company had previously made the River Nene navigable from King's Lynn as far up as Northampton in 1762, allowing cheap transportation of coal and other goods to the town, but in 1815, the Grand Union Canal reached the town, joining the River Nene, giving the town a direct link to the Midlands coalfields and to Birmingham, Manchester and London.\nThe first railway to be built into Northampton was the Northampton and Peterborough Railway, a branch from the main London and Birmingham Railway from Blisworth to Peterborough through Northampton which opened in 1845 along with the town's first railway station, Bridge Street station. This was followed by the opening of Castle station in 1859 on the site of part of the historic Northampton Castle, and later St. John's Street station in 1872. The Northampton loop of the West Coast Main Line was built in the late 1870s. Castle station was rebuilt and expanded over the site of Northampton Castle, the remains of which were purchased and demolished in 1880 to make way for the goods shed. St John's Street Station closed in 1939 and Bridge Street Station closed in 1964, leaving only Castle Station serving the town. It is now known simply as Northampton railway station.\nTram lines were also laid down in the town in 1881 and electrified in 1903. An early omnibus service ran to Wellingborough, and since 1919 motor omnibus services ran to villages around the town which brought buyers and sellers to the market.\nChurch extension.\nWhen Bishop of Peterborough from 1868 to 1891, William Connor Magee devoted considerable effort to ministering to the rapidly growing population of Northampton. Responses to the questions he circulated to the clergy of the Rural Deanery of Northampton in preparation for formal visitations held in the years 1872, 1875, 1878, 1882 and 1888 have been published, including a detailed introduction describing the condition of the town at that time and associated issues. During that period, the number of relevant Anglican parishes and ecclesiastical districts increased from 11 to 16.\nQuarrying.\nThere were iron ore quarries in the countryside around the town during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, which have left their mark on the landscape. Some of the quarries were in what is now the town area, in an arc from Kingsthorpe through Duston and Hunsbury, round to Hardingstone beginning in about 1860; some have now been built over. The town area quarries that lasted the longest were at Hunsbury, which began working in 1877 and closed in 1920. There are remains of some of these quarries at Hunsbury Hill. There was an iron works by the river to the west of the town, next to the railway, that then operated between Northampton and Blisworth. This was called the Hunsbury Ironworks, which operated between about 1874 and January 1921, using ore from these quarries and elsewhere.\nContemporary.\nFollowing World War I, the shoe industry was increasingly in decline, despite the town's factories supplying over 23 million pairs of boots to the armed forces. A total of 1,700 men from the town were lost of the 6,000 killed from the Northamptonshire Regiment. The town expanded further during the 1920s and saw the erection of Northampton Power Station, which supplied electricity to areas as far away as Wolverton, until its closure in 1975. Much council housing was also built largely to the east, north and south of the town, including Abington, Far Cotton, Kingsley, Kingsthorpe and Dallington \u2013 areas which had been incorporated within the borough's boundaries in 1901. However, the population growth slowed down as people moved beyond its boundaries. In 1901, the population had expanded to 90,923; in 1931, the population was 92,341.\nAfter World War II, Northampton changed vastly. In 1959, the M1 motorway was opened to the south-west of the town; in 1968, Northampton was designated a New Town. Both these events and the rail link helped Northampton's growth as a commuter town for London. The Northampton Development Corporation (NDC) was set up in 1968, to redevelop the town substantially in partnership with the local council, spending \u00a3205\u00a0million to build new housing and industrial estates. Initially, these were built in Lumbertubs, Moulton Park and Round Spinney to the east, followed by Briar Hill, Camp Hill and East and West Hunsbury in the south of the town; this was mainly to accommodate the overflow population of new residents from the London area. In the town centre, older buildings were demolished and replaced or redeveloped for other buildings, including the former Greyfriars bus station, the Grosvenor Centre, Peacock Place (now Market Walk), shops, flats and hotels.\nAlthough growth was slower than planned, the population grew from 105,421 in 1961 to 157,217 by 1981, with 15,655 new homes added to the town between 1970 and 1985. The borough boundaries also changed following a split of the Northampton parliamentary constituency into Northampton North and Northampton South in 1974. Northampton was reconstituted as a non-metropolitan district, which also covered areas outside the former borough boundaries but inside the designated New Town. The town tried for unitary status during the 1990s UK local government reform, but failed and it remained a non-metropolitan district until its abolition in 2021. On Good Friday 1998, Northampton suffered severe flooding, particularly in the areas of Far Cotton and St James; two people were killed and thousands of homes were affected.\nSince the turn of the new millennium, the town has continued to expand. Northampton applied for city status in 2000 to celebrate the new millennium, in 2002 to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II and most recently in 2022 to celebrate the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II; it has failed on all three occasions and remains a town.\nIn 2006, Northampton became a government expansion zone, with new growth promoted by West Northamptonshire Development Corporation (WNDC), an unelected quango, which has provoked a series of regeneration schemes across the town. Some have been completed, including:\nIn 2015, St Giles Street in the town centre was named the \"Best British High Street\" in a national competition run by the Department for Communities and Local Government. In 2024 the market square was excavated and redesigned.\nGovernance.\nPolitics.\nNorthampton was inaugurated as a constituency in 1295; for many centuries, it returned two Members of Parliament (MPs) to the House of Commons. Spencer Perceval was elected as one of these in 1796 and became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom in 1809, the only Solicitor General and only Attorney General to have done so, but also the only Prime Minister to be assassinated. The murder was by a highly disgruntled business owner John Bellingham in the House of Commons lobby in 1812. By the late 19th century, Northampton had acquired a reputation for political vanguardism. In 1880, radical non-conformist Charles Bradlaugh was elected as one of the MPs. During one of his election cross-candidate hustings a riot broke out in the Market Square. Local figures of authority called military to disperse it. For some decades following the 1918 general election, representation was reduced to one MP.\nIn 1974, the original Northampton seat was replaced by the new constituencies of Northampton North and Northampton South, which both elected one MP each, beginning in the February 1974 general election. For the 2010 general election, the new South Northamptonshire constituency took a southern sector of the borough. The southern sectors transferred to Northampton South for the 2024 general election.\nNorthampton is currently represented by two Labour MPs:\nLocal government.\nThe town existed as an ancient borough in the medieval period, before being one of the 178 boroughs to be reformed under the Municipal Corporations Act in 1835, with a democratically elected council replacing the corporation before it. Town government alternated between the Liberals and Conservatives, and the town achieved independence from Northamptonshire in 1888 when it became a county borough. It had six electoral wards from 1898, nine wards from 1900 and 12 wards from 1911. From 1931 until it was abolished in 1974, the county borough contained only the parish of Northampton.\nOn 1 April 1974, the county borough and parish were abolished and the area became part of the new Northampton district in the non-metropolitan county of Northamptonshire.\nThe new Northampton district was formed from:\nNo successor parish was formed so the former county borough became unparished.\nThe new district was granted modern borough status in 1974. From 1974 until 2021, the town had a two-tier structure of local government: the non-metropolitan district of Northampton was administered by both Northampton Borough Council and Northamptonshire County Council.\nPropositions for the borough to become a unitary authority failed during the 1990s local government reform and again, in 2011, when the motion was voted down by the council. However, in 2016, the borough council and all seven Northamptonshire MPs called for the existing eight Northamptonshire councils be scrapped for new unitary authorities.\nIn March 2018, following suspension of the County Council arising from its becoming insolvent, due to financial and cultural mismanagement by the cabinet and officers, the then Secretary of State for Local Government, Sajid Javid, sent commissioner Max Caller into the council. He recommended that the county council and all district and borough councils in the county be abolished; these would be replaced by two unitary authorities: one covering the west and one the north of the county. These proposals were approved in April 2019. It meant that the districts of Daventry, Northampton and South Northamptonshire were merged to form a new unitary authority called West Northamptonshire, whilst the second unitary authority North Northamptonshire consists of Corby, East Northamptonshire, Kettering and Wellingborough districts. These new authorities came into being on 1 April 2021. Elections for the new authorities were due to be held on 7 May 2020, but these were delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and took place in May 2021.\nA year prior to these changes, three new civil parishes were created in Northampton's urban area: a large parish covering the majority of the Northampton urban area was created, allowing Northampton to have a Town (parish) Council. Northampton Town Council is the largest parish level authority in England. In addition, two smaller parishes were created for the suburbs of Far Cotton &amp; Delapre and Kingsthorpe.\nPolicing in the town remains the responsibility of Northamptonshire Police; and firefighting, the responsibility of Northamptonshire Fire and Rescue Service. The Royal Anglian Regiment serves as the county regiment for Northamptonshire, with former county regiments being the Northamptonshire Regiment and the Northamptonshire Yeomanry\nCivil parishes.\nThe Northampton urban area is covered by 13 civil parishes. The parish councils of these form a local tier of government below West Northamptonshire Council. The largest by far of these is the area covered by Northampton Town Council, which was created in 2020; ten more, covering several outer suburbs were pre-existing; and two (Kingsthorpe and Far Cotton and Delapre) were created concurrently with the town council. These are:\nHealth services.\nNHS Northampton guides primary care services (general practitioners, dentists, opticians and pharmacists) in the town, directly provides adult social care and services in the community; these include health visiting and physiotherapy and also funds hospital care and other specialist treatments. Northampton General Hospital is an NHS trust hospital, which was founded in 1744 and moved to its present site in 1793; it has continued to provide healthcare to the local community for more than 200 years. The East Midlands Ambulance Service NHS Trust is responsible for the provision of statutory emergency medical services in Northampton.\nSt Andrew's Hospital, the flagship mental health facility of the private company St Andrew's Healthcare, is also based in Northampton. Originally opened in 1838 to serve Northampton, St Andrew's became a charity and private healthcare provider when the Berrywood Asylum (later the Northampton County Lunatic Asylum, then St Crispin Hospital in 1948, and since 2010 Berrywood Hospital) opened in 1876.\nGeography.\nNorthampton is formally in the East Midlands region but is also referred to in Government planning as being part of the South Midlands \"growth area\". The town is south-south-east of Leicester, north-north-west of Milton Keynes, west of Cambridge, north-east of Oxford and south-west of Peterborough.\nAreas and suburbs.\nNorthampton is subdivided into suburbs, council wards, constituencies, ecclesiastical parishes and other less formal areas.\nSuburbs and districts of Northampton include:\nConcurrent with the abolition of the borough of Northampton in 2021, the unparished area of Northampton became parished with three new parish councils being established. A new Town Council covering the majority of the urban area of Northampton was established, whilst the areas of Kingsthorpe, Far Cotton and Delapr\u00e9 also gained parish councils. In addition, there are nine registered parish councils which predate the abolition of the borough of Northampton. These are Billing, Collingtree, Duston, Great Houghton, Hardingstone, Hunsbury Meadow, Upton, West Hunsbury and Wootton &amp; East Hunsbury.\nOther settlements that the Office for National Statistics considers part of the Northampton urban area include Boughton, Ecton, Moulton, Overstone and Rothersthorpe. At the 2011 census, Harpole, Cogenhoe, Grange Park, Little and Great Houghton, Overstone and Sywell were just outside the Northampton built up area; this may change when the 2021 boundaries are released.\nCompass.\nNorthampton's nearest towns are Wellingborough, Daventry and Towcester. The nearest cities are Milton Keynes, Leicester, Coventry and Peterborough.\nClimate.\nAs with the rest of the British Isles, Northampton experiences an oceanic climate with cool summers and mild winters. The official Met Office weather station for Northampton is the Moulton Park Weather Station at the University of Northampton. Situated at an elevation of around above sea level compared to Northampton town centre at , it is one of the highest points in the town, and so may not be a perfect representation of Northampton as a whole. Its hilltop location means less pooling of cold air on calm clear nights and lower maxima during summer. The absolute maximum recorded is on 3 August 1990. A high of was recorded on 19 July 2006, However, a maximum temperature of was recorded on 19 July 2022 at Pitsford, located from the town centre. The absolute minimum is , recorded during February 1986. It is likely the absolute maximum in the town centre is a degree or so higher owing to the lower elevation, and absolute minimum on the eastern and western edges of the urban area around the Nene valley a couple of degrees colder due to katabatic drainage of cold air allowing a frost hollow effect. Most recently, the temperature fell to on 20 December 2010.\nRainfall, at around per year is not high, though is often unpredictable, giving rise to flooding events such as in 1998, but also short-term droughts. Desborough Weather Station also supplies the public with a local weather service.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\nThe town's population recorded at each census since 1801 was as follows:\nSince 1991, the population of the town has increased 17.41% from 180,617 to 212,069 in 2011, with a mean age in 2011 of 37.1 years, younger than the English average of 39.3 years. The population breaks down into 104,168 males, and 107,901 females, with a population density of 2,630 per km2.\nAt the 2011 census, there were 91,484 dwellings, 88,731 of which are occupied households. Some 30.5% (27,048) of these were one person households, 61.1% (54,125) contained families, and 8.5% (7,558) fell into the other household type category. Home tenure was reported as 37.5% of 88,731 households mortgaged, 25.1% owned outright, 16.5% privately rented, 12.8% rented from council, 4.3% social rented, 1.3% private (other) rented, 1.3% shared ownership and 1.2% rent free.\n75.6% of households had at least one car or van, 22.5% of residents over the age of 16 had no formal qualifications, and 15.8% have at least 5 GCSEs of grade C or above.\nThe median income for all workers (in 2012) was \u00a321,193, slightly below both the county average of \u00a321,560, and the England average of \u00a321,794.\nBetween 2001 and 2011, the greatest nominal population increase was in the White, Other group from 3,780 to 13,825 \u2013 an increase of 10,045 \u2013 likely due to migration from Eastern Europe. The largest growth relative to their 2001 numbers was in the Black, African group, recording a 376% increase from 1,361 to 6,473. The largest nominal fall in population was in respondents reporting as White, British, there being 8,146 fewer such residents in 2011 than 10 years previous. The largest fall relative to their 2001 numbers was in the White, Irish group, their count falling 20.3% from 3,838 down to 3,060.\nEthnicity.\nIn the 2011 census, Northampton was 84.5% White, 6.5% Asian, 5.1% Black, and 3.2% Mixed/multiple.\nReligion.\nIn terms of religion, 48.7% of residents described themselves as Christian, 35.7% as irreligious, 5.6% as Muslim, 1.9% as Hindu, 0.6% as other religions, 0.5% as Sikh, 0.4% as Buddhist and 0.1% as Jewish. 6.5% failed to report any affiliation.\nEconomy.\nNorthampton was a major centre of shoemaking and other leather industries, although only specialist shoemaking companies such as Barker Shoes, Church's, Crockett &amp; Jones, Edward Green, Tricker's, (formerly located in nearby Earls Barton), and Wildsmith, survive. A large number of old shoe factories remain, mostly now converted to offices or accommodation, some of which are surrounded by terraced houses built for factory workers.\nEngineering became a major employer in Northampton during the post-war years, following the establishment of the British Timken tapered roller bearing factory at Duston in 1941 as a \"shadow factory\" for the main site in Birmingham during the Second World War. The factory, which closed in 2002, employed over 4,000 employees at its peak and was a major engineering apprentice training employer.\nNorthampton's main private-sector employers are now in distribution and finance, rather than manufacturing, and include Avon Products, Barclaycard, Blacks Leisure Group, Nationwide Building Society (Anglia Building Society was formed by amalgamation of Northampton Town and County Building Society with Leicestershire Building Society in 1966 and subsequently merged with the Nationwide in 1987), Panasonic, Travis Perkins, Coca-Cola, Schweppes, Simply Business, National Grid, Texas Instruments and Carlsberg. In 1974, Princess Benedikte of Denmark opened Northampton's Carlsberg brewery, the first outside Denmark. The University of Northampton is also a major employer, as is St Andrew's Healthcare, a national mental health charity. St Andrew's Hospital, its flagship hospital and the United Kingdom's largest psychiatric hospital, is based in Northampton. In 2014, Experian named Northampton as \"the best place in the UK to start and run a business.\" In 2017, the town's annual economic output, as measured by gross value added, was worth \u00a37.31\u00a0billion.\nThe town was expected to be affected by the insolvency of Northamptonshire County Council in 2018, as the council implemented significant budget cuts for two years. That was expected to include maintenance of only the \"bare legal minimum of service, focused only on the most vulnerable residents.\"\nHealth inequality in Northampton is high, with the life expectancy gap between the least deprived and most deprived men reaching over a decade. Additionally, the constituency is 'considerably worse than [the] England average' in violent crime, self-harm, under-18 conception and GCSE achievement.\nNorthampton's market square is one of Britain's largest and dates back to 1235. The market square is linked to Abington Street, a major shopping area of Northampton. The western part of the street was pedestrianised in 1984. Further east, part was pedestrianised in 1995 and depedestrianised in 2014. The east end (beyond York Road) has never been pedestrianised. There are also two indoor shopping centres in the town centre: the Grosvenor Centre, which was built in the 1970s, and Market Walk (previously Peacock Place), which was constructed in 1988. St James Retail Park is also a large shopping precinct just south of the town centre. Other out-of-town retail parks exist: Weston Favell Shopping Centre, built in the 1970s, and Riverside Retail Park in the east of the town, as well as Sixfields in the west. Each precinct has a range of high street shops, department stores and many smaller individual speciality shops.\nTransport.\nRailway.\nNorthampton railway station is a stop on the Northampton Loop of the West Coast Main Line. London Northwestern Railway operates services southbound to London Euston and northbound to Birmingham New Street and Crewe. Avanti West Coast also provides two daily services to London, although these are set-down only.\nRoads.\nNorthampton is served by junctions 15, 15a and 16 of the M1 motorway, which connects London with Leeds. Both the A45 and A43 link the town with the other major towns in Northamptonshire and beyond, and can be accessed by a partially completed ring road. The A14 is close by to the north of Northampton, providing links to East Anglia and a secondary route to the areas of the Midlands which are situated to the north of the town.\nBuses and coaches.\nBus services are operated predominantly by Stagecoach Midlands from the North Gate bus station. It serves areas within the town and also provides travel to outlying villages and towns within the county, including Corby, Daventry, Kettering, Rushden and Wellingborough. Furthur afield, routes connect the town with Bedford, Leicester, Market Harborough, Peterborough and Rugby. Arriva Herts &amp; Essex operates two services to Milton Keynes.\nNational Express and Flixbus also operate in Northampton, covering routes to London, Birmingham, Coventry, Derby, Glasgow, Luton Airport, Leeds, Nottingham and Sheffield.\nBuses were historically operated by Northampton Corporation Transport, until privatisation in the 1980s.\nOther transport.\nSywell Aerodrome is the nearest airfield, which has recently been upgraded with a concrete runway; however, it only caters for private flying, flight training and corporate flights. For international links, East Midlands Airport and Luton Airport are quickly accessible by the M1 around north-west and south-east, respectively; Birmingham Airport is also around to the north-west of the town via the M1 and M6 motorways, as well as by train.\nNorthampton is the terminus of an arm of the Grand Union Canal, which connects to the River Nene and from that to the River Great Ouse and the North Sea. No longer used for freight, the waterway is now popular with anglers and narrowboaters. Principal outlying villages on the canal include Gayton, Blisworth, Braunston and Stoke Bruerne.\nThe town once had a horse-drawn tramway which opened in 1881. The system was extended in stages and taken over by the council in 1897 and named Northampton Corporation Tramways. It was electrified in 1904, but closed in 1934 mainly as a result of competition from motor buses which were introduced in 1929. Two of the original tram shelters are preserved: one at the Racecourse Park and another in Kingsthorpe opposite the Cock Hotel.\nEducation.\nThe first University of Northampton was established by royal charter by King Henry III in 1261, and started to rival the universities in Cambridge and Oxford, with their students migrating to the Northampton establishment. This university was dissolved by King Henry III in 1265, in revenge for its students siding with the rebellious barons in the Battle of Northampton (1264). Henry III was also advised by bishops and magnates that it posed a threat to Oxford, and signed a Royal Decree which banned the establishment of a university in Northampton.\nThis was eventually repealed and the university's name was revived in 2005, when the unconnected University College Northampton, founded in 1924, was upgraded to full university status and renamed the University of Northampton. This is the only higher education establishment in the town and offers courses from foundation and undergraduate levels to postgraduate, professional and doctoral qualifications. The university is made of up six schools: Business, Education, Health, Science and Technology, Social Sciences, and The Arts. The university was originally spread over two campuses across the town, but moved to its new \u00a3330\u00a0million waterside campus by the River Nene in the town centre in 2018.\nNorthampton's only further education (FE) college is Northampton College, one of the largest FE colleges in the South Midlands, which has two campuses across the town, offering vocational courses, GCSEs and A Levels. Moulton College is another FE college just north of Northampton, which provides many vocational courses, specialising in land-based subjects, sports and construction. In collaboration with the University of Northampton, both colleges also offer some HE programmes.\nThere are 50 primary schools and eight secondary schools in the town. Until 2004, Northamptonshire operated a three-tier system in education of lower, middle and upper schools. In 2001, the move to a two-tier system to primary and secondary schools began, aimed at improving educational standards. Some of its successful secondary schools include Northampton School for Boys, which became the top performing comprehensive school in the country in 2007, and Northampton School for Girls, the first school in England to gain Specialist Music College status. An average of 55% of students in Northampton achieved five A*-C grades at GCSE in 2015, above the government's benchmark of 40%. There are also five special schools in the town. Northampton High School is an independent school for girls.\nCulture.\nLeisure.\nBilling Aquadrome leisure park is on the eastern outskirts. The Northampton Leisure Trust (branded Trilogy Leisure) has four leisure centres across Northampton, including Mounts Baths.\nThere are a total of 170 parks and open spaces around Northampton, which altogether span around . Popular parks include Abington Park.\nAnnual events events include Northampton Carnival, the Beer Festival, the Dragonboat Race and Diwali celebrations. Northampton Music Festival has been celebrated every year since 2007 in the town centre.\nEntertainment.\nThe Royal &amp; Derngate theatre complex, on Guildhall Road in the Cultural Quarter of the town centre, is one of the main venues for arts and entertainment in Northampton. The Deco, situated in Abington Square in the town centre, is a 900-seat theatre and conference centre, which shares its Art Deco building with the Northampton Jesus Centre. It was restored by the Jesus Army as part of their Jesus Centre project. The Deco used to be a cinema in the 1960s; the Beatles appeared there twice on stage in 1963, firstly as unknowns as part of the Tommy Roe/Chris Montez tour, and secondly as part of their own tour in their own right. Smaller theatres include the Northampton Playhouse and the Cripps Theatre, which is part of Northampton School for Boys.\nThe two commercial cinemas in Northampton are Vue at Sol Central in the centre and Odeon at Sixfields. There is also the subsidised Forum Cinema at Lings Forum, whose film programme is widely varied and includes art-house and non-mainstream films. The Northampton Filmhouse, an independent cinema joined to the side of the Royal &amp; Derngate theatre complex, opened in June 2013.\nThere are also many local entertainment venues which provide events. The Roadmender, which used to be run and funded by the council and later bought by The Purplehaus group, hosts mainstream touring bands and one-off gigs. There are other popular late-night entertainment venues, pubs, bars and clubs in the town centre, and along the Wellingborough and Kettering Roads on the way into the town centre. Northampton also has ten-pin bowling alleys and late night casinos.\nLibraries, museums and galleries.\nThe Northamptonshire Central Library in town centre is a Grade II listed building which was erected in 1910. There are seven other public libraries that are dotted across Northampton\u2014in Abington, Duston, Far Cotton, Hunsbury, Kingsthorpe, St James, Wootton\u2014all run by Northamptonshire County Council.\nNorthampton Museum and Art Gallery on Guildhall Road in the Cultural Quarter has a collection of historical footwear (one of the world's largest at 13,000), Italian art, glass and ceramics, plus visiting exhibitions and local history. There is also a smaller Grade I listed historical museum in the former Abington Park house which mainly has history on domestic life in the town and the Northamptonshire Regiment. 78 Derngate, the only house in England designed by Charles Rennie Mackintosh, includes a museum celebrating Mackintosh, an art gallery and a restaurant.\nThe Northampton Arts Collective is homed on a four-storey building entitled \"NN\" in the Cultural Quarter, opposite the Northampton Museum and next to the Royal &amp; Derngate theatre complex. It relocated from the Old Fishmarket, which was demolished to make way for the North Gate bus station. The Avenue Gallery, is at the Avenue campus of the University of Northampton. The university also spent \u00a33\u00a0million on its Portfolio Innovation Centre in early 2011, which houses around 60 creative freelancers, digital media developers, and designers. Other art galleries include Collective Collaborations, Artist's Sanctuary, Albus3, Gallery 177 and Primose Gallery. Northamptonshire also runs an annual county-wide Open Studios event celebrating visual arts in which artists' studios are open to the public.\nAbington Park Museum is located in Abington Park. The museum building was donated with the parkland in 1897 and the museum opened in 1899. It had a wide ranging collection of objects from the UK, Africa and Asia. Today, it is part of the Northampton Museums.\nMusic.\nThe composers Malcolm Arnold, William Alwyn, Trevor Hold, Edmund Rubbra and Robert Walker were born in Northampton. Northampton also has one of the oldest community orchestras in the UK \u2013 the Northampton Symphony Orchestra, which started life in 1896 as Saint Celia's Orchestral Society. Indie rock band The Departure, as well as Gothic rock band Bauhaus formed in Northampton, the latter often cited as the godfathers of goth, helped pioneer the genre during the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s. Spinoff bands Love and Rockets, as well as Tones on Tail were also formed in the town. The UK rapper Slowthai was born in Northampton and frequently talks about his life growing up there in his music. Pop musician Sophie was also born in the town. Both Dominic Major, drummer of London Grammar, and Adrian Utley, guitarist of Portishead, originate from the town.\nSport.\nRugby Union.\nThe town is home to 2023-2024 Premiership rugby union champions Northampton Saints, which plays at Franklin's Gardens in the St James End area to the west of town. The Saints have won three major titles so far: the Heineken Cup in 2000, and the English Premiership twice in 2014 and 2024 respectively; it has the highest average attendance of any professional sports team in the town.\nRugby union also maintains itself as a very popular amateur sport in the town, with it being played by nearly every secondary school in the area, as well as by around ten amateur clubs within Northampton itself, most of which field multiple teams on weekends. Northampton is also home to Northampton Outlaws, its first inclusive rugby team. Due to its introduction to the town as a sport for all, it has maintained a considerably more working class character than elsewhere in the UK.\nFootball.\nEFL League One football club Northampton Town, known as \"The Cobblers\" from the town's shoemaking background, are based at Sixfields Stadium. Established in 1897, in their centenary season of 1997 they reached Wembley through the play-offs and beat Swansea City 1\u20130 with an injury time winning free kick from John Frain. It was the first club to set up a trust for supporters to work with the club as many have done. Sixfields was also briefly the home of Coventry City for just over one season between August 2013 and August 2014.\nThere are also three non-league clubs in the United Counties Football League: Northampton Spencer, Northampton Sileby Rangers and Northampton Old Northamptonian Chenecks.\nCricket.\nNorthamptonshire County Cricket Club, known in limited overs cricket as \"The Steelbacks\" (a reference to the Northamptonshire Regiment which was formed in 1881), is one of the 18 major county clubs which make up the English and Welsh domestic cricket structure. The club was promoted from Division Two of the County Championship in 2019, and play in Group C of the Clydesdale Bank 40 League and the Midlands/Wales/West group of the revamped Friends Provident T20. They are based at the County Ground, in the Abington area.\nMotorsport.\nThe Silverstone Circuit, current home of the British Grand Prix, is a few miles south of the town. Rockingham Motor Speedway and Santa Pod Raceway are a few miles north and east of Northampton respectively, the latter offering a range of drag racing events. Three-time defending BTCC Teams' champions Alliance Racing are based in Northampton.\nOther sports.\nNorthampton is also home to Collingtree Park Golf Club, which hosted the British Masters in 1995. There are also many equestrian and country activities, and several water sports centres, such as the Nene Whitewater Centre, which provides an artificial whitewater course for canoes, kayaks and rafts. The Northampton Swimming Club also trained the young Olympic swimmer Caitlin McClatchey.\nNorthampton is also home to Be Military Fit in Abington Park where members can train up to 7 times a week with serving or ex-military fitness instructors.\nNorthampton Greyhound Stadium hosted greyhound racing from 1928 to 1964 and speedway from 1929 to 1930.\nMedia.\nThe \"Northampton Chronicle &amp; Echo\" (established 1931) is the town's newspaper, published on Thursdays (before 2012, it was published Monday to Saturday) with jobs, property, motors and entertainment supplements. There are other free newspapers circulated within the town. These include \"The Mercury\" (on Thursdays) and \"Northants on Sunday\", both from the publishers of the \"Chronicle &amp; Echo\", and the \"Northampton Herald &amp; Post\" (on Thursdays). These free papers mostly consist of advertising and have limited news. \"The Mercury\" was one of the oldest newspapers still in circulation first published in 1720, founded by William Dicey, an ancestor of the public law commentator, A.V. Dicey. It was the fifth-oldest such newspaper in the United Kingdom and the tenth-oldest such in the world.\nHeart and BBC Radio Northampton are the major stations that serve the town. There are four community radio stations: Inspiration FM, NLive Radio (formerly NNBC), Revolution Radio and Embrace Radio. Revolution Radio was awarded a five year licence on 16 July 2020. Inspiration FM was officially launched in July 2010. The station broadcasts on 107.8 FM.\nNNBC was originally launched in September 2016, as a joint venture with the University of Northampton. As of 30 September 2017, the station was re-branded as NLive Radio. The station marked the re-branding with a live broadcast from Market Square on 30 September. Later that same evening, the station ran a live evening of music from a music venue in Northampton. The evening of music was headlined by Hana Brooks and broadcast live on the station under the banner 'Shoetown Sounds'. The station broadcasts on 106.9 FM.\nEmbrace Radio, was launched on 5 March 2022. It serves the town on the local small-scale DAB service.\nRevolution Radio and Inspiration FM can also be found on the local DAB service.\nRegional TV news is provided by \"BBC Look East\" and \"ITV News Anglia\". Northampton has also been used as a location for television, film and theatre. Northampton Castle is featured in William Shakespeare's history play \"King John\" and in \"Becket\", a play by Alfred, Lord Tennyson. The town was the location for the BBC sitcom \"Keeping Up Appearances\" from 1990 until 1995. Parts of the 2005 film \"Kinky Boots\" were also made in Northampton and featured shots of the statue outside the Grosvenor Centre in the town centre and inside RE Tricker's shoe factory in St. Michaels Road representing the original factory in Earls Barton. The film was turned into a musical \"Kinky Boots\", maintaining its Northampton backdrop, which premiered on Broadway in 2013 and won 6 Tony Awards. It transferred to the West End in London in 2015 and won 3 Olivier Awards. In addition, BBC Three shows \"Bizarre ER\" and \"Junior Paramedics\" were filmed in Northampton. \"Changing Ends\" (2023), a semi-autobiographical sitcom based on Alan Carr's childhood, was set in 1980s Northampton.\nNotable buildings.\nThe Church of the Holy Sepulchre is one of the largest and best-preserved round churches in England. It was built in 1100 on the orders of the first Earl of Northampton, Simon de Senlis, and based on a plan of the original Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.\nSimon de Senlis also built Northampton Castle in c. 1084, which was one of the country's most important castles for many years. It was a royal residence, holding the Parliament of England many times, and was the site of royal tournaments and feasts. Thomas Becket was imprisoned there until he escaped. The castle suffered many fates and was eventually demolished to make way for the railway station in 1879. A postern, dismantled from its original position and rebuilt into a wall by the station, and a part of the keep mound are all that remains.\nThe current All Saints' Church was built on the site of a great Norman church, All Hallows', which was almost completely destroyed by the Great Fire of Northampton in 1675. All that remained was the medieval tower and the fine vaulted crypt; by 1680, All Saints' had been rebuilt, with the help of donations from all over England, including 1,000 tons of timber from King Charles II, whose statue can be seen above the portico. Famously, the poet John Clare liked to sit beneath the portico of the church. It is home to a choral foundation.\nOther notable church buildings include Northampton Cathedral, the mother church of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Northampton and seat of the Bishop of Northampton; St Peter's (mostly built in Norman times); St Giles' Church; St Matthew's in Phippsville, which was built between 1891 and 1894, has a Henry Moore sculpture of the Madonna. St Edmund's Church (built in 1850) closed in 1978 and was demolished in 1980 (its bells are now in Saint Paul's Cathedral, Wellington).\nMedieval Northampton had ten parish churches and at least three chapels: the aforementioned All Saints', St Peter's, Holy Sepulchre and St Giles' (which four still exist), plus St Bartholomew's, St Edmund's, St Gregory's, St Margaret's, St Mary's and St Michael's. These six latter churches, along with the three chapels of St Katherine's, St Martin's and St Thomas's, were all closed between the 14th and 16th centuries.\nThere are twelve other medieval churches within the modern-day metropolitan area - that is, in villages now swallowed up by the town. These are at Abington (SS Peter &amp; Paul's), Collingtree (St Columba's), Dallington (St Mary's), Duston (St Luke's), Great Billing (St Andrew's), Hardingstone (St Edmund's), Kingsthorpe (St John the Baptist's), Little Billing (All Saints'), Moulton (SS Peter &amp; Paul's), Upton (St Michael's), Weston Favell (St Peter's) and Wootton (St George's). Kingsthorpe and Upton were chapelries to St Peter's, Northampton until 1850; the others were parochial. All except Upton church are extant.\nThe expansion of the town from the 19th century onwards led to the building of numerous other Anglican churches: St Katherine's (1839), St Andrew's (1841), St Edmund's (1850), St James's (1868), St Mary's (1875), St Lawrence's (1878), St Michael's (1882), St Crispin's (1884), St Barnabas' Duston (1887), St Paul's (1890), St Matthew's (1893), St Gabriel's (1894), Christ Church (1906), Holy Trinity (1910), St Alban's (1938), St David's (1940), St Augustine's (1950s), St Mark's (1960), St Francis' (1967), Emmanuel (1974), and St Benedict's (1982), plus building-less churches in Boothville, Rectory Farm, Grange Park and Upton. Of these St Andrew's, St Augustine's, St Barnabas', St Crispin's, St Edmund's, St Gabriel's, St Katherine's, St Lawrence's and St Paul's have closed; the others are still holding services.\nJust south of the town centre is Delapr\u00e9 Abbey, a former Cluniac nunnery, the County Records Office and site of the second Battle of Northampton, which was founded by Simon II de Senlis, the son of first Earl of Northampton, in 1145. At the edge of the Abbey, one of the three standing Eleanor crosses still remains, in memory of Eleanor of Castile, whose body rested here on its way to London. The original top of the monument has been knocked off and replaced several times from as early as 1460.\nSt Andrew's Hospital, which opened 1838, and its new building William Wake House, is one of the largest neo-classical structures in England. Northampton &amp; County Club, which was established in 1873, was also the old county hospital before becoming a private members' club; the cellars are medieval. Northampton Guildhall, which is Grade II* listed, was constructed mostly in the 1860s in Victorian Gothic architecture designed by Edward William Godwin, and extended in 1889\u201392 and in the 1990s. The Clare Street drill hall was completed in 1859.\nNo. 78 Derngate is a Grade II* listed Georgian town house, remodelled by Charles Rennie Mackintosh for Wenman Joseph Bassett-Lowke in 1916\u201317. It contains notable Mackintosh interiors (which have been restored) and is his only major domestic commission outside Scotland. It is open to the public. One of these Derngate buildings was previously home to Northampton High School, an independent Northampton girls' school.\nThe tall National Lift Tower is a dominant feature and visible from most of the town. A Terry Wogan radio phone-in during the 1980s came up with the name \"Northampton Lighthouse\" as Northampton is one of the furthest places from the sea. It is also known as the \"Cobblers' Needle\". It was built for testing new lifts at the Express Lifts factory, now closed. Though now redundant, it is a listed building.\nThe former Greyfriars bus station served the town from 1976 until 2014. In the 2000s, it was featured on Channel 4's \"Demolition\" programme as the ugliest transport station in the United Kingdom and worthy of demolition. Demolition work began in March 2014, following the move of bus services to North Gate bus station. The Greyfriars was completely destroyed on 15 March 2015 by way of a controlled explosion.\nMemorials.\nNorthampton contains several significant war memorials. The Town and County War Memorial, unveiled in 1926, commemorates casualties of the First World War from all of Northamptonshire; it replaced a temporary cenotaph which stood in Abington Square from 1919. Designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens, it consists of two large obelisks and an altar-like stone sited in a small garden behind All Saints' Church. The Town and County memorial is a grade I listed building and part of a national collection of Lutyens' war memorials. As the Town and County memorial does not contain a list of names of the fallen, the Royal British Legion launched a campaign which resulted in the construction of a second memorial, dedicated solely to the town; this memorial, in Abington Square, takes the form of a garden of remembrance with the names of the dead inscribed on the garden walls. A bust of Edgar Mobbs was later moved into the garden; Mobbs was a rugby player for Northampton Saints who was killed while serving in the First World War. A memorial to Nobel Prize winner Francis Crick, who was born in Northampton,and grow up in the Weston Favell area,\n was installed on Abington street in 2005. The sculpture, \"Discovery\" by artist Lucy Glendinning, was funded by the Wilson Foundation.\nTwin towns.\nNorthampton is twinned with:\nFreedom of the Borough.\nThe following people, military units, and organisations have received the Freedom of the Borough of Northampton.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63736", "revid": "44487672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63736", "title": "Herbert Beerbohm Tree", "text": "English actor and theatre manager (1852\u20131917)\nSir Herbert Beerbohm Tree (17 December 1852 \u2013 2 July 1917) was an English actor and theatre manager.\nTree began performing in the 1870s. By 1887, he was managing the Haymarket Theatre in the West End, winning praise for adventurous programming and lavish productions, and starring in many of its productions. In 1899, he helped fund the rebuilding, and became manager, of His Majesty's Theatre. Again, he promoted a mix of Shakespeare and classic plays with new works and adaptations of popular novels, giving them spectacular productions in this large house, and often playing leading roles. His wife, actress Helen Maud Holt, often played opposite him and assisted him with management of the theatres.\nAlthough Tree was regarded as a versatile and skilled actor, particularly in character roles, by his later years his technique was seen as mannered and old-fashioned. He founded the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in 1904 and was knighted for his contributions to theatre in 1909. His famous family includes his siblings, explorer Julius Beerbohm, author Constance Beerbohm and half-brother caricaturist Max Beerbohm. His daughters were Viola, an actress, Felicity, a socialite and Iris, a poet. His illegitimate children included film director Carol Reed. He was a grandfather of the actor Oliver Reed.\nEarly life and career.\nBorn in Kensington, London as Herbert Draper Beerbohm, Tree was the second son and second child of Julius Ewald Edward Beerbohm (1810\u20131892) and his wife Constantia (n\u00e9e\u00a0Draper) Beerbohm. The senior Beerbohm was of Lithuanian origin; he had come to the United Kingdom in about 1830 and set up and prospered as a cereal merchant. Draper was an Englishwoman. They had four children. Tree's younger brother was the author and explorer Julius Beerbohm, and his sister was author Constance Beerbohm. A younger half-brother was the parodist and caricaturist Max Beerbohm, born from their father's second marriage. Max jokingly claimed that Herbert added the \"Tree\" to his name because it was easier for audiences than shouting \"Beerbohm! Beerbohm!\" at curtain calls. The latter part of his surname, \"bohm\", is north German dialect for \"tree\".\nTree's early education included Mrs Adams's Preparatory School at Frant, East Sussex, Dr Stone's school in King's Square, Bristol, and Westbourne Collegiate School in Westbourne Grove, London. After these, he attended the Salzmann Schnepfenthal School in Thuringia, Germany, where his father had been educated. Upon his return to England, he began performing with amateur troupes, eventually using the name Herbert Beerbohm Tree, while working in his father's business.\nActor.\nIn 1878, Tree played Grimaldi in Dion Boucicault's \"The Life of an Actress\" at the Globe Theatre; shortly after, he began his professional career. For the next six years, he performed mainly on tour in the British provinces, playing character roles. He made his London debut late in 1878 at the Olympic Theatre under the management of Henry Neville. His first real success was as the elderly Marquis de Pontsabl\u00e9 in \"Madame Favart\", in which he toured towards the end of 1879. Another London engagement was as Prince Maleotti in a revival of \"Forget-me-Not\" at the Prince of Wales's Theatre in 1880.\nHis first London success came in 1884 as the Rev. Robert Spalding in Charles Hawtrey's adaptation of \"The Private Secretary.\" Tree embellished the comic elements of the role, which added to the popularity of the play. His next role was Paolo Marcari in \"Called Back\" by Hugh Conway. The contrast between this dashing Italian spy and his timid parson in Hawtrey's play, showed his versatility as a character actor. Other appearances over the next two years included roles in revivals of A. W. Pinero's \"The Magistrate\" and W. S. Gilbert's \"Engaged\". In 1886, he played Iago in \"Othello\" and Sir Peter Teazle in \"The School for Scandal\" with F. R. Benson's company at Bournemouth. The same year, in London, he made a success at the Haymarket Theatre, in the character role of Baron Harzfeld in \"Jim the Penman\" by Charles Young.\nTheatre manager and leading roles.\nIn 1887, at age thirty-four, Tree took over the management of the Comedy Theatre in the West End of London. His first production was a successful run of the Russian revolutionary play \"The Red Lamp\" by W. Outram Tristram, in which Tree took the role of Demetrius.\nLater in the year, he became the manager of the prestigious Haymarket Theatre. Since the departure of the Bancrofts in 1885, that theatre's reputation had suffered. Tree restored it during his tenure. He produced and appeared on stage in some thirty plays during the following decade. While popular farces and melodramas like \"Trilby\" anchored the repertoire (the production ran for an extraordinary 260 performances), Tree also encouraged the new drama, staging Maeterlinck's \"The Intruder\" (1890), Ibsen's \"An Enemy of the People\" (1893) and Wilde's \"A Woman of No Importance\" (1893), among others. He supported new playwrights by producing special \"Monday night\" performances of their new plays.\nTree also mounted critically acclaimed productions of \"Hamlet\" (1892), \"Henry IV, Part 1\" (1896) and \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\" (1889), establishing himself as a Shakespearean leading man. \"The Times\" thought his Hamlet a \"notable success\", but not everyone agreed: W. S. Gilbert said of it, \"I never saw anything so funny in my life, and yet it was not in the least vulgar.\" His Haymarket seasons were broken by visits to the United States in January 1895 and November 1896, and occasional visits to the provinces.\nWith the profits he had accumulated at the Haymarket, Tree helped finance the rebuilding of Her Majesty's Theatre in grand Louis XV style. He owned and managed it. He lived in the theatre for two decades following its completion in 1897 until his death in 1917. For his personal use, he had a banqueting hall and living room installed in the massive, central, square French-style dome. The theatre historian W. J. MacQueen-Pope, wrote of the theatre, \nSimply to go to His Majesty's was a thrill. As soon as you entered it, you sensed the atmosphere ... In Tree's time it was graced by footmen in powdered wigs and liveries ... Everything was in tone, nothing cheap, nothing vulgar.Tree opened his theatre in 1897 during Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee year, associating the new structure with an imperial celebration.\nOver the next two decades, Tree staged approximately sixty plays there, programming a repertory at least as varied as he had at the Haymarket. His first production at Her Majesty's was a dramatisation of Gilbert Parker's \"The Seats of the Mighty\". Tree mounted new plays by prominent British playwrights, such as \"Carnac Sahib\" (1899) by Henry Arthur Jones. His productions were exceptionally profitable; they were famous, most of all, for their elaborate and often spectacular scenery and effects. Unlike some other famous actor-managers, Tree engaged the best actors available to join his company and hired the best designers and composers for the plays with incidental music. His productions starred such noted actors as Constance Collier, Ellen Terry, Madge Kendal, Winifred Emery, Julia Neilson, Violet Vanbrugh, Oscar Asche, Arthur Bourchier, and Lewis Waller.\nTree often starred in the theatre's dramatisations of popular nineteenth-century novels, such as Sydney Grundy's adaptation of Dumas's \"Musketeers\" (1898); Tolstoy's \"Resurrection\" (1903); Dickens's \"Oliver Twist\" (1905), \"The Mystery of Edwin Drood\" (1908) and \"David Copperfield\" (1914); and Morton's dramatisation of Thackeray's \"The Newcomes\", called \"Colonel Newcome\" (1906), among others. Tree staged many contemporary verse dramas by Stephen Phillips and others, including \"Herod\" (1900), \"Ulysses\" (1902), \"Nero\" (1906) and \"Faust\" (1908). Adaptations of classic foreign plays included \"Beethoven\" by Louis Parker, an adaptation of the play by Ren\u00e9 Fauchois (1909); \"A Russian Tragedy\", an English version by Henry Hamilton of the play by Adolph Glass (1909); and \"The Perfect Gentleman\" by W. Somerset Maugham, an adaptation of the classic Moli\u00e8re play, \"Le bourgeois gentilhomme\" (1913). The classical repertory included such works as \"The School for Scandal\" (1909). Tree also programmed popular melodramas, farces, romantic comedies and premieres, such as Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\", in 1914. Tree played Henry Higgins opposite the Eliza of Mrs Patrick Campbell. The actor John Gielgud wrote, \"Rehearsing \"Pygmalion\" with Tree she must have been impossible. They were both such eccentrics. They kept ordering each other out of the theatre with Shaw in the middle, trying to cope with them.\" Tree also took his productions on tour to the United States many times. In 1907 he visited Berlin's Royal Opera House at the invitation of Kaiser Wilhelm II. Gilbert remarked that Tree had been invited by the Kaiser \"with the malignant motive of showing the Germans what impostors we all are.\"\nShakespeare.\nUnder Tree, however, Her (later His) Majesty's Theatre was most famous for its work with Shakespeare, building an international reputation as the premier British playhouse for his works during the Edwardian era, which had for so long belonged to Henry Irving at the Lyceum Theatre during the Victorian period. Tree worked untiringly to make Shakespeare popular with the theatregoing public. He mounted sixteen Shakespeare productions, many of which earned enough success to justify revivals during subsequent seasons. He also established an annual Shakespeare festival from 1905 to 1913 that showcased a total of over two hundred performances by his company and other acting troupes. Tree overturned the popular wisdom at the time that Shakespeare productions would lose money, creating stagings that appealed widely to patrons. In fact, the theatre's first Shakespearian play, \"Julius Caesar\", was its first commercial success in 1898, running for 165 consecutive performances and selling 242,000 tickets. The next two years saw two more hits, \"King John\" and \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". Tree's longest-running revival, \"Henry VIII\", ran for a sensational 254 consecutive performances from 1 September 1910 to 8 April 1911. Many of the others were similar hits.\nTree staged the Shakespeare plays, in particular, to appeal to the broad public taste for realistic scenery and scenic effects and lavish spectacle, mirroring the Edwardian fashion for luxury and extravagance. For example, in \"The Winter's Tale\" (1906), there was a woodland glade with a shepherd's cottage and babbling brook; in \"The Tempest\" (1904), a replica of a sixteenth-century vessel was tossed in a storm; in \"The Merchant of Venice\" (1908), he recreated an authentic Renaissance ghetto. Tree expounded his views on staging in 1897:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everything that tends to aid illusion, to stimulate the imagination of an audience, is legitimate on the stage. Everything that detracts from illusion is illegitimate. We hear a great deal of cant talked by those who insist that the ideal stage setting should be a green baize, whose decoration should consist of placards inscribed, \"This is a street,\" \"This is a house,\" \"This is heaven.\" In all this there seems to me something of affectation. If Shakespeare's poetry could be better or more reverently illustrated by such means, I would say: \"Take away those baubles of scenery, of costume, and of archaeological accessories!\"\nTree sometimes interpolated scenes of famous historical events into the plays to provide even more spectacle, such as King John's granting of Magna Carta or Anne Boleyn's coronation in Westminster Abbey.\nTree also pursued four Shakespeare film projects during his career at Her Majesty's. Of great historical interest is the filming, in 1899, of three brief segments from his production of \"King John\", in which he starred and directed. This is the first film record of a Shakespeare play. Charles Urban filmed the opening shipwreck from the 1904 revival of \"The Tempest\" at the theatre in 1905; Tree, whose role in the production was Caliban, did not appear in this scene. Tree played Cardinal Wolsey in a 1911 studio film by William Barker of a five-scene version of \"Henry VIII\", based on the theatre's 1910 production. Tree was paid the unprecedented sum of \u00a31,000 lest the film prove unsatisfactory, or damage ticket sales of the theatre presentation. Filming took place at studios in Ealing, west London and took only one day, thanks to careful preparation beforehand. The film was presented to the public on 27 February 1911 in various theatres in London and in the provinces, and was a huge success. \"The Moving Picture World\" wrote, \"The picture is without doubt the greatest that has even been attempted in this country, and I am almost tempted to say in any other ... the acting passes anything ever seen in moving pictures before... The effect on the moving picture industry here will be enormous.\" In California in 1916, Tree played the title role in a film of \"Macbeth\", by D. W. Griffith (considered a lost film).\nReputation and last years.\nAccording to Tree's biographers, critics and audiences considered Tree to be the best character actor of his day. He himself detested the term \"character actor\", saying: \nAll acting should be character acting. What is Shylock? A character part. What are Macbeth and Richard III but character parts? What are Hamlet, Iago, or Othello but character parts? What are Brutus, Mark Antony and Cassius? Such characters as Romeo of course require the appearance of youth and those graces of person which will alone commend the Mantuan lover to his Juliet. But even here, an audience will be more moved by the intellectual suggestion of a Jean de Reszke, than by the inadequate posturings of a youthful nincompoop.\nHe was an exceptional mime and demonstrated unrivalled versatility in creating individual characterisations. He was particularly praised for his vivid characters with eccentric and idiosyncratic and habits, including Fagin, Falstaff and Svengali. His diligent preparation and attention to detail in make-up, gesture, body position and facial expression allowed him to inhabit these roles. He used his expressive eyes to project such varied emotions as \"the dreamy languor of Hamlet during his moments of reflection and the baleful hatred of Shylock towards his persecutors to the nervous fear of Richard II during his surrender at Flint Castle. His Malvolio was a swaggering and conceited fool, King John a superstitious and deceitful coward, and Macbeth a neurotic and self-torturing monarch.\" The literary critic Desmond MacCarthy wrote of Tree: \"He could make himself look like Falstaff. He understood and revelled in the character of Falstaff, but his performance lacked fundamental force. Hence the contradiction in his acting: his performance as a whole often fell short of high excellence, yet these same impersonations were lit by insight and masterly strokes of interpretation, which made the spectator feel that he was watching the performance of the most imaginative of living actors.\"\nIn the great tragic Shakespearean roles, however, Tree was overshadowed by earlier actors such as Henry Irving. During performance, Tree allowed inspiration to suggest to him appropriate stage business, which sometimes lead to inconsistent interpretations in his portrayals of a role. \"The Manchester Guardian\" wrote, \"The wonderful thing about him was his amazing versatility, and there was an intellectual virility, an untiring earnestness about the man, which was irresistibly stimulating.\" Tree's versatility, however, was a two edged sword: he quickly tired of characters after a brief run and sought to add business and details to the part to sustain his interest, which led to further character inconsistencies in long runs. Tree's voice was described as thin, and he was sometimes criticised for struggling to project it in a manner that made his performance seem unnatural. In the last decade of his career, Tree's technique was seen as mannered and old fashioned. His spectacles, too, in comparison with the experimental methods of Poel and other producers, seemed outdated, although Tree responded to his critics by noting that his productions remained profitable and well attended.\nPersonal life.\nTree married actress Helen Maud Holt (1863\u20131937) in 1882; she often played opposite him and assisted him with management of the theatres. Her charm also assisted the couple's entry into prominent social and \u00e9lite artistic and intellectual circles. Their daughters were actresses Viola Tree (who married theatre critic Alan Parsons) and Felicity Tree (who married Sir Geoffrey Cory-Wright, third baronet) and poet Iris Tree (who married Curtis Moffat, becoming Countess Ledebur). Tree also fathered several illegitimate children (six with Beatrice May Pinney), including film director Carol Reed and Peter Reed, father of the British actor Oliver Reed. He was also the grandfather of Hollywood screenwriter and producer Ivan Moffat.\nTree founded the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) in 1904. He also served as president of the Theatrical Managers' Association and assisted the Actors' Benevolent Fund and the Actors' Association. For his contributions to theatre, he was knighted in 1909. During World War I, Tree contributed his celebrity by delivering patriotic addresses. He wrote several books discussing the importance of the theatre and the arts in modern society.\nTree's last professional undertaking was a visit to Los Angeles in 1915 fulfilling a contract with a film company. He was in America for the greater part of 1915 and 1916. He returned to England in 1917 and died, aged 64, from pulmonary blood clots. According to writer Vera Brittain, he died suddenly in the arms of her friend, the novelist Winifred Holtby, then aged 19 and working as a nursing assistant at a fashionable London nursing home where Tree was recuperating from surgery to repair a broken leg. His remains were cremated, and his ashes are buried at the additional burial ground of St John-at-Hampstead church.\nDiscography.\nTree recorded five 10\" records for the Gramophone Company (afterwards His Master's Voice, couplings as E numbers) in 1906.\nIn popular culture.\nThe songwriter Maude Val\u00e9rie White dedicated her setting of Byron's song \"So we'll go no more a-roving\" to Tree, \"in grateful remembrance of 13 July 1888\". In the musical \"Cats\", Jellylorum says of , \"He has acted with Irving, he's acted with Tree.\" In the \"Frasier\" episode \"Daphne's Room\", the plot involves Frasier's retrieval of a book from Daphne\u2019s room called \"The Life and Times of Sir Herbert Beerbohm Tree\".\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63737", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63737", "title": "Alan J. Lerner", "text": ""}
{"id": "63738", "revid": "173030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63738", "title": "Brigadoon", "text": "Musical by Frederick Loewe and Alan Jay Lerner\nBrigadoon is a musical with book and lyrics by Alan Jay Lerner and score by Frederick Loewe. The plot features two American tourists who stumble upon Brigadoon, a mysterious Scottish village that appears for only one day every 100 years; one tourist soon falls in love with a young woman from Brigadoon. The show's song \"Almost Like Being in Love\" subsequently became a standard.\nThe original production opened at the Ziegfeld Theatre on Broadway in 1947 and ran for 581 performances, starring David Brooks, Marion Bell, Pamela Britton, and Lee Sullivan. \"Brigadoon\" opened at Her Majesty's Theatre in the West End in 1949 and ran for 685 performances; many revivals have followed. The 1954 film adaptation starred Gene Kelly and Cyd Charisse, while the 1966 television version starred Robert Goulet, Sally Ann Howes, and Peter Falk.\nBackground.\nLyricist and book writer Alan Jay Lerner and composer Frederick Loewe had previously collaborated on three musicals; the first, \"Life of the Party\", closed during pre-Broadway tryouts, and the second and third, \"What's Up?\" and \"The Day Before Spring\", had met with moderate success. Inspired by Rodgers and Hammerstein's successful collaborations \"Oklahoma!\" and \"Carousel\", they created \"Brigadoon\", about a magical village in the Scottish highlands.\nLike \"Oklahoma!\" and \"Carousel\", \"Brigadoon\" included a serious love story as the main plot and a lighter romance as subplot. Thematically, the musical depicted the contrast between empty city life and the warmth and simplicity of the country, focusing on a theme of love transcending time. Agnes de Mille, who had previously choreographed \"Oklahoma!\" and \"Carousel\", was hired as choreographer, and her work for \"Brigadoon\" incorporated elements of traditional Scottish folk dance: a traditional sword dance, a chase scene, and a funeral dance.\nThough Lerner and Loewe originally took \"Brigadoon\" to producer Billy Rose, Cheryl Crawford was the producer who actually brought \"Brigadoon\" to Broadway. Lerner explained the change in producer by saying: \"The contract which [Billy Rose] wished us to sign negated Abraham Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation that freed the slaves.\" Under Loewe's guidance, Ted Royal received a sole orchestrator credit for his work on the original production. His atmospheric arrangements have been frequently used for the revivals.\nThough the Highland village of Brigadoon is fictional, it is named after the (Lowland) Brig o' Doon, a bridge located south of Alloway, Ayrshire, Scotland, which is the setting for the final verse of Robert Burns's poem \"Tam o' Shanter\".\n\"The New York Times\"'s theatre critic George Jean Nathan wrote that Lerner's book was based on a German story, published in 1860 by Friedrich Gerst\u00e4cker, later translated by Charles Brandon Schaeffer, about the mythical village of Germelshausen that fell under a magic curse. However, Lerner denied that he had based the book on an older story, and, in an explanation published in \"The New York Times\", stated that he did not learn of the existence of the Germelshausen story until after he had completed the first draft of \"Brigadoon\". Lerner said that in his subsequent research, he found many other legends of disappearing towns in various countries' folklore, and he pronounced their similarities \"unconscious coincidence\".\nPlot.\nAct I.\nNew Yorkers Tommy Albright and Jeff Douglas have travelled to the Scottish Highlands on a game-hunting vacation, but they get lost on their first night out. They begin to hear music (\"Brigadoon\") coming from a nearby village that does not appear on their map of the area. They head over there to get directions back to their inn and find a fair in progress (\"McConnachy Square\"), with villagers dressed in traditional Scottish tartan. Andrew MacLaren and his daughters arrive at the fair to purchase supplies for younger daughter Jean's wedding to Charlie Dalrymple. Archie Beaton's son Harry madly loves Jean and is depressed at the thought of her marrying another, unable to find comfort in Maggie Anderson's devotion to him. One of the girls asks Jean's older sister Fiona when she'll marry, and Fiona answers she's waiting for the right person (\"Waitin' for My Dearie\").\nTommy and Jeff wander into the village and ask where they are; Archie informs them that they are in \"Brigadoon\". Fiona invites the wanderers to have a meal and rest at the MacLaren home. Flirtatious dairymaid Meg Brockie immediately falls for Jeff and leads him off. Charlie Dalrymple appears, rejoicing in his impending nuptials. He shares a drink with Tommy, toasting to a Mr. Forsythe whom he thanks for \"postponing the miracle\". When Tommy asks what that means, Fiona shushes him and leads him away as Charlie celebrates the end of his bachelorhood (\"Go Home with Bonnie Jean\"). Tommy tells Fiona that he has a fianc\u00e9e, Jane, in New York, but he's in no hurry to marry her, and Fiona reveals that she likes Tommy very much. Tommy insists on accompanying Fiona to gather heather for the wedding (\"The Heather on the Hill\"). Meanwhile, Meg takes Jeff to a place in the forest with a shack and a cot. She tells him she's \"highly attracted\" to him, but he spurns her advances, wanting only to sleep. She reflects on her \"eventful\" love life (\"The Love of My Life\").\nAt the MacLarens', Jean's friends help her pack her things to move into Charlie's home (\"Jeannie's Packin' Up\"). Charlie arrives to sign the MacLarens' family Bible. He wants to see Jean; told that it's bad luck to see her on the wedding day, he begs for her to come out anyway (\"Come to Me, Bend to Me\"). Tommy and Fiona return with a basket full of heather, and Fiona goes upstairs to help Jean dress for the wedding. Jeff arrives wearing a pair of Highland trews (trousers); apparently his own pants have been damaged on a \"thistle\". Jeff finds that Tommy is so happy that he can barely contain it (\"Almost Like Being in Love\"). Tommy notices that all the events listed in the family Bible, including Jean's wedding, are listed as if they had happened 200 years earlier. When he asks Fiona about this, she sends him to the schoolmaster, Mr. Lundie.\nFiona, Tommy, and Jeff arrive at Mr. Lundie's home, where he relates a story that the two New Yorkers can hardly believe: to protect Brigadoon from being changed by the outside world, 200 years ago the local minister prayed to God to have Brigadoon disappear, only to reappear for one day every 100 years. All citizens of Brigadoon are forbidden to leave the town, or it will disappear forever. Tommy asks hypothetically if an outsider could be permitted to stay. Mr. Lundie replies, \"A stranger can stay if he loves someone here\u00a0\u2013 not jus' Brigadoon, mind ye, but someone in Brigadoon\u00a0\u2013 enough to want to give up everythin' an' stay with that one person. Which is how it should be. 'Cause after all, lad, if ye love someone deeply, anythin' is possible.\"\nThe group leaves to go to the wedding, which opens with the clans coming in from the hills. Mr. Lundie marries Charlie and Jean, and they perform a traditional celebratory wedding dance. Sword dancers appear, led by Harry, and they perform an elaborate dance over their weapons. All the town joins in the dance, but it abruptly halts when Jean screams as Harry tries to kiss her. In anguish over Jean's wedding, he announces that he's leaving the town (which would end the miracle, causing Brigadoon to disappear forever into the Highland mists) and sprints away.\nAct II.\nThe men of the town, including Tommy and a reluctant Jeff, frantically try to find Harry before he can depart the town (\"The Chase\"). Suddenly an agonized scream is heard. Harry, who appears to have fallen on a rock and crushed his skull, is found dead by the other men. Deciding not to tell the rest of the town until the next morning, the men carry Harry's body away. Fiona and her father arrive to see if everything is all right. As Mr. MacLaren leaves, Tommy sees Fiona, and they embrace. She reveals her love for him, and he tells her he believes he feels the same way (\"There But For You Go I\"). Fiona reminds him that the end of the day is near, and Tommy tells her he wants to stay in Brigadoon with her. They go to find Mr. Lundie.\nMeanwhile, in the village, Meg tells about the day her parents were drunkenly married (\"My Mother's Wedding Day\"), and the townsfolk dance until the sound of Highland pipes pierces the air. The gaiety is interrupted as Archie Beaton enters carrying Harry's body, led by the pipers playing a lament. Maggie, who loved Harry, performs a funeral dance for her unrequited love. The men of Brigadoon help Archie carry his son to the burial place.\nTommy finds Jeff and announces his intention to stay. Jeff thinks the idea is absurd and argues with Tommy until he has convinced him that Brigadoon is only a dream. Jeff also reveals that he tripped Harry and accidentally killed him. Fiona and Mr. Lundie arrive, and Tommy, shaken by Jeff's confession, tells Fiona that he loves her, but he can't stay; he still has doubts (\"From This Day On\"). Fiona tells Tommy, as she fades away into darkness, that she will love him forever.\nFour months later, Jeff is drinking heavily at a hotel bar in New York. Tommy, who has been living on a farm in New Hampshire, enters and greets Jeff, but is still in love with Fiona and cannot stop thinking about her. His fianc\u00e9e Jane Ashton, a beautiful socialite, talks to him about their impending wedding, but everything she says causes him to hear Fiona's voice and dream of Brigadoon (\"Come to Me, Bend to Me\" (reprise) and \"Heather on the Hill\" (reprise)). Tommy tells Jane that he cannot marry her, and she argues with him, but he continues to daydream about his true love (\"Go Home With Bonnie Jean\" (reprise) and \"From This Day On\" (reprise)). Jane leaves, and Tommy tells Jeff that he wants to return to Scotland, although he knows the village will not be there.\nThe pair return to the spot where they found Brigadoon and, as they expected, see nothing there. Just as they turn to leave, they hear the music again (\"Brigadoon\"), and Mr. Lundie appears and says, \"My my! You must really love her. You woke me up!\" Tommy waves goodbye to Jeff and disappears with Mr. Lundie into the Highland mist to be reunited with Fiona.\nMusical numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u2020 Added in 1980 revival\n\u2021 Moved to Act II in 1980 revival\nProductions.\nAfter initial shakedown runs in New Haven (starting February 6) and Boston (starting on February 10), the show opened in Philadelphia pre-Broadway (tryout) at the Forrest Theatre on February 24, 1947, for a final two weeks. The original Broadway production, directed by Robert Lewis and choreographed by Agnes de Mille, opened March 13, 1947, at the Ziegfeld Theatre, where it ran for 581 performances. It starred David Brooks as Tommy, George Keane as Jeff, Marion Bell as Fiona, Lee Sullivan as Charlie, Virginia Bosler as Jeannie, James Mitchell as Harry, and Pamela Britton as Meg. The concertmistress of the orchestra was noted American violinist Joan Field. De Mille won the Tony Award for Best Choreography, and Bell and Mitchell won the Theatre World Award. The show returned to Philadelphia post-Broadway at the Shubert Theatre on Monday, September 6, 1948, for two weeks. The production then enjoyed an extended North American tour.\nThe musical's original West End production opened on April 14, 1949, at Her Majesty's Theatre, running for 685 performances. It starred Philip Hanna as Tommy, Patricia Hughes as Fiona, James Jamieson as Harry, and Noele Gordon as Meg. Bruce Trent took the leading role in 1949 at His Majesty's Theatre. Two telegrams, one from impresario Emile Littler and another where the signature is difficult to identify, to Bruce Trent are dated 24 February 1949.\nDavid Brooks reprised his role of Tommy in the Summertime Light Opera's production in Houston, Texas in 1950, with Gregg Juarez as Jeff and Dorothy MacNeil of the New York City Opera as Fiona. Stage direction was by John Brownlee, principal baritone of the Metropolitan Opera, and the musical director and conductor was Frederick Fennell of the Rochester Eastman Kodak Symphony.\nThe musical was revived at New York City Center in May 1950. It was revived on Broadway seven years later, directed by George H. Englund and choreographed by De Mille, opening on April 15, 1957, at the Adelphi Theatre, where it ran for 24 performances. The cast included David Atkinson, Helen Gallagher, Patricia Birch, and Marilyn Cooper. Another Broadway revival, directed by John Fearnley and choreographed by De Mille, opened on January 30, 1963, at New York City Center, where it ran for 16 performances. The cast included Peter Palmer, Russell Nype, Sally Ann Howes, and Edward Villella. It was Tony-nominated for Best Actress in a Musical (Howes), Best Direction of a Musical, and Best Conductor and Musical Director.\nThe next Broadway revival, directed by Vivian Matalon and choreographed by De Mille, opened on October 16, 1980, at the Majestic Theatre, where it ran for 133 performances and eight previews. The cast included Meg Bussert, Martin Vidnovic, and John Curry. Vidnovic received Tony and Drama Desk Award nominations, Bussert earned a Tony nomination and won the Theatre World Award, and the production was Tony-nominated for Best Reproduction.\nNew York City Opera staged the musical in 1986 and 1991.\nThe musical was revived in the West End at the Victoria Palace Theatre, opening on October 25, 1988, and closing August 5, 1989, starring Robert Meadmore (Tommy), Jacinta Mulcahy, and Lesley Mackie. The director was Roger Redfarn and de Mille's dances were rechoreographed by Tommy Shaw. \"The Times\" reviewer noted that those dances were \"the main source of the magic\".\nIn 2014, a major revival was staged at the Goodman Theater in Chicago. Directed and choreographed by Rachel Rockwell, with a revised book by Brian Hill, Charles Isherwood of \"The New York Times\" called the production \"a first-class revival that boasts an infectious buoyancy of spirit and a welcome absence of postmodern flourishes\". This version with the revised book by Hill was staged at the Shaw Festival in 2019.\nThe 2017 Melbourne production by The Production Company at the State Theatre, with Rohan Browne, Genevive Kingsford and Nancye Hayes and directed by Jason Langley, updated the setting of the world outside Brigadoon to contemporary times.\nA staged concert was presented at New York City Center from November 15 to 19, 2017, with Stephanie J. Block as Meg Brockie, Aasif Mandvi as Jeff Douglas, Kelli O'Hara as Fiona and Patrick Wilson as Tommy Albright. It was directed and choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon. Reviews for this production were uniformly positive. \nA major new London revival, directed by Drew McOnie was staged at Regents Park Open Air Theatre, from 2nd August 2025 - 20th September 2025. A new adaptation by leading Scottish playwright Rona Munro, it had a change of period, being moved to World War II. The cast included, Danielle Fiamanya as Fiona, Louis Gaunt as Tommy, and Gilli Jonesas as Charlie Dalrymple &amp; Jasmine Jules Andrews as Jean MacLaren.\nAdaptations.\nFilm.\nA Cinemascope film version of \"Brigadoon\", directed by Vincente Minnelli, was released by MGM in 1954 with Gene Kelly, Van Johnson, and Cyd Charisse in leading roles.\nTelevision.\nOn October 15, 1966, a television film version was broadcast on ABC. This version won five Primetime Emmy Awards.\nThe 1966 television version used a modernized, abbreviated script that accommodated much more of the score than the 1954 film version had, though the entire production ran only ninety minutes with commercials. \"My Mother's Wedding Day\" was restored to this version, though \"Once in the Highlands\", \"Jeannie's Packin' Up\", and \"The Love of My Life\" were still absent. In this version, Tommy and Jeff were participating in an auto race when their car stalled just outside Brigadoon.\nThe TV film starred Robert Goulet as Tommy, Peter Falk as Jeff, and Sally Ann Howes as Fiona. Also appearing were Finlay Currie, in one of his last roles, as Mr. Lundie, Edward Villella as Harry Beaton, and Marlyn Mason as Meg. The TV film was directed by Fielder Cook.\nThe 1966 telecast of \"Brigadoon\" has not been shown since its 1968 rebroadcast, nor has it ever been released on videocassette or DVD. It may, however, be viewed on the Internet Archive and on YouTube. In addition, the soundtrack of this TV adaptation was released by Columbia Records (under its \"Columbia Special Products\" banner) on the same year as the original broadcast.\n\"Schmigadoon!\".\n\"Schmigadoon!\" is a musical comedy television series which premiered on Apple TV+ on July 16, 2021. The series title indicates an ironic take on \"Brigadoon\", while the premise offers an update of the classic plot.\nReception.\n\"Brigadoon\" opened to very unanimously positive reviews, one of only eight musicals that opened on Broadway between 1943 and 1964 to do so. Critics praised it for its originality and for integration of song and story, though some critics had minor points of criticism.\nBrooks Atkinson of \"The New York Times\" praised the musical's integration, saying: \"For once, the modest label 'musical play' has a precise meaning. For it is impossible to say where the music and dancing leave off and the story begins. Under Bob Lewis's direction all the arts of the theatre have been woven into a singing pattern of enchantment\". Atkinson also emphasized Agnes de Mille's contributions as choreographer: \"Some of the dances are merely illustrations for the music. One or two of them are conventional, if lovely, maiden round dances. But some of them, like the desperate chase in the forest, are fiercely dramatic. The funeral dance to the dour tune of bagpipes brings the footstep of doom into the forest. And the sword dance, done magnificently by James Mitchell, is tremendously exciting with its stylization of primitive ideas\".\nRobert Coleman of the \"New York Daily Mirror\" said: \"It took courage to produce \"Brigadoon\", an unconventional musical show of marked originality... [that] still manages to pack a tartan full of popular appeal\". In the \"New York Herald Tribune\", Howard Barnes pronounced \"Brigadoon\": \"A bonny thing for Broadway, a scintillating song and dance fantasy that has given theatregoers reason to toss tamoshanters in air\". Robert Garland of the \"New York Journal American\" particularly praised Pamela Britton as Meg Brockie: \"Pamela Britton escaped from both M.G.M. and Frank Sinatra in time to be tough as a Scottish temptress, and rough as a singer of raffish songs\". He also opined that Russian choreographer George Balanchine should watch \"Brigadoon\" to learn how a musical should be choreographed. Ward Morehouse of \"The New York Sun\" deemed it \"A stunning show\", saying: \"It has whimsy, beguiling music, exciting dancing\u00a0\u2013 and it has a book... \"Brigadoon\" is by far the best musical play the season has produced, and it is certainly one of the best within my entire play-going experience\".\nJohn Chapman of the \"Daily News\" enjoyed the dances but thought there were too many and that they interrupted the story: \"Just when I get pleasantly steamed up about the love of Mr. Brooks and Miss Bell, I don't want to be cooled off by watching a herd of gazelles from Chorus Equity running around\". He particularly praised William Hansen's performance as Mr. Lundie, declaring that he \"is so irresistibly able to persuade you that if there isn't a village named \"Brigadoon\", there ought to be\".\nLouis Kronenberger of \"PM\" said: \"the musical fantasy [\"Brigadoon\"] not only has charm; it shows a good deal of independence... its charm must lie less in any story it tells than in the general mood it creates; and it has created that mood by fusing a number of theatre elements as densely as possible\". Kronenberger, however, disliked the ending, calling it \"an outright blunder\" done \"in the corniest Broadway fashion\".\nRichard Watts Jr. of the \"New York Post\" wrote: \"I have seen other musical comedies that I enjoyed more, but few for which I have a deeper admiration\". He opined that Lerner and Loewe's score for \"The Day Before Spring\" the previous year was better than theirs for \"Brigadoon\", explaining that: \"If my first emotion last night was admiration rather than sheer enjoyment, it was because the proceedings seemed to me more marked by taste and style than by emotional warmth in book and music, but there is no denying that the authors have matured as theatrical craftsmen\".\n\"Brigadoon\" was awarded the New York Drama Critics' Circle Award for Best Musical for the 1946\u20131947 season.\nRecordings.\nThe following list of recordings is based on John Kenrick's discography for the site \"Musicals 101\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63739", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63739", "title": "AT&amp;T Bell Labs", "text": ""}
{"id": "63740", "revid": "46930796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63740", "title": "Peter Lorre", "text": "Hungarian and American actor (1904\u20131964)\nPeter Lorre (; born L\u00e1szl\u00f3 L\u00f6wenstein, ; June 26, 1904 \u2013 March 23, 1964) was a Hungarian and American actor, active first in Europe and later in the United States. Known for his timidly devious characters, appearance, and accented voice, he was frequently typecast as a sinister foreigner. He was caricatured throughout his life and his cultural legacy remains in the media today.\nHe began his stage career in Vienna, in the Austro-Hungarian Empire, before moving to Germany, where he worked first on the stage, then in film, in Berlin during the late 1920s and early 1930s. Lorre, who was Jewish, left Germany after Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party came to power. Lorre caused an international sensation in the Weimar Republic\u2013era film \"M\" (1931), where he portrayed a serial killer who preys on little girls. His first English-language film was Alfred Hitchcock's \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\" (1934), made in the United Kingdom.\nEventually settling in Hollywood, he later became a featured player in many Warner Bros. crime and mystery films. He acted in \"Mad Love\" (1935), \"Crime and Punishment\" (1935), \"The Maltese Falcon\" (1941), \"Casablanca\" (1942), \"Arsenic and Old Lace\" (1944), \"Passage to Marseille\" (1944), and \"My Favorite Brunette\" (1947). During this time he acted in several films alongside Humphrey Bogart and Sydney Greenstreet.\nLorre played Mr. Moto, the Japanese detective, in a series of B-pictures from 1937 to 1939, and was the first actor to play a James Bond villain as Le Chiffre in a TV version of \"Casino Royale\" (1954). He later starred in films such as \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" (1954), \"Around the World in 80 Days\" (1956), \"Silk Stockings\" (1957), and \"The Comedy of Terrors\" (1963). Some of his last roles were in horror films directed by Roger Corman. In 2017, \"The Daily Telegraph\" named him one of the best actors never to have received an Academy Award nomination.\nEarly life.\nLorre was born L\u00e1szl\u00f3 L\u00f6wenstein () on June 26, 1904, in R\u00f3zsahegy, a town in Lipt\u00f3 County, Kingdom of Hungary, Austro-Hungarian Empire. The town, now known by Ru\u017eomberok, is part of the present-day \u017dilina Region in Slovakia. Lorre was the first child of German-speaking Jews Elvira (n\u00e9e Freischberger) and Alajos L\u00f6wenstein. The couple had recently moved there following Alajos's appointment as chief bookkeeper at a local textile mill. Alajos also served as a lieutenant in Austria's reserve force and was often away on military maneuvers.\nElvira died when Lorre was four years old, leaving Alajos with three very young sons. Alajos soon married her best friend Melanie Klein, with whom he had two more children. However, Lorre and Melanie never got along, and this colored his childhood memories. Anticipating that he might be conscripted following the outbreak of the Second Balkan War in 1913, Alajos moved the family to Vienna. Following the outbreak of World War I, he served on the Eastern Front during the winter of 1914\u20131915 before being put in charge of a prison camp due to heart trouble.\nActing career.\nIn Europe (1922\u20131934).\nLorre began acting on stage in Vienna at age 17, working with Viennese Art Nouveau artist and puppeteer . He then moved to Breslau and later to Z\u00fcrich. In the late 1920s, the actor moved to Berlin, where he worked with Bertolt Brecht, including a role in Brecht's \"Man Equals Man\" and as Dr. Nakamura in the musical \"Happy End\".\nLorre became much better known after director Fritz Lang cast him as child-killer Hans Beckert in \"M\" (1931), a film reputedly inspired by the Peter K\u00fcrten case. Lang said that he had Lorre in mind for the part and did not give him a screen test because he was already convinced Lorre was perfect for the part. He stated that the actor gave his best performance in \"M\" and that it was among the most distinguished in film history. Sharon Packer observed that Lorre played the \"loner, [and] schizotypal murderer\" with \"raspy voice, bulging eyes, and emotive acting (a holdover from the silent screen) [which] always make him memorable.\"\nIn 1932, Lorre appeared alongside Hans Albers in the science fiction film \"F.P.1 antwortet nicht\" about an artificial island in the mid-Atlantic.\nWhen the Nazis came to power in Germany in 1933, Lorre took refuge first in Paris and then London, where he was noticed by Ivor Montagu, associate producer for \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\" (1934), who reminded the film's director, Alfred Hitchcock, about Lorre's performance in \"M\". They considered him to play the assassin, but wanted to use him in a larger role despite his limited command of English, which Lorre overcame by learning much of his part phonetically. In 2014, in \"The Guardian,\" Michael Newton wrote, \"Lorre cannot help but steal each scene; he's a physically present actor, often, you feel, surrounded as he is by the pallid English, the only one in the room with a body.\"\nLorre and his first wife, actress Celia Lovsky, boarded the Cunard-White Star Liner RMS Majestic in Southampton on July 18, 1934, to sail for New York a day after shooting had been completed on \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\", having gained visitor's visas to the United States.\nAfter his first two American films, Lorre returned to England to feature in Hitchcock's \"Secret Agent\" (1936).\nFirst years in Hollywood (1935\u20131940).\nLorre settled in Hollywood and was soon under contract to Columbia Pictures, which had difficulty finding parts suitable for him. After some months of research, Lorre decided on \"Crime and Punishment\" by Dostoevsky as a suitable project with himself in the central role. Columbia's head Harry Cohn agreed to make the film adaptation on the condition that he could lend Lorre to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, possibly as a means of recouping the cost of Lorre not appearing in any of his films.\nFor MGM's \"Mad Love\" (1935), set in Paris and directed by Karl Freund, Lorre's head was shaved for the role of Dr. Gogol, a demented surgeon who replaces the wrecked hands of a concert pianist with those of an executed knife murderer. An actress who works at the nearby Grand Guignol theater, who happens to be the pianist's wife, is the subject of Gogol's unwelcome infatuation. \"Lorre triumphs superbly in a characterization that is sheer horror\", \"The Hollywood Reporter\" commented. \"There is perhaps no one who can be so repulsive and so utterly wicked. No one who can smile so disarmingly and still sneer. His face is his fortune\".\nLorre followed \"Mad Love\" with the lead role in \"Crime and Punishment\" (also 1935) directed by Josef von Sternberg. \"Although Peter Lorre is occasionally able to give the film a frightening pathological significance,\" wrote Andre Sennwald in \"The New York Times\" on the film's release, \"this is scarcely Dostoievsky's drama of a tortured brain drifting into madness with a terrible secret.\" Columbia offered him a five-year contract at $1,000 a week (), but he declined.\nReturning from England after appearing in a second Hitchcock picture (\"Secret Agent\", 1936), he was offered and accepted a 3-year contract with 20th Century Fox. Starring in a series of Mr. Moto movies, Lorre played John P. Marquand's character, a Japanese detective and spy. Initially positive about the films, he soon grew frustrated. \"The role is childish,\" he said, and eventually tended to dismiss the films entirely. He twisted his shoulder during a stunt in \"Mr. Moto Takes a Vacation\" (1939), the penultimate entry of the series. In 1939, he attended a lunch at the request of some visiting Japanese officials; Lorre wore a badge that read \"Boycott Japanese goods.\"\nLate in 1938, Universal Pictures wanted to borrow Lorre from Fox for the top-billed titular role ultimately performed by Basil Rathbone in \"Son of Frankenstein\" (1939) starring Boris Karloff as Frankenstein's monster and Bela Lugosi as Ygor. Lorre declined the role because he thought his menacing parts were now behind him, although he was ill at this time. He tested successfully in 1937 for the role of Quasimodo in an aborted MGM version of \"The Hunchback of Notre-Dame\", according to a Fox publicist one of two roles Lorre most wanted to play, the other was Napoleon. Frustrated by broken promises from Fox, Lorre managed to end his contract.\nAfter a brief period as a freelance, he signed for two pictures at RKO in May 1940. In the first of these, Lorre appeared as the anonymous lead in the B-picture \"Stranger on the Third Floor\" (1940), reputedly the first film noir. The second RKO film, also in 1940, was \"You'll Find Out\", a musical comedy mystery vehicle for bandleader Kay Kyser in which Lorre spoofed his sinister image alongside horror stars Bela Lugosi and Boris Karloff.\nMainly at Warner Bros. (1941\u20131946).\nIn 1941, Lorre became a naturalized citizen of the United States. Director John Huston saved him from more B-pictures by casting him in \"The Maltese Falcon\". Although Warner Bros. was lukewarm, Huston was keen for him to play Joel Cairo, observing that Lorre \"had that clear combination of braininess and real innocence, and sophistication... He's always doing two things at the same time, thinking one thing and saying something else.\" Lorre himself reminisced fondly in 1962 about the \"stock company\" he now found himself working with: Humphrey Bogart, Sydney Greenstreet and Claude Rains. In his view, the four of them had the rare ability to \"switch an audience from laughter to seriousness.\"\nLorre was contracted to Warner on a picture-by-picture basis until 1943 when he signed a five-year contract, renewable each year, which lasted until 1946.\nIn 1942, he portrayed the character Ugarte in \"Casablanca\". While Ugarte is a small part, it is he who provides Rick with the \"Letters of Transit\", a key plot device. Lorre made nine movies with Sydney Greenstreet counting \"The Maltese Falcon\" and \"Casablanca\", a team which came to be called \"Little Pete-Big Syd\", although they did not always have much screen time in joint scenes. \nMost of these motion pictures were variations on \"Casablanca\", including \"Background to Danger\" (1943, with George Raft); \"Passage to Marseille\" (1944), reuniting them with Humphrey Bogart and Claude Rains; \"The Mask of Dimitrios\" (1944); \"The Conspirators\" (1944, with Hedy Lamarr and Paul Henreid); \"Hollywood Canteen\" (1944); \"Three Strangers\" (1946), a suspense film about three people who are joint partners on a winning lottery ticket, with third-billed Lorre cast against type by director Jean Negulesco as the romantic lead, also starring Geraldine Fitzgerald. \nGreenstreet and Lorre's final film together, suspense thriller \"The Verdict\" (1946), was director Don Siegel's first feature, with Greenstreet and Lorre billed first and second respectively.\nIn 1944, Lorre returned to comedy with the role of Dr. Einstein in Frank Capra's version of \"Arsenic and Old Lace\", starring Cary Grant and Raymond Massey. Writing in 1944, film critic Manny Farber described what he called Lorre's \"double-take job\", a characteristic dramatic flourish \"where the actor's face changes rapidly from laughter, love or a security that he doesn't really feel to a face more sincerely menacing, fearful or deadpan.\"\nIn 1946, Lorre's last film for Warner was \"The Beast with Five Fingers\", a horror film in which he played a crazed astrologer who falls in love with a character played by Andrea King. Daniel Bubbeo, in \"The Women of Warner Brothers\", thought Lorre's \"wildly over-the top performance\" had \"elevated the movie from minor horror to first-rate camp.\"\nLorre said his continuing friendship with Bertolt Brecht, in exile in California since 1941, had led studio head Jack L. Warner to 'graylist' him, and his contract with Warner Bros. was terminated on May 13, 1946. Warner was a \"friendly\" witness at his appearance before the House Un-American Activities Committee in May 1947. Lorre himself was sympathetic to the short-lived Committee for the First Amendment, set up by John Huston and others, and added his name to advertisements in the trade press in support of the committee.\nAfter World War II (1947\u20131964).\nAfter World War II and the end of his Warner contract, Lorre's acting career in Hollywood experienced a downturn. He concentrated on radio and stage work. In 1949, he filed for bankruptcy. In the autumn of 1950, he traveled to West Germany to make the film noir \"Der Verlorene\" (\"The Lost One\", 1951) which Lorre co-wrote, directed and starred in. According to Gerd Gem\u00fcnden in \"Continental Strangers: German Exile Cinema, 1933\u20131951\", with the exception of Josef von B\u00e1ky's \"Der Ruf\" (\"The Last Illusion\", 1949), it is the only film by an emigrant from Germany which uses a return to the country \"addressing questions of guilt and responsibility; of accountability and justice.\" While it gained some critical approval, audiences avoided it and it did badly at the box office.\nIn February 1952, Lorre returned to the United States, where he resumed appearances as a character actor in television and feature films, often parodying his \"creepy\" image. He was the first actor to play a \"James Bond\" villain when he portrayed Le Chiffre in a 1954 television adaptation of Ian Fleming's novel \"Casino Royale\", opposite Barry Nelson as an American James Bond referred to as \"Jimmy Bond\". \nLorre starred alongside Kirk Douglas and James Mason in \"20,000 Leagues Under the Sea\" (1954) around this time. Lorre appeared in NBC's espionage drama \"Five Fingers\" (1959), starring David Hedison, in the episode \"Thin Ice\", and, in 1960, in \"Rawhide\" as Victor Laurier in \"The Incident of the Slavemaster\" and in \"Wagon Train\" as Alexander Portlass in \"The Alexander Portlass Story\". \nLorre appeared in six episodes of \"Playhouse 90\" as well as two episodes of \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\" broadcast in 1957 and 1960, the latter a version of the Roald Dahl short story \"Man from the South\" starring Steve McQueen, Lorre and McQueen's wife Neile Adams. He had a supporting role in the film \"Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea\" (1961).\nIn Lorre's last years, he worked with Roger Corman on several low-budget films, including two of the director's Edgar Allan Poe cycle: \"Tales of Terror\" (1962) with Vincent Price and Basil Rathbone; and \"The Raven\" (1963), again with Price, as well as Boris Karloff and Jack Nicholson. He again worked with Price, Karloff and Rathbone in the Jacques Tourneur-directed \"The Comedy of Terrors\" (1963). He also appeared in a memorable 1962 episode of \"Route 66\", \"Lizard's Leg and Owlet's Wing\", with Lon Chaney Jr. and Boris Karloff.\nMarriages and family.\nLorre was married three times: to Celia Lovsky (1934 \u2013 March 13, 1945, divorced), to Kaaren Verne (May 25, 1945 \u2013 1950, divorced), and to Anne Marie Brenning (July 21, 1953 \u2013 March 23, 1964, his death). In 1953, Brenning bore Lorre's only child, Catharine. Anne Marie Brenning died in 1971. \nHis daughter later made headlines after serial killer Kenneth Bianchi confessed to police investigators that he and his cousin and fellow \"Hillside Strangler\" Angelo Buono, posing as undercover police officers, had stopped her in 1977 with the intent of abduction and murder, but let her go on learning that she was the daughter of Peter Lorre. It was only after Bianchi was arrested that Catharine realized whom she had met. Catharine died of complications from diabetes, on May 7, 1985, aged 32.\nFailing health and death.\nLorre had suffered from chronic gallbladder troubles, for which doctors had prescribed morphine. Lorre became trapped between the constant pain and addiction to morphine to ease the problem. It was during the period of the Mr. Moto films that Lorre struggled with and overcame his addiction. Having quickly gained 100\u00a0lb (45\u00a0kg) and not fully recovering from his addiction to morphine, Lorre suffered personal and career disappointments in his later life.\nHe died in Los Angeles on March 23, 1964, from a stroke. His body was cremated and his ashes were interred at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery in Hollywood. Vincent Price read the eulogy at his funeral.\nLegacy and honours.\nLorre was inducted into the Grand Order of Water Rats, the world's oldest theatrical fraternity, in 1942. Lorre was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6619 Hollywood Boulevard in February 1960.\nBeing Warner Bros. cartoonists' favorite characterization, Lorre was regularly caricatured in numerous \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" animated film shorts, including \"Hollywood Steps Out\" (1941), \"Horton Hatches the Egg\" (1942), \"Hair-Raising Hare\" (1946), and many more through the 1940s and 1950s. Future caricatures of Lorre have persisted in film and television for decades afterwards, including live-action and animated bit characters in numerous films and television programs. Vocal impressions of Lorre have been used to create the voices of cartoon characters such as Morocco Mole on \"The Secret Squirrel Show\" in the 1960s, Ren H\u00f6ek in \"The Ren &amp; Stimpy Show\" in the 1990s, and Kamek the magician in \"The Super Mario Bros. Movie\" in 2023.\nActor Eugene Weingand, who was unrelated to Lorre, attempted in 1963 to trade on his slight resemblance to the actor by changing his name to \"Peter Lorie\", but his petition was rejected by the courts. After Lorre's death, however, he referred to himself as \"Peter Lorre Jr.\", claiming to be Lorre's son. He obtained a few small acting roles as a result, including a brief uncredited appearance as a cab driver in Alfred Hitchcock's \"Torn Curtain\" (1966) starring Paul Newman and Julie Andrews.\nFilk songwriter Tom Smith (1988) wrote a tribute to Lorre's acting called \"I Want to Be Peter Lorre\", which was nominated for the \"Best Tribute\" Pegasus Award in 1992 and 2004, and which won the award for \"Best Classic Filk Song\" in 2006.\nPunk cabaret band The World/Inferno Friendship Society's 2007 album \"\" is a concept album written as a tribute to Lorre, focusing on the transition from Weimar Germany to the Third Reich, and Lorre's later career and death. The World/Inferno Friendship Society's lead singer Jack Terricloth describes Lorre as \"a strangely charismatic, extremely creepy person, which I think most punk rockers can identify with ... It's the lure of the other. He's the underdog, the outsider.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63741", "revid": "50454883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63741", "title": "Vanessa Redgrave", "text": "British actress (born 1937)\nDame Vanessa Redgrave (born 30 January 1937) is an English actress and political activist. In a career spanning over six decades, her accolades include an Academy Award, a Tony Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards, Volpi Cup and an Olivier Award, making her one of the few performers to achieve the Triple Crown of Acting. She has also received various honorary awards, including the BAFTA Fellowship Award, the Golden Lion Honorary Award, and an induction into the American Theatre Hall of Fame.\nRedgrave made her acting debut on stage with the production of \"\" in 1958. She rose to prominence in 1961 playing Rosalind in the Shakespearean comedy \"As You Like It\" with the Royal Shakespeare Company, and has since starred in numerous productions in the West End and on Broadway. She won the Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Revival for \"The Aspern Papers\" (1984), and received nominations for \"A Touch of the Poet\" (1988), \"John Gabriel Borkman\" (1997), and \"The Inheritance\" (2019). She also won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for the revival of \"Long Day's Journey into Night\" (2003), and was nominated for \"The Year of Magical Thinking\" (2007) and \"Driving Miss Daisy\" (2011).\nRedgrave made her film debut co-starring her father in the 1958 medical drama \"Behind the Mask\". She rose to prominence as a film actor with the satire ' (1966), which garnered her first of her six Academy Award nominations, winning Best Supporting Actress for \"Julia\" (1977). Her other nominations are for \"Isadora\" (1968), \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" (1971), \"The Bostonians\" (1984), and \"Howards End\" (1992). Her other films include \"A Man for All Seasons\" (1966), \"Blowup\" (1966), \"Camelot\" (1967), \"The Devils\" (1971), \"Murder on the Orient Express\" (1974), \"Agatha\" (1979), \"Prick Up Your Ears\" (1987), ' (1996), \"Venus\" (2006), \"Atonement\" (2007), \"Coriolanus\" (2011), and \"Foxcatcher\" (2014).\nA member of the Redgrave family of actors, she is the daughter of Sir Michael Redgrave and Lady Redgrave (Rachel Kempson), the sister of Lynn Redgrave and Corin Redgrave, the wife of Italian actor Franco Nero, the mother of actresses Joely Richardson and Natasha Richardson and screenwriter and director Carlo Gabriel Nero, the aunt of British actress Jemma Redgrave, the mother-in-law of actor Liam Neeson and film producer Tim Bevan, and the grandmother of Daisy Bevan, Miche\u00e1l Richardson and Daniel Neeson.\nEarly life.\nVanessa Redgrave was born on 30 January 1937 in Blackheath, London, the daughter of actors Sir Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson. Laurence Olivier announced her birth to the audience at a performance of \"Hamlet\" at the Old Vic, when he said that Laertes (played by Sir Michael) had a daughter. Accounts say Olivier announced, \"A great actress has been born this night.\"\nIn her autobiography, Redgrave recalls the East End and Coventry Blitzes among her earliest memories. Following the East End Blitz, Redgrave relocated with her family to Bromyard, Herefordshire before returning to London in 1943. She was educated at two independent schools for girls: the Alice Ottley School in Worcester, and Queen's Gate School in London, before \"coming out\" as a debutante. Her siblings Lynn Redgrave and Corin Redgrave were also actors.\nCareer.\nEarly stage and film career.\nVanessa Redgrave entered the Central School of Speech and Drama in 1954. She first appeared in the West End, playing opposite her brother, in 1958.\nIn 1959, she appeared at the Shakespeare Memorial Theatre under the direction of Peter Hall as Helena in \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\" opposite Charles Laughton as Bottom and \"Coriolanus\" opposite Laurence Olivier (in the title role), Albert Finney and Edith Evans.\nIn 1960, Redgrave had her first starring role in Robert Bolt's \"The Tiger and the Horse\", in which she co-starred with her father. In 1961, she played Rosalind in \"As You Like It\" for the Royal Shakespeare Company. In 1962, she played Imogen in William Gaskill's production of \"Cymbeline\" for the RSC. In 1966, Redgrave created the role of Jean Brodie in the Donald Albery production of \"The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie\", adapted for the stage by Jay Presson Allen from the novel by Muriel Spark.\nRedgrave had her first credited film role, in which she co-starred with her father, in Brian Desmond Hurst's \"Behind the Mask\" (1958). Redgrave's first starring film role was in \"Morgan \u2013 A Suitable Case for Treatment\" (1966), co-starring David Warner and directed by Karel Reisz, for which she received an Oscar nomination, a Cannes award, a Golden Globe nomination and a BAFTA Film Award nomination. Following this, she portrayed a mysterious woman in \"Blowup\" (1966). Co-starring David Hemmings, it was the first English-language film of the Italian director Michelangelo Antonioni. Reunited with Karel Reisz for the biographical film of dancer Isadora Duncan in \"Isadora\" (1968), her portrayal of Duncan led her gaining a National Society of Film Critics' Award for Best Actress, a second Prize for the Best Female Performance at the Cannes Film Festival, along with a Golden Globe and an Oscar nomination. In 1970 and 1971, Vanessa was directed by Italian filmmaker Tinto Brass in two films: \"Dropout\" and \"La vacanza\".\nIn the same period came other portrayals of historical (or semi-mythical) figures \u2013 ranging from Andromache in \"The Trojan Women\" (1971) to the lead in \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" (1971), the latter earning her a third Oscar nomination. She also played the role of Guinevere in the film \"Camelot\" (1967) with Richard Harris and Franco Nero, and briefly as Sylvia Pankhurst in \"Oh! What a Lovely War\" (1969). She portrayed the character of Mother Superior Jeanne des Anges (Joan of the Angels) in \"The Devils\" (1971), the once controversial film directed by Ken Russell.\n\"Julia\" (1977).\nIn the film \"Julia\" (1977), she starred in the title role as a woman murdered by the Nazi German regime in the years prior to World War II for her anti-Fascist activism. Her co-star in the film was Jane Fonda (playing writer Lillian Hellman). In her 2005 autobiography, Fonda wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026There is a quality about Vanessa that makes me feel as if she resides in a netherworld of mystery that eludes the rest of us mortals. Her voice seems to come from some deep place that knows all suffering and all secrets. Watching her work is like seeing through layers of glass, each layer painted in mythic watercolour images, layer after layer, until it becomes dark, but even then you know you haven't come to the bottom of it ... The only other time I had experienced this with an actor was with Marlon Brando ... Like Vanessa, he always seemed to be in another reality, working off some secret, magnetic, inner rhythm.\nWhen Redgrave was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in 1977 for her role in \"Julia\", members of the Jewish Defense League (JDL), led by Rabbi Meir Kahane, burned effigies of Redgrave and picketed the Academy Awards ceremony to protest against what they saw as her support for the Palestine Liberation Organization.\nThis film opened in 1977, the same year she produced and appeared in the film \"The Palestinian\", which followed the activities of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in Lebanon. The film was criticised by many Jewish groups for its perceived slant on Israel's occupation, and members of the Jewish Defense League (JDL) picketed Redgrave's nomination outside the Academy Awards ceremony while counter-protestors waved PLO flags. Redgrave won the Oscar and in her acceptance speech, she thanked Hollywood for having \"refused to be intimidated by the threats of a small bunch of Zionist hoodlums \u2013 whose behaviour is an insult to the stature of Jews all over the world and to their great and heroic record of struggle against fascism and oppression\". Her remarks received an on-stage response later in the ceremony from Academy Award\u2013winning screenwriter Paddy Chayefsky, that year's award presenter and sparked controversy. In his biography of Redgrave, Dan Callahan wrote, \"The scandal of her awards speech and the negative press it occasioned had a destructive effect on her acting opportunities that would last for years to come\".\nLater career.\nFilm and television.\nLater film roles include those of Agatha Christie in \"Agatha\" (1979), Helen in \"Yanks\" (1979), a Holocaust survivor in \"Playing for Time\" (1980), Leenie Cabrezi in \"My Body, My Child\" (1982), The Queen in \"Sing, Sing\" (1983), suffragist Olive Chancellor in \"The Bostonians\" (1984, a fourth Best Actress Academy Award nomination), transsexual tennis player Ren\u00e9e Richards in \"Second Serve\" (1986), Blanche Hudson in the television remake of \"What Ever Happened to Baby Jane\" (1991), Mrs. Wilcox in \"Howards End\" (1992, her sixth Academy Award nomination, this time in a supporting role); arms dealer Max in \"\" (1996, when discussing the role of Max, Brian DePalma and Tom Cruise thought it would be fun to cast an actor like Redgrave; they then decided to go with the real thing); Oscar Wilde's mother in \"Wilde\" (1997); Clarissa Dalloway in \"Mrs Dalloway\" (1997); and Dr. Sonia Wick in \"Girl, Interrupted\" (1999). Many of these roles and others garnered her widespread accolades.\nHer performance as a lesbian mourning the loss of her longtime partner in the HBO series \"If These Walls Could Talk 2\" (2000) earned her a Golden Globe for Best TV Series Supporting Actress, as well as earning an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a TV Film or Miniseries. This same performance also led to an Excellence in Media Award from the Gay &amp; Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD). In 2004, Redgrave joined the second-season cast of the FX series \"Nip/Tuck\", portraying Dr. Erica Noughton, the mother of Julia McNamara, who was played by her real-life daughter Joely Richardson. She also made appearances in the third and sixth seasons. In 2006, Redgrave starred opposite Peter O'Toole in the film \"Venus\". A year later, Redgrave starred in \"Evening\" and \"Atonement\", in which she received a Broadcast Film Critics Association award nomination for a performance that took up only seven minutes of screen time.\nIn 2008, Redgrave appeared as a narrator in an Arts Alliance production, id \u2013 Identity of the Soul. In 2009, Redgrave starred in the BBC remake of \"The Day of the Triffids\", with her daughter Joely. In the midst of losing her daughter, Natasha Richardson, Redgrave signed on to play Eleanor of Aquitaine in Ridley Scott's version of \"Robin Hood\" (2010), which began filming shortly after Natasha's death. Redgrave later withdrew from the film for personal reasons. The part was given to her \"Evening\" co-star Eileen Atkins. She was next seen in \"Letters to Juliet\" opposite her husband Franco Nero.\nShe had small roles in \"Eva\" (2009), a Romanian drama film that premiered at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival, as well as in Julian Schnabel's Palestinian drama \"Miral\" (2010), which was screened at the 67th Venice International Film Festival. She voiced the character of Winnie the Giant Tortoise in the environmental animated film \"Animals United\" (also 2010), and played a supporting role in the Bosnia-set political drama, \"The Whistleblower\" (2010), which premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival. Redgrave also narrated Patrick Keiller's semi-fictional documentary, \"Robinson in Ruins\" (2010). Since 2012, Redgrave has narrated voiceovers that are featured at the beginning and end of episodes of the BBC series \"Call The Midwife\".\nShe also played leading roles in two historical films: Shakespeare's \"Coriolanus\" (which marked actor Ralph Fiennes' directorial debut), in which she plays Volumnia; and Roland Emmerich's \"Anonymous\" (both 2011), as Queen Elizabeth I.\nSubsequently, she starred with Terence Stamp and Gemma Arterton in the British comedy-drama \"Song for Marion\" (US: \"Unfinished Song\", 2012) and with Forest Whitaker in \"The Butler\" (2013), directed by Lee Daniels. She also appeared with Steve Carell and Channing Tatum in the drama \"Foxcatcher\" (2014).\nIn 2017, at the age of 80, Redgrave made her directorial debut with the feature documentary \"Sea Sorrow\", which covers the plight of child migrants in the Calais refugee camps and the broader European migrant crisis. It premiered at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival. Critics praised the documentary's message but criticised the structure for a \"scattershot lack of focus\" and the \"ungainliness of its production values.\"\nIn June 2024, principal photography was completed on \"The Estate\", a feature drama, executive produced by Redgrave, her husband Franco Nero, and son Carlo Gabriel Nero. The film is written and directed by her son, and stars Redgrave and Franco Nero. \"The Estate\" will premiere in November, 2025 at the 43rd Torino Film Festival, where Redgrave will be presented with a Lifetime Achievement Award.\nTheatre.\nRedgrave won four Evening Standard Awards for Best Actress in four decades. She was awarded the Laurence Olivier Award for Actress of the Year in a Revival in 1984 for \"The Aspern Papers\".\nIn 2000, her theatre work included Prospero in \"The Tempest\" at Shakespeare's Globe in London. In 2003, she won a Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play for her performance in the Broadway revival of Eugene O'Neill's \"Long Day's Journey Into Night\". In January 2006, Redgrave was presented the Ibsen Centennial Award for her \"outstanding work in interpreting many of Henrik Ibsen's works over the last decades\". Previous recipients of the award include Liv Ullmann, Glenda Jackson and Claire Bloom.\nIn 2007, Redgrave played Joan Didion in her Broadway stage adaptation of her 2005 book, \"The Year of Magical Thinking\", which played 144 regular performances in a 24-week limited engagement at the Booth Theatre. For this, she won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding One-Person Show and was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play. She reprised the role at the Lyttelton Theatre at the Royal National Theatre in London to mixed reviews. She also spent a week performing the work at the Theatre Royal in Bath in September 2008. She once again performed the role of Joan Didion for a special benefit at Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York City on 26 October 2009. The performance was originally slated to debut on 27 April, but was pushed due to the death of Redgrave's daughter Natasha. The proceeds for the benefit were donated to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA). Both charities work to provide help for the children of Gaza.\nIn October 2010, she starred in the Broadway premiere of \"Driving Miss Daisy\" starring in the title role opposite James Earl Jones. The show premiered on 25 October 2010 at the John Golden Theatre in New York City to rave reviews. The production was originally scheduled to run to 29 January 2011 but due to a successful response and high box office sales, was extended to 9 April 2011. In May 2011, she was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play for the role of Daisy in \"Driving Miss Daisy\". The play transferred to the Wyndham's Theatre in London from 26 September to 17 December 2011.\nIn 2013, Redgrave starred alongside Jesse Eisenberg in Eisenberg's \"The Revisionist\". The New York production ran from 15 February to 27 April. Redgrave played a Polish holocaust survivor in the play. In September 2013, Redgrave once again starred opposite James Earl Jones in a production of \"Much Ado About Nothing\" at The Old Vic, London, directed by Mark Rylance.\nIn 2016, Redgrave played Queen Margaret in \"Richard III\" with Ralph Fiennes in the title role, at the Almeida Theatre, London.\nIn February 2022, it was confirmed that she would be playing Mrs Higgins in \"My Fair Lady\" at the London Coliseum from May to August 2022.\nIn a poll of \"industry experts\" and readers conducted by \"The Stage\" in 2010, Redgrave was ranked as the ninth greatest stage actor/actress of all time.\nPersonal life.\nRedgrave was married to film and theatre director Tony Richardson from 1962 to 1967; the couple had two daughters: actresses Natasha Richardson (1963\u20132009), and Joely Richardson (b. 1965). In 1967, the year Redgrave divorced Richardson, who left her for the French actress Jeanne Moreau, she became romantically involved with Italian actor Franco Nero when they met on the set of \"Camelot\". In 1969, they had a son, Carlo Gabriel Redgrave Sparanero (known professionally as Carlo Gabriel Nero), a screenwriter and director. From 1971 to 1986, she had a long-term relationship with actor Timothy Dalton, with whom she had appeared in the film \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" (1971). Redgrave later reunited with Franco Nero, and they married on 31 December 2006. Carlo Nero directed Redgrave in \"The Fever\" (2004), a film adaptation of the Wallace Shawn play. Redgrave has six grandchildren.\nWithin 14 months in 2009 and 2010, Redgrave lost both a daughter and her two younger siblings. Her daughter Natasha Richardson died on 18 March 2009 from a traumatic brain injury caused by a skiing accident. On 6 April 2010, her brother, Corin Redgrave, died, and on 2 May 2010, her sister, Lynn Redgrave, died.\nRedgrave had a near-fatal heart attack in April 2015. In September 2015, she revealed that her lungs are working at only 30 per cent capacity due to emphysema caused by years of smoking.\nRedgrave has described herself as a person of faith and said that she \"sometimes\" attends a Catholic church.\nPolitical activism.\nIn 1961, Vanessa Redgrave was an active member of the Committee of 100 and its working group. Redgrave and her brother Corin joined the Workers Revolutionary Party (WRP) in the 1970s. She stood for parliament several times as a party member but never received more than a few hundred votes. The party disbanded in 1985 amid allegations that chairman Gerry Healy was implicated in sexual abuse of female supporters.\nOn 17 March 1968, Redgrave participated in the anti-Vietnam War protest outside United States Embassy in Grosvenor Square. She was allowed to enter the embassy to deliver a protest.\nRedgrave used her wage from \"Mary, Queen of Scots\" to build a nursery school, near her home in west London. She donated the school to the state.\nAfter the 1973 Old Bailey bombing, Redgrave volunteered to post bond for the defendants and offered up her own house in West Hampstead, should any of them need a place to stay. None of the defendants were released from custody to take her up on her offer.\nIn 1977, Redgrave produced and starred in a controversial documentary film, \"The Palestinian\", about the activities of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). She funded the documentary by selling her house. The pro-Israel Anti-Defamation League's honorary chairman criticised the film, saying that some of the responses of the people she interviews were not translated from Arabic, that the film showed children training with guns and that the phrase, \"Kill the enemy!\" kept being repeated. The president of Actors Equity in the United States said he had seen a transcript of the film's interview with the chairman of the PLO, Yasser Arafat, in which Arafat said that the only solution to the Middle East problem is the liquidation of the State of Israel, and Redgrave responded with, \"Certainly\". In June 1978, at one theatre showing the film, a bomb exploded, causing damage to property, but screening of the film resumed the following day. Two months later, a Jewish Defense League member was convicted of the bombing and sentenced to a three-month \"thorough psychological examination\" with the California Youth Authority. In a 2018 interview, Redgrave stood by her acceptance speech (which included the \"Zionist hoodlums\" remark) during the 1978 Academy Awards ceremony.\nIn 1977, Redgrave offered a resolution asking the British actors union to boycott Israel, allegedly including the selling of any taped material. The resolution was reportedly not brought to a vote.\nIn 1980, Redgrave made her American TV debut as concentration camp survivor Fania F\u00e9nelon in the Arthur Miller-scripted TV movie \"Playing for Time\", a part for which she won an Emmy as Outstanding Lead Actress in 1981. The decision to cast Redgrave as F\u00e9nelon was, however, a source of controversy. In light of Redgrave's support for the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), F\u00e9nelon herself and the Jewish groups the Simon Wiesenthal Center, the Anti-Defamation League, and the American Jewish Congress objected to Redgrave's casting. Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center wrote in a telegram that, \"Your selection shows utter callous disregard of the tens of thousands of survivors for whom Miss Redgrave's portrayal would desecrate the memory of the martyred millions. Your decision could only be compared to selecting J. Edgar Hoover to portray Martin Luther King Jr.\" Producer David L. Wolper, in a telephone interview, compared it to letting the head of the Ku Klux Klan play a sympathetic white man in \"Roots\", a miniseries about the slave trade. Miller said \"She's a Marxist; this is a political matter. Turning her down because of her ideas was unacceptable to me; after all I suffered the blacklist myself\".\nIn 1984, Redgrave sued the Boston Symphony Orchestra, claiming that the orchestra had fired her from a 1982 performance of Stravinsky's \"Oedipus Rex\" because of her support of the PLO. Lillian Hellman testified in court on Redgrave's behalf. Redgrave won on a count of breach of contract, but did not win on the claim that the Boston orchestra had violated her civil rights by firing her.\nIn 1995, Redgrave was elected to serve as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador.\nIn December 2002, Redgrave paid \u00a350,000 bail for Chechen separatist Deputy Premier and special envoy Akhmed Zakayev, who had sought political asylum in the United Kingdom. Zakayev was accused by Russia of hostage-taking and murder during the 1994\u20131996 Chechen war.\nAt a press conference, Redgrave said she feared for Zakayev's safety if he were extradited to Russia on terrorism charges. He would \"die of a heart attack\" or some other mysterious explanation offered by Russia, she said. On 13 November 2003, a London court rejected the Russian government's request for Zakayev's extradition. Instead, the court accepted a plea by lawyers for Zakayev that he would not get a fair trial, and could even face torture, in Russia. \"It would be unjust and oppressive to return Mr Zakayev to Russia\", Judge Timothy Workman ruled. Due to her support of Zakayev and Chechen independence, she was awarded the Order of Friendship by the Chechen government in exile in 2024.\nIn 2004, Vanessa Redgrave and her brother Corin Redgrave launched the Peace and Progress Party, which campaigned against the Iraq War and for human rights. Redgrave left the party in 2005.\nRedgrave has been an outspoken critic of the \"war on terrorism\". During a June 2005 interview on \"Larry King Live\", Redgrave was challenged on this criticism and on her political views. In response she questioned whether there can be true democracy if the political leadership of the United States and Britain does not \"uphold the values for which my father's generation fought the Nazis, [and] millions of people gave their lives against the Soviet Union's regime. [Such sacrifice was made] because of democracy and what democracy meant: no torture, no camps, no detention forever or without trial... [Such] techniques are not just alleged [against the governments of the U.S. and Britain], they have actually been written about by the FBI. I don't think it's being 'far left'...to uphold the rule of law.\"\nIn March 2006, Redgrave remarked in an interview with US broadcast journalist Amy Goodman: \"I don't know of a single government that actually abides by international human rights law, not one, including my own. In fact, [they] violate these laws in the most despicable and obscene way, I would say.\" Goodman's interview with Redgrave took place in the actress's West London home on the evening of 7 March, and covered a range of subjects, particularly the cancellation by the New York Theatre Workshop of the Alan Rickman production \"My Name is Rachel Corrie\". Such a development, said Redgrave, was an \"act of catastrophic cowardice\" as \"the essence of life and the essence of theatre is to communicate about lives, either lives that have ended or lives that are still alive, [and about] beliefs, and what is in those beliefs.\"\nIn June 2006, she was awarded a lifetime achievement award from the Transilvania International Film Festival, one of whose sponsors is a mining company named Gabriel Resources. She dedicated the award to a community organisation from Ro\u015fia Montan\u0103, Romania, which is campaigning against a gold mine that Gabriel Resources was seeking to build near the village. Gabriel Resources placed an \"open letter\" in \"The Guardian\" on 23 June 2006, attacking Redgrave, arguing the case for the mine. The open letter was signed by 77 villagers.\nIn December 2007, Redgrave was named as one of the possible suretors who paid the \u00a350,000 bail for Jamil al-Banna, one of three British residents arrested after landing back in the UK following four years' captivity at Guantanamo Bay. Redgrave has declined to be specific about her financial involvement but said she was \"very happy\" to be of \"some small assistance for Jamil and his wife\", adding, \"It is a profound honour and I am glad to be alive to be able to do this. Guantanamo Bay is a concentration camp.\"\nIn 2009, Redgrave, together with artist Julian Schnabel and playwright Martin Sherman, opposed the cultural boycott of Israel at the Toronto Film Festival, whilst maintaining her critical stance of the Israeli government's occupation of Palestinian territory.\nIn March 2014, Redgrave took part in a protest outside Pentonville Prison in North London after new prison regulations were introduced which forbade sending books to prisoners. She and fellow actor Samuel West, playwright David Hare and Poet Laureate Carol Ann Duffy took turns reading poetry and making speeches. Redgrave stated that the ban was \"vicious and deplorable...Literature is something that stirs us beyond our immediate problems, it can help us to learn better our own problems, our own faults or to have a goal to live for, an aspiration.\" The ban was overturned by the Ministry of Justice the following December.\nIn 2017, Redgrave made her directorial debut with the movie \"Sea Sorrow\", a documentary about the European migrant crisis and the plight of migrants encamped outside Calais, France, trying to reach Britain. She has heavily criticised the exclusionary policy of the British government towards refugees, stating that the British Government \"... has violated these principles (of the Declaration of Human Rights), and it continues to do so, which I find deeply shameful. The UN signed the Declaration of Human Rights, and now we have to employ lawyers to take the government to court to force them to obey the law. Just thinking about that makes my mind go berserk.\"\nSelected film and TV acting credits.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and honours.\nRedgrave has received an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, two Emmy Awards, a Olivier Award, two Golden Globe Awards, a Screen Actors Guild Award, and a Tony Award.\nRedgrave has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:\nRedgrave was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 1967. Reportedly, she declined a damehood in 1999. However, she was appointed Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2022 New Year Honours for services to drama.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "63742", "revid": "51000121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63742", "title": "Friedrich Schiller", "text": "German playwright, poet, philosopher and historian (1759\u20131805)\nJohann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller ( ; 10 November 1759\u00a0\u2013 9 May 1805) was a German playwright, poet, philosopher and historian. Schiller is considered to be one of Germany's most important classical playwrights.\nHe was born in Marbach to a devoutly Protestant family. Initially intended for the priesthood, in 1773 he entered a military academy in Stuttgart and ended up studying medicine. His first play, \"The Robbers\", was written at this time and proved very successful. After a brief stint as a regimental doctor, he left Stuttgart and eventually wound up in Weimar. In 1789, he became professor of History and Philosophy at Jena, where he wrote historical works.\nDuring the last seventeen years of his life (1788\u20131805), Schiller developed a productive, if complicated, friendship with the already famous and influential Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. They frequently discussed issues concerning aesthetics, and Schiller encouraged Goethe to finish works that he had left as sketches. This relationship and these discussions led to a period now referred to as Weimar Classicism. Together they founded the Weimar Theater.\nThey also worked together on \"Xenien\", a collection of short satirical poems in which both Schiller and Goethe challenge opponents of their philosophical vision.\nEarly life and career.\nFriedrich Schiller was born on 10 November 1759, in Marbach, W\u00fcrttemberg, as the only son of military doctor Johann Kaspar Schiller and Elisabetha Dorothea Schiller. They also had five daughters, including Christophine, the eldest. Schiller grew up in a very religious Protestant family and spent much of his youth studying the Bible, which would later influence his writing for the theatre. His father was away in the Seven Years' War when Friedrich was born. He was named after king Frederick the Great, but he was called Fritz by nearly everyone. Kaspar Schiller was rarely home during the war, but he did manage to visit the family once in a while. His wife and children also visited him occasionally wherever he happened to be stationed. When the war ended in 1763, Schiller's father became a recruiting officer and was stationed in Schw\u00e4bisch Gm\u00fcnd. The family moved with him. Due to the high cost of living\u2014especially the rent\u2014the family moved to the nearby town of Lorch.\nAlthough the family was happy in Lorch, Schiller's father found his work unsatisfying. He sometimes took his son with him. In Lorch, Schiller received his primary education. The quality of the lessons was fairly bad, and Friedrich regularly cut class with his older sister. Because his parents wanted Schiller to become a priest, they had the priest of the village instruct the boy in Latin and Greek. Father Moser was a good teacher, and later Schiller named the cleric in his first play \"Die R\u00e4uber\" (\"The Robbers\") after him. As a boy, Schiller was excited by the idea of becoming a cleric and often put on black robes and pretended to preach.\nIn 1766, the family left Lorch for the Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg's principal residence, Ludwigsburg. Schiller's father had not been paid for three years, and the family had been living on their savings but could no longer afford to do so. So Kaspar Schiller took an assignment to the garrison in Ludwigsburg.\nThere the boy Schiller came to the attention of Karl Eugen, Duke of W\u00fcrttemberg. He entered the Karlsschule Stuttgart (an elite military academy founded by the Duke), in 1773, where he initially studied law but eventually switched to medicine, graduating with a doctor of medicine in 1780. During most of his short life, he suffered from illnesses that he tried to cure himself.\nWhile at the Karlsschule, Schiller read Rousseau and Goethe and discussed Classical ideals with his classmates. At school, he wrote his first play, \"The Robbers\", which dramatizes the conflict between two aristocratic brothers: the elder, Karl Moor, leads a group of rebellious students into the Bohemian forest where they become Robin Hood-like bandits, while Franz Moor, the younger brother, schemes to inherit his father's considerable estate. The play's critique of social corruption and its affirmation of proto-revolutionary republican ideals astounded its original audience. Schiller became an overnight sensation. Later, Schiller would be made an honorary member of the French Republic because of this play. The play was inspired by Leisewitz' earlier play \"Julius of Taranto\", a favourite of the young Schiller.\nIn 1780, he obtained a post as regimental doctor in Stuttgart, a job he disliked. In order to attend the first performance of \"The Robbers\" in Mannheim, Schiller left his regiment without permission. As a result, he was arrested, sentenced to 14 days of imprisonment, and forbidden by Karl Eugen from publishing any further works.\nHe fled Stuttgart in 1782, going via Frankfurt, Mannheim, Leipzig, and Dresden to Weimar. During the journey, he had an affair with Charlotte von Kalb, an army officer's wife. At the centre of an intellectual circle, she was known for her cleverness and instability. To extricate himself from a dire financial situation and attachment to a married woman, Schiller eventually sought help from family and friends. \nIn 1787, he settled in Weimar and in 1789, was appointed professor of History and Philosophy in Jena. His inaugural lecture, \"What Is, and to What End do We Study, Universal History?\" (\"Was hei\u00dft und zu welchem Ende studiert man Universalgeschichte?\"), delivered on 26 May 1789, outlined his philosophy of history and the moral purpose of historical study. At Jena, he wrote historical works.\nMarriage and family.\nOn 22 February 1790, Schiller married Charlotte von Lengefeld, sister of writer Caroline von Wolzogen (1763\u20131847) and daughter of forest administrator of Louis G\u00fcnther II, Prince of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt Carl Christoph von Lengefeld (1715\u20131775) and his wife Louise von Lengefeld, n\u00e9e Wurmb (1743\u20131823).\nKarl Friedrich Ludwig (1793\u20131857) and Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm (1796\u20131841), Karoline Luise Henriette (1799\u20131850) and Luise Henriette Emilie (1804\u20131872) were born between 1793 and 1804. The last living descendant of Schiller was a grandchild of Emilie, Baron Alexander von Gleichen-Ru\u00dfwurm (1865\u20131947), who died at Baden-Baden, Germany, in 1947.\nWeimar and later career.\nSchiller returned with his family to Weimar from Jena in 1799. Goethe convinced him to return to playwriting. He and Goethe founded the Weimar Theater, which became the leading theater in Germany. Their collaboration helped lead to a renaissance of drama in Germany.\nFor his achievements, Schiller was ennobled in 1802 by the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, adding the nobiliary particle \"von\" to his name. He remained in Weimar, Saxe-Weimar until his death at 45 from tuberculosis in 1805.\nLegacy and honors.\nThe first authoritative biography of Schiller was by his sister-in-law Caroline von Wolzogen in 1830, \"\" (Schiller's Life).\nThe coffin containing what was purportedly Schiller's skeleton was brought in 1827 into the Weimarer F\u00fcrstengruft (Weimar's Ducal Vault), the burial place of the house of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach in the Historical Cemetery of Weimar and later also Goethe's resting place. On 3 May 2008, scientists announced that DNA tests have shown that the skull of this skeleton is not Schiller's, and his tomb is now vacant. The physical resemblance between this skull and the extant death mask as well as to portraits of Schiller, had led many experts to believe that the skull was Schiller's.\nThe city of Stuttgart erected in 1839 a statue in his memory on a square renamed Schillerplatz. A Schiller monument was unveiled on Berlin's Gendarmenmarkt in 1871.\nThe German-American community of New York City donated a bronze sculpture of Schiller to Central Park in 1859. It was Central Park's first installed sculpture.\nChicago dedicated a statue to Schiller in its Lincoln Park.\nSchiller Park in Columbus, Ohio is named for Schiller, and has been centered on a statue of his likeness since it was donated in 1891. During the First World War, the name of the park was changed to Washington Park in response to anti-German sentiment, but was changed back several years later. It is the primary park for the South Side neighborhood of German Village.\nThere is a Friedrich Schiller statue on Belle Isle in Detroit, Michigan. This statue of the German playwright was commissioned by Detroit's German-American community in 1908 at a cost of $12,000; the designer was Herman Matzen.\nAn Ignatium Taschner bronze of Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller stands in Como Park - Saint Paul, MN. It was dedicated in 1907. The sculpture was donated by U.S. German Societies of Saint Paul and private citizens of German descent to commemorate the renowned Johann von Schiller.\nHis image has appeared on several coins and banknotes in Germany, including the 1964 German Democratic Republic 10 Mark banknotes, 1972 German Democratic Republic 20 Mark commemorative coins, and 1934 German Reich 5 Reichsmark commemorative coins.\nIn September 2008, the German-French TV channel Arte conducted a poll among its viewers to determine the greatest European playwright (\"King of Drama\"). Schiller was voted in second place after William Shakespeare.\nSiblings.\nFriedrich Schiller had five sisters, two of whom died in childhood and three of whom lived to adulthood:\nWriting.\nPhilosophical papers.\nSchiller wrote many philosophical papers on ethics and aesthetics. He synthesized the thought of Immanuel Kant with the thought of the German idealist philosopher, Karl Leonhard Reinhold. He elaborated upon Christoph Martin Wieland's concept of ' (the beautiful soul), a human being whose emotions have been educated by reason, so that ' (duty and inclination) are no longer in conflict with one another; thus beauty, for Schiller, is not merely an aesthetic experience, but a moral one as well: the Good is the Beautiful. The link between morality and aesthetics also occurs in Schiller's controversial poem, \"Die G\u00f6tter Griechenlandes\" (The Gods of Greece). The \"gods\" in Schiller's poem are thought by modern scholars to represent moral and aesthetic values, which Schiller tied to Paganism and an idea of enchanted nature. In this respect, Schiller's aesthetic doctrine shows the influence of Christian theosophy.\nThere is general consensus among scholars that it makes sense to think of Schiller as a liberal, and he is frequently cited as a cosmopolitan thinker. Schiller's philosophical work was particularly concerned with the question of human freedom, a preoccupation which also guided his historical research, such as on the Thirty Years' War and the Dutch Revolt, and then found its way as well into his dramas: the \"Wallenstein\" trilogy concerns the Thirty Years' War, while \"Don Carlos\" addresses the revolt of the Netherlands against Spain. Schiller wrote two important essays on the question of the sublime (\"), entitled \" and \"\"; these essays address one aspect of human freedom\u2014the ability to defy one's animal instincts, such as the drive for self-preservation, when, for example, someone willingly sacrifices themselves for conceptual ideals.\nPlays.\nSchiller is considered to be one of Germany's most important classical playwrights. Critics like F. J. Lamport and Erich Auerbach have noted his innovative use of dramatic structure and his creation of new forms, such as the melodrama and the bourgeois tragedy. What follows is a brief chronological description of the plays.\n\"Aesthetic Letters\".\nA pivotal work by Schiller was \"On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters\" (\"\u00dcber die \u00e4sthetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer Reihe von Briefen\"), first published 1794, which was inspired by the great disenchantment Schiller felt about the French Revolution, its degeneration into violence and the failure of successive governments to put its ideals into practice. Schiller wrote that \"a great moment has found a little people\"; he wrote the \"Letters\" as a philosophical inquiry into what had gone wrong, and how to prevent such tragedies in the future. In the \"Letters\" he asserts that it is possible to elevate the moral character of a people, by first touching their souls with beauty, an idea that is also found in his poem \"Die K\u00fcnstler\" (\"The Artists\"): \"Only through Beauty's morning-gate, dost thou penetrate the land of knowledge.\"\nOn the philosophical side, \"Letters\" put forth the notion of \"der sinnliche Trieb / Sinnestrieb\" (\"the sensuous drive\") and \"Formtrieb\" (\"the formal drive\"). In a comment to Immanuel Kant's philosophy, Schiller transcends the dualism between \"Formtrieb\" and \"Sinnestrieb\" with the notion of \"Spieltrieb\" (\"the play drive\"), derived from, as are a number of other terms, Kant's \"Critique of the Faculty of Judgment\". The conflict between man's material, sensuous nature and his capacity for reason (\"Formtrieb\" being the drive to impose conceptual and moral order on the world), Schiller resolves with the happy union of \"Formtrieb\" and \"Sinnestrieb\", the \"play drive\", which for him is synonymous with artistic beauty, or \"living form\". Modern interpretations consider Schiller to be one of the earliest known pansexual figures due to these ideals. On the basis of \"Spieltrieb\", Schiller sketches in \"Letters\" a future \"ideal state\" (a eutopia), where everyone will be content, and everything will be beautiful, thanks to the free play of \"Spieltrieb\". Schiller's focus on the dialectical interplay between \"Formtrieb\" and \"Sinnestrieb\" has inspired a wide range of succeeding aesthetic philosophical theory, including notably Jacques Ranci\u00e8re's conception of the \"aesthetic regime of art\", as well as social philosophy in Herbert Marcuse. In the second part of his important work \"Eros and Civilization\", Marcuse finds Schiller's notion of \"Spieltrieb\" useful in thinking a social situation without the condition of modern social alienation. He writes, \"Schiller's \"Letters\" ... aim at remaking of civilization by virtue of the liberating force of the aesthetic function: it is envisaged as containing the possibility of a new reality principle.\"\nFreemasonry.\nSome Freemasons speculate that Schiller was a Freemason, but this has not been proven. In 1787, in his tenth letter about \"Don Carlos\", Schiller wrote: \"I am neither Illuminatus nor Mason, but if the fraternization has a moral purpose in common with one another, and if this purpose for human society is the most important, ...\" In a letter from 1829, two Freemasons from Rudolstadt complain about the dissolving of their Lodge \"G\u00fcnther zum stehenden L\u00f6wen\" that was honoured by the initiation of Schiller. According to Schiller's great-grandson Alexander von Gleichen-Ru\u00dfwurm, Schiller was brought to the lodge by Wilhelm Heinrich Karl von Gleichen-Ru\u00dfwurm. No membership document has been found.\nMusical settings.\nLudwig van Beethoven said that a great poem is more difficult to set to music than a merely good one because the composer must rise higher than the poet \u2013 \"who can do that in the case of Schiller? In this respect Goethe is much easier,\" wrote Beethoven.\nThere are relatively few famous musical settings of Schiller's poems. Notable exceptions are Beethoven's setting of \"An die Freude\" (\"Ode to Joy\") in the final movement of his Ninth Symphony, Johannes Brahms' choral setting of \"N\u00e4nie\", and \"Des M\u00e4dchens Klage\" by Franz Schubert, who set 44 of Schiller's poems as Lieder, mostly for voice and piano, also including \"Die B\u00fcrgschaft\".\nThe Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi admired Schiller greatly and adapted several of his stage plays for his operas:\nDonizetti's \"Maria Stuarda\" is based on \"Mary Stuart\"; Rossini's \"Guillaume Tell\" is an adaptation of \"William Tell\". Nicola Vaccai's \"Giovanna d'Arco\" (1827) is based on \"The Maid of Orleans\", and his \"La sposa di Messina\" (1839) on \"The Bride of Messina\". Bruch\u2019s The Lay of the Bell is also based on a poem by Schiller. Elise Schmezer (1810\u20131856) used Schiller\u2019s text for her Lied \u201cDas Geheimnis\u201d. Tchaikovsky's 1881 opera \"The Maid of Orleans\" is partly based on Schiller's work. In 1923, German composer Frieda Schmitt-Lermann wrote the music for a theatre production (\"Das Lied von der Glocke)\" based on Schiller's text. German-Russian composer Zinaida Petrovna Ziberova created a musical setting for Schiler's \"William Tell\" in 1935. The 20th-century composer Giselher Klebe adapted \"The Robbers\" for his first opera of the same name, which premiered in 1957.\nSchiller's burial.\nA poem written about the poet's burial:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2014\u200a\nWorks.\nPlays\nHistories\nTranslations\nProse\nPoems\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographical\nEditions\nOther valuable editions are:\nTranslations of Schiller's works\nDocuments and other memorials of Schiller are in the Goethe and Schiller Archive in Weimar."}
{"id": "63743", "revid": "724850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63743", "title": "Jean Anouilh", "text": "French playwright (1910\u20131987)\nJean Marie Lucien Pierre Anouilh (; ; 23 June 1910 \u2013 3 October 1987) was a French dramatist and screenwriter whose career spanned five decades. Though his work ranged from high drama to absurdist farce, Anouilh is best known for his 1944 production of Sophocles' \"Antigone,\" which, though performed without objection by censors, was nevertheless seen as an attack on Marshal P\u00e9tain's Vichy government. His plays are less experimental than those of his contemporaries, having clearly organized plot and eloquent dialogue. One of France's most prolific writers after World War II, much of Anouilh's work deals with themes of maintaining integrity in a world of moral compromise.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nAnouilh was born in C\u00e9risole, a small village on the outskirts of Bordeaux, France and had Basque ancestry. His father, Fran\u00e7ois Anouilh, was a tailor, and Anouilh maintained that he inherited from him a pride in conscientious craftmanship. He may owe his artistic bent to his mother, Marie-Magdeleine, a violinist who supplemented the family's meager income by playing summer seasons in the casino orchestra in the nearby seaside resort of Arcachon. Marie-Magdeleine worked the night shifts in the music-hall orchestras and sometimes accompanied stage presentations, affording Anouilh ample opportunity to absorb the dramatic performances from backstage. He often attended rehearsals and solicited the resident authors to let him read scripts until bedtime. He first tried his hand at playwriting here, at the age of 12, though his earliest works do not survive.\nIn 1918 the family moved to Paris where the young Anouilh received his secondary education at the Lyc\u00e9e Chaptal. Jean-Louis Barrault, later a major French director, was a pupil there at the same time and recalls Anouilh as an intense, rather dandified figure who hardly noticed a boy some two years younger than himself. He earned acceptance into the law school at the Sorbonne but, unable to support himself financially, he left after just 18 months to seek work as a copywriter at the advertising agency Publicit\u00e9 Damour. He liked the work, and spoke more than once with wry approval of the lessons in the classical virtues of brevity and precision of language he learned while drafting advertising copy.\nAnouilh's financial troubles continued after he was called up to military service in 1929. Supported by only his meager conscription salary, Anouilh married the actress Monelle Valentin in 1931. Though Valentin starred in many of his plays, Anouilh's daughter Caroline (from his second marriage), says the marriage was not a happy one. Anouilh's youngest daughter Colombe even says there was never an official marriage between Anouilh and Valentin. She allegedly had multiple extramarital affairs, which caused Anouilh much pain and suffering. The infidelity weighed heavily on the dramatist as a result of the uncertainty about his own parentage. According to Caroline, Anouilh had learned that his mother had had a lover at the theatre in Arcachon who was actually his biological father. In spite of this, Anouilh and Valentin had a daughter, Catherine, in 1934 who followed the pair into theatre work at an early age. Anouilh's growing family placed further strain on his already limited finances. Determined to break into writing full-time, he began to write comic scenes for the cinema to supplement their income.\nTheatre work.\nAt the age of 25, Anouilh found work as a secretary to the French actor and director Louis Jouvet at the Com\u00e9die des Champs-Elys\u00e9es. Though Anouilh's boss had happily lent him some of the set furniture left over from the production of Jean Giraudoux's play \"Siegfried\" to furnish his modest home, the director was not interested in encouraging his assistant's attempts at playwriting. Jouvet had risen to fame in the early 1930s through his collaborations with the playwright Giraudoux, and together the two worked to shift focus from the authorial voice of the director (which had dominated the French stage since the early twentieth century) back to the playwright and his text.\nGiraudoux was an inspiration to Anouilh and, with the encouragement of the acclaimed playwright, he began writing again in 1929. Before the end of the year he made his theatrical debut with \"Humulus le muet\", a collaborative project with Jean Aurenche. It was followed by his first solo projects, \"L'Hermine\" (\"The Ermine\") in 1932 and \"Mandarine\" in 1933, both produced by Aur\u00e9lien Lugn\u00e9-Poe, an innovative actor and stage manager who was then head of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u0152uvre. Ruled by the philosophy, \"the word creates the decor,\" Lugn\u00e9-Poe let Anouilh's lyrical prose shine in front of a backdrop of simple compositions of line and color that created a unity of style and mood.\nThe plays were not great successes, closing after 37 and 13 performances respectively, but Anouilh persevered, following it up with a string of productions, most notably \"Y'avait un prisonnier\" (1935). These works, most in collaboration with the experimental Russian director Georges Pito\u00ebff, were considered promising despite their lack of commercial profits, and the duo continued to work together until they had their first major success in 1937 with \"Le voyageur sans bagage\" (\"Traveller Without Luggage\"). In subsequent years, there was rarely a season in Paris that did not prominently feature a new Anouilh play and many of these were also being exported to England and America. After 1938, however, much of Anouilh's later work was directed by the prominent Paris scenic designer Andr\u00e9 Barsacq, who had taken over as director of the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Atelier after Charles Dullin's retirement in 1940. Barsacq was a champion for Anouilh and their affiliation was a major factor in the playwright's continued success after the war.\nPlaywright.\nIn the 1940s, Anouilh turned from contemporary tales to more mythical, classic, and historic subjects. With protagonists who asserted their independence from the fated past, themes during this period are more closely related to the existential concerns of such writers as Jean-Paul Sartre and Albert Camus. The most famous play of this group is \"Antigone\", which \"established Anouilh as a leading dramatist, not only because of the power with which he drew the classic confrontation between the uncompromising Antigone and the politically expedient Creon, but also because French theatre-goers under the occupation read the play as a contemporary political parable.\" His post-war plays dealt with similar concerns and included \"Rom\u00e9o et Jeannette\", \"M\u00e9d\u00e9e\" (\"Medea\"), and Anouilh's Joan of Arc story \"L'Alouette\" (\"The Lark\"), which, in its distinct optimism, rivalled the commercial success of \"Antigone\".\nAnouilh himself grouped his plays of this period on the basis of their dominant tone, publishing his later works in collected volumes to reflect what he felt \"represented the phases of his evolution and loosely resembled the distinction between comedy and tragedy.\" \"Pi\u00e8ces noires\" or \"Black plays\" were tragedies or realistic dramas and included \"Antigone\", \"J\u00e9zabel\", and \"La Sauvage\" (\"The Restless Heart\"). This category typically featured \"young, idealistic, and uncompromising protagonists [who] are able to maintain their integrity only by choosing death.\" By contrast, Anouilh's \"pi\u00e8ces roses\" or \"pink plays\" were comedies where fantasy dominated with an atmosphere similar to that of fairy tales. In these plays such as \"Le Bal des voleurs\" (\"Carnival of Thieves\"), \"Le Rendez-vous de Senlis\" (\"Dinner with the Family\") and \"L\u00e9ocadia\" (\"Time Remembered\"), the focus is on \"the burden of the environment and especially of the past on a protagonist seeking a happier, freer existence.\"\nMost of Anouilh's plays of the late 1940s and into the 1950s become darker and distinctly cruel and, in contrast with his earlier works, begin to feature middle-aged characters who must view life more practically than Anouilh's former idealistic youths. The playwright divided the works of this period into \"pi\u00e8ces brillantes\" (\"brilliant plays\") and \"pi\u00e8ces grin\u00e7antes\" (\"grating plays\"). The first group includes works such as \"L'Invitation au ch\u00e2teau\" (Ring Round the Moon) and \"Colombe\", and are typified by aristocratic settings and witty banter. The grating plays like \"La Valse des tor\u00e9adors\" (\"Waltz of the Toreadors\") and \"Le R\u00e9actionnaire amoureux\" (\"The Fighting Cock\") are more bitterly funny, trading clever word play for a darker tone of disillusionment.\nAnother category Anouilh specifies are his \"pi\u00e8ces costum\u00e9es\" (\"costume plays\") which include \"The Lark\", \"La Foire d'Empoigne\" (\"Catch as Catch Can\"), and \"Becket\", an international success, depicting the historical martyr Thomas Becket, the Archbishop of Canterbury who sought to defend the church against the monarch (and his friend), Henry II of England, who had appointed him to his see. So classified because they share historical \"costumed\" settings, Anouilh also specifies that these plays must also prominently feature an enlightened protagonist seeking \"a moral path in a world of corruption and manipulation.\"\nAnouilh's final period begins with \"La Grotte\" (\"The Cavern\"), in which he comments on his own progress as a writer and a theatre artist. The central character is a playwright suffering from writer's block who in his frustration recalls the foibles of Luigi Pirandello's \"Six Characters in Search of an Author\". Anouilh's work had always contained hints of metatheatricality, or commentary on the business of theatre within the world of the play, but in his late works these structures became more fully developed as he begins to write primarily about characters who are dramatists or theatre directors. There is also a pronounced link, during this time, of Anouilh's emphasis of theatre and the family, displaying intimate relationships that are \"more profound and more important than the traditional heightened action of 'theatre'\". Antoine, the playwright-protagonist of \"Cher Antoine; ou, L'Amour rat\u00e9\" (\"Dear Antoine; or, The Love That Failed\"), asserts that the world must take notice of these \"pi\u00e8ces secr\u00e8tes\" (secret dramas) and Anouilh scholars have proposed this name, \"pi\u00e8ces secr\u00e8tes\", to classify the collected works of his latest period.\"\nPolitical controversy.\nAnouilh remained staunchly apolitical for most of his life and career. He served in the military during at least two periods, having been drafted into the French Army in 1931 and 1939. He was a prisoner of war for a short time when the Germans conquered France and willingly lived and worked in Paris during the subsequent German occupation. Because he refused to take sides during France's collaboration with the Axis Alliance, some critics have branded him as a potential Nazi sympathiser. This controversy escalated as a result of Anouilh's public clashes with the leader of the Free French Forces (and later president of the Fifth Republic), General Charles de Gaulle. In the mid-1940s, Anouilh and several other intellectuals signed a petition for clemency to save the writer Robert Brasillach, who was condemned to death for being a Nazi collaborator. Brasillach was executed by firing squad in February 1945, despite the outcry from Anouilh and his peers that the new government had no right to persecute individuals for \"intellectual crimes\" in the absence of military or political action. Nevertheless, Anouilh refused to comment on his political views, writing in a letter to the Belgian critic Hubert Gignoux in 1946, \"I do not have a biography and I am very happy about it. The rest of my life, as long as God wills it, will remain my personal business, and I will withhold the details of it.\"\nAnouilh's plays provide the most important clues about his political point of view, though their reputation for ambiguity further complicates the matter. For instance, \"Antigone\" provides an allegorical representation of the debate between the idealistic members of the French Resistance and the pragmatism of the collaborationists. Though many have read the play as having a strong anti-Nazi sentiment, the fact that the Vichy Regime allowed the piece to be performed without censure testifies to the fact that it was potentially seen as supportive of the occupation in its time. Though the playwright romanticizes Antigone's sense of honor and duty to what is morally right, in this case resisting the Nazi forces, it can also be said that Anouilh, like Sophocles before him, makes a convincing argument for Creon's method of leadership.\nAwards and recognition.\nIn 1970 his work was recognized with the \"Prix mondial Cino Del Duca\". In 2012, the Nobel Records were opened after 50 years and it was revealed that Anouilh was among a shortlist of authors considered for the 1962 Nobel Prize in Literature, along with John Steinbeck (winner), Robert Graves, Lawrence Durrell and Karen Blixen. According to a report in \"The Guardian\", \"It is not clear why Anouilh was passed over, but the French poet Saint-John Perse had taken the Nobel in 1960, meaning that France was well represented on the roster of winners, and \"Svenska Dagbladet\" reveals that Jean-Paul Sartre, who won the prize in 1964, was starting to be seriously considered as a candidate.\"\nIn 1980, Anouilh was the first recipient of the Grand Prix du Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise established that year.\nCritical discussion.\nBy the end of his career, Anouilh's reputation outstripped those of some of his contemporaries despite his repertoire remaining mostly confined to theatre and film. Most French dramatists of the 1930s and 1940s, including Anouilh's most significant contemporary influence, Giraudoux, not only wrote for the stage but also composed poetry, novels, or essays. Nevertheless, he remained prolific, consistently producing and publishing performance works for more than fifty years.\nAnouilh's early works were \"naturalistic studies of a sordid and corrupt world.\" Many of these plays present the reader with the striking and inescapable dichotomy between pragmatism and a sort of transcendent idealism. There is little to no \"middle ground of ambiguity\" that exists where this conflict asserts itself. This is evidenced in \"Le Voyageur Sans Bagage.\" The main character Gaston, a World War I veteran who suffers from amnesia, cannot remember the moral depravity of his youth (he slept with his brother's wife and severely injured his best friend). This checkered past is invariably at odds with the near-angelic behavior that he now exhibits, and recognition of this truth forces him to leave his former identity behind, unable to reconcile the two sides of himself. In denouncing his past, Gaston reclasses his freedom as an illusion, but one of his own making. He befriends a young English boy and shows him his identifying scar; this gesture allows the boy to describe Gaston to the authorities, thereby claiming him as kin. With a new life and a new family, Gaston has a fresh start. David I. Grossvogel, describes this situation as the \"restoration of a childhood paradise lost,\" attributing \"Le Voyageur Sans Bagage\" as the beginning of Anouilh's search to justify the unhappiness of his youth. Theatre historian Marvin Carlson agrees, noting that this play epitomizes the \"complex tonality and deft dramatic technique\" that remained throughout his work, though, he asserts, it was only as the playwright matured that his \"dark view of the human condition [reached] its final expression.\"\nAnouilh disagreed with these somber readings of his best works, however, arguing that, like all great French literature, his plays had found ways to laugh at misfortune. \"Thanks to Moli\u00e8re,\" Anouilh said, \"the true French theatre is the only one that is not gloomy, in which we laugh like men at war with our misery and our horror. This humor is one of France's messages to the world.\"\nDisclosing his thoughts on French theatre and his personal perspective as a playwright, he said that the perception of his work was often misguided:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am played in private theaters, so I write for the bourgeoisie. One has to rely on the people who pay for their places; the people who support the theater are bourgeois. But this public has changed: They have such a terror of not being in touch, of missing out on a fashionable event that they no longer exist as a decisive force. I think the public has lost its head. They now say that a play can't be that good if they can understand it. My plays are not hermetic enough. It's rather Moli\u00e8resque, don't you think?\u2014\u200a\nIn the 1950s, Anouilh examined his antagonism with General de Gaulle in \"L'Hurluberlu, ou Le Reactionnaire amoureux\" (1958) and \"Le Songe du critique\" (1960). He began to lose the favor of audiences and critics alike, however, with the emergence of such playwrights as Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco and Samuel Beckett. Though he shared with these authors a \"similar desperate vision of human existence,\" these new absurdist theatres' pursuit of alternative dramaturgies made Anouilh's semi-realistic plays seem dull and old-fashioned. In the 1980s Anouilh reinvented himself as a director, staging his own plays as well as those of other authors. He died of a heart attack in Lausanne, Switzerland on 3 October 1987. By then divorced from Monelle Valentin, he was survived by his second wife, Nicole Lan\u00e7on, and four children.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
