{"id": "66599", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66599", "title": "Noise pollution", "text": "Excessive displeasing noise\nNoise pollution, or sound pollution, is the propagation of noise or sound with potential harmful effects on humans and animals. The source of outdoor noise worldwide is mainly caused by machines, transport and propagation systems. Poor urban planning may give rise to noise disintegration or pollution. Side-by-side industrial and residential buildings can result in noise pollution in the residential areas. Some of the main sources of noise in residential areas include loud music, transportation (traffic, rail, airplanes, etc.), lawn care maintenance, construction, electrical generators, wind turbines, explosions, and people.\nDocumented problems associated with noise in urban environments go back as far as ancient Rome. Research suggests that noise pollution in the United States is the highest in low-income and racial minority neighborhoods, and noise pollution associated with household electricity generators is an emerging environmental degradation in many developing nations.\nHigh noise levels can contribute to cardiovascular effects in humans and an increased incidence of coronary artery disease. In animals, noise can increase the risk of death by altering predator or prey detection and avoidance, interfere with reproduction and navigation, and contribute to permanent hearing loss.\nNoise assessment.\nMetrics of noise.\nResearchers measure noise in terms of pressure, intensity, and frequency. Sound pressure level (SPL) represents the amount of pressure relative to atmospheric pressure during sound wave propagation that can vary with time; this is also known as the sum of the amplitudes of a wave. Sound intensity, measured in Watts per meters-squared, represents the flow of sound over a particular area. Although sound pressure and intensity differ, both can describe the level of loudness by comparing the current state to the threshold of hearing; this results in decibel units on the logarithmic scale. The logarithmic scale accommodates the vast range of sound heard by the human ear. \nFrequency, or pitch, is measured in Hertz (Hz) and reflects the number of sound waves propagated through the air per second. The range of frequencies heard by the human ear range from 20\u00a0Hz to 20,000\u00a0Hz; however, sensitivity to hearing higher frequencies decreases with age. Some organisms, such as elephants, can register frequencies between 0 and 20\u00a0Hz (infrasound), and others, such as bats, can recognize frequencies above 20,000\u00a0Hz (ultrasound) to echolocate.\nResearchers use different weights to account for noise frequency with intensity, as humans do not perceive sound at the same loudness level. The most commonly used weighted levels are A-weighting, C-weighting, and Z-weighting. A-weighting mirrors the range of hearing, with frequencies of 20\u00a0Hz to 20,000\u00a0Hz. This gives more weight to higher frequencies and less weight to lower frequencies. C-weighting has been used to measure peak sound pressure or impulse noise, similar to loud short-lived noises from machinery in occupational settings. Z-weighting, also known as zero-weighting, represents noise levels without any frequency weights.\nUnderstanding sound pressure levels is key to assessing measurements of noise pollution. Several metrics describing noise exposure include:\nResearchers with the US National Park Service found that human activity doubles the background-noise levels in 63 percent of protected spaces like national parks, and increases them tenfold in 21 percent. In the latter places, \"if you could have heard something 100 feet away, now you can only hear it 10 feet away\".\nInstrumentation.\nSound level meters.\nSound can be measured in the air using a sound level meter, a device consisting of a microphone, an amplifier, and a time meter. Sound level meters can measure noise at different frequencies (usually A- and C-weighted levels). There are two settings for response time constants, fast (time constant = 0.125 seconds, similar to human hearing) or slow (1 second, used for calculating averages over widely varying sound levels). Sound level meters meet the required standards set by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and in the United States, the American National Standards Institute as type 0, 1, or 2 instruments.\nType 0 devices are not required to meet the same criteria expected of types 1 and 2 since scientists use these as laboratory reference standards. Type 1 (precision) instruments are to study the precision of capturing sound measurements, while type 2 instruments are for general field use. Type 1 devices acceptable by the standards have a margin of error of \u00b11.5\u00a0dB, while type 2 instruments meet a margin of error of \u00b12.3\u00a0dB.\nDosimeters.\nSound can also be measured using a noise dosimeter, a device similar to a sound level meter. Individuals have used dosimeters to measure personal exposure levels in occupational settings given their smaller, more portable size. Unlike many sound level meters, a dosimeter microphone attaches to the worker and monitors levels throughout a work shift. Additionally, dosimeters can calculate the percent dose or time-weighted average (TWA).\nSmartphone applications.\nIn recent years, scientists and audio engineers have been developing smartphone apps to conduct sound measurements, similar to the standalone sound level meters and dosimeters. In 2014, the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published a study examining the efficacy of 192 sound measurement apps on Apple and Android smartphones.\nThe authors found that only 10 apps, all of which were on the App Store, met all acceptability criteria. Of these 10 apps, only 4 apps met accuracy criteria within 2\u00a0dB(A) from the reference standard. As a result of this study, they created the NIOSH Sound Level Meter App to increase accessibility and decrease costs of monitoring noise using crowdsourcing data with a tested and highly accurate application. The app is compliant with ANSI S1.4 and IEC 61672 requirements.\nThe app calculates the following measures: total run time, instantaneous sound level, A-weighted equivalent sound level (LAeq), maximum level (LAmax), C-weighted peak sound level, time-weighted average (TWA), dose, and projected dose. Dose and projected dose are based on sound level and duration of noise exposure in relation to the NIOSH recommended exposure limit of 85\u00a0dB(A) for an eight-hour work shift.\nUsing the phone's internal microphone (or an attached external microphone), the NIOSH Sound Level Meter measures instantaneous sound levels in real time and converts sound into electrical energy to calculate measurements in A-, C-, or Z-weighted decibels. App users are able to generate, save, and e-mail measurement reports. The NIOSH Sound Level Meter is currently only available on Apple iOS devices.\nImpacts.\nHuman health.\nNoise pollution affects both health and behavior. Unwanted sound (noise) can damage physiological health and mental health. Noise pollution is associated with several health conditions, including cardiovascular disorders, hypertension, high stress levels, tinnitus, hearing loss, sleep disturbances, and other harmful effects. According to a research article, the exposure of sound level more than 81 dB increased the chances of prehypertension and hypertension in local population of Pakistan. According to a 2019 review of the existing literature, noise pollution was associated with faster cognitive decline.\nAcross Europe, according to the European Environment Agency, it estimated 113 million people are affected by road traffic noise levels above 55\u00a0decibels, the threshold at which noise becomes harmful to human health by the WHO's definition.\nSound becomes unwanted when it either interferes with normal activities such as sleep or conversation, or disrupts or diminishes one's quality of life. Noise-induced hearing loss can be caused by prolonged exposure to noise levels above 85 A-weighted decibels. A comparison of Maaban tribesmen, who were insignificantly exposed to transportation or industrial noise, to a typical U.S. population showed that chronic exposure to moderately high levels of environmental noise contributes to hearing loss.\nNoise exposure in the workplace can also contribute to noise-induced hearing loss and other health issues. Occupational hearing loss is one of the most common work-related illnesses in the U.S. and worldwide.\nIt is less clear how humans adapt to noise subjectively. Tolerance for noise is frequently independent of decibel levels. Murray Schafer's soundscape research was groundbreaking in this regard. In his work, he makes compelling arguments about how humans relate to noise on a subjective level, and how such subjectivity is conditioned by culture. Schafer notes that sound is an expression of power in material culture. As such, fast cars or Harley Davidson motorcycles with aftermarket pipes tend to have louder engines not only for safety reasons, but for expressions of power by dominating the soundscape with a particular sound.\nOther key research in this area can be seen in Fong's comparative analysis of soundscape differences between Bangkok, Thailand, and Los Angeles, California, US. Based on Schafer's research, Fong's study showed how soundscapes differ based on the level of urban development in the area. He found that cities in the periphery have different soundscapes than inner city areas. Fong's findings tie not only soundscape appreciation to subjective views of sound, but also demonstrates how different sounds of the soundscape are indicative of class differences in urban environments.\nNoise pollution can have negative affects on adults and children on the autistic spectrum. Those with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) can have hyperacusis, which is an abnormal sensitivity to sound. People with ASD who experience hyperacusis may have unpleasant emotions, such as fear and anxiety, and uncomfortable physical sensations in noisy environments with loud sounds. This can cause individuals with ASD to avoid environments with noise pollution, which in turn can result in isolation and negatively affect their quality of life. Sudden explosive noises typical of high-performance car exhausts and car alarms are types of noise pollution that can affect people with ASD.\nWhile the elderly may have cardiac problems due to noise, according to the World Health Organization, children are especially vulnerable to noise, and the effects that noise has on children may be permanent. Noise poses a serious threat to a child's physical and psychological health, and may negatively interfere with a child's learning and behavior. Exposure to persistent noise pollution shows how important maintaining environmental health is in keeping children and elderly healthy.\nWildlife.\nNoise generated by traffic, ships, vehicles, and aircraft can affect the survivability of wildlife species and can reach undisturbed habitats. Although sounds are commonly present in the environment, anthropogenic noises are distinguishable due to differences in frequency and amplitude. Many animals use sounds to communicate with others of their species, whether that is for reproduction purposes, navigation, or to notify others of prey or predators. However, anthropogenic noises inhibit species from detecting these sounds, affecting overall communication within the population. Species such as birds, amphibians, reptiles, fishes, mammals, and invertebrates are examples of biological groups that are impacted by noise pollution. If animals cannot communicate with one another, this would result in reproduction to decline (not able to find mates), and higher mortality (lack of communication for predator detection). The study of these relationships between acoustic organisms, the acoustic environment, and resulting impacts is known as soundscape ecology or acoustic ecology. \nEuropean robins living in urban environments are more likely to sing at night in places with high levels of noise pollution during the day, suggesting that they sing at night because it is quieter, and their message can propagate through the environment more clearly. The same study showed that daytime noise was a stronger predictor of nocturnal singing than night-time light pollution, to which the phenomenon often is attributed. Anthropogenic noise reduced the species richness of birds found in Neotropical urban parks.\nZebra finches become less faithful to their partners when exposed to traffic noise. This could alter a population's evolutionary trajectory by selecting traits, sapping resources normally devoted to other activities and thus leading to profound genetic and evolutionary consequences.\nWhy invertebrates are affected.\nSeveral reasons have been identified relating to hypersensitivity in invertebrates when exposed to anthropogenic noise. Invertebrates have evolved to pick up sound, and a large portion of their physiology is adapted for the purpose of detecting environmental vibrations. Antennae or hairs on the organism pick up particle motion. Anthropogenic noise created in the marine environment, such as pile driving and shipping, are picked up through particle motion; these activities exemplify near-field stimuli.\nThe ability to detect vibration through mechanosensory structures is most important in invertebrates and fish. Mammals, also, depend on pressure detector ears to perceive the noise around them. Therefore, it is suggested that marine invertebrates are likely perceiving the effects of noise differently than marine mammals. It is reported that invertebrates can detect a large range of sounds, but noise sensitivity varies substantially between each species. Generally, however, invertebrates depend on frequencies under 10\u00a0kHz. This is the frequency at which a great deal of ocean noise occurs.\nTherefore, not only does anthropogenic noise often mask invertebrate communication, but it also negatively impacts other biological system functions through noise-induced stress.\nAnother one of the leading causes of noise effects in invertebrates is because sound is used in multiple behavioral contexts by many groups. This includes regularly sound produced or perceived in the context of aggression or predator avoidance. Invertebrates also utilize sound to attract or locate mates, and often employ sound in the courtship process.\nStress recorded in physiological and behavioral responses.\nMany of the studies that were conducted on invertebrate exposure to noise found that a physiological or behavioral response was triggered. Most of the time, this related to stress, and provided concrete evidence that marine invertebrates detect and respond to noise. Some of the most informative studies in this category focus on hermit crabs. In one study, it was found that the behavior of the hermit crab \"Pagurus bernhardus\", when attempting to choose a shell, was modified when subjected to noise.\nProper selection of hermit crab shells strongly contributes to their ability to survive. Shells offer protection against predators, high salinity and desiccation. However, researchers determined that approach to shell, investigation of shell, and habitation of shell, occurred over a shorter time duration with anthropogenic noise as a factor. This indicated that assessment and decision-making processes of the hermit crab were both altered, even though hermit crabs are not known to evaluate shells using any auditory or mechanoreception mechanisms.\nIn another study that focused on \"Pagurus bernhardus\" and the blue mussel (\"Mytilus edulis\"), physical behaviors exhibited a stress response to noise. When the hermit crab and mussel were exposed to different types of noise, significant variation in the valve gape occurred in the blue mussel. The hermit crab responded to the noise by lifting the shell off of the ground multiple times, then vacating the shell to examine it before returning inside. The results from the hermit crab trials were ambiguous with respect to causation; more studies must be conducted in order to determine whether the behavior of the hermit crab can be attributed to the noise produced.\nAnother study that demonstrates a stress response in invertebrates was conducted on the longfin inshore squid (\"Doryteuthis pealeii\"). The squid was exposed to sounds of construction known as pile driving, which impacts the sea bed directly and produces intense substrate-borne and water-borne vibrations. The squid reacted by jetting, inking, pattern change and other startle responses. Since the responses recorded are similar to those identified when faced with a predator, it is implied that the squid initially viewed the sounds as a threat. However, it was also noted that the alarm responses decreased over a period of time, signifying that the squid had likely acclimated to the noise. Regardless, it is apparent that stress occurred in the squid, and although further investigation has not been pursued, researchers suspect that other implications exist that may alter the squid's survival habits.\nAn additional study examined the impact noise exposure had on the Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin (\"Sousa chinensis\"). The dolphins were exposed to elevated noise levels due to construction in the Pearl River Estuary in China, specifically caused by the world's largest vibration hammer\u2014the OCTA-KONG. The study suggested that while the dolphin's clicks were not affected, their whistles were because of susceptibility to auditory masking. The noise from the OCTA-KONG was found to have been detectable by the dolphins up to 3.5\u00a0km away from the original source, and while the noise was not found to be life-threatening it was indicated that prolonged exposure to this noise could be responsible for auditory damage.\nMarine life.\nNoise pollution is common in marine ecosystems, affecting at least 55 marine species. For many marine populations, sound is their primary sense used for their survival; able to detect sound hundreds to thousands of kilometers away from a source, while vision is limited to tens of meters underwater. As anthropogenic noises continue to increase, doubling every decade, this compromises the survivability of marine species. One study discovered that as seismic noises and naval sonar increases in marine ecosystems, cetacean, such as whales and dolphins, diversity decreases. Noise pollution has also impaired fish hearing, killed and isolated whale populations, intensified stress response in marine species, and changed species' physiology. Because marine species are sensitive to noise, most marine wildlife are located in undisturbed habitats or areas not exposed to significant anthropogenic noise, limiting suitable habitats to forage and mate. Whales have changed their migration route to avoid anthropogenic noise, as well as altering their calls. Research on narwhals in the Canadian Arctic found that individuals significantly reduced their acoustic activity in the presence of ships, highlighting the potential for vessel noise to disrupt essential behaviors such as navigation, foraging, and communication.\nFor many marine organisms, sound is the primary means of learning about their environments. For example, many species of marine mammals and fish use sound as their primary means of navigating, communicating, and foraging. Anthropogenic noise can have a detrimental effect on animals, increasing the risk of death by changing the delicate balance in predator or prey detection and avoidance, and interfering with the use of the sounds in communication, especially in relation to reproduction, and in navigation and echolocation. These effects then may alter more interactions within a community through indirect (\"domino\") effects. Acoustic overexposure can lead to temporary or permanent loss of hearing.\nNoise pollution may have caused the death of certain species of whales that beached themselves after being exposed to the loud sound of military sonar. (see also Marine mammals and sonar) Up until recently, most research on noise impacts has been focused on marine mammals, and to a lesser degree, fish. In the past few years, scientists have shifted to conducting studies on invertebrates and their responses to anthropogenic sounds in the marine environment. This research is essential, especially considering that invertebrates make up 75% of marine species, and thus compose a large percentage of ocean food webs. Of the studies that have been conducted, a sizable variety in families of invertebrates have been represented in the research. A variation in the complexity of their sensory systems exists, which allows scientists to study a range of characteristics and develop a better understanding of anthropogenic noise impacts on living organisms.\nEven marine invertebrates, such as crabs (\"Carcinus maenas\"), have been shown to be negatively affected by ship noise. Larger crabs were noted to be negatively affected more by the sounds than smaller crabs. Repeated exposure to the sounds did lead to acclimatization.\nUnderwater noise pollution due to human activities is also prevalent in the sea, and given that sound travels faster through water than through air, is a major source of disruption of marine ecosystems and does significant harm to sea life, including marine mammals, fish, and invertebrates. The once-calm sea environment is now noisy and chaotic due to ships, oil drilling, sonar equipment, and seismic testing. The principal anthropogenic noise sources come from merchant ships, naval sonar operations, underwater explosions (nuclear), and seismic exploration by oil and gas industries.\nCargo ships generate high levels of noise due to propellers and diesel engines. This noise pollution significantly raises the low-frequency ambient noise levels above those caused by wind. Animals such as whales that depend on sound for communication can be affected by this noise in various ways. Higher ambient noise levels also cause animals to vocalize more loudly, which is called the Lombard effect. Researchers have found that humpback whales' song lengths were longer when low-frequency sonar was active nearby.\nUnderwater noise pollution is not only limited to oceans, and can occur in freshwater environments as well. Noise pollution has been detected in the Yangtze River, and has resulted in the endangerment of Yangtze finless porpoises. A study conducted on noise pollution in the Yangtze River suggested that the elevated levels of noise pollution altered the temporal hearing threshold of the finless porpoises and posed a significant threat to their survival.\nCoral Reefs.\nNoise pollution has emerged as a prominent stressor on coral reef ecosystems. Coral reefs are among the most important ecosystems of the earth, as well as they are of great importance to several communities and cultures around the world, that depend on the reefs for the services they provide, such as fishing and tourism. The reefs contribute substantially to global biodiversity and productivity, and is a critical part of the support systems of the earth. Anthropogenic noise, originating from human activities, has increased underwater noise in the natural sound environment of the reefs. The preeminent sources of noise pollution on coral reefs are boat and ship activities. The sound created by the crossing of boats and ships overlaps with the natural sounds of the coral reef organisms. This pollution impacts the various organisms inhabiting the coral reefs in different ways, and ultimately damages the capabilities of the reef and may cause permanent deterioration.\nHealthy coral reefs are naturally noisy, consisting of the sounds of breaking waves and tumbling rocks, as well as the sounds produced by fish and other organisms. Marine organisms use sound for purposes such as navigating, foraging, communicating, and reproductive activities. The sensitivity and range of hearing varies across different organisms within the coral reef ecosystem. Among coral reef fish, sound detection and generation can span from 1\u00a0Hz to 200\u00a0kHz, while their hearing abilities encompasses frequencies within the range of 100\u00a0Hz to 1\u00a0kHz. Several different types of anthropogenic noise are at the same frequencies as marine organisms in coral reefs use for navigation, communication, and other purposes, which disturbs the natural sound environment of the coral reefs.\nAnthropogenic sources of noise are generated by a range of different human activities, such as shipping, oil and gas exploration and fishing. The principal cause of noise pollution on coral reefs is boat and ship activities. The use of smaller motorboats, for purposes as fishing or tourism within coral reef areas, and larger vessels, such as cargo ships transporting goods, significantly amplifies disturbances to the natural marine soundscape. Noise from shipping and small boats is at the same frequency as sounds generated by marine organisms, and therefore acts as a disruptive element in the sound environment of coral reefs. Both longer-term and acute effects have been documented on coral reefs organisms after exposure to noise pollution.\nAnthropogenic noise is essentially a persistent stressor on coral reefs and its inhabitants. Both temporary and permanent noise pollution has been found to induce changes in the distributional, physiological, and behavioral patterns of coral reef organisms. Some of the observed changes has been compromised hearing, increased heart rate in coral fish and a reduction in the number of larvae reaching their settlement areas. Ultimately, the outcome of such changes results in reduced survival rates and altered patterns which potentially alters the entirety of the reef ecosystem.\nThe white damselfish, a coral reef fish, has been found to have a compromised anti-predator behavior as a result to ship noise. The distraction of anthropogenic noise is possibly distracting the fish, and thereby affecting the escape response and routine swimming of the coral fish. A study conducted on species of coral larvae, which are crucial for the expansion of coral reefs, discovered that the larvae oriented towards the sound of healthy reefs. The noise created by anthropogenic activities could mask this soundscape, hindering the larvae from swimming towards the reef. Noise pollution ultimately poses a threat to the behavioral patterns of several coral organisms.\nImpacts on communication.\nTerrestrial anthropogenic noise affects the acoustic communications in grasshoppers while producing sound to attract a mate. The fitness and reproductive success of a grasshopper is dependent on its ability to attract a mating partner. Male \"Corthippus biguttulus\" grasshoppers attract females by using stridulation to produce courtship songs. The females produce acoustic signals that are shorter and primarily low frequency and amplitude, in response to the male's song. Research has found that this species of grasshopper changes its mating call in response to loud traffic noise. Lampe and Schmoll (2012) found that male grasshoppers from quiet habitats have a local frequency maximum of about 7319\u00a0Hz.\nIn contrast, male grasshoppers exposed to loud traffic noise can create signals with a higher local frequency maximum of 7622\u00a0Hz. The higher frequencies are produced by the grasshoppers to prevent background noise from drowning out their signals. This information reveals that anthropogenic noise disturbs the acoustic signals produced by insects for communication. Similar processes of behavior perturbation, behavioral plasticity, and population level shifts in response to noise likely occur in sound-producing marine invertebrates, but more experimental research is needed.\nImpacts on development.\nBoat-noise has been shown to affect the embryonic development and fitness of the sea hare \"Stylocheilus striatus\". Anthropogenic noise can alter conditions in the environment that have a negative effect on invertebrate survival. Although embryos can adapt to normal changes in their environment, evidence suggests they are not well adapted to endure the negative effects of noise pollution. Studies have been conducted on the sea hare to determine the effects of boat noise on the early stages of life and the development of embryos. Researchers have studied sea hares from the lagoon of Moorea Island, French Polynesia. In the study, recordings of boat noise were made by using a hydrophone. In addition, recordings of ambient noise were made that did not contain boat noise. In contrast to ambient noise playbacks, mollusks exposed to boat noise playbacks had a 21% reduction in embryonic development. Additionally, newly hatched larvae experienced an increased mortality rate of 22% when exposed to boat noise playbacks.\nImpacts on ecosystem.\nAnthropogenic noise can have negative effects on invertebrates that aid in controlling environmental processes that are crucial to the ecosystem. There are a variety of natural underwater sounds produced by waves in coastal and shelf habitats, and biotic communication signals that do not negatively impact the ecosystem. The changes in behavior of invertebrates vary depending on the type of anthropogenic noise and is similar to natural noisescapes.\nExperiments have examined the behavior and physiology of the clam (\"Ruditapes philippinarum\"), the decapod (\"Nephrops norvegicus\"), and the brittlestar (\"Amphiura filiformis\") that are affected by sounds resembling shipping and building noises. The three invertebrates in the experiment were exposed to continuous broadband noise and impulsive broadband noise. The anthropogenic noise impeded the bioirrigation and burying behavior of \"Nephrops norvegicus\". In addition, the decapod exhibited a reduction in movement. \"Ruditapes philippinarum\" experienced stress which caused a reduction in surface relocation. The anthropogenic noise caused the clams to close their valves and relocate to an area above the interface of the sediment-water. This response inhibits the clam from mixing the top layer of the sediment profile and hinders suspension feeding. Sound causes \"Amphiura filiformis\" to experience changes in physiological processes which results in irregularity of bioturbation behavior.\nThese invertebrates play an important role in transporting substances for benthic nutrient cycling. As a result, ecosystems are negatively impacted when species cannot perform natural behaviors in their environment. Locations with shipping lanes, dredging, or commercial harbors are known as continuous broadband sound. Pile-driving, and construction are sources that exhibit impulsive broadband noise. The different types of broadband noise have different effects on the varying species of invertebrates and how they behave in their environment.\nAnother study found that the valve closures in the Pacific oyster \"Magallana gigas\" was a behavioral response to varying degrees of acoustic amplitude levels and noise frequencies. Oysters perceive near-field sound vibrations by utilizing statocysts. In addition, they have superficial receptors that detect variations in water pressure. Sound pressure waves from shipping can be produced below 200\u00a0Hz. Pile driving generates noise between 20 and 1000\u00a0Hz. In addition, large explosions can create frequencies ranging from 10 to 200\u00a0Hz. \"M. gigas\" can detect these noise sources because their sensory system can detect sound in the 10 to &lt; 1000\u00a0Hz range.\nThe anthropogenic noise produced by human activity has been shown to negatively impact oysters. Studies have revealed that wide and relaxed valves are indicative of healthy oysters. The oysters are stressed when they do not open their valves as frequently in response to environmental noise. This provides support that the oysters detect noise at low acoustic energy levels. While we generally understand that marine noise pollution influences charismatic megafauna like whales and dolphins, understanding\u00a0 how invertebrates like oysters perceive and respond to human generated sound can provide further insight about the effects of anthropogenic noise on the larger ecosystem. The aquatic ecosystems are known to use sound to navigate, find food, and protect themselves. In 2020, one of the worst mass stranding of whales occurred in Australia. Experts suggest that noise pollution plays a major role in the mass stranding of whales.\nNoise pollution has also altered avian communities and diversity. Anthropogenic noises have a similar effect on bird population as seen in marine ecosystems, where noises reduce reproductive success; cannot detect predators due to interferences of anthropogenic noises, minimize nesting areas, increase stress response, and species abundances and richness declining. Certain avian species are more sensitive to noises compared to others, resulting in highly-sensitive birds migrating to less disturbed habitats. There has also been evidence of indirect positive effects of anthropogenic noises on avian populations. It was found that nesting bird predators, such as the western scrub-jay (\"Aphelocoma californica\"), were uncommon in noisy environments (western scrub-jay are sensitive to noise). Therefore, reproductive success for nesting prey communities was higher due to the lack of predators. Noise pollution can alter the distribution and abundance of prey species, which can then impact predator populations.\nNoise control.\nThe Hierarchy of Controls concept is often used to reduce noise in the environment or the workplace. Engineering noise controls can be used to reduce noise propagation and protect individuals from overexposure. When noise controls are not feasible or adequate, individuals can also take steps to protect themselves from the harmful effects of noise pollution. If people must be around loud sounds, they can protect their ears with hearing protection (e.g., ear plugs or ear muffs).\nBuy Quiet programs and initiatives have arisen in an effort to combat occupational noise exposures. These programs promote the purchase of quieter tools and equipment and encourage manufacturers to design quieter equipment.\nNoise from roadways and other urban factors can be mitigated by urban planning and better design of roads. Roadway noise can be reduced by the use of noise barriers, limitation of vehicle speeds, alteration of roadway surface texture, limitation of heavy vehicles, use of traffic controls that smooth vehicle flow to reduce braking and acceleration, and tyre design.\nAn important factor in applying these strategies is a computer model for roadway noise, that is capable of addressing local topography, meteorology, traffic operations, and hypothetical mitigation. Costs of building-in mitigation can be modest, provided these solutions are sought in the planning stage of a roadway project.\nAircraft noise can be reduced by using quieter jet engines. Altering flight paths and time of day runway has benefited residents near airports.\nLegal status and regulation.\nCountry-specific regulations.\nUp until the 1970s governments tended to view noise as a \"nuisance\" rather than an environmental problem.\nMany conflicts over noise pollution are handled by negotiation between the emitter and the receiver. Escalation procedures vary by country, and may include action in conjunction with local authorities, in particular the police.\nEgypt.\nIn 2007, the Egyptian National Research Center found that the average noise level in central Cairo was 90\u00a0decibels and that the noise never fell below 70\u00a0decibels. Noise limits set by law in 1994 are not enforced. In 2018, the World Hearing Index declared Cairo to be the world's second-noisiest city.\nIndia.\nNoise pollution is a major problem in India. The government of India has rules and regulations against firecrackers and loudspeakers, but enforcement is extremely lax. Awaaz Foundation is a non-governmental organization in India working to control noise pollution from various sources through advocacy, public interest litigation, awareness, and educational campaigns since 2003. Despite increased enforcement and stringency of laws now being practiced in urban areas, rural areas are still affected.\nThe Supreme Court of India had banned playing of music on loudspeakers after 10\u00a0p.m. In 2015, The National Green Tribunal directed authorities in Delhi to ensure strict adherence to guidelines on noise pollution, saying noise is more than just a nuisance as it can produce serious psychological stress. However, implementation of the law remains poor.\nSweden.\nHow noise emissions should be reduced, without the industry being hit too hard, is a major problem in environmental care in Sweden today. The Swedish Work Environment Authority has set an input value of 80\u00a0dB for maximum sound exposure for eight hours. In workplaces where there is a need to be able to converse comfortably the background noise level should not exceed 40\u00a0dB. The government of Sweden has taken soundproofing and acoustic absorbing actions, such as noise barriers and active noise control.\nUnited Kingdom.\nFigures compiled by rockwool, the mineral wool insulation manufacturer, based on responses from local authorities to a Freedom of Information Act (FOI) request reveal in the period April 2008 \u2013 2009 UK councils received 315,838 complaints about noise pollution from private residences. This resulted in environmental health officers across the UK serving 8,069 noise abatement notices or citations under the terms of the Anti-Social Behavior (Scotland) Act. In the last 12 months, 524 confiscations of equipment have been authorized involving the removal of powerful speakers, stereos and televisions. Westminster City Council has received more complaints per head of population than any other district in the UK with 9,814 grievances about noise, which equates to 42.32 complaints per thousand residents. Eight of the top 10 councils ranked by complaints per 1,000 residents are located in London.\nUnited States.\nThe Noise Control Act of 1972 established a U.S. national policy to promote an environment for all Americans free from noise that jeopardizes their health and welfare. In the past, Environmental Protection Agency coordinated all federal noise control activities through its Office of Noise Abatement and Control. The EPA phased out the office's funding in 1982 as part of a shift in federal noise control policy to transfer the primary responsibility of regulating noise to state and local governments. However, the Noise Control Act of 1972 and the Quiet Communities Act of 1978 were never rescinded by Congress and remain in effect today, although essentially unfunded.\nThe National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) researches noise exposure in occupational settings and recommends a Recommended Exposure Limit (REL) for an 8-hour time-weighted average (TWA) or work shift of 85\u00a0dB(A) and for impulse noise (instant events such as bangs or crashes) of 140\u00a0dB(A). The agency published this recommendation along with its origin, noise measurement devices, hearing loss prevention programs, and research needs in 1972 (later revised June 1998) as an approach in preventing occupational noise-related hearing loss.\nThe Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) within the Department of Labor issues enforceable standards to protect workers from occupational noise hazards. The permissible exposure limit (PEL) for noise is a TWA of 90\u00a0dB(A) for an eight-hour work day. However, in manufacturing and service industries, if the TWA is greater than 85\u00a0dB(A), employers must implement a Hearing Conservation Program.\nThe Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulates aircraft noise by specifying the maximum noise level that individual civil aircraft can emit through requiring aircraft to meet certain noise certification standards. These standards designate changes in maximum noise level requirements by \"stage\" designation. The U.S. noise standards are defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Title 14 Part 36 \u2013 Noise Standards: Aircraft Type and Airworthiness Certification (14 CFR Part 36). The FAA also pursues a program of aircraft noise control in cooperation with the aviation community. The FAA has set up a process to report for anyone who may be impacted by aircraft noise.\nThe Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) developed noise regulations to control highway noise as required by the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1970. The regulations requires promulgation of traffic noise-level criteria for various land use activities, and describe procedures for the abatement of highway traffic noise and construction noise.\nThe Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) noise standards as described in 24 CFR part 51, Subpart B provides minimum national standards applicable to HUD programs to protect citizen against excessive noise in their communities and places of residence. For instance, all sites whose environmental or community noise exposure exceeds the day night average sound level (DNL) of 65 (dB) are considered noise-impacted areas, it defines \"Normally Unacceptable\" noise zones where community noise levels are between 65 and 75\u00a0dB, for such locations, noise abatement and noise attenuation features must be implemented. Locations where the DNL is above 75\u00a0dB are considered \"Unacceptable\" and require approval by the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development.\nThe Department of Transportation's Bureau of Transportation Statistics has created a to provide access to comprehensive aircraft and road noise data on national and county levels. The map aims to assist city planners, elected officials, scholars, and residents to gain access to up-to-date aviation and Interstate highway noise information.\nStates and local governments typically have very specific statutes on building codes, urban planning, and roadway development. Noise laws and ordinances vary widely among municipalities and indeed do not even exist in some cities. An ordinance may contain a general prohibition against making noise that is a nuisance, or it may set out specific guidelines for the level of noise allowable at certain times of the day and for certain activities. Noise laws classify sound into three categories. First is ambient noise, which refers to sound pressure of all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment. The second is continuous noise, which could be steady or fluctuating, but continues for more than an hour. The third is cyclically varying noise, which could be steady or fluctuating, but occurs repetitively at reasonably uniform intervals of time.\nNew York City instituted the first comprehensive noise code in 1985. The Portland Noise Code includes potential fines of up to $5000 per infraction and is the basis for other major U.S. and Canadian city noise ordinances.\nWorld Health Organization.\nEuropean Region.\nIn 1995, the World Health Organization (WHO) European Region released guidelines on regulating community noise. The WHO European Region subsequently released other versions of the guidelines, with the most recent version circulated in 2018. The guidelines provide the most up-to-date evidence from research conducted in Europe and other parts of the world on non-occupational noise exposure and its relationship to physical and mental health outcomes. The guidelines provide recommendations for limits and preventive measures regarding various noise sources (road traffic, railway, aircraft, wind turbine) for day-evening-night average and nighttime average levels. Recommendations for leisure noise in 2018 were conditional and based on the equivalent sound pressure level during an average 24-hour period in a year without weights for nighttime noise (LAeq, 24\u00a0hrs); WHO set the recommended limit to 70\u00a0dB(A).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66600", "revid": "806755709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66600", "title": "Albumins", "text": ""}
{"id": "66601", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66601", "title": "Lost World", "text": "Lost World, The Lost World or Lost Worlds may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66602", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66602", "title": "330 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 330 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Crassus and Venno (or, less frequently, year 424 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 330 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66604", "revid": "31831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66604", "title": "Willis H. O'Brien", "text": "American special effects technician and animator (1886\u20131962)\nWillis Harold O'Brien (March 2, 1886 \u2013 November 8, 1962), known as Obie O'Brien, was an American motion picture special effects and stop-motion animation pioneer, who according to ASIFA-Hollywood \"was responsible for some of the best-known images in cinema history,\" and is best remembered for his work on \"The Lost World\" (1925), \"King Kong\" (1933), \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1935) and \"Mighty Joe Young\" (1949), for which he won the 1950 Academy Award for Best Visual Effects.\nBiography.\nO'Brien was born in Oakland, California. He first left home at the age of eleven to work on cattle ranches, and again at the age of thirteen when he took on a variety of jobs including farmhand, factory worker, fur trapper, cowboy, and bartender. During this time he also competed in rodeos and developed an interest in dinosaurs while working as a guide to palaeontologists in Crater Lake region.\nHe spent his spare time sculpting and illustrating and his natural talent led to him being employed first as draftsman in an architect's office and then as a sports cartoonist for the \"San Francisco Daily News\". During this time he also became a professional boxer, winning his first nine bouts but retiring after an unsuccessful tenth. He subsequently worked for the railroad, first as a brakeman and later a surveyor, as a professional marble sculptor, and was assistant to the head architect of the 1915 San Francisco World's Fair, where some of his work was displayed. \nDuring this time he made models, including a dinosaur and a caveman, which he animated with the assistance of a local newsreel cameraman. San Francisco exhibitor Herman Wobber saw this 90-second test footage and commissioned O'Brien to make his first film, \"\" (1915) for a budget of $5,000.\nThomas Edison was impressed by the film and O'Brien was hired by the Edison Company to animate a series of short films with a prehistoric theme, these included \"R.F.D. 10,000 B.C.\" and \"Prehistoric Poultry\" (both 1917) released as part of Conquest Pictures film packages for youth audiences. During this time he also worked on other Edison Company productions including Sam Loyd's \"The Puzzling Billboard\" and \"Nippy's Nightmare\" (both 1917), which were the first stop-motion films to combine live actors with stop motion models.\nThese films led to a commission from Herbert M. Dawley to write, direct, co-star and produce the effects for another dinosaur film, \"The Ghost of Slumber Mountain\" (1918), for a budget of $3,000. The collaboration was not a happy one and Dawley cut the 45-minute film down to 11 minutes and claimed credit for O'Brien's pioneering effects work, which combined realistic stop-motion animated prehistoric models with live action. The film grossed over $100,000 and Dawley used the cut effects footage in a sequel \"Along the Moonbeam Trail\" (1920) and the documentary \"Evolution\" (1923), but O'Brien received little financial reimbursement from this success.\nThe film however did help to secure his position on Harry O. Hoyt's \"The Lost World\". For his early, short films O'Brien created his own characters out of clay, although for much of his feature career he would employ Richard and Marcel Delgado to create much more detailed stop-motion models (based on O'Brien's designs) with rubber skin built up over complex, articulated metal armatures. The models contained a bladder inside the skeleton model that could be inflated and deflated to give the illusion of breathing. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who appeared in the prologue to the film based on his novel of the same name, reportedly showed a reel of O'Brien's animation from the film to his friends, claiming it was real footage of living dinosaurs, to try to convince them that his story was based on fact.\nO'Brien married Hazel Ruth Collette in 1925; they had two sons together, William and Willis, Jr., but the marriage was an unhappy one. O'Brien was reportedly forced into it, and rebelled with drinking, gambling, and extra-marital affairs. The couple had divorced by 1930 and the two boys remained with their mother, who had begun to show unbalanced behaviour. By 1931, Hazel had been diagnosed with cancer and tuberculosis, while William also contracted tuberculosis resulting in blindness in one eye and then the other.\nThroughout this time O'Brien worked with Hoyt on a series of cancelled projects included \"Atlantis\" for First National studio, \"Frankenstein\", and \"Creation\" for RKO Pictures, which was finally cancelled in 1931 with only 20 minutes of effects footage to show for an estimated $120,000 development cost. The studio's head of production, Merian C. Cooper, had recommended the cancellation of O'Brien's project as he thought the story was boring but he was impressed by the effects work and saw how it could be used to facilitate the development of his own pet project about a giant gorilla battling Komodo dragons. O'Brien and the dinosaur models he had created for the cancelled project were put to work on what was to become his best remembered film, the iconic \"King Kong\" (1933).\nThe Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) proposed giving O'Brien an Oscar for his technical effects on \"King Kong\" but Willis insisted that each of his crew receive an Oscar statue also, which the AMPAS refused to do, so O'Brien refused to accept the Oscar award for himself. This act of refusing his Oscar hurt O'Brien's reputation as a player in the Hollywood establishment, forever making him a semi-outsider in the industry, and thus whose own film proposals were seldom taken seriously. One of O'Brien's crew was Linwood G. Dunn, who did all of the optical composites for \"King Kong\" and \"Son of Kong\" (also 1933), and who was a future Treasurer and President of the AMPAS and who revealed this story in private conversations with various visual effects associates years later, long after O'Brien's death.\nThe success of \"King Kong\" led to the studio commissioning the hurried sequel, which O'Brien described as cheesy. With a limited budget and a short production schedule, O'Brien chose to leave the animation work to his animation assistant, Buzz Gibson, and asked the studio not to credit him on the project. While making one of his daily visits to the set, O'Brien, who had remained close to his two sons after his separation from his estranged wife, invited Willis Jr. and the now completely blind William with him to handle the Kong and dinosaur models. A few weeks after this visit O'Brien's ex-wife, Hazel Ruth Collette, shot and killed William and Willis Jr. before turning the gun on herself. She survived the suicide attempt, and by draining her tubercular lung actually extended her life by another year. A publicity photo of O'Brien taken around this time shows the anguish on his face. \nHazel Ruth Collette remained in the Los Angeles General Hospital prison ward until her death in 1934. On November 17 that same year O'Brien married his second wife, Darlyne Prenett, with whom he remained until his death.\nO'Brien continued to work with Merian C. Cooper at RKO on a number of projects including the epic \"The Last Days of Pompeii\" (1935) and \"Dancing Pirate\" (1936), which was O'Brien's first Technicolor production. The two also developed \"War Eagles\" about a race of Vikings riding on prehistoric eagles fighting with dinosaurs, but the project was cancelled when Cooper re-enlisted as a colonel in the U.S. Army Air Forces at the outset of World War II. O'Brien went on to do some special effects work, re-using one of the mattes from \"Son of Kong\", on Orson Welles' \"Citizen Kane\" (1941) and George Pal's Oscar-nominated animated short \"Tulips Shall Grow\" (1942), as well as developing his own project, \"Gwangi\", about cowboys who encounter a prehistoric animal in a \"lost\" valley, which he failed to sell to the studio.\n\"Mighty Joe Young\" (1949), on which O'Brien is credited as Technical Creator, won an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects in 1950. Credit for the award went to the film's producers, RKO Productions, but O'Brien was also awarded a statue, this time proudly accepted by him. O'Brien was assisted by his protege (and successor) Ray Harryhausen and Pete Peterson on this film, and by some accounts left the majority of the animation to them.\nO'Brien and his wife developed \"Emilio and Guloso\" (aka, \"Valley of the Mist\"), about a Mexican boy and his pet bull who save their town from a dinosaur called \"Lagarto Grande\", which was optioned by producer Jesse L. Lasky Sr., with O'Brien and Harryhausen on board to do special effects, before falling through. O'Brien subsequently worked for Cooper at the new Cinerama corporation with plans to do a remake of \"King Kong\" using the new wide-screen techniques but ended up contributing a matte for the travelogue \"This Is Cinerama\" (1952) when this project also fell through. O'Brien worked with Harryhausen one last time on the dinosaur sequence for Irwin Allen's nature documentary \"The Animal World\" (1956). O'Brien's story ideas for \"Gwangi\" and \"Valley of the Mist\" were developed into Edward Nassour and Ismael Rodr\u00edguez's \"The Beast of Hollow Mountain\" (also 1956) but he did not work on the film's effects, which were the first to combine stop-motion and live-action in a color film. O'Brien also worked with Peterson again on \"The Black Scorpion\" (1957) and \"Behemoth, the Sea Monster\" (aka \"The Giant Behemoth\") (1959), but the two animators subsequently struggled to find other work.\nAllen hired O'Brien as the effects technician on his remake of \"The Lost World\" (1960), but he was given little to do as the producer opted for live lizards instead of stop-motion animation for the dinosaurs. One of his story ideas \"King Kong vs. Frankenstein\" was developed into Ishir\u014d Honda's \"King Kong vs. Godzilla\" (1962) but O'Brien was once again not involved in the production. Shortly before his death, he animated a brief scene for Linwood G. Dunn's \"Film Effects of Hollywood\" company in \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\" (1963), featuring the male leads and secondary characters dangling from a fire escape and ladder, but he died before the film was released.\nO'Brien died in Los Angeles on November 8, 1962. He was survived by his second wife, Darlyne. In 1997, he was posthumously awarded the Winsor McCay Award by ASIFA-Hollywood, the United States chapter of the International Animated Film Society ASIFA (Association internationale du film d'animation). The award is in recognition of lifetime or career contributions to the art of animation. His interment was located at Chapel of the Pines Crematory.\nThe film \"The Valley of Gwangi\" (1969), completed for Warner Brothers by Harryhausen seven years after O'Brien's death, was based on an idea the latter had spent years trying to bring to the screen. O'Brien wrote the script for an earlier version of the story which was released as \"The Beast of Hollow Mountain\" (US 1956), but O'Brien did not handle the effects for that movie.\nO'Brien's work was celebrated in March 1983 with the appearance of his wife, Darlene, at a 50th anniversary event commemorating the day of the first screening of the film at Graumann's (later Mann's) Chinese Theater on Hollywood Boulevard, complete with a screening of a new print of \"King Kong\" and a new recreation of the full-scale bust of Kong that appeared 50 years apart at both events in the outdoor lobby of the theater. Three articles in the August, 1983, issue of \"American Cinematographer\" magazine detailed the 1983 anniversary event.\nIn March 1984, O'Brien's work was the subject of a special exhibit at the Kaiser Center in Oakland, California. This exhibit included many sketches, artifacts, and photographs from O'Brien's personal collection, some of which had never been seen in public.\nIn 2005, Peter Jackson produced and directed \"King Kong\". It was filmed in New Zealand and featured visual effects by Weta Digital. It was dedicated to O'Brien and the other key contributors to the original film.\nFilmography.\nSilent shorts.\nHerman Webber production, later sold to Edison:\nEdison Studio's Conquest Pictures (half-reel shorts):\nUnknown releases:\nHerbert M. Dawley Productions:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66605", "revid": "1049964280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66605", "title": "329 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 329 BCE was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Privernas and Decianus (or, less frequently, year 425 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 329 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMacedonian Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66606", "revid": "44874128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66606", "title": "328 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 328 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Proculus and Scapula or Decianus and Barbatus (or, less frequently, year 426 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 328 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMacedonian Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66607", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66607", "title": "Vine", "text": "Plant with a growth habit of trailing or scandent stems or runners\nA vine is any plant with a growth habit of trailing or scandent (that is, climbing) stems, lianas, or runners. The word \"vine\" can also refer to such stems or runners themselves, for instance, when used in wicker work.\nIn parts of the world, including the British Isles, the term \"vine\" usually applies exclusively to grapevines, while the term \"climber\" is used for all climbing plants.\nGrowth forms.\nCertain plants always grow as vines, while a few grow as vines only part of the time. For instance, poison ivy and bittersweet can grow as low shrubs when support is not available, but will become vines when support is available.\nA vine displays a growth form based on very long stems. This has two purposes. A vine may use rock exposures, other plants, or other supports for growth rather than investing energy in a lot of supportive tissue, enabling the plant to reach sunlight with a minimum investment of energy. This has been a highly successful growth form for plants such as kudzu and Japanese honeysuckle, both of which are invasive exotics in parts of North America. There are some tropical vines that develop skototropism, and grow away from the light, a type of negative phototropism. Growth away from light allows the vine to reach a tree trunk, which it can then climb to brighter regions.\nThe vine growth form may also enable plants to colonize large areas quickly, even without climbing high. This is the case with periwinkle and ground ivy. It is also an adaptation to life in areas where small patches of fertile soil are adjacent to exposed areas with more sunlight but little or no soil. A vine can root in the soil but have most of its leaves in the brighter, exposed area, getting the best of both environments.\nThe evolution of a climbing habit has been implicated as a key innovation associated with the evolutionary success and diversification of a number of taxonomic groups of plants. It has evolved independently in several plant families, using many different climbing methods, such as:\nThe climbing fetterbush (\"Pieris phillyreifolia\") is a woody shrub-vine which climbs without clinging roots, tendrils, or thorns. It directs its stem into a crevice in the bark of fibrous barked trees (such as bald cypress) where the stem adopts a flattened profile and grows up the tree underneath the host tree's outer bark. The fetterbush then sends out branches that emerge near the top of the tree.\nMost vines are flowering plants. These may be divided into woody vines or lianas, such as akebia wisteria, kiwifruit, and common ivy, and herbaceous (nonwoody) vines, such as morning glory.\nOne odd group of vining plants is the fern genus \"Lygodium\", called climbing ferns. The stem does not climb, but rather the fronds (leaves) do. The fronds unroll from the tip, and theoretically never stop growing; they can form thickets as they unroll over other plants, rockfaces, and fences.\nTwining vines.\nA twining vine, also known as a bine, climbs by its shoots growing in a helix, in contrast to vines that climb using tendrils or suckers. Many bines have rough stems or downward-pointing bristles to aid their grip. Hops (used in flavoring beer) are a commercially important example of a bine. Compare woodbines.\nThe direction of rotation of the shoot tip during climbing is autonomous and does not (as sometimes imagined) derive from the shoot's following the sun around the sky \u2013 the direction of twist does not therefore depend upon which side of the equator the plant is growing on. This is shown by the fact that some bines always twine clockwise, including runner bean (\"Phaseolus coccineus\") and bindweed (\"Convolvulus\" species), while others twine anticlockwise, including black bryony (\"Dioscorea communis\") and climbing honeysuckles (\"Lonicera\" species). The contrasting rotations of bindweed and honeysuckle was the theme of the satirical song \"Misalliance\", written and sung by Michael Flanders and Donald Swann (but the lyrics confuse the direction of twining, describing honeysuckle as right-handed and bindweed as left-handed).\nHorticultural climbing plants.\nThe term \"vine\" also applies to Cucurbitaceae, including cucumbers, where botanists refer to creeping vines; in commercial agriculture the natural tendency of coiling tendrils to attach themselves to pre-existing structures or espaliers is optimized by the installation of trellis netting.\nGardeners can use the tendency of climbing plants to grow quickly. If a plant display is wanted quickly, a climber can achieve this. Climbers can be trained over walls, pergolas, fences, etc. Climbers can be grown over other plants to provide additional attraction. Artificial support can also be provided. Some climbers climb by themselves; others need work, such as tying them in and training them.\nScientific description.\nVines widely differ in size, form and evolutionary origin. Darwin classified climbing groups based on their climbing method. He classified five classes of vines \u2013 twining plants, leaf climbers, tendril bearers, root climbers and hook climbers.\nVines have multiple evolutionary origins. They usually reside in tropical locations and have the unique ability to climb. Vines are able to grow in both deep shade and full sun due to their uniquely wide range of phenotypic plasticity. This climbing action prevents shading by neighbors and allows the vine to grow out of reach of herbivores. The environment where a vine can grow successfully is determined by the climbing mechanism of a vine and how far it can spread across supports. There are many theories supporting the idea that photosynthetic responses are closely related to climbing mechanisms.\nTemperate twining vines, which twist tightly around supports, are typically poorly adapted for climbing beneath closed canopies due to their smaller support diameter and shade intolerance. In contrast, tendril vines usually grow on the forest floor and onto trees until they reach the surface of the canopy, suggesting that they have greater physiological plasticity. It has also been suggested that twining vines' revolving growth is mediated by changes in turgor pressure mediated by volume changes in the epidermal cells of the bending zone.\nClimbing vines can take on many unique characteristics in response to changes in their environments. Climbing vines can induce chemical defenses and modify their biomass allocation in response to herbivores. In particular, the twisting vine \"Convolvulus arvensis\" increases its twining in response to herbivore-associated leaf damage, which may lead to reduced future herbivory. Additionally, the tendrils of perennial vine \"Cayratia japonica\" are more likely to coil around nearby plants of another species than nearby plants of the same species in natural and experimental settings. This ability, which has only been previously documented in roots, demonstrates the vine's ability to distinguish whether another plant is of the same species as itself or a different one.\nIn tendrilled vines, the tendrils are highly sensitive to touch and the coiling action is mediated by the hormones octadecanoids, jasmonates and indole-3-acetic acid. The touch stimulus and hormones may interact via volatile compounds or internal oscillation patterns. Research has found the presence of ion translocating ATPases in the \"Bryonia dioica\" species of plants, which has implications for a possible ion mediation tendril curling mechanism. In response to a touch stimulus, vanadate-sensitive K+, Mg2+ ATPase and Ca2+-translocating ATPases rapidly increase their activity. This increases transmembrane ion fluxes that appear to be involved in the early stages of tendril coiling.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66608", "revid": "1259124608", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66608", "title": "327 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 327 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Lentulus and Philo (or, less frequently, year 427 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 327 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66609", "revid": "43493935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66609", "title": "326 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 326 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Visolus and Cursor (or, less frequently, year 428 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 326 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66610", "revid": "11487052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66610", "title": "325 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 325 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Camillus and Scaeva (or, less frequently, year 429 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 325 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nPhilosophy.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66611", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66611", "title": "324 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 324 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Dictatorship of Cursor (or, less frequently, year 430 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 324 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nGreece.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66612", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66612", "title": "Hugo Grotius", "text": "Dutch philosopher and jurist (1583\u20131645)\nHugo Grotius ( ; 10 April 1583\u00a0\u2013 28 August 1645), also known as Hugo de Groot () or Huig de Groot (), was a Dutch humanist, diplomat, lawyer, theologian, jurist, statesman, poet and playwright. A teenage prodigy, he was born in Delft and studied at Leiden University. He was imprisoned in Loevestein Castle for his involvement in the controversies over religious policy of the Dutch Republic, but escaped hidden in a chest of books that was regularly brought to him and was transported to Gorinchem. Grotius wrote most of his major works in exile in France.\nGrotius was a major figure in the fields of philosophy, political theory and law during the 16th and 17th centuries. Along with the earlier works of Francisco de Vitoria and Alberico Gentili, his writings laid the foundations for international law. Two of his books have had a lasting impact in the field: \"De jure belli ac pacis\" (\"On the Law of War and Peace\") dedicated to Louis XIII of France and the \"Mare Liberum\" (\"The Free Seas\") for which Grotius has been called the \"father of international law.\" Grotius has also contributed significantly to the evolution of the notion of \"rights\". Before him, rights were, above all, perceived as attached to objects; after him, they are seen as belonging to persons, as the expression of an ability to act, or as a means of realizing something.\nPeter Borschberg suggests that Grotius was significantly influenced by Francisco de Vitoria and the School of Salamanca in Spain, who supported the idea that the sovereignty of a nation does not lie simply in a ruler through God's will, but originates in its people, who agree to confer such authority upon a ruler. It is also thought that Grotius was not the first to formulate the international society doctrine, but he was one of the first to define expressly the idea of one society of states, governed not by force or warfare but by actual laws and mutual agreement to enforce those laws. As Hedley Bull declared in 1990: \"The idea of international society which Grotius propounded was given concrete expression in the Peace of Westphalia, and Grotius may be considered the intellectual father of this first general peace settlement of modern times.\" Additionally, his contributions to Arminian theology helped provide the seeds for later Arminian-based movements, such as Methodism and Pentecostalism; Grotius is acknowledged as a significant figure in the Arminian\u2013Calvinist debate. Because of his theological underpinning of free trade, he is also considered an \"economic theologist\".\nAfter fading over time, the influence of Grotius's ideas revived in the 20th century following the First World War.\nEarly life.\nBorn in Delft during the Dutch Revolt, Grotius was the first child of Jan Cornets de Groot and Alida van Overschie. His father was a man of learning, once having studied with the eminent Justus Lipsius at Leiden University, as well as of political distinction. His family was considered Delft patrician as his ancestors played an important role in local government since the 13th century.\nJan de Groot was also the translator of Archimedes and a friend of Ludolph van Ceulen. He groomed his son from an early age in a traditional humanist and Aristotelian education. A prodigious learner, Grotius entered Leiden University when he was just eleven years old. There he studied with some of the most acclaimed intellectuals in northern Europe, including Franciscus Junius, Joseph Justus Scaliger, and Rudolph Snellius. At age 16 (1599), he published his first book: a scholarly edition of the late antique author Martianus Capella's work on the seven liberal arts, \"Martiani Minei Felicis Capell\u00e6 Carthaginiensis viri proconsularis Satyricon.\" It remained a reference for several centuries.\nIn 1598, at the age of 15 years, he accompanied Johan van Oldenbarnevelt to a diplomatic mission in Paris. On this occasion, the King Henri IV of France would have presented Grotius to his court as \"the miracle of Holland\". During his stay in France, he passed or bought a law degree from the University of Orleans. In Holland, Grotius earned an appointment as advocate to The Hague in 1599 and then as official historiographer for the States of Holland in 1601. It was on this date that the States of Holland requested from Grotius an account of the United Provinces' revolt against Spain; Grotius is indeed contemporary with the Eighty Years' War between Spain and the Netherlands. The resulting work, entitled \"Annales et Historiae de rebus Belgicis,\" describing the period from 1559 to 1609, was written in the style of the Roman historian Tacitus and was first finished in 1612. The States, however, did not publish it, possibly because of the way the work resonated with the politico-religious tensions within the Dutch Republic (see below).\nHis first occasion to write systematically on issues of international justice came in 1604 when he became involved in the legal proceedings following the seizure by Dutch merchants of a Portuguese carrack and its cargo in the Singapore Strait. Throughout his life Grotius wrote a variety of philological, theological and politico-theological works.\nIn 1608, he married Maria van Reigersberch; they had three daughters and four sons.\nJurist career.\nThe Dutch were at war with Spain; although Portugal was closely allied with Spain, it was not yet at war with the Dutch. Near the start of the war, Grotius's cousin captain Jacob van Heemskerk captured a loaded Portuguese carrack merchant ship, \"Santa Catarina\", off present-day Singapore in 1603. Heemskerk was employed with the United Amsterdam Company (part of the Dutch East India Company), and though he did not have authorization from the company or the government to initiate the use of force, many shareholders were eager to accept the riches that he brought back to them.\nNot only was the legality of keeping the prize questionable under Dutch statute, but a faction of shareholders (mostly Mennonite) in the Company also objected to the forceful seizure on moral grounds, and of course, the Portuguese demanded the return of their cargo. The scandal led to a public judicial hearing and a wider campaign to sway public (and international) opinion. It was in this wider context that representatives of the Company called upon Grotius to draft a polemical defence of the seizure.\nThe result of Grotius' efforts in 1604/05 was a long, theory-laden treatise that he provisionally entitled \"De Indis\" (\"On the Indies\"). Grotius sought to ground his defense of the seizure in terms of the natural principles of justice. In this, he had cast a net much wider than the case at hand; his interest was in the source and ground of war's lawfulness in general. The treatise was never published in full during Grotius' lifetime, perhaps because the court ruling in favor of the Company preempted the need to garner public support.\n In \"The Free Sea\" (\"Mare Liberum\", published 1609), Grotius formulated the new principle that the sea was international territory and all nations were free to use it for seafaring trade. Grotius, by claiming 'free seas' (freedom of the seas), provided suitable ideological justification for the Dutch breaking up of various trade monopolies through its formidable naval power. England, competing fiercely with the Dutch for domination of world trade, opposed this idea and claimed in John Selden's \"Mare clausum\" \"(The Closed Sea)\", \"That the Dominion of the British Sea, or That Which Incompasseth the Isle of Great Britain, is, and Ever Hath Been, a Part or Appendant of the Empire of that Island.\"\"\"\nIt is generally assumed that Grotius first propounded the principle of freedom of the seas, although all countries in the Indian Ocean and other Asian seas accepted the right of unobstructed navigation long before Grotius wrote his \"De Jure Praedae\" (\"On the Law of Spoils\") in the year of 1604. Additionally, 16th-century Spanish theologian Francisco de Vitoria had postulated the idea of freedom of the seas in a more rudimentary fashion under the principles of \"jus gentium\". Grotius's notion of the freedom of the seas would persist until the mid-20th century, and it continues to be applied even to this day for much of the high seas, though the application of the concept and the scope of its reach is changing.\nArminian controversy, arrest and exile.\nAided by his continued association with Van Oldenbarnevelt, Grotius made considerable advances in his political career, being retained as Oldenbarnevelt's resident advisor in 1605, Advocate General of the Fisc of Holland, Zeeland and Friesland in 1607, and then as Pensionary of Rotterdam (the equivalent of a mayoral office) in 1613. Also in 1613, following the capture of two Dutch ships by the British, he was sent on a mission to London, a mission tailored to a man who wrote \"Mare liberum\" [\"The Free Seas\"] in 1609. However, it was opposed by the English by reason of force and he didn't obtain the return of the boats.\nIn these years a great theological controversy broke out between the chair of theology at Leiden Jacobus Arminius and his followers (who are called Arminians or Remonstrants) and the strongly Calvinist theologian, Franciscus Gomarus, whose supporters are termed Gomarists or Counter-Remonstrants.\nLeiden University \"was under the authority of the States of Holland\u00a0\u2013 they were responsible, among other things, for the policy concerning appointments at this institution, which was governed in their name by a board of Curators\u00a0\u2013 and, in the final instance, the States were responsible for dealing with any cases of heterodoxy among the professors.\" The domestic dissension resulting over Arminius' professorship was overshadowed by the continuing war with Spain, and the professor died in 1609 on the eve of the Twelve Years' Truce. The new peace would move the people's focus to the controversy and Arminius' followers. Grotius played a decisive part in this politico-religious conflict between the Remonstrants, supporters of religious tolerance, and the orthodox Calvinists or Counter-Remonstrants.\nControversy within Dutch Protestantism.\nThe controversy expanded when the Remonstrant theologian Conrad Vorstius was appointed to replace Jacobus Arminius as the theology chair at Leiden. Vorstius was soon seen by Counter-Remonstrants as moving beyond the teachings of Arminius into Socinianism and he was accused of teaching irreligion. Leading the call for Vorstius' removal was theology professor Sibrandus Lubbertus. On the other side, Johannes Wtenbogaert (a Remonstrant leader) and Johan van Oldenbarnevelt, Grand Pensionary of Holland, had strongly promoted the appointment of Vorstius and began to defend their actions. Gomarus resigned his professorship at Leyden, in protest that Vorstius was not removed. The Counter-Remonstrants were also supported in their opposition by King James I of England \"who thundered loudly against the Leyden nomination and gaudily depicted Vorstius as a horrid heretic. He ordered his books to be publicly burnt in London, Cambridge, and Oxford, and he exerted continual pressure through his ambassador in the Hague, Ralph Winwood, to get the appointment canceled.\" James began to shift his confidence from Oldenbarnevelt towards Maurice.\nGrotius joined the controversy by defending the civil authorities' power to appoint (independently of the wishes of religious authorities) whomever they wished to a university's faculty. He did this by writing \"Ordinum Pietas\", \"a pamphlet...directed against an opponent, the Calvinist Franeker professor Lubbertus; it was ordered by Grotius' masters the States of Holland, and thus written for the occasion\u00a0\u2013 though Grotius may already have had plans for such a book.\"\nThe work is twenty-seven pages long, is \"polemical and acrimonious\" and only two-thirds of it speaks directly about ecclesiastical politics (mainly of synods and offices). The work met with a violent reaction from the Counter-Remonstrants, and \"It might be said that all Grotius' next works until his arrest in 1618 form a vain attempt to repair the damage done by this book.\" Grotius would later write \"De Satisfactione\" aiming \"at proving that the Arminians are far from being Socinians\".\nEdict of toleration.\nLed by Oldenbarnevelt, the States of Holland took an official position of religious toleration towards Remonstrants and Counter-Remonstrants. Grotius (who acted during the controversy first as Attorney General of Holland and later as a member of the Committee of Counsellors) was eventually asked to draft an edict to express the policy of toleration. This edict, \"Decretum pro pace ecclesiarum\" was completed in late 1613 or early 1614. The edict put into practice a view that Grotius had been developing in his writings on church and state (see Erastianism): that only the basic tenets necessary for undergirding civil order (e.g., the existence of God and His providence) ought to be enforced while differences on obscure theological doctrines should be left to private conscience.\nThe edict \"imposing moderation and toleration on the ministry\" was backed up by Grotius with \"thirty-one pages of quotations, mainly dealing with the Five Remonstrant Articles.\" In response to Grotius' \"Ordinum Pietas\", Professor Lubbertus published \"Responsio Ad Pietatem Hugonis Grotii\" in 1614. Later that year, Grotius anonymously published \"Bona Fides Sibrandi Lubberti\" in response to Lubbertus.\nJacobus Trigland joined Lubberdus in expressing the view that tolerance in matters of doctrine was inadmissible, and in his 1615 works \"Den Recht-gematigden Christen: Ofte vande waere Moderatie\" and \"Advys Over een Concept van moderatie\" Trigland denounced Grotius' stance.\nIn late 1615, when Middelburg professor Antonius Walaeus published \"Het Ampt der Kerckendienaren\" (a response to Johannes Wtenbogaert's 1610 \"Tractaet van 't Ampt ende authoriteit eener hoogher Christelijcke overheid in kerckelijkcke zaken\") he sent Grotius a copy out of friendship. This was a work \"on the relationship between ecclesiastical and secular government\" from the moderate counter-remonstrant viewpoint. In early 1616, Grotius also received the 36-page letter championing a remonstrant view \"Dissertatio epistolica de Iure magistratus in rebus ecclesiasticis\" from his friend Gerardus Vossius.\nThe letter was \"a general introduction on (in)tolerance, mainly on the subject of predestination and the sacrament...[and] an extensive, detailed and generally unfavourable review of Walaeus' \"Ampt\", stuffed with references to ancient and modern authorities.\" When Grotius wrote asking for some notes \"he received a treasure-house of ecclesiastical history. ...offering ammunition to Grotius, who gratefully accepted it\". Around this time (April 1616) Grotius went to Amsterdam as part of his official duties, trying to persuade the civil authorities there to join Holland's majority view about church politics.\nIn early 1617 Grotius debated the question of giving counter-remonstrants the chance to preach in the Kloosterkerk in The Hague which had been closed. During this time lawsuits were brought against the States of Holland by counter-remonstrant ministers and riots over the controversy broke out in Amsterdam.\nArrest and exile.\nAs the conflict between civil and religious authorities escalated, in order to maintain civil order Oldenbarnevelt eventually proposed that local authorities be given the power to raise troops (the Sharp Resolution of August 4, 1617). Such a measure undermined the unity of the Republic's military force, the very same reason Spain had managed to retake so much lost territory in the 1580s, something the Captain-General of the republic, Maurice of Nassau, Prince of Orange could not allow with the treaty nearing its end. Maurice seized the opportunity to solidify the preeminence of the Gomarists, whom he had supported, and to eliminate the nuisance he perceived in Oldenbarnevelt (the latter had previously brokered the Twelve Years' Truce with Spain in 1609 against Maurice's wishes). During this time Grotius made another attempt to address ecclesiastical politics by completing \"De Imperio Summarum Potestatum circa Sacra\", on \"the relations between the religious and secular authorities...Grotius had even cherished hopes that publication of this book would turn the tide and bring back peace to church and state\".\nThe conflict between Maurice and the States of Holland, led by Oldenbarnevelt and Grotius, about the Sharp Resolution and Holland's refusal to allow a National Synod, came to a head in July 1619 when a majority in the States General authorized Maurice to disband the auxiliary troops in Utrecht. Grotius went on a mission to the States of Utrecht to stiffen their resistance against this move, but Maurice prevailed. The States General then authorized him to arrest Oldenbarnevelt, Grotius and Rombout Hogerbeets on 29 August 1618. They were tried by a court of delegated judges from the States General. Van Oldenbarnevelt was sentenced to death and was beheaded in 1619. Grotius was sentenced to life imprisonment and transferred to Loevestein Castle.\nFrom his imprisonment in Loevestein, Grotius made a written justification of his position \"as to my views on the power of the Christian [civil] authorities in ecclesiastical matters, I refer to my...booklet \"De Pietate Ordinum Hollandiae\" and especially to an unpublished book \"De Imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra\", where I have treated the matter in more detail...I may summarize my feelings thus: that the [civil] authorities should scrutinize God's Word so thoroughly as to be certain to impose nothing which is against it; if they act in this way, they shall in good conscience have control of the public churches and public worship\u00a0\u2013 but without persecuting those who err from the right way.\" Because this stripped Church officials of any power some of their members (such as Johannes Althusius in a letter to Lubbertus) declared Grotius' ideas diabolical.\nIn 1621, with the help of his wife and his maidservant, Elsje van Houwening, Grotius managed to escape the castle in a book chest and fled to Paris. In the Netherlands today, he is mainly famous for this daring escape. Both the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam and the museum Het Prinsenhof in Delft claim to have the original book chest in their collection.\nLife in Paris.\nGrotius then fled to Paris, where the authorities granted him an annual royal pension. Grotius lived in France almost continuously from 1621 to 1644. His stay coincides with the period (1624-1642) during which the Cardinal Richelieu led France under the authority of Louis XIII. In France in 1625 Grotius published his most famous book, \"De jure belli ac pacis\" [\"On the Law of War and Peace\"] dedicated to Louis XIII.\nWhile in Paris, Grotius set about rendering into Latin prose a work which he had originally written as Dutch verse in prison, providing rudimentary yet systematic arguments for the truth of Christianity. The Dutch poem, \"Bewijs van den waren Godsdienst\", was published in 1622, the Latin treatise in 1627, under the title \"De veritate religionis Christianae\".\nIn 1631, he tried to return to Holland, but the authorities remained hostile to him. He moved to Hamburg in 1632. But as early as 1634, the Swedes - a European superpower - sent him to Paris as ambassador. He remained in this position for ten years, where he had the mission to negotiate for Sweden at the end of the Thirty Years' War. During this period, he had been interested in the unity of Christians and published many texts that would posthumously (1679) be published under the title of \"Opera Omnia Theologica\".\nGovernmental theory of atonement.\nGrotius also developed a particular view of the atonement of Christ known as the \"Governmental theory of atonement\". He theorized that Jesus' sacrificial death occurred in order for the Father to forgive while still maintaining his just rule over the universe. This idea, further developed by theologians such as John Miley, became one of the prominent views of the atonement in Methodist Arminianism.\n\"De Jure Belli ac Pacis\".\nLiving in the times of the Eighty Years' War between Spain and the Netherlands and the Thirty Years' War between Catholic and Protestant European nations (Catholic France being in the otherwise Protestant camp), it is not surprising that Grotius was deeply concerned with matters of conflicts between nations and religions. His most lasting work, begun in prison and published during his exile in Paris, was a monumental effort to restrain such conflicts on the basis of a broad moral consensus. Grotius wrote:\nFully convinced...that there is a common law among nations, which is valid alike for war and in war, I have had many and weighty reasons for undertaking to write upon the subject. Throughout the Christian world, I observed a lack of restraint in relation to war, such as even barbarous races should be ashamed of; I observed that men rush to arms for slight causes or no cause at all and that when arms have once been taken up, there is no longer any respect for the law, divine or human; it is as if, in accordance with a general decree, frenzy had openly been let loose for the committing of all crimes.\n\"De jure belli ac pacis libri tres\" (\"On the Law of War and Peace: Three books\") was first published in 1625, dedicated to Grotius' current patron, Louis XIII. The treatise advances a system of principles of natural law, which are held to be binding on all people and nations regardless of local custom. The work is divided into three books:\nNatural law.\nGrotius' concept of natural law had a strong impact on the philosophical and theological debates and political developments of the 17th and 18th centuries. Among those he influenced were Samuel Pufendorf and John Locke, and by way of these philosophers, his thinking became part of the cultural background of the Glorious Revolution in England and the American Revolution. In Grotius' understanding, nature was not an entity in itself but God's creation. Therefore, his concept of natural law had a theological foundation. The Old Testament contained moral precepts (e.g. the Decalogue), which Christ confirmed and therefore were still valid. They were useful in interpreting the content of natural law. Both Biblical revelation and natural law originated in God and could, therefore, not contradict each other.\nLater years.\nMany exiled Remonstrants began to return to the Netherlands after the death of Prince Maurice in 1625 when toleration was granted to them. In 1630, they were allowed complete freedom to build and run churches and schools and to live anywhere in Holland. The Remonstrants guided by Johannes Wtenbogaert set up a presbyterial organization. They established a theological seminary at Amsterdam where Grotius came to teach alongside Episcopius, van Limborch, de Courcelles, and Leclerc.\nIn 1634, Grotius was given the opportunity to serve as Sweden's ambassador to France. Axel Oxenstierna, regent of the successor of the recently deceased Swedish king, Gustavus Adolphus, was keen to have Grotius in his employ. Grotius accepted the offer and took up diplomatic residence in Paris, which remained his home until he was released from his post in 1645.\nIn 1644, the queen Christine of Sweden, who had become an adult, began to perform her duties and brought him back to Stockholm. During the winter of 1644\u20131645, he went to Sweden in difficult conditions, which he decided to leave in the summer of 1645.\nWhile departing from his last visit to Sweden, Grotius was shipwrecked on the voyage. He washed up on the shore of Rostock, ill and weather-beaten, and on August 28, 1645, he died; his body at last returned to the country of his youth, being laid to rest in the Nieuwe Kerk in Delft.\nPersonal life.\nGrotius' personal motto was \"Ruit hora\" (\"Time is running away\"); his last words were purportedly, \"By understanding many things, I have accomplished nothing\" (\"Door veel te begrijpen, heb ik niets bereikt\"). Significant friends and acquaintances of his included the theologian Franciscus Junius, the poet Daniel Heinsius, the philologist Gerhard Johann Vossius, the historian Johannes Meursius, the engineer Simon Stevin, the historian Jacques Auguste de Thou, the Orientalist and Arabic scholar Erpinius, and the French ambassador in the Dutch Republic, Benjamin Aubery du Maurier, who allowed him to use the French diplomatic mail in the first years of his exile. He was also friends with the Brabantian Jesuit Andreas Schottus.\nGrotius was the father of regent and diplomat Pieter de Groot.\nInfluence of Grotius.\nGrotius designed his theory to apply not only to states but also to rulers and subjects of law in general. Grotius's masterpiece \"De Jure Belli ac Pacis\" thus proved useful in the later development of theories of both private and criminal law.\nFrom his time to the end of the 17th century.\nThe king of Sweden, Gustavus Adolphus, was said to have always carried a copy of \"De jure belli ac pacis\" in his saddle when leading his troops. In contrast, King James VI and I of Great Britain reacted very negatively to Grotius' presentation of the book during a diplomatic mission.\nSome philosophers, notably Protestants such as Pierre Bayle, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and the main representatives of the Scottish Enlightenment Francis Hutcheson, Adam Smith, David Hume, Thomas Reid held him in high esteem. The French Enlightenment, on the other hand, was much more critical. Voltaire called it boring and Rousseau developed an alternative conception of human nature. Pufendorf, another theoretician of the natural law concept, was also skeptical.\nCommentaries of the 19th century.\nAndrew Dickson White wrote:\nInto the very midst of all this welter of evil, at a point in time to all appearance hopeless, at a point in space apparently defenseless, in a nation of which every man, woman, and child was under sentence of death from its sovereign, was born a man who wrought as no other has ever done for the redemption of civilization from the main cause of all that misery; who thought out for Europe the precepts of right reason in international law; who made them heard; who gave a noble change to the course of human affairs; whose thoughts, reasonings, suggestions, and appeals produced an environment in which came an evolution of humanity that still continues.\nIn contrast, Robert A. Heinlein satirized the Grotian governmental approach to theology in \"Methuselah's Children\": \"There is an old, old story about a theologian who was asked to reconcile the doctrine of Divine Mercy with the doctrine of infant damnation. 'The Almighty,' he explained, 'finds it necessary to do things in His official and public capacity which in His private and personal capacity He deplores.'\"\nRevival of interest in the 20th century.\nThe influence of Grotius declined following the rise of positivism in the field of international law and the decline of natural law in philosophy. The Carnegie Foundation has nevertheless re-issued and re-translated \"On the Law of War and Peace\" after the World War I. At the end of the 20th century, his work aroused renewed interest as a controversy over the originality of his ethical work developed. For Irwing, Grotius would only repeat the contributions of Thomas Aquinas and Francisco Su\u00e1rez. On the contrary, Schneewind argues that Grotius introduced the idea that \"the conflict can not be eradicated and could not be dismissed, even in principle, by the most comprehensive metaphysical knowledge possible of how the world is made up\".\nAs far as politics is concerned, Grotius is most often considered not so much as having brought new ideas but rather as one who has introduced a new way of approaching political problems. For Kingsbury and Roberts, \"the most important direct contribution of [\"On the Law of War and Peace\"] lies in the way it systematically brings together practices and authorities on the traditional but fundamental subject of \"jus belli\", which he organizes for the first time from a body of principles rooted in the law of nature.\"\nThe \"Grotiana Foundation\" seeks through its journal, \"Grotiana\", to advance \"the Grotian tradition\".\nBibliography (selection).\nThe Peace Palace Library in The Hague holds the Grotius Collection, which has a large number of books by and about Grotius. The collection was based on a donation from Martinus Nijhoff of 55 editions of \"De jure belli ac pacis libri tres\".\nWorks are listed in order of publication, with the exception of works published posthumously or after long delay (estimated composition dates are given). Where an English translation is available, the most recently published translation is listed beneath the title.\n\"The Antiquity of the Batavian Republic\", ed. Jan Waszink and others (van Gorcum, 2000).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Meletius\", ed. G.H.M. Posthumus Meyjes (Brill, 1988).\n\"The Annals and History of the Low-Countrey-warrs\", ed. Thomas Manley (London, 1665): \n - Modern English translation of the \"Annales\" only in: Hugo Grotius, \"Annals of the War in the Low Countries\", ed. with introduction by J. Waszink (Latin/English edition), Leuven UP 2023. Bibliotheca Latinitatis Novae, , .\n - Modern Dutch translation of the \"Annales\" only in: Hugo de Groot, \"Kroniek van de Nederlandse Oorlog. De Opstand 1559-1588\", ed. Jan Waszink (Nijmegen, Vantilt 2014), with introduction, index, plates.\n\"Ordinum Hollandiae ac Westfrisiae pietas\", ed. Edwin Rabbie (Brill, 1995).\n\"De imperio summarum potestatum circa sacra\", ed. Harm-Jan van Dam (Brill, 2001).\n\"Defensio fidei catholicae de satisfactione Christi\", ed. Edwin Rabbie (van Gorcum, 1990).\n\"The Jurisprudence of Holland\", ed. R.W. Lee (Oxford, 1926).\n\"Hugo Grotius: On the Law of War and Peace\". Student edn. Ed. Stephen C. Neff (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012)\n\"The Truth of the Christian Religion\", ed. John Clarke (Edinburgh, 1819).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSee \"Catalogue of the Grotius Collection\" (Peace Palace Library, The Hague) and 'Grotius, Hugo' in \"Dictionary of Seventeenth Century Dutch Philosophers\" (Thoemmes Press 2003).\nExternal links.\nCollections\nIndividual works by Grotius\nOther"}
{"id": "66613", "revid": "4373810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66613", "title": "322 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 322 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Rullianus and Curvus (or, less frequently, year 432 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 322 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66614", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66614", "title": "Ornament (music)", "text": "Type of musical flourish\nIn music, ornaments or embellishments are musical flourishes\u2014typically, added notes\u2014that are not essential to carry the overall line of the melody (or harmony), but serve instead to decorate or \"ornament\" that line (or harmony), provide added interest and variety, and give the performer the opportunity to add expressiveness to a song or piece. Many ornaments are performed as \"fast notes\" around a central, main note.\nThere are many types of ornaments, ranging from the addition of a single, short grace note before a main note to the performance of a virtuosic and flamboyant trill. The amount of ornamentation in a piece of music can vary from quite extensive (it was often extensive in the Baroque period, from 1600 to 1750) to relatively little or even none. The word \"agr\u00e9ment\" is used specifically to indicate the French Baroque style of ornamentation.\nImprovised vs. written.\nIn the Baroque period, it was common for performers to improvise ornamentation on a given melodic line. A singer performing a da capo aria, for instance, would sing the melody relatively unornamented the first time and decorate it with additional flourishes and trills the second time. Similarly, a harpsichord player performing a simple melodic line was expected to be able to improvise harmonically and stylistically appropriate trills, mordents (upper or lower) and appoggiaturas.\nOrnamentation may also be indicated by the composer. A number of standard ornaments (described below) are indicated with standard symbols in music notation, while other ornamentations may be appended to the score in small notes, or simply written out normally as fully sized notes. Frequently, a composer will have his or her own vocabulary of ornaments, which will be explained in a preface, much like a code. A grace note is a note written in smaller type, with or without a slash through it, to indicate that its note value does not count as part of the total time value of the bar. Alternatively, the term may refer more generally to any of the small notes used to mark some other ornament (see below), or in association with some other ornament's indication (see below), regardless of the timing used in the execution.\nIn Spain, melodies ornamented upon repetition (\"divisions\") were called \"diferencias\", and can be traced back to 1538, when Luis de Narv\u00e1ez published the first collection of such music for the vihuela.\nTypes.\nTrill.\nA trill, also known as a \"shake\", is a rapid alternation between an indicated note and the one above it. In simple music, trills may be diatonic, using just the notes of the scale; in other cases, the trill may be chromatic. The trill is usually indicated by either a tr or a tr~~, with the ~ representing the length of the trill, above the staff.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;score&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n \\relative c\" {\n \\time 2/4\n g2\\trill\n&lt;/score&gt;\nAt a moderate tempo, the above might be executed as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn Baroque music, the trill is sometimes indicated with a + (plus) sign above or below the note.\nIn the late 18th century, when performers played a trill, it always started from the upper note. However, \"[Heinrich Christoph] Koch expressed no preference and observed that it was scarcely a matter of much importance whether the trill began one way or the other, since there was no audible difference after the initial note had been sounded.\" Clive Brown writes that \"Despite three different ways of showing the trills, it seems likely that a trill beginning with the upper note and ending with a turn was envisaged in each case.\"\nSometimes it is expected that the trill will end with a turn (by sounding the note below rather than the note above the principal note, immediately before the last sounding of the principal note), or some other variation. Such variations are often marked with a few grace notes following the note that bears the trill indication.\nThere is also a single tone trill variously called \"trillo\" or \"tremolo\" in late Renaissance and early Baroque. Trilling on a single note is particularly idiomatic for the bowed strings.\nMordent.\nA mordent is a rapid alternation between an indicated note, the note above (called the \"upper mordent\", \"pralltriller\", or simply \"mordent\") or below (called the \"inverted mordent\" or \"lower mordent\"), and the indicated note again. The upper mordent is indicated by a short thick tilde (which may also indicate a trill); the lower mordent is the same with a short vertical line through it.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;score&gt; { \\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f \\relative c\" { \\time 2/4 d\\prall c\\mordent } }&lt;/score&gt;\nAs with the trill, the exact speed with which a mordent is performed will vary according to the tempo of the piece, but, at a moderate tempo, the above might be executed as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConfusion over the meaning of the unadorned word \"mordent\" has led to the modern terms \"upper\" and \"lower\" mordent being used, rather than \"mordent\" and \"inverted mordent\". Practice, notation, and nomenclature vary widely for all of these ornaments; that is to say, whether, by including the symbol for a mordent in a musical score, a composer intended the direction of the additional note (or notes) to be played above or below the principal note written on the sheet music varies according to when the piece was written, and in which country.\nIn the Baroque period, a \"mordant\" (the German or Scottish equivalent of \"mordent\") was what later came to be called an \"inverted mordent\" and what is now often called a \"lower mordent\". In the 19th century, however, the name \"mordent\" was generally applied to what is now called the \"upper\" mordent. Although mordents are now thought of as a single alternation between notes, in the Baroque period a \"mordant\" may have sometimes been executed with more than one alternation between the indicated note and the note below, making it a sort of inverted trill. Mordents of all sorts might typically, in some periods, begin with an extra \"inessential note\" (the lesser, added note), rather than with the \"principal note\" as shown in the examples here. The same applies to trills, which in the Baroque and Classical periods would begin with the added, upper note. A \"lower\" inessential note may or may not be chromatically raised (that is, with a natural, a sharp, or even a double sharp) to make it one semitone lower than the principal note.\nTurn.\nA turn is a short figure consisting of the note above the one indicated, the note itself, the note below the one indicated, and the note itself again. It is marked by a backwards S-shape lying on its side, sometimes known as an \"inverted lazy S\", above the staff. The details of its execution depend partly on the exact placement of the turn mark. For instance, the turns below\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;score&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n\u00ab \\clef treble\n \\relative c\" {\n \\stemNeutral c4. d8 e2 c4 d\\turn e2\n s4 s^\\turn\n\u00bb\n&lt;/score&gt;\nmay be executed as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe exact speed with which a turn is executed can vary, as can its rhythm. The question of how a turn is best executed is largely one of context, convention, and taste. The lower and upper added notes may or may not be chromatically raised.\nAn inverted turn (the note below the one indicated, the note itself, the note above it, and the note itself again) is usually indicated by putting a short vertical line through the normal turn sign, though sometimes the sign itself is turned upside down.\nAppoggiatura.\nAn appoggiatura ( , ) is an added note that is important melodically (unlike an acciaccatura) and suspends the principal note by a portion of its time-value, often about half, but this may be considerably more or less depending on the context. The added note (the auxiliary note) is one degree higher or lower than the principal note, and may or may not be chromatically altered. Appoggiaturas are also usually on the strong or strongest beat of the resolution, are themselves emphasised, and are approached by a leap and left by a step in the opposite direction of the leap.\nAn appoggiatura is often written as a grace note prefixed to a principal note and printed in small character, without the oblique stroke:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;score&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n \\relative c\" {\n \\time 2/4\n \\grace { d4( } c2)\n&lt;/score&gt;\nThis may be executed as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAcciaccatura.\nThe word \"acciaccatura\" (, ; ) comes from the Italian verb \"\", \"to crush\". In the 18th century, it was an ornament applied to any of the main notes of arpeggiated chords, either a tone or semitone below the chord tone, struck simultaneously with it and then immediately released. Hence the German translation \"Zusammenschlag\" (together-stroke).\nIn the 19th century, the acciaccatura (sometimes called \"short appoggiatura\") came to be a shorter variant of the \"long appoggiatura\", where the delay of the principal note is quick. It is written using a grace note (often a quaver, or eighth note), with an oblique stroke through the stem. In the Classical period, an acciaccatura is usually performed before the beat and the emphasis is on the main note, not the grace note. The \"appoggiatura\" long or short has the emphasis on the grace note.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;score&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n \\relative c\" {\n \\time 2/4\n \\slashedGrace { d8( } c4)\n \\slashedGrace { e8( } d4)\n&lt;/score&gt;\nThe exact interpretation of this will vary according to the tempo of the piece, but the following is possible:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhether the note should be played before or on the beat is largely a question of taste and performance practice. Exceptionally, the acciaccatura may be notated in the bar preceding the note to which it is attached, showing that it is to be played before the beat. The implication also varies with the composer and the period. For example, Mozart's and Haydn's long appoggiaturas are \u2013 to the eye \u2013 indistinguishable from Mussorgsky's and Prokofiev's before-the-beat acciaccaturas.\nGlissando.\nA glissando is a slide from one note to another, signified by a wavy line connecting the two notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;score&gt; {\n\\override Score.TimeSignature #'stencil = ##f\n \\relative c' {\n \\override Glissando.style = #'trill\n e2\\glissando e'\n&lt;/score&gt;\nAll of the intervening diatonic or chromatic notes (depending on instrument and context) are heard, albeit very briefly. In this way, the glissando differs from portamento. In contemporary classical music (especially in avant garde pieces), a glissando tends to assume the whole value of the initial note.\nSlide.\nA slide (or \"Schleifer\" in German) instructs the performer to begin one or two diatonic steps below the marked note and slide upward. The schleifer usually includes a prall trill or mordent trill at the end. Willard A. Palmer writes that \"[t]he schleifer is a 'sliding' ornament, usually used to fill in the gap between a note and the previous one.\"\n\"Nachschlag\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe word \"Nachschlag\" () translates, literally, to \"after-beat\", and refers to \"the two notes that sometimes terminate a trill, and which, when taken in combination with the last two notes of the shake, may form a turn\". The term \"Nachschlag\" may also refer to \"an ornament that took the form of a supplementary note that, when placed after a main note, 'steals' time from it\".\nThe first definition of \"Nachschlag\" refers to the \"shaken\" or trilled version of the ornament, while the second definition refers to the \"smooth\" version. This ornament has also been referred to as a \"cadent\" or a \"springer\" in English Baroque performance practice. Instruction books from the Baroque period, such as Christopher Simpson's \"The Division Violist\", refer to the \"cadent\" as an ornament in which \"a Note is sometimes graced by joyning [\"sic\"] part of its sound to the note following... whose following Quaver is Placed with the ensuing Note, but played with the same Bow.\"\nIn Western classical music.\nRenaissance and early Baroque music.\nFrom Silvestro Ganassi's treatise in 1535 we have instructions and examples of how musicians of the Renaissance and early Baroque periods decorated their music with improvised ornaments. Michael Praetorius spoke warmly of musicians' \"sundry good and merry pranks with little runs/leaps\".\nUntil the last decade of the 16th century the emphasis is on \"divisions\", also known as \"diminutions\", \"passaggi\" (in Italian), \"gorgia\" (\"throat\", first used as a term for vocal ornamentation by Nicola Vicentino in 1555), or \"glosas\" (by Ortiz, in both Spanish and Italian) \u2013 a way to decorate a simple cadence or interval with extra shorter notes. These start as simple passing notes, progress to step-wise additions and in the most complicated cases are rapid passages of equal valued notes \u2013 virtuosic flourishes. There are rules for designing them, to make sure that the original structure of the music is left intact. Towards the end of this period the divisions detailed in the treatises contain more dotted and other uneven rhythms and leaps of more than one step at a time.\nStarting with Antonio Archilei (1589), the treatises bring in a new set of expressive devices called \"graces\" alongside the divisions. These have a lot more rhythmic interest and are filled with affect as composers took much more interest in text portrayal. It starts with the \"trillo\" and \"cascate\", and by the time we reach Francesco Rognoni (1620) we are also told about fashionable ornaments: , , , , and .\nKey treatises detailing ornamentation:\nBaroque music.\nOrnaments in Baroque music take on a different meaning. Most ornaments occur on the beat, and use diatonic intervals more exclusively than ornaments in later periods do. While any table of ornaments must give a strict presentation, consideration has to be given to the tempo and note length, since at rapid tempos it would be difficult or impossible to play all of the notes that are usually required. One realisation of some common Baroque ornaments is set in the following table from the \"Klavierb\u00fcchlein f\u00fcr Wilhelm Friedemann Bach\" by J.S. Bach:\nAnother realisation can be seen in the table in Pi\u00e8ces de clavecin (1689) by \"Jean-Henri d'Anglebert\":\nClassical period.\nIn the late 18th and early 19th century, there were no standard ways of performing ornaments and sometimes several distinct ornaments might be performed in a same way.\nIn the 19th century, performers were adding or improvising ornaments on compositions. As C.P.E Bach observed, \"pieces in which all ornaments are indicated need give no trouble; on the other hand, pieces in which little or nothing is marked must be supplied with ornaments in the usual way.\" Clive Brown explains that \"For many connoisseurs of that period the individuality of a performer's embellishment of the divine notation was a vital part of the musical experience.\"\nIn Beethoven's work, however, there should not be any additional ornament added from a performer. Even in Mozart's compositions, ornaments not included in the score are not allowed, as Brown explains: \"Most of the chamber music from Mozart onwards that still remains in the repertoire belongs to the kind in which every note is thought out and which tolerates virtually no ornamental additions of the type under consideration here...\" Recent scholarship has however brought this statement in question.\nIn other music.\nJazz.\nJazz music incorporates a wide variety of ornaments including many of the classical ones mentioned above as well as a number of their own. Most of these ornaments are added either by performers during their solo extemporizations or as written ornaments. While these ornaments have universal names, their realizations and effects vary depending on the instrument. Jazz music incorporates most of the standard \"classical\" ornaments, such as trills, grace notes, mordents, glissandi and turns but adds a variety of additional ornaments such as \"dead\" or ghost notes (a percussive sound, notated by an \"X\"), \"doit\" notes and \"fall\" notes (annotated by curved lines above the note, indicating by direction of curve that the note should either rapidly rise or fall on the scale), squeezes (notated by a curved line from an \"X\" to a specific pitch, that denotes an un-pitched glissando), and shakes (notated by a squiggly line over a note, which indicates a fast lip trill for brass players and a minor third trill for winds).\nIndian classical music.\nIn Carnatic music, the Sanskrit term \"gamaka\" (which means \"to move\") is used to denote ornamentation. One of the most unusual forms of ornamentation in world music is the Carnatic \"kampitam\" which is about oscillating a note in diverse ways by varying amplitude, speed or number of times the note is oscillated. This is a highly subtle, yet scientific ornamentation as the same note can be oscillated in different ways based on the raga or context within a raga. For instance, the fourth note (Ma) in Shankarabharanam or Begada allows at least three to five types of oscillation based on the phrasings within the raga.\nAnother important gamaka in Carnatic is the \"Sphuritam\" which is about rendering a note twice but forcefully from a grace note immediately below it the second time. For instance, the third note (Ga) would be rendered plain first time and with a force from the second (Ri) the next time.\nCeltic music.\nOrnamentation is a major distinguishing characteristic of Welsh, Irish, Scottish, and Cape Breton music. A singer, fiddler, flautist, harpist, tin whistler, piper or a player of another instrument may add grace notes (known as 'cuts' / 'strikes' in Irish fiddling), slides, rolls, cranns, doubling, mordents, drones, trebles (or birls in Scottish fiddling), or a variety of other ornaments to a given melody.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "66615", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66615", "title": "321 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 321 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Calvinus and Caudinus (or, less frequently, year 433 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 321 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nIndia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66616", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66616", "title": "320 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 320 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Cursor and Philo (or, less frequently, year 434 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 320 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nDemography.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66617", "revid": "20296737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66617", "title": "Epigenetic inheritance", "text": ""}
{"id": "66618", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66618", "title": "The Limits to Growth", "text": "1972 book on economic and population growth\nThe Limits to Growth (LTG) is a 1972 report that discussed the possibility of exponential economic and population growth with a finite supply of resources, studied by computer simulation. The study used the World3 computer model to simulate the consequence of interactions between the Earth and human systems.\nCommissioned by the Club of Rome, the study saw its findings first presented at international gatherings in Moscow and Rio de Janeiro in the summer of 1971. The report's authors are Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, J\u00f8rgen Randers, and William W. Behrens III, representing a team of 17 researchers. The model was based on the work of Jay Forrester of MIT, as described in his book \"World Dynamics\".\nThe report's findings suggest that, in the absence of significant alterations in resource utilization and environmental destruction, it is highly likely that there will be an abrupt and unmanageable decrease in both population and industrial capacity. Although it faced severe criticism and scrutiny upon its release, the report influenced environmental reforms for decades. Subsequent analysis notes that global use of natural resources has been inadequately reformed to alter its expected outcome. Yet price predictions based on resource scarcity failed to materialize in the years since publication.\nSince its publication, some 30 million copies of the book in 30 languages have been purchased. It continues to generate debate and has been the subject of several subsequent publications.\n\"Beyond the Limits\" and \"The Limits to Growth: The 30-Year Update\" were published in 1992 and 2004 respectively; in 2012, a 40-year forecast from J\u00f8rgen Randers, one of the book's original authors, was published as \"2052: A Global Forecast for the Next Forty Years\"; and in 2022, two of the original \"Limits to Growth\" authors, Dennis Meadows and J\u00f8rgen Randers, joined 19 other contributors to produce \"Limits and Beyond\".\nPurpose.\nIn commissioning the MIT team to undertake the project that resulted in \"LTG\", the Club of Rome had three objectives:\nMethod.\nThe World3 model is based on five variables: \"population, food production, industrialization, pollution, and consumption of nonrenewable natural resources.\" At the time of the study, all these variables were increasing and were assumed to continue to grow exponentially, while the ability of technology to increase resources grew only linearly. The authors intended to explore the possibility of a sustainable feedback pattern that would be achieved by altering growth trends among the five variables under three scenarios. They noted that their projections for the values of the variables in each scenario were predictions \"only in the most limited sense of the word\" and were only indications of the system's behavioral tendencies. Two of the scenarios saw \"overshoot and collapse\" of the global system by the mid- to latter part of the 21st century, while a third scenario resulted in a \"stabilized world.\"\nExponential reserve index.\nA key idea in \"The Limits to Growth\" is the notion that if the rate of resource use is increasing, the number of reserves cannot be calculated by simply taking the current known reserves and dividing them by the current yearly usage, as is typically done to obtain a static index. For example, in 1972, the amount of chromium reserves was 775 million metric tons, of which 1.85\u00a0million metric tons were mined annually. The static index is 775/1.85=418 years, but the rate of chromium consumption was growing exponentially at 2.6 percent annually. If instead of assuming a constant rate of usage, the assumption of a constant rate of growth of 2.6 percent annually is made, the resource will instead last\nformula_1\nIn general, the formula for calculating the amount of time left for a resource with constant consumption growth is:\nformula_2\nwhere:\n\"y\" = years left;\n\"r\" = the continuous compounding growth rate;\n\"s\" = R/C or static reserve;\n\"R\" = reserve;\n\"C\" = (annual) consumption.\nCommodity reserve extrapolation.\nThe chapter contains a large table that spans five pages in total, based on actual geological reserves data for a total of 19 non-renewable resources, and analyzes their reserves at the 1972 modeling time of their exhaustion under three scenarios: static (constant growth), exponential, and exponential with reserves multiplied by 5 to account for possible discoveries. A short excerpt from the table is presented below:\nThe chapter also contains a detailed computer model of chromium availability with current (as of 1972) and double the known reserves, as well as numerous statements on the current increasing price trends for discussed metals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Given present resources consumption rates and the projected increase in the rates, the great majority of the currently important nonrenewable resources will be extremely costly 100 years from now. (...) The prices of those resources with the shortest static reserve indices have already begun to increase. The price of mercury, for example, has gone up 500 percent in the last 20 years; the price of lead has increased 300 percent in the last 30 years.\u2014\u200a\nInterpretations of the exhaustion model.\nDue to the detailed nature and use of actual resources and their real-world price trends, the indexes have been interpreted as a prediction of the number of years until the world would \"run out\" of them, both by environmentalist groups calling for greater conservation and restrictions on use and by skeptics criticizing the accuracy of the predictions. This interpretation has been widely propagated by media and environmental organizations and authors who, apart from a note about the possibility of the future flows being \"more complicated,\" did not clearly constrain or deny this interpretation.\nWhile environmental organizations used it to support their arguments, a number of economists used it to criticize \"LTG\" as a whole shortly after publication in the 1970s (Peter Passel, Marc Roberts, and Leonard Ross), with similar criticism reoccurring from Ronald Baily, George Goodman, and others in the 1990s. In 2011 Ugo Bardi, in \"The Limits to Growth Revisited,\" argued that \"nowhere in the book was it stated that the numbers were supposed to be read as predictions\"; nonetheless, as they were the only tangible numbers referring to actual resources, they were promptly picked as such by both supporters and opponents.\nWhile Chapter 2 serves as an introduction to the concept of exponential growth modeling, the actual World3 model uses an abstract \"non-renewable resources\" component based on static coefficients rather than the actual physical commodities described above.\nConclusions.\nAfter reviewing their computer simulations, the research team came to the following conclusions:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \nThe introduction goes on to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These conclusions are so far-reaching and raise so many questions for further study that we are quite frankly overwhelmed by the enormity of the job that must be done. We hope that this book will serve to interest other people, in many fields of study and in many countries of the world, to raise the space and time horizons of their concerns, and to join us in understanding and preparing for a period of great transition\u00a0\u2013 the transition from growth to global equilibrium.\nCriticism.\n\"LTG\" provoked a wide range of responses, including immediate criticisms almost as soon as it was published.\nPeter Passell and two co-authors published a 2 April 1972 article in the \"New York Times\" describing \"LTG\" as \"an empty and misleading work\u00a0... best summarized\u00a0... as a rediscovery of the oldest maxim of computer science: Garbage In, Garbage Out.\" Passell found the study's simulation simplistic while assigning little value to the role of technological progress in solving the problems of resource depletion, pollution, and food production. They charged that all \"LTG\" simulations ended in collapse, predicting the imminent end of irreplaceable resources. Passell also charged that the entire endeavour was motivated by a hidden agenda: to halt growth in its tracks.\nIn 1973, a group of researchers at the Science Policy Research Unit at the University of Sussex concluded that simulations in \"Limits to Growth\" were very sensitive to a few key assumptions and suggested that the MIT assumptions were unduly pessimistic and the MIT methodology, data, and projections were faulty. However, the \"LTG\" team, in a paper entitled \"A Response to Sussex,\" described and analyzed five major areas of disagreement between themselves and the Sussex authors. The team asserted that the Sussex critics applied \"micro reasoning to macro problems\" and suggested that their own arguments had been either misunderstood or wilfully misrepresented. They pointed out that the critics had failed to suggest any alternative model for the interaction of growth processes and resource availability, and \"nor had they described in precise terms the sort of social change and technological advances that they believe would accommodate current growth processes.\"\nDuring that period, the very idea of any worldwide constraint, as indicated in the study, was met with scepticism and opposition by both businesses and the majority of economists. Critics declared that history proved the projections to be incorrect, such as the predicted resource depletion and associated economic collapse by the end of the 20th century. The methodology, the computer, the conclusions, the rhetoric, and the people behind the project were criticised. Yale economist Henry C. Wallich agreed that growth could not continue indefinitely; however, he believed that a natural end to growth was preferable to intervention. Wallich stated that technology could solve all the problems the report was concerned about, but only if growth continued apace. According to Wallich's cautionary statement, prematurely halting progress would result in the perpetual impoverishment of billions.\nJulian Simon, a professor at the Universities of Illinois and, later, Maryland, argued that the fundamental underlying concepts of the LTG scenarios were faulty because the very idea of what constitutes a \"resource\" varies over time. For instance, wood was the primary shipbuilding resource until the 1800s, and there were concerns about prospective wood shortages from the 1500s on. But then boats began to be made of iron, later steel, and the shortage issue disappeared. Simon argued in his book \"The Ultimate Resource\" that human ingenuity creates new resources as required from the raw materials of the universe. For instance, copper will never \"run out.\" History demonstrates that as it becomes scarcer, its price will rise, more will be found, more will be recycled, new techniques will use less of it, and at some point a better substitute will be found for it altogether. His book was revised and reissued in 1996 as \"The Ultimate Resource 2\".\nTo the US Congress in 1973, Allen V. Kneese and Ronald Riker of Resources for the Future (RFF) testified that in their view, \"The authors load their case by letting some things grow exponentially and others not. Population, capital, and pollution grow exponentially in all models, but technologies for expanding resources and controlling pollution are permitted to grow, if at all, only in discrete increments.\" However, their testimony also noted the possibility of \"relatively firm long-term limits\" associated with carbon dioxide emissions, that humanity might \"loose upon itself, or the ecosystem services on which it depends, a disastrously virulent substance,\" and (implying that population growth in \"developing countries\" is problematic) that \"we don't know what to do about it.\"\nIn 1997, the Italian economist Giorgio Nebbia observed that the negative reaction to the \"LTG\" study came from at least four sources: those who saw the book as a threat to their business or industry; professional economists, who saw \"LTG\" as an uncredentialed encroachment on their professional perquisites; the Catholic Church, which bridled at the suggestion that overpopulation was one of mankind's major problems; and finally, the political left, which saw the \"LTG\" study as a scam by the elites designed to trick workers into believing that a proletarian paradise was a pipe dream. A UK government report found that \"In the 1990s, criticism tended to focus on the misconception that \"Limits to Growth\" predicted global resource depletion and social collapse by the end of the year 2000.\"\nPeter Taylor and Frederick Buttle\u2019s interpretation of the \"LTG\" study and the associated system dynamics (SD) models found that the original SD was created for firms and set the pattern for urban, global, and other SD models. These firm-based SDs relied on superintending managers to prevent undesirable cycling and feedback loops caused by separate common-sense decisions made by individual sectors. However, the later global model lacked superintending managers to enforce interrelated world-level changes, resulting in undesirable cycles that led to exponential growth and collapse in nearly all models, regardless of the parameter settings. There was no way for a few individuals in the model to override the structure of the system, even if they understood it as a whole. This meant there were only two solutions: convincing everyone in the system to change the basic structure of population growth and collapse (moral response) and having a superintending agency analyzing the system as a whole and directing changes (technocratic response). The \"LTG\" report combined these two approaches multiple times. System dynamists constructed interventions into the world model to demonstrate how their proposed interventions improved the system to prevent collapse. The SD model also aggregated the world\u2019s population and resources, which meant that it demonstrated crises emerging with a strictly global logic or form at similar times and in similar ways less effectively because of the unequal distributions of populations and resources. These issues indicate that the local, national, and regional differentiation in politics and economics surrounding socioenvironmental change was excluded from the SD used by \"LTG\", making it unable to accurately demonstrate real-world dynamics.\nPositive reviews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWith few exceptions, economics as a discipline has been dominated by a perception of living in an unlimited world, where resource and pollution problems in one area were solved by moving resources or people to other parts. The very hint of any global limitation as suggested in the report \"The Limits to Growth\" was met with disbelief and rejection by businesses and most economists. However, this conclusion was mostly based on false premises.\nIn 1980, the Global 2000 Report to the President arrived at similar conclusions regarding expected global resource scarcity and the need for multilateral coordination to prepare for this situation.\nIn a 2008 blog post, Ugo Bardi commented that \"Although, by the 1990s \"LTG\" had become everyone's laughing stock, among some the \"LTG\" ideas are becoming again popular\". Reading \"LTG\" for the first time in 2000, Matthew Simmons concluded his views on the report by saying, \"In hindsight, The Club of Rome turned out to be right. We simply wasted 30 important years ignoring this work.\"\nRobert Solow, who had been a vocal critic of LTG, said in 2009 that \"thirty years later, the situation may have changed... it will probably be more important in the future to deal intellectually, quantitatively, as well as practically, with the mutual interdependence of economic growth, natural resource availability, and environmental constraints.\"\nIn a study conducted in 2008, Graham Turner from CSIRO discovered a significant correlation between the observed historical data spanning from 1970 to 2000 and the simulated outcomes derived from the \"standard run\" limits of the growth model. This correlation was apparent across nearly all the reported outputs. The comparison falls comfortably within the range of uncertainty for almost all the available data, both in terms of magnitude and the patterns observed over time. Turner conducted an analysis of many studies, with a special focus on those authored by economists, that have consistently aimed to discredit the limits-to-growth concept over the course of several years. According to Turner, the aforementioned studies exhibit flaws and demonstrate a lack of comprehension regarding the model.\nTurner reprised these observations in another opinion piece in \"The Guardian\" on 2 September 2014. Turner used data from the UN to claim that the graphs almost exactly matched the 'Standard Run' from 1972 (i.e., the worst-case scenario, assuming that a 'business as usual' attitude was adopted and there were no modifications of human behaviour in response to the warnings in the report). Birth rates and death rates were both slightly lower than projected, but these two effects cancelled each other out, leaving the growth in world population almost exactly as forecast.\nIn 2010, N\u00f8rg\u00e5rd, Peet, and Ragnarsd\u00f3ttir called the book a \"pioneering report\" and said that it \"has withstood the test of time and, indeed, has only become more relevant.\"\nIn 2012, Christian Parenti drew comparisons between the reception of \"The Limits to Growth\" and the ongoing global warming controversy. Parenti further remarked that despite its scientific rigour and credibility, the intellectual guardians of influential economic interests actively dismissed LTG as a warning. A parallel narrative is currently unfolding within the realm of climate research.\nIn 2012, John Scales Avery, a member of the Nobel Prize-winning group associated with the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs, supported the basic thesis of \"LTG\" by stating, Although the specific predictions of resource availability in \"Limits to Growth\" lacked accuracy, its basic thesis\u00a0\u2013 that unlimited economic growth on a finite planet is impossible \u2013 was indisputably correct.\nLegacy.\nUpdates and symposia.\nThe Club of Rome has persisted after \"The Limits to Growth\" and has generally provided comprehensive updates to the book every five years.\nAn independent retrospective on the public debate over \"The Limits to Growth\" concluded in 1978 that optimistic attitudes had won out, causing a general loss of momentum in the environmental movement. While summarizing a large number of opposing arguments, the article concluded that \"scientific arguments for and against each position\u00a0... have, it would seem, played only a small part in the general acceptance of alternative perspectives.\"\nIn 1989, a symposium was held in Hanover, entitled \"Beyond the Limits to Growth: Global Industrial Society, Vision or Nightmare?\" and in 1992, \"Beyond the Limits\" (BTL) was published as a 20-year update on the original material. It \"concluded that two decades of history mainly supported the conclusions we had advanced 20 years earlier. But the 1992 book did offer one major new finding. We suggested in BTL that humanity had already overshot the limits of Earth's support capacity.\"\n\"Limits to Growth: The 30-Year Update\" was published in 2004. The authors observed that \"It is a sad fact that humanity has largely squandered the past 30 years in futile debates and well-intentioned, but halfhearted, responses to the global ecological challenge. We do not have another 30 years to dither. Much will have to change if the ongoing overshoot is not to be followed by collapse during the twenty-first century.\"\nIn 2012, the Smithsonian Institution held a symposium entitled \"Perspectives on \"Limits to Growth\"\". Another symposium was held in the same year by the Volkswagen Foundation, entitled \"Already Beyond?\"\n\"Limits to Growth\" did not receive an official update in 2012, but one of its coauthors, J\u00f8rgen Randers, published a book, \"\".\nComparisons and updated models.\nIn 2008, physicist Graham Turner at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) in Australia published a paper called \"A Comparison of 'The Limits to Growth' with Thirty Years of Reality.\" It compared the past thirty years of data with the eleven scenarios laid out in the 1972 book and found that changes in industrial production, food production, and pollution are all congruent with one of the book's eleven scenarios\u2014that of \"business as usual.\" This scenario in \"Limits\" points to economic and societal collapse in the 21st century. In 2010, N\u00f8rg\u00e5rd, Peet, and Ragnarsd\u00f3ttir called the book a \"pioneering report.\" They said that \"its approach remains useful and that its conclusions are still surprisingly valid ... unfortunately the report has been largely dismissed by critics as a doomsday prophecy that has not held up to scrutiny.\"\nAlso in 2008, researcher Peter A. Victor wrote that even though the \"Limits\" team probably underestimated the price mechanism's role in adjusting outcomes, their critics have overestimated it. He states that \"Limits to Growth\" has had a significant impact on the conception of environmental issues and notes that (in his view) the models in the book were meant to be taken as predictions \"only in the most limited sense of the word\".\nIn a 2009 article published in \"American Scientist\" entitled \"Revisiting the Limits to Growth After Peak Oil,\" Hall and Day noted that \"the values predicted by the limits-to-growth model and actual data for 2008 are very close.\" These findings are consistent with the 2008 CSIRO study, which concluded, \"The analysis shows that 30 years of historical data compares favorably with key features ... [of the \"Limits to Growth\"] \"standard run\" scenario, which results in collapse of the global system midway through the 21st Century.\"\nIn 2011, Ugo Bardi published a book-length academic study of \"The Limits to Growth\", its methods, and historical reception and concluded that \"The warnings that we received in 1972 ... are becoming increasingly more worrisome as reality seems to be following closely the curves that the ... scenario had generated.\" A popular analysis of the accuracy of the report by science writer Richard Heinberg was also published.\nIn 2012, writing in \"American Scientist\", Brian Hayes stated that the model is \"more a polemical tool than a scientific instrument\". He went on to say that the graphs generated by the computer program should not, as the authors note, be used as predictions.\nIn 2014, Turner concluded that \"preparing for a collapsing global system could be even more important than trying to avoid collapse.\" Another 2014 study from the University of Melbourne confirmed that data closely tracked the World3 BAU model.\nIn 2015, researchers undertook a calibration of the updated World3-03 model using historical data from 1995 to 2012 to better understand the dynamics of today's economic and resource system. The results showed that human society has invested more to abate persistent pollution, increase food productivity, and have a more productive service sector; however, the broad trends within \"Limits to Growth\" still held true.\nIn 2016, a group of MPs in the UK established an all-party parliamentary group on limits to growth. Its initial report concluded that \"there is unsettling evidence that society is still following the 'standard run' of the original study\u2014in which overshoot leads to an eventual collapse of production and living standards.\" The report also points out that some issues not fully addressed in the original 1972 report, such as climate change, present additional challenges for human development.\nIn 2020, an analysis by Gaya Herrington, then Director of Sustainability Services of KPMG US, was published in Yale University's \"Journal of Industrial Ecology\". The study assessed whether, given key data known in 2020 about factors important for the \"Limits to Growth\" report, the original report's conclusions are supported. In particular, the 2020 study examined updated quantitative information about ten factors, namely population, fertility rates, mortality rates, industrial output, food production, services, nonrenewable resources, persistent pollution, human welfare, and ecological footprint, and concluded that the \"Limits to Growth\" prediction is essentially correct in that continued economic growth is unsustainable under a \"business as usual\" model. The study found that current empirical data is broadly consistent with the 1972 projections and that if major changes to the consumption of resources are not undertaken, economic growth will peak and then rapidly decline by around 2040.\nIn 2023, the parameters of the World3 model were recalibrated using empirical data up to 2022. This improved parameter set results in a World3 simulation that shows the same overshoot and collapse mode in the coming decade as the original business-as-usual scenario of the Limits to Growth standard run. The main effect of the recalibration update is to raise the peaks of most variables and move them a few years into the future.\nRelated books.\nBooks discussing humanity's challenges and uncertain future have been consistently published over the years. A few of them, including the books mentioned above for reference, include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBooks:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66621", "revid": "36188177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66621", "title": "348 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 348 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Corvus and Laenas (or, less frequently, year 406 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 348 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66622", "revid": "50322851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66622", "title": "349 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 349 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Camillus and Crassus (or, less frequently, year 405 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 349 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nMacedonia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66623", "revid": "45239753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66623", "title": "350 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 350 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Laenas and Scipio (or, less frequently, year 404 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 350 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66624", "revid": "1279744694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66624", "title": "Kearney", "text": "Kearney or Kearneys may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66625", "revid": "47474982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66625", "title": "Adolphe Willette", "text": "French painter (1857\u20131926)\nAdolphe L\u00e9on Willette (30 July 1857 \u2013 4 February 1926) was a French painter, illustrator, caricaturist, and lithographer, as well as an architect of the famous Moulin Rouge cabaret. Willette ran as an \"anti-semitic\" candidate in the 9th arrondissement of Paris for the September 1889 legislative elections.\nBiography.\nWillette studied for four years at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts under Alexandre Cabanel. His graphical work ranged from dainty triviality or political satire: he made Pierrot an imaginary hero of France, and established Mimi Pinson as frail, lovable, and essentially good-hearted. He could also be bitter and fierce, a partisan of political ideas. The guillotine and the figure of Death appear in his caricatures. At the time of the Dreyfus affair he was an \"anti-dreyfusard\"; with Jean-Louis Forain, he moved to the political right.\nWorks.\nThe artist was a prolific contributor to the French illustrated press under the pseudonyms \"C\u00e9moi\", \"Pierrot\", \"Louison\", \"B\u00e9b\u00e9\", and \"Nox\", but more often under his own name. He illustrated Melandri's \"Les Pierrots\" and \"Les Giboulles d'avril\", \"Le Courrier fran\u00e7ais\", and published his own \"Pauvre Pierrot\" and other works, in which he tells his stories in scenes in the manner of Busch. He decorated several \"brasseries artistiques\" with wall-paintings, stained glass, and so on notably Le Chat noir and La Palette d'or, and he painted the ceiling for La Cigale music hall. Willette contributed to the Salon des Cent and six of his posters were published in \"Les Ma\u00eetres de l'Affiche\". A collection of his works was exhibited in 1888. His \"V'almy\" is in the Luxembourg, Paris.\nWillette's characteristically fantastic \"Parce Domine\" was commissioned by Rodolphe Salis for Le Chat Noir in Montmartre. It was shown in the Franco-British Exhibition in 1908.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66626", "revid": "5360838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66626", "title": "Proteins", "text": ""}
{"id": "66627", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66627", "title": "The Little Foxes", "text": "Play by Lillian Hellman\nThe Little Foxes is a 1939 play by Lillian Hellman, considered a classic of 20th century drama. Its title comes from Chapter 2, Verse 15, of the Song of Solomon in the King James version of the Bible, which reads, \"Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for our vines have tender grapes.\" Set in a small town in Alabama in 1900, it focuses on the struggle for control of a family business. Tallulah Bankhead starred in the original production as Regina Hubbard Giddens.\nPlot.\nThe play's focus is Southerner Regina Hubbard Giddens, who struggles for wealth and freedom within the confines of an early 20th-century society where fathers considered only sons as their legal heirs. As a result of this practice, while her two avaricious brothers Benjamin and Oscar have wielded the family inheritance into two independently substantial fortunes, she has had to rely upon her manipulation of her cautious, timid, browbeaten husband, Horace. He is no businessman, just her financial support; although he is pliable enough for her ambition, that ambition has driven him into becoming merely the tool of her insatiable greed. He uses a wheelchair.\nHer brother Oscar married Birdie, his much-maligned alcoholic wife, solely to acquire her family's plantation and cotton fields. Oscar now wants to join forces with his brother, Benjamin, to construct a cotton mill. They need an additional $75,000 and approach Regina, asking her to invest in the project. Oscar initially proposes marriage between his son Leo and Regina's daughter Alexandra\u2014first cousins\u2014as a means of getting Horace's money, but Horace and Alexandra are repulsed by the suggestion, as is Birdie. Horace refuses when Regina asks him outright for the money, so Leo, a bank teller, is pressured into stealing Horace's railroad bonds from the bank's safe deposit box.\nHorace, after discovering this, tells Regina he is going to change his will in favor of their daughter, and also claim he gave Leo the bonds as a loan, thereby cutting Regina out of the deal completely. When he has a heart attack during this chat, she makes no effort to help him. He dies within hours, without anyone knowing his plan and before changing his will. This leaves Regina free to blackmail her brothers by threatening to report Leo's theft unless they give her 75% ownership in the cotton mill (it is, in Regina's mind, a fair exchange for the stolen bonds). The price Regina ultimately pays for her evil deeds is the loss of her daughter Alexandra's love and respect. Regina's actions cause Alexandra to finally understand the importance of not idly watching people do evil. She tells Regina she will not watch her be \"one who eats the earth,\" and abandons her. Having let her husband die, alienated her brothers, and driven away her only child, Regina is left wealthy but completely alone.\nBackground.\nThe fictional Hubbards in the play are reputedly drawn from Lillian Hellman's Marx relatives. Hellman's mother was Julia Newhouse of Demopolis, Alabama. Julia Newhouse's parents were Leonard Newhouse, a Demopolis wholesale liquor dealer, and Sophie Marx, of a successful Demopolis banking family. According to Hellman, Sophie Marx Newhouse never missed an opportunity to belittle and mock her father for his poor business sense in front of her and her mother. The discord between the Marx and Hellman families was to later serve as the inspiration for the play.\nThe title \"The Little Foxes\" was suggested by Dorothy Parker.\nIn 1946, Hellman wrote \"Another Part of the Forest\", a prequel chronicling the roots of the Hubbard family.\nProduction.\nProduced and directed by Herman Shumlin, the original Broadway production of \"The Little Foxes\" opened February 15, 1939, at the National Theatre. It closed February 3, 1940, running for 410 performances before its two-season tour of the United States. The main poster and playbill design (yellow background with red and black lettering and the tagline \"The Greatest Play of the Generation\" over a circular photo of Bankhead in character) was closely referenced over eight decades later for the promotional materials for the satirical comedy \"Oh, Mary!\".\nCast.\nOn October 30, 1939, Eugenia Rawls replaced Florence Williams in the role of Alexandra Giddens. Rawls had made her Broadway debut as one of the students in Lillian Hellman's 1934 play, \"The Children's Hour\", which was also produced and directed by Herman Shumlin. Rawls played Alexandra for the rest of the play's Broadway run and the national tour that followed.\nThe 104-city tour of \"The Little Foxes\" began February 5, 1940, in Washington, D.C., and ended April 15, 1941, in Philadelphia.\nAccolades.\nTallulah Bankhead won \"Variety\" magazine's citation as best actress of the 1938\u201339 Broadway season.\nAdaptations.\nLillian Hellman wrote the screenplay for a 1941 film version, a Samuel Goldwyn production directed by William Wyler. Other contributors to the screenplay included Arthur Kober, Dorothy Parker and Alan Campbell. The touring production of \"The Little Foxes\" went on hiatus for three months during filming, and Patricia Collinge, Charles Dingle, Dan Duryea, John Marriott and Carl Benton Reid all reprised their stage roles in their motion picture debuts. Bette Davis, Herbert Marshall and Teresa Wright star as Regina, Horace and Alexandra Giddens.\n\"The Little Foxes\" was presented on \"Philip Morris Playhouse\" October 10, 1941. The radio adaptation starred Tallulah Bankhead.\nIn 1949, the play was adapted for an opera entitled \"Regina\" by Marc Blitzstein.\nGeorge Schaefer produced and directed Robert Hartung's television adaptation of \"The Little Foxes\" for the \"Hallmark Hall of Fame\", broadcast December 16, 1956, on NBC. The cast included Greer Garson (Regina), Franchot Tone (Horace), Sidney Blackmer (Ben), E. G. Marshall (Oscar) and Eileen Heckart (Birdie).\nRevivals.\nMike Nichols directed a production that opened October 26, 1967, at the Vivian Beaumont Theater in Lincoln Center, then transferred to the Ethel Barrymore Theatre. It ran a total of 100 performances. The cast included Anne Bancroft as Regina, Richard A. Dysart as Horace, Margaret Leighton as Birdie, E.G. Marshall as Oscar, George C. Scott as Benjamin, and Austin Pendleton as Leo. Costume design was by Patricia Zipprodt. In reviewing the production, \"Time\" said, \"An admirable revival of Lillian Hellman's 1939 play in Lincoln Center demonstrates how securely bricks of character can be sealed together with the mortar of plot. Anne Bancroft, George C. Scott, Richard Dysart, and Margaret Leighton are expertly guided by Director Mike Nichols through gilt-edged performances.\" The production was profiled in the William Goldman book \"\".\nGeraldine Page played Regina in a production in which she starred opposite her husband Rip Torn (in the role of Benjamin Hubbard) directed by Philip Minor. It was staged for the Academy Festival Theater at Barat College in Lake Forest, Illinois and received a rave review from William Leonard of the \"Chicago Tribune\": \"Geraldine Page is giving one of the greatest performances of her glorious career in Lake Forest and she is surrounded by a cast so superb that the Academy Festival Theater's production of \"The Little Foxes\" becomes a powerful, searing, unforgettable show... it is a harrowing and ennobling evening in the theater-the kind that comes along all too seldom. We have seen other stars in the role of the malevolently, ruthlessly scheming Regina Giddens\u2014Tallulah Bankhead years ago in her greatest triumph, Eileen Herlie five seasons back at the Ivanhoe. Geraldine Page is a whole new story\u2014I have seen Geraldine Page in innumerable roles, ever since she was playing in \"East Lynne\" with the Lake Zurich Players back in the '40s. I've never seen her more thrillingly convincing than in this production.\"\nThe legendary Kim Stanley once said of Page's Regina that it \"was possibly the finest performance\" she had ever seen.\nAustin Pendleton directed a production at the Parker Playhouse in Fort Lauderdale for three weeks that transferred to the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C., for six weeks before opening on Broadway. The production opened on May 7, 1981, at the Martin Beck Theatre for 123 performances and eight previews. The cast included Elizabeth Taylor as Regina, Tom Aldredge as Horace, Dennis Christopher as Leo, Maureen Stapleton as Birdie, and Anthony Zerbe as Benjamin. Florence Klotz was the costume designer. In a \"Time\" article prior to the Broadway opening, Gerald Clarke reported nearly $1 million worth of ticket sales during the week after advertisements announcing Taylor's appearance appeared in \"The New York Times\". Taylor received nominations for both the Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play and the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actress in a Play. Tony nominations also went to Pendleton for Best Direction of a Play, Aldredge for Best Featured Actor in a Play, Stapleton for Best Featured Actress in a Play, and the play itself for Best Revival.\nA 1997 revival, again at the Vivian Beaumont, ran for 27 previews and 57 performances from April 3 to June 15. Directed by Jack O'Brien, the cast included Stockard Channing as Regina, Kenneth Welsh as Horace, Brian Kerwin as Oscar, Brian Murray as Benjamin, and Frances Conroy as Birdie. Murray was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play and won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Featured Actor in a Play, and John Lee Beatty was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Scenic Design.\nThe production was revived at The Shakespeare Theatre of New Jersey, from June 3 to 28, 2009, with Venida Evans, Ron Brice, Deanne Lorette, Brian Dykstra, Fisher Neal, Kathryn Meisle, Einar Gunn, Philip Goodwin, Lindsey Wochley, Bradford Cover, and directed by Matthew Arbour.\nAnother revival was produced by Cleveland Play House in the 75th anniversary year of the original Broadway production, September 12\u2013October 5, 2014, in the Allen Theatre (Playhouse Square) in Cleveland. The production was directed by Artistic Director Laura Kepley.\nKyle Donnelly directed a revival at Washington, DC's Arena Stage from September 23 to October 30, 2016. The cast included Marg Helgenberger, Edward Gero, Isabel Keating, and Jack Willis.\nManhattan Theatre Club produced a Broadway revival that began previews on March 29, 2017, and opened officially on April 19 at the Samuel J. Friedman Theatre. It starred Laura Linney (who was nominated for a Tony Award\u2014Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play) and Cynthia Nixon who alternated the roles of Regina Giddens and Birdie, with direction by Daniel J. Sullivan. Cynthia Nixon won the Tony Award for Featured Actress in a Play for her turn as Birdie. The production team included Scott Pask, Justin Townsend, Jane Greenwood, Fotz Patton, and Tom Watson. It played its final performance on July 2, 2017.\nThe Gate Theatre in Dublin, was planning a revival in 2020, directed by Blanche McIntyre, but this was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe Young Vic in London produced a three-month revival that opened December 2, 2024 starring Anne-Marie Duff as Regina.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66628", "revid": "1314032476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66628", "title": "Poe (singer)", "text": "American singer-songwriter\nPoe (born Anne Decatur Danielewski; ; March 23, 1968) is an American singer, songwriter, and record producer. Poe's musical style is a blend of rock, jazz, electronica, folk, and hip hop elements combined with intimate lyrical compositions. Many of Poe's songs have been featured in films and on television. Poe first hit the modern rock charts in 1995.\nSome of her early charting singles included \"Angry Johnny\", \"Trigger Happy Jack\", \"Hello\", and \"Hey Pretty\". Videos for these singles had heavy rotation on MTV. Poe spent six years with Atlantic Records and is currently on her own label, Repoezessed Music Records.\nPoe's involvement with her online community of fans via her website and the fan sites that supported her early in her career predated modern social networking platforms and were among the first of their kind. Atlantic Records' Senior Vice President of New Media, Nikki Sleight, referred to Poe's online power and one-on-one communication with thousands attending her concerts as \"unheard of and pretty phenomenal\" in Sleight's 1997 interview with \"Web Magazine.\"\nIn 2004, she co-founded the digital innovations agency http:// with John Gheur.\nIn September 2014, Poe received the title of UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador due to her invitation by Yoko Ono to participate in a UNICEF campaign and her donated performance. The campaign launched a world version of John Lennon's classic song \"Imagine\" featuring dozens of musical artists from around the world. Poe joined others singing in the music video that included a video clip of John Lennon that spearheads a global campaign by UNICEF to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.\nEarly life.\nBorn in New York City, Poe is the daughter of Polish film director Tad Z. Danielewski and his wife Priscilla Decatur Machold. Poe and her brother, novelist Mark Z. Danielewski, lived in six different countries before she turned eight. Her father's film directing took the family to Africa, India, Spain, Switzerland, England, and the United States. When Poe was 12, her father moved his family to Provo, Utah to join the Arts faculty at Brigham Young University. Poe attended junior high school and some of high school in Provo. When Poe's parents divorced, Poe, then 16, left home and moved to New York City where she lived in a squat on the lower east side of Manhattan while attempting to connect with her estranged mother. Poe continued submitting schoolwork to her high school in Utah and eventually graduated. She pursued her undergraduate studies at Princeton University, where she organized her first band.\nEarly career.\nPoe began experimenting with musical samplers and sequencers as a teenager. Noteworthy are her early collaborations with J Dilla of Slum Village. Poe's musical influences ranged \"from Black Flag to Bob Dylan -- from Billie Holiday to Tribe Called Quest\" according to music writer Stephen Grecco.\nPoe was signed to Modern/Atlantic Records in 1994 on the strength of the demos she made with J Dilla and RJ Rice in RJ's living room in Detroit.\nOn January 28, 1996, \"The New York Times\" named Poe, along with Alanis Morissette, among the defining voices of the current \"movement in music\" which featured \"angry\" female artists who were \"...articulate, sexually explicit, both lover and fighter...(women who) reject self-pity and refuse to define themselves purely in terms of their connection to men.\" In September 1996, \"Glamour\" published a picture of Poe, with a snarl on her face and wearing a tee-shirt on which she had written the words, \"Happy-Well-Adjusted Female.\" In the accompanying interview, Poe says \"I don't think 'Angry' really sums it up at all!\" In the November 14, 1996, issue of \"Rolling Stone\", Poe's album, \"Hello,\" attained a position on the Reader's Top Ten Chart. and in August 1997, \"Esquire\" named Poe, along with Gwen Stefani, Lil' Kim, and Sarah McLachlan among the top five \"Women Who Rock Our World\".\nPoe began her first major tour in January 1996, as the opening act for Lenny Kravitz. She and her touring band (Daris Adkins on Guitar, Dan Marfisi \"Jones\" on Drums, Toby Skard on bass/ and Cameron Stone on cello) then continued touring extensively as headliners and at festivals until 1999, when she stopped to begin pre-production on her second album for Atlantic. Pollstar Magazine reported in 1998 that Poe had performed for approximately 600 shows in a two-year time period.\n\"Hello\".\nPoe's first album, \"Hello\", was released in 1995. Musically, the album was described as a sample-rich amalgam of hip-hop, rock, and jazz. Lyrically, the album was filled with literary allusions, film nods, comic book references, and psychological irony. The CD was critically acclaimed. \"Hits Magazine\" called \"Hello\" an \"over-the-top PoMo masterpiece.\" In an interview on Spotify's Landmark series discussing the making of Alanis Morissette's Jagged Little Pill, Glen Ballard quoted \"Hello was probably the biggest influence I had at that time, honestly, because it was a brilliant record that had jazz influence, hip hop, electronic, rock. It was a hybrid of the first degree.\"\nNot long after the album's release, Poe's single, \"Trigger Happy Jack (Drive By a Go-Go)\" broke into the top 20 of the \"Billboard\" Alternative and Modern Rock chart. \"Trigger Happy Jack\" was produced by Dave Jerden (Jane's Addiction, Alice in Chains) and Jeffrey Connor and featured Matt Sorum (of Guns N' Roses) on drums and Dean Pleasants (of Suicidal Tendencies) on guitar.\nPoe met Jeffrey Connor towards the completion of the record as a session bassist she hired for additional overdubs on \"Hello\". Connor had given Poe a track he started writing after working with her. Poe heard the demo and passed it to Jerden who immediately gave the track the green light and had Connor come in to produce. Connor brought in Sorum and Pleasants for what was to become \"Trigger Happy Jack\". It featured the lyric \"You can't talk to a psycho like a normal human being\". The song's video went into high rotation on MTV and introduced Poe to the mainstream. Also in 1997, Atlantic released a maxi CD and 12-inch vinyl single of \"Trigger Happy Jack\" which included \"The Drive By Remix\" and \"The Psycho Demolition Mix\" by Steve Lyon, an instrumental version of the song, and a \"Poe Only\" Mix. Another single, \"Angry Johnny\", broke into the top 10 of \"Billboard\"'s Modern Rock chart, and also enjoyed heavy rotation on radio. The song's video received high rotation on MTV. The song featured the line,\" \"I wanna blow you...(pause) away.\"\" A promotional maxi-single of the song was released to radio but was never available commercially. This single included a \"Band Mix\" produced by Poe and Matt Sorum that received heavy rotation on radio. There was another great remix done by the notorious spanish producer Jesus N. Gomez.\nIn August 1997, Atlantic released a maxi-single of the song \"Hello\" that included six remixes of the song (\"Hello: E-Smoove Funk Mix\" by E-Smoove/ \"Hello: Modern Mix\" by Edge Factor/ \"Hello: Nevins Electronica Mix\" by Jason Nevins/ \"Hello: The Generator Mix by E-Smoove/ \"Hello: The Edge Factor Mix\" by, Edge Factor, and \"Hello: Trial Dub Mix\" by Edge Factor.)\nOn September 13, 1997, \"Hello\" hit number one on the \"Billboard\" Hot Dance chart. The video for this song also enjoyed heavy rotation on MTV.\nOn November 20, 1997, the RIAA awarded \"Hello\" gold certification.\n\"Haunted\".\nPoe's second album, \"Haunted,\" was released in October 2000. The album, produced by Poe and Olle Romo was inspired by Poe's discovery of a box of audio tapes that contained recordings of her late father's voice. Listening to those tapes for the first time proved so difficult for Poe that she was hesitant to use them in her music. She was quoted in the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"I took these tapes home, and I couldn't listen to them. It was too hard, so I kept finding ways to avoid it. They were sitting on my coffee table next to a boombox for quite some time.\" Poe was quoted in the \"New York Daily News\" about when she finally listened to the tapes, \"It was clear how the next few years of my life would be spent.\"\n\"Haunted\" was embraced by the press. The \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that \"The wait for Poe's follow up to her debut album has paid off with rich, sophisticated, songs of depth and emotional intensity.\" They instructed audiences to \"Think of \"Haunted\" as the equivalent of Pink Floyd's \"The Wall\".\" They added that \"Poe's version is more succinct, darker in parts, but just as accessible.\" The \"New York Daily News\" wrote, \"Samples of Poe's late father's voice and heartfelt musings weave in and out of the songs on \"Haunted\", providing a narrative structure inside which Poe attempts to put her father's ghost to rest.\" AllMusic wrote that \"(Poe's) original compositions have the makings for a new music revolution alongside the likes of Radiohead's \"Kid A\"\". \"Elle\" magazine credited Poe with \"...defining the future of pop\". \"Maxim\" magazine called \"Haunted\", \"The best mindf**k you'll get all year.\" The publication \"Indiana Statesman\" described \"Haunted\" as \"one of the most influential and innovative albums of this decade,\" further claiming that \"...this digitally produced album far outshines any studio album produced thus far.\"\nThe first single from \"Haunted\", \"Hey Pretty\", hit the top 20 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart at a time when female musicians and singers in the format rarely got airtime. At the end of 2000, the only two women in the Billboard top 100 year-end Modern Rock Chart were Gwen Stefani and Poe. MTV put the \"Hey Pretty\" video into heavy rotation, and in July 2001, Poe was invited to be the opening act for Depeche Mode's Exciter Tour.\nHaunted was also referred to in the 2002 film \"Panic Room\". In a conversation between Jodie Foster's character, Meg Altman, and the agent selling the home containing the Panic Room, Sarah Altman (Meg's daughter, played by Kristen Stewart) asks \"Ever read any Poe?\", to which the response given is \"No, but I loved her last album!\"\nAlso in 2000, Atlantic released a promotional CD single of the song, \"Haunted\", which included a remix by Grammy-winning producer/musician Chris Vrenna (Nine Inch Nails, Marilyn Manson).\nWith Mark Danielewski.\nPoe's brother, Mark Z. Danielewski, is a best-selling novelist, and as young children Mark and Poe formed a creative relationship wherein Poe would read and edit the pages her brother wrote. In 1997, Poe sent a manuscript of her brother's first novel \"House of Leaves\" to Warren Frazier, who was a college friend of hers and who had become an agent at John Hawkins Literary Agency in New York. Warren agreed to represent Mark and eventually secured a publishing deal for Mark at Pantheon Books. In 2000, Pantheon published \"House of Leaves\", releasing it to coincide with the release of Poe's second album \"Haunted\". Poe invited Mark to do a spoken word passage in her \"Drive By 2001\" remix of the song \"Hey Pretty\" and also invited him to perform this passage in both her video and live show opening for Depeche Mode. Of his sister's support, Mark recounts how he once in a moment of rage tore the handwritten manuscript of a story called \"Redwood\" into tiny pieces and threw it into a dumpster. Poe rescued the pieces from the dumpster and taped the entire manuscript back together. It took her two weeks.\nIn October-November 2000, Poe performed a tour of Borders with her brother. Their set included Mark reading passages from \"House of Leaves\" and Poe singing songs that share themes with the book. \"House of Leaves\" made the New York Times Best Seller list in April 2000.\nEffect of AOL\u2013Time Warner merger.\nWith \"Haunted\" climbing the charts, Atlantic Records announced that it had renewed Poe's contract for three more albums. It renewed its agreement with the boutique label, Modern/FEI Records (Fishkin Entertainment, Inc.) through which Poe was signed to Atlantic. Atlantic also committed to releasing and distributing \"Haunted\" internationally and serviced the album globally. Shortly thereafter, it printed promo copies of \"Wild\", the second single from \"Haunted\", which included a remix by Static Revenger. Copies of that single were never sent to radio.\nA merger of Time Warner, the parent company of Atlantic, and AOL was approved by the FCC in January 2001. AOL Time Warner was under close scrutiny to show positive results almost immediately after the merger. With a softening of the economy after the FCC approval, it began close review of all relationships with third-party production houses, such as Modern Records\nIn November 2001, six weeks after renewing Poe's contract, \"Billboard Magazine\" announced that Atlantic was severing ties with Modern/FEI records.\nThe result was that Poe was dropped from Atlantic's roster of artists. Poe's manager and Modern/FEI label head Paul Fishkin stated that \"Poe was stunned to be let go as Atlantic had just picked up its option on her next three albums and had already printed promo CDs of her next single 'Wild' and sent them to radio.\" Val Azzoli, then President of Atlantic, said to \"Billboard Magazine\" of dropping Poe, \"Poe must be feeling pretty bruised right about now,\" adding that Atlantic had simply made a business decision. The article points out that it was a strange decision in light of the fact that, \"according to SoundScan, \"Haunted\" had sold 250,000 copies and the album's first single, 'Hey Pretty', had only come out two months prior.\" Spinner reflected ten years later on the business decision and its impact stating, \"With a gold record under her belt, a critically-acclaimed second album, a new hit single, strong sales, and an arena tour opening for Depeche Mode, Poe was well-established as an important influence. And then, poof\u2014she disappeared.\"\nHiatus and later career (2001\u2013present).\nIn 2002, a story in the August issue of \"LA Weekly\" shed some light on the action of Atlantic to drop their rapidly rising artist with commitments and creative work underway. Poe had been signed to Atlantic in 1995 through Stevie Nicks' record label Modern Records. Amid the complex merger of Time Warner with AOL in 2000, it came to light that, in spite of the fact that Atlantic was responsible for providing all funding, marketing, publicity, radio promotion, tour support and distribution for the Poe project, Modern/FEI (not Atlantic) in its 1982 distribution deal with Atlantic, was awarded ownership of the masters of all Poe recordings. What this meant for Atlantic was that, by renewing Poe's contract, Atlantic had committed sizable resources to a project in which it would have a financial participation, but not an equity stake in Poe's past, present or future catalogue.\nIn November 2000, Atlantic/AOL Time Warner first chose to drop Modern/FEI, and as a result were contractually obligated to pay Modern/FEI an undisclosed amount of money, and effectively release themselves from any further fiduciary responsibilities to Modern/ FEI and/or Poe. This resulted in a pay-off for Modern/FEI and prematurely ended all printing, distribution, marketing, and promotion of Poe's second album \"Haunted\". In exchange for these monies, Modern/FEI's agreed to give Atlantic a two-year grace period during which Modern/FEI agreed not to do anything commercially with any of Poe's master recordings, enabling Atlantic to sell off their stock of already produced copies of \"Haunted\". As a result, \"Haunted\" received no further promotional support and the album faded from the market place.\nIn 2004, Modern/ FEI sold the Poe Masters for \"Hello\" and \"Haunted\" to Sheridan Square Music who merged in 2005 with V2 Records, which cataloged the Poe masters under a sub-label called IndieBlu. IndieBlu and Sheridan Square Music were acquired by Entertainment One in 2009.\nIn 2001, as \"Haunted\" was climbing the charts, Poe turned to a friend of her fianc\u00e9's father, Robert M. Edsel for legal advice. He advised her to retain the services of his firm's legal counsel, David Helfant on a professional basis. Edsel and Helfant told Poe that she could expect a settlement from FEI or Atlantic within a few months, and advised her to sever her relationship with her management firm and her accounting firm in order to avoid sharing a portion of her settlement. Poe understood that Edsel took over her business management, who over a year lent Poe $200,000 for living costs, professional expenses and repayment of debts, with a signed promissory note which indicated that if there was a default her current and future works would be eligible to be used for repayment. A settlement with Atlantic was never obtained, Poe's new management through Edsel and colleagues did not secure paying work, and the loan was defaulted upon. Consequently, Poe sued on the grounds that she had been represented by an unlicensed agency and therefore the agreement was void. Edsel kept Poe tied up in court, unable to release new music or perform professionally for a few years. What music Poe did release during that time was generally done under the pseudonym \"Jane.\" Ultimately, the case was found in Poe's favour, voiding the contract but obliging her to repay the portion of the loan that was not used to pay for Edsel and colleagues\u2019 services.\nPoe was able to perform for charitable events during this period, and she collaborated on film soundtracks and continued to compose and write. Her previously released songs were also licensed for use in films and commercials.\n\"Alan Wake II\" soundtrack, \"This Road\".\nOn September 12, 2012, Poe posted a one-minute song and video on a new mobile platform called PTCH; however, no announcement was made about an official release date. The video features a split narrative told across different frames on a single screen. The song, which repeats the line \"And some say that it loops forever this road that I lose you on every time\", was titled \"September 30, 1955\". The video later appeared on her YouTube channel.\nPoe returned to the stage in 2014 for five shows at The Sayers Club in Los Angeles, during which she previewed a new song, \"Not Jane\".\nFashion designer Tom Ford showcased his 2015 Autumn/Winter women's wear collection to the beat of Poe's \"Hey Pretty\".\nOn October 1, 2018, Poe posted several cryptic teasers to her Instagram, suggesting new music was in the works. Among these posts was a short video of her gazing to the side and repeating the line \"Once upon a time, there was a little boy who lived in a remote region of the earth, and from the day that he was born, until he turned twelve, he'd only ever heard one story, about a little boy, who lived in a remote region of the earth.\"\nFive years later on October 17, 2023, Poe would post a one-minute long video to her YouTube channel, titled \"This Window\", and also opened her online store, linked from her official website. On October 19, she announced through another video titled \"In the Dark Place\", that she would be releasing a new song with Sam Lake, titled \"This Road (AW)\", on October 27, 2023, for the \"Alan Wake II\" video game. The song appeared on the game's official soundtrack, although separated into four tracks: \"This Mirror is a Trap\", \"The Dark Chamber\", \"Falling Apart\", and \"The Beginning\".\nIn a press release the week after the release of \"Alan Wake II\" and \"This Road\", Sam Lake reflected on the creative journey together with Poe, saying, \"At some points we were so closely in sync that it got a bit scary. She was amazing to work with, a musical genius. A brilliant, brilliant artist. I feel the song perfectly captures all aspects of the world of the Dark Place where Alan Wake is trapped. In the disturbing dream-reality taking the shape of New York City, the song has in part the hazy, smoky, feel of a Film Noir nightclub, the aching longing the novelist Alan Wake feels toward Alice, his wife, as he tries to escape the nightmare and get back to her, the paranoid feel of being lost and having forgotten something vital. It\u2019s all of this and more. It\u2019s beautiful.\"\nOn October 1, 2024, Poe once again posted a cryptic teaser video to her YouTube channel, titled \"I\", in which she appears saying, \"I went missing in 2001. I barely noticed, but you knew. You could feel it. My symptoms were abstract, most notable among them was my ability to utilize the word.\" On October 17, a limited edition 12\" single of \"This Road\" became available for pre-order on Poe's online store. The single includes a new song, \"6 Deep Breaths\" as the B-side.\nCharitable work.\nPoe is a supporter of the David Lynch Foundation, a charity which teaches Transcendental Meditation to children in underprivileged school districts. Poe has played at numerous fundraisers for the foundation, including a show with Donovan at the El Rey Theatre. She performed again for the foundation, along with Ellen DeGeneres and Russell Brand, at their Gala Fundraiser at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art on December 3, 2011.\nTo benefit UNICEF, Poe joined with a group of other notable music artists and celebrities recording their versions of John Lennon's song \"Imagine\" in 2014. This was at the invitation of Yoko Ono who gave permission for the use of Lennon's song for a musical collage, which became the launch of UNICEF's global campaign to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Poe received the title of UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador for her participation. She was joined by 56 performers in the \"Imagine\" video including will.i.am, Katy Perry, Nicole Scherzinger, David Guetta, Hugh Jackman, Yoko Ono, Ang\u00e9lique Kidjo, Craig David, Danny O'Donoghue, Mari Malek, Australian singer Cody Simpson and actors David Arquette, Eric Christian Olsen, Seth Green, Dianna Agron, Courteney Cox and Idris Elba, among others. Each artist's version forms part of a new remix by David Guetta that released on New Year's Eve 2014 with an app to enable individuals to record and add themselves to the video. Poe is at the time mark 2:46 on \"Imagine\" (UNICEF: World Version) published online by Universal Music India. The music video spotlights the 28 million children globally who have been driven from their homes due to conflict. World leaders received a preview of the video in September 2014 at the United Nations Summit on Migrants and Refugees in the UN General Hall. The World Version officially launched by UNICEF on September 23, 2016, with people from more than 140 countries.\nAdditional professional projects.\nVideo games.\nIn October 1998, Poe appeared with actor Bruce Willis in the PlayStation video game \"Apocalypse\". Poe plays Bruce Willis's ex-girlfriend, Mary Magdelene, who had been turned into the evil Plague\u2014one of the Horsemen of Apocalypse. Clips of Poe performing on stage also play on screens in the game's environment. Poe also contributed an early version of the song \"Control\" to the soundtrack of \"Apocalypse\".\nIn May 2010, Poe's song \"Haunted\" appeared in the ending of Episode 2 in the Remedy Entertainment game \"Alan Wake\".\nPoe's newest song in over a decade, \"This Road\", credited to her and Sam Lake, appears in \"Alan Wake 2\".\nConjure One projects.\nIn 2002, Poe co-wrote and performed \"Center of the Sun\" and \"Make a Wish\" for Conjure One's self-titled release on Nettwerk Records. \"Center of the Sun\" was featured in the film \"X-Men 2\". A Special Edition 12-inch vinyl record and a CD single of the song were released in 2003, with remixes by Pete Lorimer \u2013 29 Palms Remix, Junkie XL Remix, and Solarstone's Chilled-Out Remix.\nIn 2005, Poe co-wrote and performed \"Endless Dream\", \"Extraordinary Way\" and \"One Word\" for Conjure One's second album entitled \"Extraordinary Ways\". On the original packaging, Poe was credited with the pseudonym \"Jane\" due to her legal limitations during that period. Also in 2005, a CD single and 12-inch vinyl records were released of \"Extraordinary Way\", which included remixes by Antillas and Low End Specialists.\nSoundtracks and film work.\n1998\n1999\n2000\n2002\n2008\n2009\n2010\n2011\n2014\n2023\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66630", "revid": "31876559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66630", "title": "Impossible trident", "text": "2D drawing of impossible 3D object\nAn impossible trident, also known as an impossible fork, blivet, poiuyt, or devil's tuning fork, is a drawing of an impossible object (undecipherable figure), a kind of an optical illusion. It appears to have three cylindrical prongs at one end which then mysteriously transform into two rectangular prongs at the other end.\nIn 1964, D. H. Schuster reported that he noticed an ambiguous figure of a new kind in the advertising section of an aviation journal. He dubbed it a \"three-stick clevis\". He described the novelty as follows: \"Unlike other ambiguous drawings, an actual shift in visual fixation is involved in its perception and resolution.\"\nThe word \"poiuyt\" appeared on the March 1965 cover of \"Mad\" magazine bearing the four-eyed Alfred E. Neuman balancing the impossible fork on his finger with caption \"Introducing 'The Mad Poiuyt'\" (the last six letters on the top row of QWERTY typewriters, right to left). An anonymously contributed version described as a \"hole location gauge\" was printed in the June 1964 issue of \"Analog Science Fiction and Fact\", with the comment that \"this outrageous piece of draftsmanship evidently escaped from the Finagle &amp; Diddle Engineering Works\". Subsequently, a correspondent revealed that he had encountered the type of figure about twenty years previously, and had used it as a business logo since 1952.\nThe term \"blivet\" for the impossible fork was popularized by \"Worm Runner's Digest\" magazine. In 1967, Harold Baldwin published there an article, \"Building better blivets\", in which he described the rules for the construction of drawings based on the impossible fork.\nIn December 1968, American optical designer and artist Roger Hayward wrote a humorous submission \"Blivets\u2014Research and Development\" for \"The Worm Runner's Digest\" in which he presented various drawings based on the blivet, with a short sequel the following year. The article was reprinted later in an anthology; in an introduction to the article, James V. McConnell \"explained\" the term as follows: \"The blivet was first discovered in 1892 in Pfulingen, Germany, by a cross-eyed dwarf named Erasmus Wolfgang Blivet.\" Hayward also published another sequel,\" Blivets\u2014the Makin's\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66632", "revid": "1808194", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66632", "title": "Moya (Farscape)", "text": ""}
{"id": "66633", "revid": "49555578", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66633", "title": "Moth", "text": "Group of mostly-nocturnal insects in the order Lepidoptera\nMoths are a group of insects that includes all members of the order Lepidoptera that are not butterflies. They were previously classified as suborder Heterocera, but the group is paraphyletic with respect to butterflies (suborder Rhopalocera) and neither subordinate taxon is used in modern classifications. Moths make up the vast majority of the order. There are approximately 160,000 species of moth, many of which have yet to be described. Most species of moth are nocturnal, although there are also crepuscular and diurnal species.\nEtymology.\nThe modern English word \"moth\" comes from Old English (cf. Northumbrian ) from Common Germanic (compare Old Norse , Dutch , and German all meaning 'moth'). Its origins are possibly related to the Old English meaning 'maggot' or from the root of \"midge\" which until the 16th century was used mostly to indicate the larva, usually in reference to devouring clothes.\nDifferences between butterflies and moths.\nWhile the butterflies form a monophyletic group, the moths, comprising the rest of the Lepidoptera, do not. Many attempts have been made to group the superfamilies of the Lepidoptera into natural groups, most of which fail because one of the two groups is not monophyletic: Microlepidoptera and Macrolepidoptera, Heterocera and Rhopalocera, Jugatae and Frenatae, Monotrysia, and Ditrysia.\nAlthough the rules for distinguishing moths from butterflies are not well established, one very good guiding principle is that butterflies have thin antennae and (with the exception of the family Hedylidae) have small balls or clubs at the end of their antennae. Moth antennae are usually feathery with no ball on the end. The divisions are named by this principle: \"club-antennae\" (Rhopalocera) or \"varied-antennae\" (Heterocera). Lepidoptera first evolved during the Carboniferous period, but only evolved their characteristic proboscis alongside the rise of angiosperms in the Cretaceous period.\nCaterpillar.\nMoth larvae, or caterpillars, make cocoons from which they emerge as fully grown moths with wings. Some moth caterpillars dig holes in the ground, where they live until they are ready to turn into adult moths.\nEvolution.\nMoths evolved long before butterflies; moth fossils have been found that may be 190\u00a0million years old. Both types of Lepidoptera are thought to have co-evolved with flowering plants, mainly because most modern species, both as adults and larvae, feed on flowering plants. One of the earliest known species that is thought to be an ancestor of moths is \"Archaeolepis mane\". Its fossil fragments show scaled wings that are similar to caddisflies in their veining.\nEconomics.\nSignificance to humans.\nSome moths, particularly their caterpillars, can be major agricultural pests in many parts of the world. Examples include corn borers and bollworms. The caterpillar of the spongy moth (\"Lymantria dispar\") causes severe damage to forests in the northeastern United States, where it is an invasive species. In temperate climates, the codling moth causes extensive damage, especially to fruit farms. In tropical and subtropical climates, the diamondback moth (\"Plutella xylostella\") is perhaps the most serious pest of brassicaceous crops. Also in sub-Saharan Africa, the African sugarcane borer is a major pest of sugarcane, maize, and sorghum.\nSeveral moths in the family Tineidae are commonly regarded as pests because their larvae eat fabric such as clothes and blankets made from natural proteinaceous fibers such as wool or silk. They are less likely to eat mixed materials containing some artificial fibers. There are some reports that they may be repelled by the scent of wood from juniper and cedar, by lavender, or by other natural oils; however, many consider this unlikely to prevent infestation. Naphthalene (the chemical used in mothballs) is considered more effective, but there are concerns over its effects on human health.\nDespite being commonly thought to be undertaken by all moths, only the larvae of several moth species eat animal fibres, creating holes in articles of clothing, in particular those made of wool. Most species do not eat fabrics, and some moth adults do not even eat at all. Some, like the Luna, Polyphemus, Atlas, Promethea, cecropia, and other large moths do not have mouth parts. This is possible because they live off the food stores from when they were a caterpillar, and only live a short time as an adult (roughly a week for some species). Many species of adult moths do however eat: for instance, many will drink nectar.\nItems of fabric infested by clothes moth larvae may be treated by freezing them for several days at a temperature below .\nSome moths are farmed for their economic value. The most notable of these is the silkworm, the larva of the domesticated moth \"Bombyx mori\". It is farmed for the silk with which it builds its cocoon. As of 2002[ [update]], the silk industry produces more than 130\u00a0million kilograms of raw silk, worth about 250\u00a0million U.S. dollars, each year.\nNot all silk is produced by \"Bombyx mori\". There are several species of Saturniidae that also are farmed for their silk, such as the ailanthus moth (\"Samia cynthia\" group of species), the Chinese oak silkmoth (\"Antheraea pernyi\"), the Assam silkmoth (\"Antheraea assamensis\"), and the Japanese silk moth (\"Antheraea yamamai\").\nThe larvae of many species are used as food, particularly in Africa, where they are an important source of nutrition. The mopane worm, the caterpillar of \"Gonimbrasia belina\", from the family Saturniidae, is a significant food resource in southern Africa. Another saturniid used as food is the cavorting emperor (\"Usta terpsichore\"). In one country alone, Congo, more than 30 species of moth larvae are harvested. Some are sold not only in the local village markets, but are shipped by the ton from one country to another.\nPredators and parasites.\nNocturnal insectivores often feed on moths; these include some bats, some species of owls and other species of birds. Moths also are eaten by some species of lizards, amphibians, cats, dogs, rodents, and some bears. Moth larvae are vulnerable to being parasitized by Ichneumonidae.\nBaculoviruses are parasite double-stranded DNA insect viruses that are used mostly as biological control agents. They are members of the Baculoviridae, a family that is restricted to insects. Most baculovirus isolates have been obtained from insects, in particular from Lepidoptera.\nThere is evidence that ultrasound in the range emitted by bats causes flying moths to make evasive maneuvers. Ultrasonic frequencies trigger a reflex action in the noctuid moth that causes it to drop a few centimeters or inches in its flight to evade attack, and tiger moths can emit clicks to foil bats' echolocation.\nThe fungus \"Ophiocordyceps sinensis\" infects the larvae of many different species of moths.\nEcological importance.\nMoths, like butterflies, bees and other more popularly recognized pollinating insects, serve an essential role as pollinators for many flowering plants, including species that bees do not visit. Nocturnal moths fly from flower to flower to feed on nectar during the night much as their diurnal relatives do during the day. A study conducted in the UK found moths dusted with pollen from 47 different plant species, including seven species largely ignored by bees. Some studies indicate that certain species of moths, such as those belonging to the families Erebidae and Sphingidae, may be the key pollinators for some flowering plants in the Himalayan ecosystem. The roles of moths as pollinators have been studied less frequently than those of diurnal pollinators, but recent studies have established that moths are important, but often overlooked, nocturnal pollinators of a wide range of plants. Some researchers say it is likely that many plants thought to be dependent on bees for pollination also rely on moths, which have historically been less observed because they pollinate mainly at night.\nAttraction to light.\nMoths frequently appear to circle artificial lights. The reason for this behavior (positive phototaxis) is currently unknown.\nOne hypothesis is called celestial or transverse orientation. By maintaining a constant angular relationship to a bright celestial light, such as the moon, they can fly in a straight line. Celestial objects are so far away that, even after travelling great distances, the change in angle between the moth and the light source is negligible; further, the moon will always be in the upper part of the visual field, or on the horizon. When a moth encounters a much closer artificial light and uses it for navigation, the angle changes noticeably after only a short distance, in addition to being often below the horizon. The moth instinctively attempts to correct by turning toward the light, thereby causing airborne moths to come plummeting downward, and resulting in a spiral flight path that gets closer and closer to the light source.\nStudies have found that light pollution caused by increasing use of artificial lights has either led to a severe decline in moth population in some parts of the world or has severely disrupted nocturnal pollination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66637", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66637", "title": "Third Age", "text": ""}
{"id": "66639", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66639", "title": "Plainchant", "text": ""}
{"id": "66640", "revid": "50889647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66640", "title": "Arnold J. Toynbee", "text": "British historian (1889\u20131975)\nArnold Joseph Toynbee (; 14 April 1889 \u2013 22 October 1975) was an English historian, a philosopher of history, an author of numerous books and a research professor of international history at the London School of Economics and King's College London. From 1918 to 1950, Toynbee was considered a leading specialist on international affairs; from 1929 to 1956 he was the Director of Studies at Chatham House, in which position he also produced 34 volumes of the \"Survey of International Affairs,\" a \"bible\" for international specialists in Britain.\nHe is best known for his 12-volume \"A Study of History\" (1934\u20131961). With his prodigious output of papers, articles, speeches and presentations, and numerous books translated into many languages, Toynbee was widely read and discussed in the 1940s and 1950s.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nToynbee was born on 14 April 1889 in London, England, to Harry Valpy Toynbee (1861\u20131941), secretary of the Charity Organization Society, and his wife Sarah Edith Marshall (1859\u20131939). His mother took the equivalent of an undergraduate degree in English history at Cambridge University, when higher education for women was unusual and before women were allowed to graduate from the university, and his sister Jocelyn Toynbee was an archaeologist and art historian. Arnold Toynbee was a grandson of Joseph Toynbee, a nephew of the 19th-century economist Arnold Toynbee (1852\u20131883), and a descendant of prominent British intellectuals for several generations.\nHaving won a scholarship, he was educated at Winchester College, an all-boys independent boarding school in Winchester, Hampshire. From 1907 to 1911, having won a scholarship to Oxford University, he read \"literae humaniores\" (i.e. classics) at Balliol College, Oxford. Early in Toynbee's degree, his father suffered a nervous collapse and was institutionalised, causing financial difficulties for the family. Regardless, Toynbee achieved first class honours in \"mods\" and in \"greats\" and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree. From 1911 to 1912, he toured Italy and Greece to study the classical landscape and remains that \"he had thitherto known only through books\".\nCareer.\nIn 1912, having returned from his travels, Toynbee was elected a fellow of his \"alma mater\" Balliol College, Oxford, and appointed a tutor in ancient history. Unusually for a British classical scholar of that time, his interests crossed Greek and Roman civilisation, and ranged from Bronze Age Greece to the Byzantine Empire. He also combined traditional classical literary scholarship with the emerging discipline of classical archaeology.\nFirst World War.\nAt the start of the First World War, Toynbee was found to be unfit for military service because of a bout of dysentery after his return from Greece. In 1915, he began working for the intelligence department of the British Foreign Office. He worked under Viscount Bryce to investigate the Ottoman atrocities against the Armenians and wrote a number of pro-Allied propaganda leaflets.\nParis Peace Conference.\nHe served as a delegate to the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, where he helped shape the Treaty of S\u00e8vres. He was present at the meeting at the Hotel Majestic when Lionel Curtis proposed the formation of an Institute of International Affairs, resulting in the formation of Chatham House in London and The Council on Foreign Relations in New York.\nHistorian and Director of Studies.\nFollowing the end of the First World War, he returned to the University of London, specialising in the Byzantine Empire and Modern Greek studies and being appointed to the Koraes Professor of Modern Greek and Byzantine History, Language and Literature at King's College London in 1919. He was forced to resign from the chair in 1924, following his reporting on the Turco-Greek War in Asia Minor for the Manchester Guardian. Having witnessed the atrocities of the War in close proximity, he abandoned his Philhellene political stance. However, the Koraes chair was being funded by the Greek government and Toynbee's chair had been inaugurated with Venizelos in attendance. Toynbee's subsequent political resolution concerning the war in Asia Minor led to his dismissal from the position at King's College. (see subsection on Greece below).\nIn 1921 and 1922 he was the \"Manchester Guardian\" correspondent during the Greco-Turkish War, an experience that resulted in the publication of \"The Western Question in Greece and Turkey\". In 1925 he became Research Professor of International History at the London School of Economics. In 1929 he became Director of Studies at the Royal Institute of International Affairs (Chatham House), a post he held until 1956. He was elected a Fellow of the British Academy (FBA) in 1937. He was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1941 and an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1949.\nPersonal life.\nHis first marriage was to Rosalind Murray (1890\u20131967), daughter of Gilbert Murray, in 1913; they had three sons, of whom Philip Toynbee was the second. Their son Lawrence (born 1922) was a painter and married Jean Constance Asquith, granddaughter of Prime Minister H. H. Asquith. Arnold and Rosalind divorced in 1946; Toynbee then married his research assistant, Veronica M. Boulter (1893\u20131980), in the same year. He died on 22 October 1975, age 86.\nViews on the post-World War I peace settlement and geopolitical situation.\nIn his 1915 book \"Nationality &amp; the War\", Toynbee argued that any eventual postwar peace settlement should be guided by the principle of nationality. In Chapter IV of his 1916 book \"The New Europe: Essays in Reconstruction\", Toynbee argued against the competing principle of \"natural borders.\" Toynbee encouraged the use of plebiscites for the allocation of disputed territories, an idea brought to fruition by the postwar use of plebiscites. \nIn his 1915 book \"Nationality &amp; the War\", Toynbee offered various elaborate proposals and predictions for the future of various countries, both European and non-European. For example, he advocated an autonomous Poland in a federal arrangement with Russia, the retention of Austro-Hungarian dominion over Czech and Slovak lands, Austro-Hungarian relinquishment of Galicia, Transylvania, and Bukovina, independence for Bosnia, Croatia, and Slovenia, the division of Bessarabia between Russia and Romania and joint use by those two countries of the port of Odessa, Russian acquisition of Outer Mongolia and the Tarim Basin in central Asia and of Pontus and the Armenian Vilayets in the Ottoman Empire, a strong, independent, central government in Persia. and a Russo-British partitioning of Afghanistan.\nAcademic and cultural influence.\nMichael Lang says that for much of the twentieth century, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Toynbee was perhaps the world's most read, translated, and discussed living scholar. His output was enormous, hundreds of books, pamphlets, and articles. Of these, scores were translated into thirty different languages...the critical reaction to Toynbee constitutes a veritable intellectual history of the midcentury: we find a long list of the period's most important historians, Beard, Braudel, Collingwood, and so on.\n(Oxford University Press 1934)\n(Oxford University Press 1939)\n(Oxford University Press 1954)\n(Oxford University Press 1959)\n(Oxford University Press 1961)\n\"The three sets of lectures published separately in the UK in 1962 appeared in New York in the same year in one volume under the title America and the World Revolution and Other Lectures, Oxford University Press.\"\n(Oxford University Press 1965)\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66643", "revid": "29449026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66643", "title": "Second Age", "text": ""}
{"id": "66645", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66645", "title": "Richard Burton (actor)", "text": ""}
{"id": "66647", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66647", "title": "Amiga games", "text": ""}
{"id": "66648", "revid": "29449026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66648", "title": "First Age", "text": ""}
{"id": "66649", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66649", "title": "Masoretic text", "text": ""}
{"id": "66650", "revid": "141421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66650", "title": "Joule per kilogram-kelvin", "text": ""}
{"id": "66653", "revid": "328895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66653", "title": "St. Juan Diego", "text": ""}
{"id": "66654", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66654", "title": "Populous (video game)", "text": "1989 video game\nPopulous is a video game developed by Bullfrog Productions and published by Electronic Arts for the Amiga in 1989, then quickly followed by versions for the Atari ST and MS-DOS. It is regarded by many as the first god game. With over four million copies sold, \"Populous\" is one of the best-selling PC games of all time.\nThe player assumes the role of a deity, who must lead followers through direction, manipulation, and divine intervention, with the goal of eliminating the followers led by the opposite deity. Played from an isometric perspective, the game consists of more than 500 levels, with each level being a piece of land which contains the player's followers and the enemy's followers. The player is tasked with defeating the enemy followers and increasing their own followers' population using a series of divine powers before moving on to the next level. The game was designed by Peter Molyneux, and Bullfrog developed a gameplay prototype via a board game they invented using Lego.\nThe game received critical acclaim upon release, with critics praising the game's graphics, design, sounds and replay value. It was nominated for multiple year-end accolades, including Game of the Year from several gaming publications. Retrospectively, it has been considered one of the greatest video games of all time. The game was ported to many other computer systems and was later supported with multiple expansion packs. It is the first game in the \"Populous\" series, preceding ' and '.\nPlot.\nIn this game the player adopts the role of a deity and assumes the responsibility of shepherding people by direction, manipulation, and divine intervention. The player has the ability to shape the landscape and grow their civilization \u2013 and their divine power \u2013 with the overall aim of having their followers conquer an enemy force, which is led by an opposing deity.\nGameplay.\nThe main action window in \"Populous\" is viewed from an isometric perspective, and it is set in a \"tabletop\" on which are set the command icons, the world map (depicted as an open book) and a slider bar that measures the level of the player's divine power or \"mana\".\nThe game consists of 500 levels, and each level represents an area of land on which live the player's followers and the enemy followers. In order to progress to the next level the player must increase the number of their followers such that they can wipe out the enemy followers. This is done by using a series of divine powers. There are a number of different landscapes the world (depicted on the page in the book) can be, such as desert, rock and lava, snow and ice, etc. and the type of landscape is not merely aesthetic: it affects the development of the player's and enemy's followers.\nThe most basic power is raising and lowering land. This is primarily done in order to provide flat land for the player's followers to build on (though it is also possible to remove land from around the enemy's followers). As the player's followers build more houses they create more followers, and this increases the player's mana level.\nIncreasing the mana level unlocks additional divine powers that allow the player to interact further with the landscape and the population. The powers include the ability to cause earthquakes and floods, create swamps and volcanoes, and turn ordinary followers into more powerful knights.\nDevelopment.\nPeter Molyneux led development, inspired by Bullfrog's artist Glenn Corpes having drawn isometric blocks after playing David Braben's Virus. The game's budget was \u00a320,000.\nInitially Molyneux developed an isometric landscape, then populated it with little people that he called \"peeps\", but there was no game; all that happened was that the peeps wandered around the landscape until they reached a barrier such as water. He developed the raise/lower terrain gameplay mechanic simply as a way of helping the peeps to move around. Then, as a way of reducing the number of peeps on the screen, he decided that if a peep encountered a piece of blank, flat land, it would build a house, and that a larger area of land would enable a peep to build a larger house. Thus the core mechanics \u2013 god-like intervention and the desire for peeps to expand \u2013 were created.\nThe endgame \u2013 of creating a final battle to force the two sides to enter a final conflict \u2013 developed as a result of the developmental games going on for hours and having no firm end.\nBullfrog attempted to prototype the gameplay via a board game they invented using Lego, and Molyneux admits that whilst it didn't help the developers to balance the game at all, it provided a useful media angle to help publicise the game. One curious incident related in media coverage involved an attempt by Molyneux to investigate the displacement of water when adding blocks to the world model, this being frustrated by Lego not being watertight and thus causing a \"flood\" that \"dissuaded further experimentation\".\nDuring the test phase the testers requested a cheat code to skip to the end of the game, as there was insufficient time to play through all 500 levels, and it was only at this point that Bullfrog realised that they had not included any kind of ending to the game. The team quickly repurposed an interstitial page from between levels and used it as the final screen.\nAfter demoing the game to over a dozen publishers, Bullfrog eventually gained the interest of Electronic Arts, who had a gap in their spring release schedule and was willing to take a chance on the game. Bullfrog accepted their offer, although Molyneux later described the contract as \"pretty atrocious:\" 10% royalties on units sold, rising to 12% after one million units sold, with only a small up-front payment.\nPeter Molyneux presented a post-mortem of the game's development and work in progress on a related personal project at Game Developers Conference in 2011.\nAfter the 1990 Amiga release, the game was released to Sega Genesis in 1990-1991.\nExpansion packs.\nBullfrog produced Populous World Editor, which gave users the ability to modify the appearance of characters, cities, and terrain. An expansion pack called Populous: The Promised Lands added five new types of landscape (the geometric Silly Land, Wild West, Lego style Block Land, Revolution Fran\u00e7aise, and computer themed Bit Plains). In addition, another expansion disk called Populous: The Final Frontier added a single new landscape-type and was released as a cover disk for \"The One\".\nReception.\n\"Populous\" was released in 1989 to almost universal critical acclaim. The game received a 5 out of 5 stars in 1989 in \"Dragon\" #150 by Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser in \"The Role of Computers\" column. Biff Kritzen of \"Computer Gaming World\" gave the game a positive review, noting, \"as heavy-handed as the premise sounds, it really is a rather light-hearted game.\" The simple design and layout were praised, as were the game's colourful graphics. In a 1993 survey of pre 20th-century strategy games the magazine gave the game three stars out of five, calling it a \"quasi-arcade game, but with sustained play value\". \"MegaTech\" magazine stated that the game has \"super graphics and 500 levels. \"Populous\" is both highly original and amazingly addictive, with a constant challenge on offer\". They gave the Mega Drive version of \"Populous\" an overall score of 91%.\nIn the September\u2013October 1989 edition of \"Games International\" (Issue #9), John Harrington differed from other reviewers, only giving the game a rating of 2 out of 5, calling it \"repetitive\" and saying, \"Although you take on the role of a god, somehow there is a lack of mystique about this game, and despite the cute graphics, the colourful worlds and the commendably elegant icon-driven game system, this game left me with a less than 'god like' feeling.\"\n\"Computer and Video Games\" reviewed the Amiga version, giving it an overall score of 96%. Japanese gaming magazine \"Famitsu\" gave the Super NES version 31 out of 40. \"Raze\" gave the Mega Drive version of \"Populous\" an overall score of 89%. \"Zero\" gave the Amiga version of \"Populous\" an overall score of 92%. \"Your Amiga\" gave the Amiga version of \"Populous\" an overall score of 93%. \"ST/Amiga Format\" gave the Amiga version of \"Populous\" an overall score of 92%.\nMaxwell Eden reviewed \"Populous World Editor\" for \"Computer Gaming World\", and stated that \"Now all \"Populous\" fans wanting to be apprentice wizards can share in the magic of that gift. \"Populous\" is a great game and \"PWE\" is an ideal enhancement that breathes new life into weary bytes. Absolute power was never as incorruptible, nor this creative.\"\n\"Compute!\" named the game to its list of \"nine great games for 1989\", stating that with \"great graphics, a simple-to-learn interface, and almost unlimited variety, \"Populous\" is a must buy for 1989\". Peter Molyneux estimated that the game accounted for nearly a third of all the revenue of Electronic Arts in that year.\nOrson Scott Card in \"Compute!\" criticized the game's user interface, but praised the graphics and the ability to \"create your own worlds ... you control the world of the game, instead of the other way around\". \"STart\" in 1990 gave \"kudos especially to Peter Molyneux, the creative force behind \"Populous\"\". The magazine called the Atari ST version \"a fascinating, fun and challenging game. It's unlike any other computer game I've ever seen, ever. Don't miss it, unless you are a dyed-in-the-wool arcade gamer who has no time for strategy\". \"Entertainment Weekly\" picked the game as the No. 16 greatest game available in 1991, saying: \"Talk about big-time role-playing. Most video games posit you as a mere sword-wielding, perilously mortal human; in \"Populous\" you're a deity. Slow-paced, intricate, and difficult to learn: You literally have to create entire worlds while all the time battling those pesky forces of evil.\"\nThe game was released in the same month that \"The Satanic Verses\" controversy gained publicity in the United States following the publication of \"The Satanic Verses\" in the United States. Shortly after release, Bullfrog was contacted by the \"Daily Mail\" and was warned that the \"good vs evil\" nature of the game could lead to them receiving similar fatw\u0101, although this did not materialize.\nBy October 1997, global sales of \"Populous\" had surpassed 3 million units, a commercial performance that \"PC Gamer US\" described as \"an enormous hit\". By 2001, \"Populous\" had sold four million copies, making it one of the best-selling PC games of all time.\nAwards.\nIn 1990 \"Computer Gaming World\" named \"Populous\" as Strategy Game of the Year. In 1996, the magazine named it the 30th best game ever, with the editors calling it \"the father of real-time strategy games\". In 1991 it won the Origins Award for \"Best Military or Strategy Computer Game of 1990\", the \"1990 Computer Game of the Year\" in issue 25 of American video game magazine \"Video Games &amp; Computer Entertainment\", and was voted the sixth best game of all time in \"Amiga Power\". In 1992 \"Mega\" placed the game at No. 25 in their Top Mega Drive Games of All Time. In 1994, \"PC Gamer US\" named \"Populous\" as the third best computer game ever. The editors hailed it as \"unbelievably addictive fun, and one of the most appealing and playable strategy games of all time.\"\nIn 1999, \"Next Generation\" listed \"Populous\" as number 44 on their \"Top 50 Games of All Time\", commenting that, \"A perfect blend of realtime strategy, resource management, and more than a little humor, it remains unsurpassed in the genre it created.\" In 2018, Complex placed the game 98th on their \"The Best Super Nintendo Games of All Time\". IGN ranked Populous 70th on its \"Top 100 SNES Games of All Time.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 1990 Bullfrog used the \"Populous\" engine to develop \"Powermonger\", a strategic combat-oriented game with similar mechanics to \"Populous\", but with a 3-dimensional graphical interface. In 1991 they developed and released a true sequel, ', and in 1998 a further direct sequel, '.\n\"Populous\" was also released on the Super NES, developed by Infinity Co., Ltd and published by Imagineer as one of the original titles for the console in Japan, and features the addition of a race based on the Three Little Pigs.\n\"Populous DS\", a new version of the game (published by Xseed Games in North America and Rising Star Games in Europe), was developed by Genki for the Nintendo DS and released 11 November 2008. The game allows the user to shape the in-game landscape using the DS's stylus. It also features a multiplayer mode allowing four players to play over a wireless connection.\n\"Populous\" has been re-released through GOG.com and on Origin through the Humble Origin Bundle sale. It runs under DOSBox.\nThe browser-based game \"Reprisal\" was created in 2012 by Electrolyte and Last17 as a homage to \"Populous\".\n\"Godus\" (formerly \"Project GODUS\") was revealed as a URL on the face of \"Curiosity \u2013 What's Inside the Cube?\", and \"is aimed to reimagine\" \"Populous\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66655", "revid": "50683917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66655", "title": "Richard Francis Burton", "text": "British explorer, army officer, writer and scholar (1821\u20131890)\nSir Richard Francis Burton, KCMG, FRGS, (19 March 1821 \u2013 20 October 1890) was a British explorer, army officer, writer and scholar. He was famed for his travels and explorations in Asia, Africa and South America, as well as his extensive knowledge of languages and cultures, speaking up to 29 different languages.\nBorn in Torquay, Devon, Burton joined the Bombay Army as an officer in 1842, beginning an eighteen-year military career which included a brief stint in the Crimean War. He was subsequently engaged by the Royal Geographical Society (RGS) to explore the East African coast, where Burton along with John Hanning Speke led an expedition to discover the source of the Nile and became the first European known to have seen Lake Tanganyika. He later served as the British consul in Fernando P\u00f3, Santos, Damascus and Trieste. Burton was also a Fellow of the RGS and was awarded a knighthood in 1886.\nHis best-known achievements include undertaking the Hajj to Mecca in disguise, translating \"One Thousand and One Nights\" and \"The Perfumed Garden\", and publishing the \"Kama Sutra\" in English. Although he abandoned his university studies, Burton became a prolific and erudite author and wrote numerous books and academic articles on subjects such as human behaviour, travel, falconry, fencing, sexual practices and ethnography.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nRichard Burton was born in Torquay, Devon, on 19 March 1821; in his autobiography, he incorrectly claimed to have been born in the family home of Barham House in Elstree, Hertfordshire. Burton was baptised on 2 September 1821 at Elstree Church in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire. His father, Lieutenant-Colonel Joseph Netterville Burton, was an Anglo-Irish officer in the British Army's 36th (Herefordshire) Regiment of Foot. Joseph, through his mother's family, the Campbells of Tuam, was a first cousin of Henry Pearce Driscoll and Eliza Graves. Burton's mother, Martha Baker, was the daughter and co-heiress of Richard Baker, a wealthy Hertfordshire squire after whom Burton was named. He had two siblings, Maria Katherine Elizabeth Burton (who married Lieutenant-General Sir Henry William Stisted) and Edward Joseph Netterville Burton.\nIn his early life, Burton grew up between Elstree, England, the home of Richard's esteemed and wealthy namesake, Richard Baker, and, initially, Tours, France, the latter after their father sought a better climate for his asthma. The transition to Tours appears to have been before the death of Baker, on 16 September 1824. Burton was looked after while very young, in both England and France, by the family's \"Hertfordshire nurse, Mrs. Ling, a good, but obstinately English soul\"; his formal, early education began at a school in Tours, taught by \"a lame Irishman named Clough\", which was followed, when \"for the children\u2019s sake\" the family moved to a house in the Rue De L\u2019Archeveche, \"the best street\" in Tours, after which \"[t]he little Burtons... attended the academy of a Mr. John Gilchrist, who grounded them in Latin and Greek\".\nThe Colonel, earlier preoccupied with (but also sustaining injury by) boar hunting, eventually began a pursuit of the study of chemistry, including experimental, that would persist for some time, while, during forays \"into society\", becoming known for his ability to \"inexpressibly shoc[k]... sensitive company\" in his directness of speech (e.g., publicly referring to \u201can adulteress\u201d in that way), a characteristic that Thomas Wright, in his \"Life\", suggests the son learnt from the father. The Burton family returned to England in 1829, and Richard and his brother Edward were sent to a preparatory school at Richmond Green run by a Reverend Charles Delafosse, a school that Wright describes in his \"Life\" as having \"fees [that] were high\", and the school as being \"badly conducted\" with the boys being \"both ill-taught and ill-fed\".\nBy the time measles broke out in the school, the Colonel had \"tired of Richmond\", and after arranging tutors for the children\u2014a Rev. H. R. Du Pre for the boys, and a \"peony-faced lady named Miss Ruxton\" for Maria\u2014the family moved to Blois, France (Du Pre continuing tenaciously, but Ruxton returning home, having \"g[iven] up in despair\"). The time in Blois would amount to a year, after which, via Marseille, France and \"Leghorn\" (Livorno, Italy), on the coast of Tuscany,), the family settled in Pisa, allowing the boys to become \"proficient in Italian and drawing\", and to begin the violin (against which Richard would rebel, and in which Edward would excel). By July 1832, they were in Siena and Perugia, then Florence, Rome and Naples, then Sorrento and Capri (with Rev. Du Pre yet in tow, and the Colonel still devoted to pursuits related to \"[o]xygen, abandoning... mass\u201d to become a gas). At this juncture, the boys are described as having become \"generally ungovernable\", with escapades that included \"a visit to a house of poor reputation\" and thwarted whipping by father and tutor.\nColonel Burton quit England again for France in 1836, for Pau in the south, and soon again after, for Italy, first Pisa, then Lucca, where the sons divided time \"ruffl[ing] it with a number of dissolute medical students\" learning \"several quite original wickednesses\", and time spent under the influence of their parents, in \"more wholesome society\", in the latter case with introductions to the painter Louis Desanges, to \"Helen Croly, daughter of... [George Croly, author of] \"Salathiel\"\", and to Virginia Gabriel, later a composer, and daughter of an English Major-general.\nAs well, during his youth, he allegedly had a sexual relationship with a Roma girl and learned the rudiments of the Romani language. The peregrinations of Burton's youth may have encouraged him to regard himself as an outsider for much of his life. In The Kas\u00eedah of H\u00e2j\u00ee Abd\u00fb El-Yezd\u00ee (1880) he wrote, \"Do what thy manhood bids thee do, from none but self expect applause. He noblest lives and noblest dies who makes and keeps his self-made laws.\"\nThroughout the foregoing period, Burton had ample opportunity to learn languages, modern and ancient, for which he had demonstrated aptitude; prior to departing for university, he had become acquainted with written ancient Greek and Latin, and had become fluent in French, Italian, and modern Greek, quickly learning these as well as Neapolitan and several dialects. According to biographer Ed Rice, during Burton's days at university, he wouldsti[r] the bile of the dons by speaking real\u2014that is, Roman\u2014Latin instead of the artificial type peculiar to England, and [by speaking] Greek Romaically, with the accent of Athens, as he had learned it from a Greek merchant at Marseille, as well as [knowing] the classical forms. Such a linguistic feat was a tribute to Burton's remarkable ear and memory, for he was only a teenager when... in Italy and southern France.\"\nIn October 1840, he matriculated at Trinity College, Oxford. Before getting a room at the college, Burton was coached by William Alexander Greenhill and by a \"Dr. Ogle\"; he lived for a short time in the house of Greenhill, a doctor at the Radcliffe Infirmary. Wright, in his \"Life\", notes that Burton \"spent his first months, not in studying, but in rowing, [and] fencing\"\u2014in the latter case, in the \"fencing saloons\" of an Italian and a Scotsman, with mastery of foil and broad-sword\u2014to which he added falconry. As well, he had engaged in \"shooting the college rooks, and breaking the rules generally\", and, despite his expressed respect, in pranks \"at the expense of [a] Dr. Jenkins\".\nFor all the experiences and education Burton brought with him to Oxford, he described his reception there as being unpleasant, and disparaged its educational offerings, stating that the \"college teaching for which one was obliged to pay... was of the most worthless description\", with \"[t]wo hours a day... regularly wasted\", noting that \"those who read for honours... choose and pay a private coach\". On a personal level, he describes having \"grown a splendid moustache... the envy of all the boys abroad\", that, despite his mentors Greenhill and Ogle advising removal, was only shaved after being given formal college orders; he describes havingalready formed strong ideas upon the Shaven Age of England, when her history, with some brilliant exceptions, such as Marlborough, Wellington and Nelson, was at its meanest. On being laughed at by a fellow undergraduate, he responded by challenging him to a duel. While there, he sat under the Christian teaching of John Henry Newman, \"[t]he only preacher Burton would listen to\"; Greenhill, Burton's mentor, was Newman's churchwarden.\nStill, Burton \"longed to excel as a linguist, and particularly in Oriental languages\", and sought to learn Arabic, approaching the Regius Professor\u2014whose retort was that professors did not teach individuals\u2014and then going it alone, with \"a little assistance from the Spanish scholar Don Pascual de Gayangos\". In April 1842, Burton attended a steeplechase event at the Oxford races, an act forbidden \"at the last moment\" by the college; the culprits being brought before the same on the morning following the event, \"the dons having lectured Burton, he began lecturing them\"\u2014in particular, observing that \"young men ought not to be treated like children\". As such, while all other offenders were \"rusticated\" (temporarily expelled), Burton was instead permanently expelled from Oxford.\nBombay Army career.\nIn his own words, \"fit for nothing but to be shot at for six pence a day\", Burton was commissioned into the Bombay Army at the behest of his former classmates in college who were already serving as officers there. He had hoped to fight in the First Anglo-Afghan War, but the conflict was over by the time Burton arrived in India. He was posted to the 18th Regiment of Native Infantry, which was stationed in Gujarat and under the command of General Charles James Napier. He earned the nickname \"Ruffian Dick\", for his \"demonic ferocity as a fighter and because he had fought in single combat more enemies than perhaps any other man of his time\".\nWhile in India, he became a proficient speaker of Persian and Arabic, as well as Hindustani, Gujarati, Punjabi, Sindhi, Saraiki, and Marathi, having passed six formal language examinations, and being in the process of studying for two more. (And while in the Bombay Army, he kept a large menagerie of tame monkeys in the hopes of learning their language, and has been quoted as stating he had accumulated sixty \"words\" of their speech.)\nBurton also had a documented interest and actively participated in the cultures and religions of India. This was one of the many peculiar habits that set him apart from other British officers in India. According to a Burton autobiographical work, his studies of Hindu culture had progressed to such an extent that \"my Hindu teacher officially allowed me to wear the \"janeo\"\".\nBurton's religious experiences were varied, including attending Catholic services, becoming a Naga Brahmin, converting to Sikhism and Islam, and undergoing the \"chilla\" retreat for Qadiriyya Sufism. Regarding Burton's Muslim beliefs, Rice stated that \"he was circumcised, and made a Muslim, and lived like a Muslim and prayed and practiced like one.\" Furthermore, Burton, \"was entitled to call himself a \"h\u0101fiz\", one who can recite the Qur'\u0101n from memory.\"\nExploring the African Great Lakes.\nBurton and Speke.\nA prolonged public quarrel followed, damaging the reputations of both Burton and Speke. Some biographers have suggested that friends of Speke (particularly Laurence Oliphant) had initially stirred up trouble between the two. Burton's sympathizers contend that Speke resented Burton's leadership role. Tim Jeal, who has accessed Speke's personal papers, suggests that it was more likely the other way around, Burton being jealous and resentful of Speke's determination and success. \"As the years went by, [Burton] would neglect no opportunity to deride and undermine Speke's geographical theories and achievements\".\nSpeke had earlier proven his mettle by trekking through the mountains of Tibet, but Burton regarded him as inferior as he did not speak any Arabic or African languages. Despite his fascination with non-European cultures, some have portrayed Burton as an unabashed imperialist convinced of the historical and intellectual superiority of the white race, citing his involvement in the Anthropological Society of London, an organisation which supported scientific racism. Speke appears to have been kinder and less intrusive to the Africans they encountered and reportedly fell in love with an African woman on a later expedition.\nThe two men travelled home separately. Speke returned to London first and presented a lecture at the Royal Geographical Society, claiming Lake Victoria as the source of the Nile. According to Burton, Speke broke an agreement they had made to give their first public speech together. Apart from Burton's word, there is no proof that such an agreement existed, and most modern researchers doubt that it did. Tim Jeal, evaluating the written evidence, says the odds are \"heavily against Speke having made a pledge to his former leader\". Speke undertook a second expedition, along with Captain James Grant and Sidi Mubarak Bombay, to prove that Lake Victoria was the true source of the Nile. Speke, in light of the issues he was having with Burton, had Grant sign a statement saying, among other things, \"I renounce all my rights to publishing\u00a0... my own account [of the expedition] until approved of by Captain Speke or [the Royal Geographical Society]\".\nOn 16 September 1864, Burton and Speke were scheduled to debate the source of the Nile at a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. On the day before the debate, Burton and Speke sat near each other in the lecture hall. According to Burton's wife, Speke stood up, said \"I can't stand this any longer,\" and abruptly left the hall. That afternoon Speke went hunting on the nearby estate of a relative. He was discovered lying near a stone wall, felled by a fatal gunshot wound from his hunting shotgun. Burton learned of Speke's death the following day while waiting for their debate to begin. A jury ruled Speke's death an accident. An obituary surmised that Speke, while climbing over the wall, had carelessly pulled the gun after himself with the muzzle pointing at his chest and shot himself. Alexander Maitland, Speke's only biographer, concurs.\nDiplomatic service and scholarship (1861\u20131890).\nBurton was reassigned in 1872 to the port city of Trieste in Austria-Hungary. A \"broken man\", Burton was never particularly content with this post, but it required little work, was far less dangerous than Damascus (as well as less exciting), and allowed him the freedom to write and travel. In 1863, Burton co-founded the Anthropological Society of London with Dr. James Hunt. In Burton's own words, the main aim of the society (through the publication of the periodical \"Anthropologia\") was \"to supply travellers with an organ that would rescue their observations from the outer darkness of manuscript and print their curious information on social and sexual matters\". On 13 February 1886, Burton was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG) by Queen Victoria.\nHe wrote a number of travel books in this period that were not particularly well received. His best-known contributions to literature were those considered risqu\u00e9 or even pornographic at the time, which were published under the auspices of the Kama Shastra society. These books include \"The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana\" (1883) (popularly known as the Kama Sutra), \"The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night\" (1885) (popularly known as The Arabian Nights), \"The Perfumed Garden of the Shaykh Nefzawi\" (1886) and \"The Supplemental Nights to the Thousand Nights and a Night\" (seventeen volumes 1886\u201398). Published in this period but composed on his return journey from Mecca, \"The Kasidah\" has been cited as evidence of Burton's status as a Bektashi Sufi. Deliberately presented by Burton as a translation, the poem and his notes and commentary on it contain layers of Sufic meaning that seem to have been designed to project Sufi teaching in the West. \"Do what thy manhood bids thee do/ from none but self expect applause;/ He noblest lives and noblest dies/ who makes and keeps his self-made laws\" is \"The Kasidah\"'s most-quoted passage. As well as references to many themes from Classical Western myths, the poem contains many laments that are accented with fleeting imagery such as repeated comparisons to \"the tinkling of the Camel bell\" that becomes inaudible as the animal vanishes in the darkness of the desert.\nOther works of note include a collection of Hindu tales, \"Vikram and the Vampire\" (1870); and his uncompleted history of swordsmanship, \"The Book of the Sword\" (1884). He also translated \"The Lusiads\", the Portuguese national epic by Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es, in 1880 and, the next year, wrote a sympathetic biography of the poet and adventurer. The book \"The Jew, the Gipsy and el Islam\" was published posthumously in 1898 and was controversial for its criticism of Jews and for its assertion of the existence of Jewish human sacrifices. Burton's investigations into this had provoked hostility from the Jews of Damascus. The manuscript of the book included an appendix discussing the topic in more detail, but by the decision of his widow, it was not included in the book when published.\nDeath.\nBurton died in Trieste early on the morning of 20 October 1890 of a heart attack. His wife Isabel persuaded a priest to perform the last rites, although Burton was not a Catholic, and this action later caused a rift between Isabel and some of Burton's friends. It has been suggested that the death occurred very late on 19{{Nbsp}}October and that Burton was already dead by the time the last rites were administered. Regarding his religious views, Burton called himself an atheist, stating he was raised in the Church of England, which he said was \"officially [his] church\".\nIsabel never recovered from the loss. After his death, she burned many of her husband's papers, including journals and a planned new translation of \"The Perfumed Garden\" to be called \"The Scented Garden\", for which she had been offered six thousand guineas and which she regarded as his \"magnum opus\". She believed she was acting to protect her husband's reputation, and that she had been instructed to burn the manuscript of \"The Scented Garden\" by his spirit, but her actions were controversial. However, a substantial quantity of his written materials have survived, and are held by the Huntington Library in San Marino, California, including 21 boxes of his manuscripts, 24 boxes of correspondence, and other material.\nIsabel wrote a biography in praise of her husband.\nThe couple are buried in a tomb in the shape of a Bedouin tent, designed by Isabel, in the cemetery of St Mary Magdalen Roman Catholic Church Mortlake in southwest London. The coffins of Sir Richard and Lady Burton can be seen through a window at the rear of the tent, which can be accessed via a short fixed ladder. Next to the lady chapel in the church, there is a memorial stained-glass window to Burton, also erected by Isabel; it depicts Burton as a medieval knight. Burton's personal effects and a collection of paintings, photographs and objects relating to him are in the Burton Collection at Orleans House Gallery, Twickenham. Among these is a small quartz stone from Mesopotamia, inscribed in supposed Kufic script, which has thus far resisted decipherment by experts.\nKama Shastra Society.\nBurton had long had an interest in sexuality and some erotic literature. However, the Obscene Publications Act 1857 had resulted in many jail sentences for publishers, with prosecutions being brought by the Society for the Suppression of Vice. Burton referred to the society and those who shared its views as \"Mrs Grundy\". A way around this was the private circulation of books among the members of a society. For this reason Burton, together with Forster Fitzgerald Arbuthnot, created the Kama Shastra Society to print and circulate books that would be illegal to publish in public.\nOne of the most celebrated of all his books is his translation of \"The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night\" (commonly called \"The Arabian Nights\" in English after early translations of Antoine Galland's French version) in ten volumes (1885), with seven further volumes being added later. The volumes were printed by the Kama Shastra Society in a subscribers-only edition of one thousand with a guarantee that there would never be a larger printing of the books in this form. The stories collected were often sexual in content and were considered pornography at the time of publication. In particular, the \"Terminal Essay\" in volume 10 of the \"Nights\" contained a 14,000-word essay entitled \"Pederasty\" (Volume 10, section IV, D), at the time a synonym for homosexuality (as it still is, in modern French). This was and remained for many years the longest and most explicit discussion of homosexuality in any language. Burton speculated that male homosexuality was prevalent in an area of the southern latitudes named by him the \"Sotadic zone\".\nPerhaps Burton's best-known book is his translation of \"The Kama Sutra\". It is untrue that he was the translator since the original manuscript was in ancient Sanskrit, which he could not read. However, he collaborated with Forster Fitzgerald Arbuthnot on the work and provided translations from other manuscripts of later translations. The Kama Shastra Society first printed the book in 1883 and numerous editions of the Burton translation are in print to this day.\nHis English translation from a French edition of the Arabic erotic guide \"The Perfumed Garden\" was printed as \"The Perfumed Garden of the Cheikh Nefzaoui: A Manual of Arabian Erotology\" (1886). After Burton's death, Isabel burnt many of his papers, including a manuscript of a subsequent translation, \"The Scented Garden\", containing the final chapter of the work, on pederasty. Burton all along intended for this translation to be published after his death, to provide an income for his widow.\n1. English&lt;br&gt;\n2. French&lt;br&gt;\n3. Occitan&lt;br&gt;\na. Gascon/B\u00e9arnese dialect\n4. Italian\na. Neapolitan Italian\n5. Romani&lt;br&gt;\n6. Latin&lt;br&gt;\n7. Classical Greek&lt;br&gt;\n8. Saraiki&lt;br&gt;\n9. Hindustani&lt;br&gt;\na. Urdu\n10. Sindhi&lt;br&gt;\n11. Marathi&lt;br&gt;\n12. Arabic&lt;br&gt;\n13. Persian (Farsi)&lt;br&gt;\n14. Pushtu&lt;br&gt;\n15. Sanskrit&lt;br&gt;\n16. Portuguese&lt;br&gt;\n17. Spanish&lt;br&gt;\n18. German&lt;br&gt;\n19. Icelandic&lt;br&gt;\n20. Swahili&lt;br&gt;\n21. Amharic&lt;br&gt;\n22. Fan&lt;br&gt;\n23. Yoruba&lt;br&gt;\na. Egba\n24. Asante&lt;br&gt;\n25. Hebrew&lt;br&gt;\n26. Aramaic&lt;br&gt;\n27. Many other West African &amp; Indian dialects\nScandals.\nBurton's writings are unusually open and frank about his interest in sex and sexuality. His travel writing is often full of details about the sexual lives of the inhabitants of areas he travelled through. Burton's interest in sexuality led him to make measurements of the lengths of the penises of male inhabitants of various regions, which he includes in his travel books. He also describes sexual techniques common in the regions he visited, often hinting that he had participated, hence breaking both sexual and racial taboos of his day. Many people at the time considered the Kama Shastra Society and the books it published scandalous.\nBiographers disagree on whether or not Burton ever experienced homosexual sex (he never directly acknowledges it in his writing). Rumours began in his army days when Charles James Napier requested that Burton go undercover to investigate a male brothel reputed to be frequented by British soldiers. It has been suggested that Burton's detailed report on the workings of the brothel led some to believe he had been a customer. There is no documentary evidence that such a report was written or submitted, nor that Napier ordered such research by Burton, and it has been argued that this is one of Burton's embellishments.\nA story that haunted Burton up to his death (recounted in some of his obituaries) was that, during his journey to Mecca disguised as a Muslim, he came close to being discovered one night when he lifted his robe to urinate rather than squatting as an Arab would. It was said that he was seen by an Arab and, to avoid exposure, killed him. Burton denied this, pointing out that killing the boy would almost certainly have led to his being discovered as an impostor. Burton became so tired of denying this accusation that he took to baiting his accusers, although he was said to enjoy the notoriety and even once laughingly claimed to have done it. A doctor once asked him: \"How do you feel when you have killed a man?\", Burton retorted: \"Quite jolly. What about you?\". When asked by a priest about the same incident Burton is said to have replied: \"Sir, I'm proud to say I have committed every sin in the Decalogue.\" Stanley Lane-Poole, a Burton detractor, reported that Burton \"confessed rather shamefacedly that he had never killed anybody at any time.\"\nThese allegations coupled with Burton's often irascible nature were said to have harmed his career and may explain why he was not promoted further, either in army life or in the diplomatic service. As an obituary described: \"...he was ill fitted to run in official harness, and he had a Byronic love of shocking people, of telling tales against himself that had no foundation in fact.\" Ouida reported: \"Men at the FO [Foreign Office]\u00a0... used to hint dark horrors about Burton, and certainly justly or unjustly he was disliked, feared and suspected\u00a0... not for what he had done, but for what he was believed capable of doing.\"\nSotadic zone.\nBurton theorized about the existence of a \"Sotadic zone\" in the closing essay of his English translation of \"The Arabian Nights\" (1885\u20131886). He asserted that there exists a geographic-climatic zone in which sodomy and pederasty (sexual intimacy between older men and young pubescent/adolescent boys) are endemic, prevalent, and celebrated among the indigenous inhabitants and within their cultures. The name derives from Sotades, a 3rd-century BC Ancient Greek poet who was the chief representative of a group of Ancient Greek writers of obscene, and sometimes pederastic, satirical poetry; these homoerotic verses are preserved in the \"Greek Anthology\", a collection of poems spanning the Classical and Byzantine periods of Greek literature.\nBurton first advanced his Sotadic zone concept in the \"Terminal Essay\", contained in Volume 10 of his English translation of \"The Arabian Nights\", which he called \"The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night\", published in England in 1886.\nWorks and correspondence.\nBurton published over 40 books and countless articles, monographs and letters. A great number of his journal and magazine pieces have never been catalogued. Over 200 of these have been collected in PDF facsimile format at burtoniana.org.\nBrief selections from a variety of Burton's writings are available in Frank McLynn's \"Of No Country: An Anthology of Richard Burton\" (1990; New York: Charles Scribner's Sons)."}
{"id": "66662", "revid": "4497767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66662", "title": "Battle of Stamford Bridge", "text": "1066 battle between Harald Hardrada and King Harold II\nThe Battle of Stamford Bridge () took place at the village of Stamford Bridge, East Riding of Yorkshire, in England, on 25 September 1066, between an English army under King Harold Godwinson and an invading Norwegian force led by King Harald Hardrada and the English king's brother Tostig Godwinson. After a bloody battle, both Hardrada and Tostig, along with most of the Norwegians, were killed. Although Harold Godwinson repelled the Norwegian invaders, his army was defeated by the Normans at Hastings less than three weeks later.\nThe battle has traditionally been presented as symbolising the end of the Viking Age, although major Scandinavian campaigns in Britain and Ireland occurred in the following decades, such as those of King Sweyn Estrithson of Denmark in 1069\u20131070 and King Magnus Barefoot of Norway in 1098 and 1102\u20131103.\nBackground.\nThe death of the childless King Edward the Confessor of England in January 1066 had triggered a succession struggle in which a variety of contenders from across north-western Europe fought for the English throne. These claimants included the King of Norway, Harald Hardrada. According to the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" Manuscript D (p.\u00a0197), the Norwegians assembled a fleet of 300 ships to invade England. The authors, however, did not seem to differentiate between warships and supply ships. In \"King Harald's Saga\", Snorri Sturluson states, \"it is said that King Harald had over two hundred ships, apart from supply ships and smaller craft\". Combined with reinforcements picked up in Orkney, the Norwegian army most likely numbered between 7,000 and 9,000 men. Arriving off the English coast in September, Hardrada was joined by further forces recruited in Flanders and Scotland by Tostig Godwinson. Tostig was at odds with his elder brother Harold (who had been elected king by the Witenagemot on the death of Edward). Having been ousted from his position as Earl of Northumbria and exiled in 1065, Tostig had mounted a series of abortive attacks on England in the spring of 1066.\nIn the late summer of 1066, the invaders sailed up the Ouse before advancing on York. On 20 September they defeated a northern English army led by Edwin, Earl of Mercia, and his brother Morcar, Earl of Northumbria, at the Battle of Fulford, outside York. Following this victory they received the surrender of York. Having briefly occupied the city and taken hostages and supplies from the city they returned towards their ships at Riccall. They offered peace to the Northumbrians in exchange for their support for Hardrada's bid for the throne, and demanded further hostages from the whole of Yorkshire.\nAt this time King Harold was in Southern England, anticipating an invasion from France by William, Duke of Normandy, another contender for the English throne. Learning of the Norwegian invasion he headed north at great speed with his housecarls and as many thegns as he could gather, travelling day and night. He made the journey from London to Yorkshire, a distance of about , in only four days, enabling him to take the Norwegians completely by surprise. Having learned that the Northumbrians had been ordered to send the additional hostages and supplies to the Norwegians at Stamford Bridge, Harold hurried on through York to attack them at this rendezvous on 25 September. Until the English army came into view, the invaders remained unaware of the presence of a hostile army anywhere in the vicinity.\nLocation.\nManuscripts C, D and E of the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" all mention Stamford Bridge by name. Manuscript C contains a passage which states, \"Then Harold, king of the English, came upon them beyond the bridge by surprise; and there they joined battle and were fighting very hard long in the day\". Though often interpreted to mean the main battle took place east of the Derwent River after the English army had crossed the bridge, Charles Plummer explains that the phrase \"beyond the bridge\" must be viewed \"from the point of view of the enemy. To the English coming from York, they [the Norwegians] would be on the hither [near] side of the bridge\". According to Henry of Huntington, after many \"fearful assaults on both sides,\" the English superiority in numbers forced the Norwegians \"to give way but not to flee. Driven back beyond the river, the living crossing over the dead, they resisted stoutheartedly\". Like the \"Chronicle\" account, Henry's description suggests the main battle may have been fought west of the bridge.\nThe exact location of the battle site is not known for certain. Sources indicate that it took place along the Derwent River, where a wooden bridge crossed the water. There are indications of a meadow on the west side of the river and higher ground on the eastern side. The original bridge no longer exists, and no archaeological traces of it remain. The traditional locating of part of the battle at Battle Flats is based on no contemporary references. Statements that in the 18th century skeletons and weapons were found there have not been corroborated by modern finds.\nBattle.\nAccording to Snorri Sturluson's Heimskringla, before the battle a single man rode up alone to Harald Hardrada and Tostig. He gave no name, but spoke to Tostig, offering the return of his earldom if he would turn against Hardrada. Tostig asked what his brother Harold would be willing to give Hardrada for his trouble. The rider replied \"Seven feet of English ground, as he is taller than other men\" (implying that both Hardrada and his army would be killed and buried on English soil). Then he rode back to the Saxon host. Hardrada was impressed by the rider's boldness, and asked Tostig who he was. Tostig replied that the rider was Harold Godwinson himself. According to Henry of Huntingdon, Harold said \"Six feet of ground or as much more as he needs, as he is taller than most men.\"\nThe sudden appearance of the English army caught the Norwegians by surprise. The English advance was then delayed by the need to pass through the choke-point presented by the bridge itself. The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle and the Chronicle of Henry of Huntingdon has it that one of the Norwegians (possibly armed with a Dane Axe) blocked the narrow crossing and single-handedly held up the entire English army. The story is that this Viking alone cut down up to 40 Englishmen and was defeated only when an English soldier floated under the bridge and thrust his spear through the planks in the bridge, mortally wounding the warrior. His name was not preserved in the aftermath of this battle.\nThis delay had allowed the bulk of the Norse army to form a shieldwall to face the English attack. Harold's army poured across the bridge, forming a line just short of the Norse army, locked shields and charged. The battle went far beyond the bridge itself, and although it raged for hours, the Norse army's decision to leave their armour behind left them at a distinct disadvantage. Eventually, the Norse army began to fragment and fracture, allowing the English troops to force their way in and break up the Scandinavians' shield wall. Completely outflanked, and with Hardrada killed with an arrow to his windpipe and Tostig slain, the Norwegian army disintegrated and was virtually annihilated.\nIn the later stages of the battle, the Norwegians were reinforced by troops who had been guarding the ships at Riccall some 25\u00a0km away, led by Eystein Orre, Hardrada's prospective son-in-law. Some of his men were said to have collapsed and died of exhaustion upon reaching the battlefield. The remainder were fully armed for battle. Their counter-attack, described in the Norwegian tradition as \"Orre's Storm\", briefly checked the English advance, but was soon overwhelmed and Orre was slain. The Norwegian army were routed. As given in the Chronicles, pursued by the English army, some of the fleeing Norsemen drowned whilst crossing rivers.\nSo many died in an area so small that the field was said to have been still whitened with bleached bones 50 years after the battle.\nAftermath.\nKing Harold accepted a truce with the surviving Norwegians, including Harald's son Olaf and Paul Thorfinnsson, Earl of Orkney. They were allowed to leave after giving pledges not to attack England again. The losses the Norwegians had suffered were so severe that only 24 ships from the fleet of over 300 were needed to carry the survivors away. They withdrew to Orkney, where they spent the winter, and in the spring Olaf returned to Norway. The kingdom was then divided and shared between him and his brother Magnus, whom Harald had left behind to govern in his absence. The casualties are referred as so high in both sides in many sources, an English-born Norman historian Orderic Vitalis reports half a century later that the battle ground was still \"easily recognizable by the piles of bones that still bear witness to the heavy losses on both sides\".\nHarold's victory was short-lived. Three days after the battle, on 28 September, a Norman invasion army led by William the Conqueror landed in Pevensey, Sussex, on the south coast of England. Harold had to immediately turn his troops around and force-march them southwards to intercept the Norman army. On 14 October, Harold, leading an army of between 5,000 and 13,000 troops, confronted the Norman army at the Battle of Hastings. There, he was decisively defeated and killed in action, allowing for William to march on London and take control over all of England as part of the Norman Conquest.\nMonuments.\nTwo monuments to the battle have been erected in and around the village of Stamford Bridge.\nVillage monument.\nThe first memorial is located in the village on Main Street (A166) to the east of Church Road. The monument's inscription reads (in both English and Norwegian):\n&lt;poem&gt;\nTHE BATTLE OF STAMFORD BRIDGE\nWAS FOUGHT IN THIS NEIGHBOURHOOD\nON SEPTEMBER 25TH, 1066\nSLAGET VED STAMFORD BRU BLE UTKJEMPET I DISSE TRAKTER DEN 25. SEPTEMBER 1066\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe inscription on the accompanying marble tablet reads:\n&lt;poem&gt;\nTHE BATTLE OF STAMFORD BRIDGE\nKING HAROLD OF ENGLAND DEFEATED\nHIS BROTHER TOSTIG AND KING\nHARDRAADA OF NORWAY HERE ON\n25 SEPTEMBER 1066\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nBattlefield monument.\nA second monument is located at the battlefield site, at the end of Whiterose Drive. It has memorial stone and plaque that shows the events and the outcome of the battle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66663", "revid": "1271497441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66663", "title": "Franc Rozman", "text": "Slovenian partisan commander (1912\u20131944)\nFranc Rozman, nom de guerre Stane (Slovene convention: \"Franc Rozman \u2013 Stane\") or Stane Mlinar (27 March 1911 \u2013 7 November 1944), was a Slovene Partisan commander in World War II.\nEarly life.\nFranc Rozman was born in the Carniolan village of Spodnje Pirni\u010de near Ljubljana, part of Austria-Hungary at the time, to a Slovene working-class family. His father Franc Rozman was a railway track-worker, while his mother Marjana (n\u00e9e Stare) was a housewife. He was the third of four children, with two elder sisters, Marjeta and Terezija, and a younger brother, Martin.\nAt the age of three, Rozman's father died on the Eastern Front, where he fought as a soldier in the Austro-Hungarian Army. Rozman had a poor and hard childhood. His sisters Marjeta and Terezija were sent to an orphanage, while Franc and his brother Martin remained in Pirni\u010de. At the age of 15, he worked in a tavern and then trained as an apprentice baker.\nAs a young boy he had great enthusiasm for a military career, but his application to the military school was rejected. In spring 1932, he did his military service in the Royal Yugoslav army.\nMilitary experience prior to World War II.\nIn 1935, after the Italian invasion of Ethiopia, Rozman tried unsuccessfully to join the Ethiopian forces fighting the Italian invaders. Soon after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, he decided to travel to Spain. Rozman was among the first Yugoslav volunteers in Spain, where he, on 1 October 1936 joined the International Brigades. In November 1936 he became a member of the Spanish Communist Party.\nIn Jarama he completed non commissioned officers' school, became a lieutenant and a commander of a company, then captain and commander of a battalion. His comrades in arms remembered him as an energetic and earnest person. After the Spanish Civil War, he was imprisoned in France. He became a member of the Yugoslav Communist Party in 1939. In April 1941 he was imprisoned and sentenced to forced labor in Germany. In July the same year he fled Germany and returned to Yugoslavia.\nWorld War II.\nFor a while, Rozman lived with an activist of the Liberation Front of the Slovenian People. In early December 1941, he visited his younger brother, Martin, after which he joined the Slovene partisan resistance. Soon he became a military instructor with the High Command of the Slovene partisan forces. He was given the task of setting up the Styrian Battalion (\"\u0160tajerski bataljon\"), which would consist of the partisan troops, the Revirje and the Savinja companies (\"Revirske in Savinjske \u010dete\"), which were active in Styria in the autumn of 1941. He participated in the attack on \u0160o\u0161tanj and later in the Battle of \u010creta. The Germans repeatedly tried to liquidate Rozman, setting many ambushes.\nIn the April 1942 Rozman became the commander of a Slovene partisan brigade, established on 5 April 1942 at Kremenik in Lower Carniola, and numbering more than 300 fighters. Measured by composition, organization, training, and fighting power, this was the most powerful Slovene partisan unit at that time. On 13 July 1943, he became a commander of the High Command of the Slovene partisan army with the rank of lieutenant general (\"generallajtnant\"), which he held up to his death.\nRozman died on 7 November 1944, aged 33, in White Carniola as a consequence of a serious wound received while testing newly arrived PIAT weapons sent to the partisans by their British Allies. There were some rumors that he was killed by sabotage by the Chetnik military authorities or at the behest of Partisan commander Arso Jovanovi\u0107, but they have never been proven. He was proclaimed a People's Hero of Yugoslavia four days later, on 11 November 1944.\nLegacy.\n\"Commander Stane\", as he was nicknamed by the partisan fighters, was one of the most prominent figures of the Yugoslav front of the Second World War. His legacy is controversial and questions have been raised about his involvement in wartime liquidations of civilians.\nHis legacy includes the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66664", "revid": "45938645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66664", "title": "Artur Schnabel", "text": "Austrian pianist (1882\u20131951)\nArtur Schnabel (17 April 1882\u00a0\u2013 15 August 1951) was an Austrian-born classical pianist, composer and pedagogue. Schnabel was known for his intellectual seriousness as a musician, avoiding pure technical bravura. Among the 20th century's most respected and important pianists, his playing displayed marked vitality, profundity and spirituality in the Austro-German classics, particularly the works of Beethoven and Schubert.\nMusic critic Harold C. Schonberg described Schnabel as \"the man who invented Beethoven\". Between 1932 and 1935, he made history by producing the first recording of the complete Beethoven piano sonatas. In 2018, the Library of Congress selected this recording to be placed in the National Recording Registry for its historical significance.\nLife and work.\nEarly years.\nBorn Aaron Schnabel in Lipnik (Kunzendorf) near Bielsko-Bia\u0142a, Austro-Hungarian Empire (today a part of Poland), he was the youngest of three children born to Isidor Schnabel, a textile merchant, and his wife, Ernestine Taube (n\u00e9e Labin). He had two sisters, Clara and Frieda. His family was Jewish.\nWhen the boy was two, Schnabel's parents moved the family to Vienna in 1884 for the benefit of young Schnabel whom his mother recalls as showing a natural gift for music. Schnabel began learning the piano at the age of four, when he took a spontaneous interest in his eldest sister Clara's piano lessons. At the age of six, he began piano lessons under Professor Hans Schmitt of the Vienna Conservatorium (today the University of Music and Performing Arts, Vienna). Three years later he began studying under Theodor Leschetizky. The teacher once said to him, \"You will never be a pianist; you are a musician.\" He allowed Schnabel to leave Liszt's \"Hungarian Rhapsodies\" and concentrate instead on Schubert's sonatas, which had been widely neglected up to that point.\nLeschetizky years.\nSchnabel studied under Leschetizky's tutelage for seven years, between 1891 and 1897. Co-students of Leschetizky during that period included Ossip Gabrilowitsch, Mark Hambourg, and Ignaz Friedman.\nInitially, for his first year under Leschetizky, Schnabel was given rigorous preparatory technical tuition from Anna Yesipova (Leschetizky's second wife and a famous pianist in her own right) and also from Malwine Br\u00e9e, who was Leschetizky's assistant. From age ten, he participated in all of Leschetizky's classes.\nFollowing a failed initial approach to Anton Bruckner, Schnabel studied music theory and composition under Eusebius Mandyczewski. Mandyczewski was an assistant to Johannes Brahms, and through him Schnabel was introduced to Brahms' circle. He often was in the great composer's presence. The young Schnabel once heard Brahms play in a performance of his first piano quartet; for all the missed notes, said Schnabel, it \"was in the true grand manner.\"\nSchnabel made his official concert debut in 1897, at the B\u00f6sendorfer-Saal in Vienna. Later that same year, he gave a series of concerts in Budapest, Prague and Brno.\nBerlin years.\nSchnabel moved to Berlin in 1898, making his debut there with a concert at the Bechstein-Saal. Following World War I, Schnabel also toured widely, visiting the United States, Russia and England.\nHe gained initial fame thanks to orchestral concerts he gave under the conductor Arthur Nikisch as well as playing in chamber music and accompanying his future wife, the contralto Therese Behr, in Lieder.\nIn chamber music, he founded the Schnabel Trio with the violinist Alfred Wittenberg and the cellist Anton Hekking; they played together between 1902 and 1904. In 1905, he formed a second Schnabel Trio with Carl Flesch (with whom he also played violin sonatas) and the cellist Jean G\u00e9rardy. In 1914, with the outbreak of the First World War, G\u00e9rardy (a Belgian) left the trio as he could no longer remain in Germany. He was replaced by Hugo Becker and this became the third Schnabel Trio.\nLater, Schnabel also played in a quartet with violinist Bronis\u0142aw Huberman, composer/violist Paul Hindemith and the cellist Gregor Piatigorsky (with whom he also played and recorded cello sonatas). Schnabel also played with a number of other famous musicians including the violinist Joseph Szigeti and the cellists Pablo Casals and Pierre Fournier.\nHe was friends of, and played with, the most distinguished conductors of the day, including Wilhelm Furtw\u00e4ngler, Bruno Walter, Otto Klemperer, George Szell, Willem Mengelberg, and Adrian Boult.\nFrom 1925 Schnabel taught at the Berlin State Academy, where his masterclasses brought him great renown. For his piano students, See: .\nLater years.\nSchnabel, who was Jewish, left Berlin in 1933 after the Nazi Party took control. He lived in England for a time while giving masterclasses at Tremezzo on Lake Como in Italy, before moving to the United States in 1939. In 1944, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States. There he took a teaching post at the University of Michigan. Among his pupils in Michigan was composer Sam Raphling. At the end of World War II he returned to Europe, settling in Switzerland.\nHis mother Ernestine Taube remained in Vienna after the Anschluss, and at the age of 83, in August 1942, was deported to Theresienstadt concentration camp, where she died two months later. Artur Schnabel never returned to Germany or Austria after the war. He continued to give concerts on both sides of the Atlantic until the end of his life, as well as composing and continuing to make records, although he was never very fond of the whole studio process. He died of uremia in Axenstein, Switzerland, after developing an ailment of the heart, and was buried in Schwyz, Switzerland. Schnabel was awarded the Order of Prince Danilo I.\nFamily.\nIn 1899, when Schnabel was 17, his daughter Elizabeth Rostra was born in the Czech city of Brno. The offspring from a youthful love affair, Elizabeth became a pianist and piano pedagogue, was married to a psychoanalyst and died in Switzerland in 1995. \nIn 1905, Artur Schnabel married the contralto and Lieder singer Therese Behr (1876\u20131959). They had two sons, Karl Ulrich Schnabel (1909\u20132001) who also became a classical pianist and renowned piano teacher, and Stefan Schnabel (1912\u20131999), who became a well regarded actor. The Schnabel family kept a lifelong, close relationship with Artur Schnabel's daughter from his teenage relationship, Elizabeth Rostra.\nHis wife, son Karl Ulrich and his wife Helen, n\u00e9e Fogel (1911\u20131974), a pianist from the US, and their grandson Claude Alain Mottier (1972\u20132002), who was a pianist as well and died as the innocent victim of a traffic accident, were buried in Artur's grave as well. In 2006, the municipality of the town of Schwyz declared the tomb a monument. This exempts the grave site from the regulations that stipulate the removal of the remains after a certain period.\nRepertoire.\nSchnabel was best known for his devotion to the core German composers, especially the Viennese classics of Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert. He was also renowned for his playing of works by Brahms and Schumann, and he played and recorded works by Bach.\nHowever, his repertoire was wider than that. During his young virtuosic years in Berlin, he played works by other composers including Liszt, Chopin and Weber. On his early American tours, he programmed works such as the Chopin Preludes and Schumann's Fantasie in C. Among other works that he played, as recalled by those such as Claudio Arrau and Vladimir Horowitz, who had heard Schnabel in the 1920s, were Chopin's E minor Piano Concerto and the Piano Sonata No. 2 in B-flat minor, and Weber's \"Konzertst\u00fcck in F minor\", Piano Sonata No. 2, and \"Invitation to the Dance\". Schnabel himself mentioned that he had played the Liszt Sonata in B minor \"very often\", as well as the Liszt E-flat Piano Concerto.\nIt is not clear why Schnabel dropped those from his performing repertoire in the 1930s, after his final departure from Germany. He claimed that it was because he decided that he wanted to play only \"music which is better than it could be performed\". However, it has been suggested by some that \"Schnabel, uprooted from his native heritage, may have been clinging to the great German composers in an attempt to keep his cultural origins alive\".\nSchnabel was known for championing the then-neglected sonatas of Schubert and, even more so, Beethoven, including his more challenging late works. While on a tour of Spain, Schnabel wrote to his wife saying that during a performance of Beethoven's \"Diabelli Variations\" he had begun to feel sorry for the audience. \"I am the only person here who is enjoying this, and I get the money; they pay and have to suffer,\" he wrote. Schnabel did much to popularize Beethoven's piano music, making the first complete recording of the sonatas, completing the set for the British label His Master's Voice in 1935. In March 2018, it was one of 25 recordings that the Library of Congress selected to be placed in the National Recording Registry, for its cultural and historical significance. This set of recordings has never been out of print and is considered by many to be the touchstone of Beethoven sonata interpretations, though shortcomings in finger technique mar many performances of fast movements (Sergei Rachmaninoff is supposed to have referred to him as \"the great adagio pianist\"). It has been said that he suffered greatly from nerves when recording; in a more private setting, his technique was impeccable. Claudio Arrau has said that Schnabel's live performances during the 1920s were technically \"flawless.\" He also recorded all the Beethoven piano concertos.\nPerformance style.\nSchnabel was a pragmatic performer. As an example, Schnabel never played encores, believing they would cheapen the performance. He is quoted saying, \"I have always considered applause to be a receipt, not a bill.\" American composer Milton Babbitt said of Schnabel, \"He was the thinking man's pianist, and in spite of that was very popular.\"\nCompositional style.\nDespite his performing repertoire being concentrated largely on the works of Beethoven, Schubert, Mozart and Brahms, almost all of his own compositions (none of which are in the active repertoire) are atonal. (It is interesting, in this regard, to note that Schnabel was a close friend of Arnold Schoenberg, his Austrian-American compatriot, who was famous as a pioneering composer of atonal and twelve-tone music.)\nThey are \"difficult\" yet fascinating and complex works, and are marked by genuine originality of style. Composers Ernst Krenek and Roger Sessions have commented that they show signs of undoubted genius (see biography of Schnabel by Cesar Saerchinger). Schnabel's list of compositions eventually included three symphonies, a piano concerto, a rhapsody for orchestra, a piano sonata (premiered by Eduard Erdmann at the 1925 Venice ISCM Festival) and five string quartets, amongst various smaller works.\nIn recent years, a number of his compositions (notably championed by the violinist Paul Zukofsky) have been recorded and made available on CD, including three of his string quartets, the three symphonies, a rhapsody for orchestra, and four solo piano works: his Sonata, Dance Suite, Piece in Seven Movements (1935\u201337) and Seven Pieces (1947). Pianist Jenny Lin released a recording of Schnabel's complete keyboard music for the Steinway and Sons label in 2019.\nCompositions.\nArtur Schnabel compositions are published by Peermusic Classical and distributed by Hal Leonard Artur Schnabel scores.\nSolo piano.\nhttps:// \n2016 revival and 2018 documentary film.\nOn September 11, 2016, a major international revival of Schnabel's compositions began with a concert at the Gro\u00dfer Sendesaal des rbb im Haus des Rundfunks, presented as part of the Musikfest Berlin. The program featured pianist Markus Pawlik (who also curated), the Szymanowski String Quartet, baritone Dietrich Henschel, and film projections by Matthew Mishory. German actor Udo Samel read a selection of Artur Schnabel's letters to Mary Virginia Foreman. The program was repeated Wednesday, 14 September 2016, at the RadioKulturhaus in Vienna and again on Thursday, 30 August 2018, at the Salle des congr\u00e8s in Meg\u00e8ve, France, with further performances planned. The 2016 Berlin concert was broadcast in its entirety on Rundfunk Berlin-Brandenburg radio and filmed for the Arte documentary \"Artur Schnabel: No Place of Exile,\" directed by Matthew Mishory. The film premiered on Arte on 4 February 2018. The film was shot in Switzerland, Italy, Vienna, and Berlin, utilizing unexpected textures (super8, drone footage, back-projection) and the actor Udo Samel to chart Schnabel's course through the emotional and physical landscapes of the European 20th century. It also features the performances from the 2016 Haus des Rundfunks concert.\nIn May 2019, Steinway &amp; Sons label released the first complete piano works with pianist Jenny Lin. In November 2019, an LA premiere of the film was held at the Villa Aurora in Pacific Palisades. The Villa had served as an important venue for German-Jewish intellectuals and artists during and after WWII.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66666", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66666", "title": "Philip Jos\u00e9 Farmer", "text": "American science fiction and fantasy writer (1918\u20132009)\nPhilip Jos\u00e9 Farmer (January 26, 1918 \u2013 February 25, 2009) was an American author known for his science fiction and fantasy novels and short stories.\nFarmer is best known for two sequences of novels, the \"World of Tiers\" (1965\u201393) and \"Riverworld\" (1971\u201383) series. He is noted for the pioneering use of sexual and religious themes in his work, his fascination for, and reworking of, the lore of celebrated pulp heroes, and occasional tongue-in-cheek pseudonymous works written as if by fictional characters. Farmer often mixed real and classic fictional characters and worlds and real and fake authors as epitomized by his Wold Newton family books, which tie classic fictional characters together as real people and blood relatives resulting from an alien conspiracy. Such works as \"The Other Log of Phileas Fogg\" (1973) and \"\" (1973) are early examples of literary mashup novels.\nLiterary critic Leslie Fiedler compared Farmer to Ray Bradbury, describing both as \"provincial American eccentrics\" who \"strain at the classic limits of the [science fiction] form,\" but found Farmer distinctive for his capacity \"to be at once naive and sophisticated in his odd blending of theology, pornography, and adventure.\"\nBiography.\nYouth and education.\nFarmer was born in North Terre Haute, Indiana. His parents gave him the middle name \"Josie\", from his paternal grandmother Josephine, but Farmer later changed it himself to \u201cJos\u00e9\u201d as he resented having a traditionally female middle name and wanted to lend color to what he felt was an otherwise rather drab name. Farmer grew up in Peoria, Illinois, where he attended Peoria High School. His father was a civil engineer and a supervisor for the local power company. A voracious reader as a boy, Farmer said he resolved to become a writer in the fourth grade. He underwent basic religious training in the Church of Christ, Scientist (Christian Science) as a child, which he later characterized as a \"peculiar background\" for a science fiction writer. He became an agnostic at the age of 14, and ultimately an atheist, though not, he said, indifferent to religion. At age 23, in 1941, he married Bette V. Andre, remaining a couple throughout his life; together, they had a son and a daughter. After washing out of flight training in World War II, he went to work in a local steel mill. He later continued his education, however, earning a bachelor's degree in English from Bradley University in 1950 at the age of 32.\nEarly career.\nFarmer had his first literary success when his novella \"The Lovers\" was published by Samuel Mines in \"Startling Stories\", August 1952. It features a sexual relationship between a human and an extraterrestrial. He won a Hugo Award for Best New SF Author or Artist in 1953, the first of three Hugo awards he won in his career. Thus encouraged, he quit his job to become a full-time writer, entered a publisher's contest, and promptly won first prize for a novel, \"Owe for the Flesh\", that contained the germ of his later \"Riverworld\" series. But the book was not published and Farmer did not get the $4,000 prize money that was supposed to go to the winner. Literary success did not translate into financial security, so he left Peoria in 1956 to launch a career as a technical writer. He spent the next 14 years working in that capacity for various defense contractors, from Syracuse, New York, to Los Angeles, while writing science fiction in his spare time.\nFarmer won a second Hugo award in 1968, in the category Best Novella, for \"Riders of the Purple Wage\", a pastiche of James Joyce's \"Finnegans Wake\" as well as a satire on a futuristic, cradle-to-grave welfare state. Reinvigorated, Farmer became a full-time writer again in 1969. Upon moving back to Peoria in 1970, he entered his most prolific period, publishing 25 books in 10 years. His novel \"To Your Scattered Bodies Go\" (a reworking of the unpublished prize-winning first novel of 20 years before) won him a third Hugo in 1972, for Best Novel.\nA 1975 novel, \"Venus on the Half-Shell\", created a stir in the larger literary community and media. It purported to be written in the first person by one \"Kilgore Trout,\" a fictional character appearing as an underappreciated science fiction writer in several of Kurt Vonnegut's novels. The escapade did not please Vonnegut when some reviewers not only concluded that it had been written by Vonnegut himself, but that it was a worthy addition to his works. Farmer did have permission from Vonnegut to write the book, although Vonnegut later said he regretted giving permission.\nLater years.\nFarmer had both critical champions and detractors. Leslie Fiedler proclaimed him \"the greatest science fiction writer ever\" and lauded his approach to storytelling as a \"gargantuan lust to swallow down the whole cosmos, past, present and to come, and to spew it out again.\" Isaac Asimov praised Farmer as an \"excellent science fiction writer; in fact, a far more skillful writer than I am...\" But Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, a reviewer opposed to \"that sci-fi crap,\" dismissed him in \"The New York Times\" in 1972 as \"a humdrum toiler in the fields of science fiction.\"\nIn 2001 Farmer won the World Fantasy Award for Life Achievement and the Science Fiction Writers of America made him its 19th SFWA Grand Master in the same year.\nFarmer's output slowed, but he continued to be active, publishing one novel and co-authoring three others (as well as producing about 20 short stories) in his last decade. He died on February 25, 2009.\nNovel sequences.\n\"Riverworld\" series.\nThe \"Riverworld\" series follows the adventures of such diverse characters as Richard Francis Burton, Hermann G\u00f6ring, and Samuel Clemens through a bizarre afterlife in which every human ever to have lived is simultaneously resurrected along a single river valley that stretches over an entire planet. The series consists of \"To Your Scattered Bodies Go\" (1971), \"The Fabulous Riverboat\" (1971), \"The Dark Design\" (1977), \"The Magic Labyrinth\" (1980) and \"Gods of Riverworld\" (1983). Although \"Riverworld and Other Stories\" (1979) is not part of the series as such, it does include the second-published Riverworld story, which is free-standing rather than integrated into one of the novels.\nThe first two Riverworld books were originally published as novellas, \"The Day of the Great Shout\" and \"The Suicide Express,\" and as a two-part serial, \"The Felled Star,\" in the science fiction magazines \"Worlds of Tomorrow\" and \"If\" between 1965 and 1967. The separate novelette \"Riverworld\" ran in \"Worlds of Tomorrow\" in January 1966. A final pair of linked novelettes appeared in the 1990s: \"Crossing the Dark River\" (in \"Tales of Riverworld\", 1992) and \"Up the Bright River\" (in \"Quest to Riverworld\", 1993). Farmer introduced himself into the series as Peter Jairus Frigate (PJF).\nThe Riverworld series originated in a novel, \"Owe for the Flesh\", written in one month in 1952 as a contest entry. It won the contest, but the book was left unpublished and orphaned when the prize money was misappropriated, and Farmer nearly gave up writing altogether. The original manuscript of the novel was lost, but years later Farmer reworked the material into the Riverworld magazine stories mentioned above. Eventually, a copy of a revised version of the original novel surfaced in a box in a garage and was published as \"River of Eternity\" by Phantasia Press in 1983. Farmer's introduction to this edition gives the details of how it all happened.\n\"World of Tiers\" series.\nThe series is set within a number of artificially constructed parallel universes (of which Earth is one), created tens of thousands of years ago by a race of human beings not from Earth who had achieved an advanced level of technology which gave them almost godlike power and immortality. The principal universe in which these stories take place, and from which the series derives its name, consists of an enormous tiered planet, shaped like a stack of disks or squat cylinders, of diminishing radius, one atop the other. The series follows the adventures of several of these godlike humans and several \"ordinary\" humans from Earth who accidentally travel to these artificial universes. (One of those \"ordinary\" humans was Paul Janus Finnegan [PJF], who becomes the main character in the series.) The series consists of \"The Maker of Universes\" (1965), \"The Gates of Creation\" (1966), \"A Private Cosmos\" (1968), \"Behind the Walls of Terra\" (1970), \"The Lavalite World\" (1977) and \"More Than Fire\" (1993). Roger Zelazny has mentioned that \"The World of Tiers\" was something he had in his mind when he created his Amber series. A related novel is \"Red Orc's Rage\" (1991), which does not involve the principal characters of the other books directly, but does provide background information to certain events and characters portrayed in the other novels. This is the most \"psychological\" of Farmer's novels.\nLiterary themes.\nSexuality.\nFarmer's work often handles sexual themes; some early works were notable for their ground-breaking introduction of such material to popular science fiction literature. His first published science fiction story (with one minor exception), the novella \"The Lovers\", earned him the Hugo Award for Best New SF Author or Artist in 1953, and is critically recognized as the story that broke the taboo on sex in science fiction. (Farmer's talk at the award ceremony was entitled \u201cScience Fiction and the Kinsey Report\u201d.) It instantly put Farmer on the literary map.\nThe short story collection \"Strange Relations\" (1960) was a notable event in the genre. He was one of three persons to whom Robert A. Heinlein dedicated \"Stranger in a Strange Land\" (1961), a novel which explored sexual freedom as one of its primary themes. Moreover, \"Fire and the Night\" (1962) is a mainstream novel about an interracial romance; it features sociological and psychosexual twists. In \"Night of Light\" (1966), he devised an alien race where aliens have only one mother but several fathers, perhaps because of an unusual or untenable physical position that cannot be reached or continued by two individuals acting alone. Both \"Image of the Beast\" and the sequel \"Blown\" from 1968 to 1969 explore group sex, interplanetary travel, and interplay between fictional figures like Herald Childe and real people like Forry Ackerman. In the \"World of Tiers\" series he explores Oedipal themes. In 1982, Farmer acknowledged that most of literary critic Leslie Fiedler's \"Freudian\" analysis of his work is valid, but insisted that \"there is also much that is Jungian and Reichian in my works\".\nReligion.\nFarmer's fiction frequently includes religious themes; he once went so far as to muse that \"religion is the earliest form of science fiction\". Raised in the Christian Science church, he lost his religious faith in early youth. Nevertheless, he eventually found that he was not truly indifferent to religion, but was \"powerfully attracted by the Roman Catholic faith\". Immortality, the afterlife and soteriology were particular theological concerns for him. \"The brain, knowing that a person can't live forever in this world, rationalizes a future, or other-dimensional, world in which immortality is possible... For me, only those stories concerned with this one vital issue are serious stories. All others, no matter how moving or profound, are mere entertainments. They do not deal with that which is our gravest concern. Without a belief in eternal life for us, the terrestrial existence is something to be gotten through with as little pain and as much pleasure as possible. If this conclusion is the triumph of irrationality over logic, so be it.\"\nIn his groundbreaking novella \"The Lovers\" (1952) he invented a fictional religion based on J. W. Dunne's \"Serialism\". The novel \"Night of Light\" (1957, expanded 1966) takes the rather unholy Father John Carmody on an odyssey on an alien world where spiritual forces are made manifest in the material world. In \"Flesh\" (1960) astronauts return to an Earth 800 years in their future dominated by a pagan goddess-worshiping religion. Jesus of Nazareth shows up as a character in both the \"Riverworld\" series (in the 1966 novelette \"Riverworld\" \u2014 but not in the novels, except for the brief mention of his death early in \"The Magic Labyrinth\") and in the 1979 novel \"Jesus on Mars\". Other examples of religious themes include the short stories \"J.C. on the Dude Ranch\", \"The God Business\", \"The Making of Revelation, Part I\", and the novels \"Inside, Outside\" (1964) \u2014 which may or may not be set in Hell \u2014 and \"Traitor to the Living\" (1973), among many others.\nPulp heroes.\nMany of Farmer's works rework existing characters from fiction and history,\nas in \"The Wind Whales of Ishmael\" (1971), a far-future sequel to Herman Melville's \"Moby-Dick\"; \"The Other Log of Phileas Fogg\" (1973), which fills in the missing time periods from Jules Verne's \"Around the World in Eighty Days\"; and \"A Barnstormer in Oz\" (1982), in which Dorothy's adult son, a pilot, flies to the Land of Oz by accident.\nHe has often written about the pulp heroes Tarzan and Doc Savage, or pastiches thereof: In his novel \"The Adventure of the Peerless Peer\", Tarzan and Sherlock Holmes team up. Farmer's Lord Grandrith and Doc Caliban series portray analogues of Tarzan and Doc Savage. It consists of \"A Feast Unknown\" (1969), \"Lord of the Trees\" (1970) and \"The Mad Goblin\" (1970). Farmer has also written two mock biographies of both characters, \"Tarzan Alive\" (1972) and \"\" (1973), which adopt the premise that the two were based on real people fictionalized by their original chroniclers, and connect them genealogically with a large number of other well-known fictional characters in a schema now known as the \"Wold Newton family.\" Further, Farmer wrote both an authorized Doc Savage novel, \"Escape from Loki\" (1991) and an authorized Tarzan novel, \"The Dark Heart of Time\" (1999). In his 1972 novel \"Time's Last Gift,\" Farmer also explored the Tarzan theme combined with time travel, using the transparently reverse-syllabled name of \"Sahhindar\" for his hero (and the book's initials, TLG, as code for \"Tarzan, Lord Greystoke\"). A short story on this theme is \"The Jungle Rot Kid on the Nod\" (1968): \"if William S. rather than Edgar Rice [Burroughs] had written Tarzan,\" Farmer also wrote \"Lord Tyger\" (1970) about a ruthless millionaire who tries to create a real Tarzan by having a child kidnapped and then brought up subject to the same tragic events which shaped Tarzan in the original books.\nIn his incomplete historical Khokarsa cycle\u00a0\u2014 \"Hadon of Ancient Opar\" (1974) and \"Flight to Opar\" (1976)\u00a0\u2014 Farmer portrayed the \"lost city\" of Opar, which plays an important part in the Tarzan saga, in the time of its glory as a colony city of the empire of Khokarsa. One of the books mentions a mysterious grey-eyed traveller, clearly \"Sahhindar\"/Tarzan.\nPseudonyms.\nFarmer wrote \"Venus on the Half-Shell\" (1975) under the name Kilgore Trout, a fictional author who appears in the works of Kurt Vonnegut. He had planned to write more of Trout's fictional books (notably \"Son of Jimmy Valentine\"), but Vonnegut put an end to those plans. Farmer's use of the pseudonym had caused confusion among many readers, who for some time assumed that Vonnegut was behind it; when the truth of \"Venus on the Half-Shell\"'s authorship came out, Vonnegut was reported as being \"not amused.\" In an issue of the semi-prozine The Alien Critic/Science Fiction Review, published by Richard E. Geis, Farmer claimed to have received an angry, obscenity-laden telephone call from Vonnegut about it. Thereafter Farmer wrote a number of pseudonymous \"fictional author\" stories, mostly for \"The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction\". These were stories whose \"authors\" are characters in other stories. The first such story was \"by\" Jonathan Swift Somers III (invented by Farmer himself in \"Venus on the Half-Shell\" but inspired by one of the dead voices of \"Spoon River Anthology\"). Later Farmer used the \"Cordwainer Bird\" byline, a pseudonym invented by Harlan Ellison for film and television projects from which he wished to disassociate himself, and perhaps related to the name Cordwainer Smith, a pseudonym used by Paul Linebarger.\nBibliography.\nIn a writing career spanning more than 60 years (1946\u20132008), Farmer published almost 60 novels, over 100 short stories and novellas (many expanded or combined into novels), two \"fictional biographies\" and numerous essays, articles and ephemera in fan publications.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66667", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66667", "title": "Samuel Clemens", "text": ""}
{"id": "66668", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66668", "title": "Bullhead shark", "text": "Genus of sharks\nThe bullhead sharks are members of the genus Heterodontus, the only members of the family Heterodontidae and only living members of the order Heterodontiformes. All are relatively small, with the largest species reaching just in maximum length. They are bottom feeders in tropical and subtropical waters.\nThe Heterodontiforms appear in the fossil record in the Early Jurassic. The oldest fossils of the modern genus date to the Late Jurassic. Despite the very ancient origins of this genus and its abundance in the fossil record, phylogenetic evidence indicates that all extant species in the genus arose from a single common ancestor that survived the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction, with diversification into modern species only starting around the mid-Eocene.\nDescription.\nBullhead sharks have tapered bodies, with most species reaching around in length. Their bodies vary in colour, including shades of grey, brown, and red and pale colours, and are covered in a variety of patterns, including spots and stripes. They have blunt, proportionally large heads with relatively small mouths and large nostrils, with pronounced ridges above their eyes. They have two dorsal fins, both substantial in size, the first larger than the second, each of which has a rigid fin spine at the front, along with an anal fin. The tail fin is also large, with upper and lower lobes separated by a notch. Bullhead sharks have differentiated teeth, with cusped grasping teeth at the front of the mouth, and flattened teeth at the back of the mouth. Their egg cases have a spiral colarettes running along their length.\nEcology.\nBullhead sharks live in coastal littoral environments, generally shallower than , and are usually primarily active at night. Bullhead sharks ingest prey via suction feeding. They feed on invertebrate prey, including both hard prey such as crustaceans and sea urchins, and soft bodied prey such as octopuses, as well as predating on fish. They use their flattened teeth at the back of the mouth to crush hard-shelled prey and fish. Juveniles generally take softer prey than adults. The sharp fin spines provide a deterrent to being consumed by predators.\nBullhead shark egg cases are shaped like an auger, with two spiral flanges. This allows the egg cases to become wedged in the crevices of rocky sea floors, where the eggs are protected from predators; however, some bullhead sharks deposit their eggs on sponges or seaweed. Hatchlings are considered large for sharks, reaching over 14\u00a0cm in length by the time they leave the egg case. Bullhead shark eggs typically hatch after 7 to 12 months, depending on the species. The female Japanese bullhead shark has been known to deposit their eggs in one location along with other females, called a \"nest\". The egg case of the Mexican hornshark features a tendril and more rigid flanges, suggesting that egg case design of this species primarily involves anchoring with tendrils rather than wedging into crevices.\nSpecies.\nTen living species of bullhead shark have been described:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66669", "revid": "7436027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66669", "title": "Eusko Gudariak", "text": "Eusko Gudariak (originally spelt Euzko Gudariak, \"Basque Soldiers\") was the republican anthem of the Eusko Gudarostea, the army of the Basque Autonomous Government during the Spanish Civil War. The song used to refer to the defense of the Basque country within the Republic of Spain against the nationalist Spain army.\nIt is also used as an anthem by ETA and the organizations orbiting the Basque National Liberation Movement.\nThe music is a traditional Basque tune from Araba, named . The lyrics were composed in 1932 by Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda de G\u00e1rate, an officer of the EAJ-PNV. During the war, Captain Alejandro Lizaso Eizmendi added some verses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n 1 \"Irrintzi\", literally \"neigh\", is a high-pitched scream used in celebrations and to call others at long distances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66670", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66670", "title": "List of guerrilla movements", "text": "This is a list of notable guerrilla movements. It gives their English name, common acronym, and main country of operation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66673", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66673", "title": "List of guerilla movements", "text": ""}
{"id": "66674", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66674", "title": "List of guerillas", "text": ""}
{"id": "66675", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66675", "title": "Light curve", "text": "Graph of light intensity of a celestial object or region, as a function of time\nIn astronomy, a light curve is a graph of the light intensity of a celestial object or region as a function of time, typically with the magnitude of light received on the \"y\"-axis and with time on the \"x\"-axis. The light is usually in a particular frequency interval or band.\nLight curves can be periodic, as in the case of eclipsing binaries, Cepheid variables, other periodic variables, and transiting extrasolar planets; or aperiodic, like the light curve of a nova, cataclysmic variable star, supernova, microlensing event, or binary as observed during occultation events. The study of a light curve and other observations can yield considerable information about the physical process that produces such a light curve, or constrain the physical theories about it.\nVariable stars.\nGraphs of the apparent magnitude of a variable star over time are commonly used to visualise and analyse their behaviour. Although the categorisation of variable star types is increasingly done from their spectral properties, the amplitudes, periods, and regularity of their brightness changes are still important factors. Some types such as Cepheids have extremely regular light curves with exactly the same period, amplitude, and shape in each cycle. Others such as Mira variables have somewhat less regular light curves with large amplitudes of several magnitudes, while the semiregular variables are less regular still and have smaller amplitudes.\nThe shapes of variable star light curves give valuable information about the underlying physical processes producing the brightness changes. For eclipsing variables, the shape of the light curve indicates the degree of totality, the relative sizes of the stars, and their relative surface brightnesses. It may also show the eccentricity of the orbit and distortions in the shape of the two stars. For pulsating stars, the amplitude or period of the pulsations can be related to the luminosity of the star, and the light curve shape can be an indicator of the pulsation mode.\nSupernovae.\nLight curves from supernovae can be indicative of the type of supernova. Although supernova types are defined on the basis of their spectra, each has typical light curve shapes. Type I supernovae have light curves with a sharp maximum and gradually decline, while Type II supernovae have less sharp maxima. Light curves are helpful for classification of faint supernovae and for the determination of sub-types. For example, the type II-P (for plateau) have similar spectra to the type II-L (linear) but are distinguished by a light curve where the decline flattens out for several weeks or months before resuming its fade.\nPlanetary astronomy.\nIn planetary science, a light curve can be used to derive the rotation period of a minor planet, moon, or comet nucleus. From the Earth there is often no way to resolve a small object in the Solar System, even in the most powerful of telescopes, since the apparent angular size of the object is smaller than one pixel in the detector. Thus, astronomers measure the amount of light produced by an object as a function of time (the light curve). The time separation of peaks in the light curve gives an estimate of the rotational period of the object. The difference between the maximum and minimum brightnesses (the amplitude of the light curve) can be due to the shape of the object, or to bright and dark areas on its surface. For example, an asymmetrical asteroid's light curve generally has more pronounced peaks, while a more spherical object's light curve will be flatter. This allows astronomers to infer information about the shape and spin (but not size) of asteroids.\nAsteroid lightcurve database.\nLight curve quality code.\nThe \"Asteroid Lightcurve Database\" (LCDB) of the Collaborative Asteroid Lightcurve Link (CALL) uses a numeric code to assess the quality of a period solution for minor planet light curves (it does not necessarily assess the actual underlying data). Its quality code parameter \"U\" ranges from 0 (incorrect) to 3 (well-defined):\nA trailing plus sign (+) or minus sign (\u2212) is also used to indicate a slightly better or worse quality than the unsigned value.\nOccultation light curves.\nThe occultation light curve is often characterised as binary, where the light from the star is terminated instantaneously, remains constant for the duration, and is reinstated instantaneously. The duration is equivalent to the length of a chord across the occulting body.\nCircumstances where the transitions are not instantaneous are;\nThe observations are typically recorded using video equipment and the disappearance and reappearance timed using a GPS disciplined Video Time Inserter (VTI).\nOccultation light curves are archived at the VizieR service.\nExoplanet discovery.\nPeriodic dips in a star's light curve graph could be due to an exoplanet passing in front of the star that it is orbiting. When an exoplanet passes in front of its star, light from that star is temporarily blocked, resulting in a dip in the star's light curve. These dips are periodic, as planets periodically orbit a star. Many exoplanets have been discovered via this method, which is known as the astronomical transit method. \nLight curve inversion.\nLight curve inversion is a mathematical technique used to model the surfaces of rotating objects from their brightness variations. This can be used to effectively image starspots or asteroid surface albedos.\nMicrolensing.\nMicrolensing is a process where relatively small and low-mass astronomical objects cause a brief small increase in the brightness of a more distant object. This is caused by the small relativistic effect as larger gravitational lenses, but allows the detection and analysis of otherwise-invisible stellar and planetary mass objects. The properties of these objects can be inferred from the shape of the lensing light curve. For example, PA-99-N2 is a microlensing event that may have been due to a star in the Andromeda Galaxy that has an exoplanet."}
{"id": "66676", "revid": "197202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66676", "title": "Tropic of Cancer", "text": "Line of northernmost latitude at which the Sun can be directly overhead\nThe Tropic of Cancer, also known as the Northern Tropic, is the Earth's northernmost circle of latitude where the Sun can be seen directly overhead. This occurs on the June solstice, when the Northern Hemisphere is tilted toward the Sun to its maximum extent. It also reaches 90 degrees below the horizon at solar midnight on the December solstice. Using a continuously updated formula, the circle is currently \u00b0\u2032\u2033\u00a0(or\u00a0\u00b0) north of the Equator.\nIts Southern Hemisphere counterpart, marking the most southerly position at which the Sun can be seen directly overhead, is the Tropic of Capricorn. These tropics are two of the seven major circles of latitude that mark maps of Earth, the others being the Arctic and Antarctic circles, the Equator, and the Poles (which are degenerate circles). The positions of these two circles of latitude (relative to the Equator) are dictated by the tilt of Earth's axis of rotation relative to the plane of its orbit, and since the tilt changes, the location of these two circles also changes.\nIn geopolitics, it is known for being the southern limitation on the mutual defence obligation of NATO, as member states of NATO are not obligated to come to the defence of territory south of the Tropic of Cancer.\nName.\nWhen this line of latitude was named in the last centuries BC, the Sun was in the constellation Cancer (Latin: \"Crab\") at the June solstice (90\u00b0 ecliptic longitude). Due to the precession of the equinoxes, this is no longer the case; today the Sun is in the constellation Taurus at the June solstice. The word \"tropic\" itself comes from the Greek \"trope (\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c0\u03ae)\", meaning turn (change of direction or circumstance) or inclination, referring to the fact that the Sun appears to \"turn back\" at the solstices.\nDrift.\nThe Tropic of Cancer's position is not fixed, but constantly changes because of axial precession in the Earth's longitudinal alignment relative to the ecliptic, the plane in which the Earth orbits around the Sun. Earth's axial tilt varies over a 41,000-year period from about 22.1 to 24.5 degrees, and as of 2000[ [update]] is about 23.4 degrees, which will continue to remain valid for about a millennium. This wobble means that the Tropic of Cancer is currently drifting southward at a rate of almost half an arcsecond (0.468\u2033) of latitude, or , per year. The circle's position was at exactly 23\u00b027\u2032N in 1917 and will be at 23\u00b026'N in 2045.\nThe distance between the Antarctic Circle and the Tropic of Cancer is essentially constant as they move in tandem. This is based on an assumption of a constant equator, but the precise location of the equator is not truly fixed. See: equator, axial tilt and circles of latitude for additional details.\nGeography.\nNorth of the tropic are the subtropics and the North Temperate Zone. The equivalent line of latitude south of the Equator is called the Tropic of Capricorn, and the region between the two, centered on the Equator, is the tropics.\nIn the year 2000, more than half of the world's population lived north of the Tropic of Cancer.\nOn the Tropic of Cancer there are approximately 13 hours, 35 minutes of daylight during the summer solstice. During the winter solstice, there are 10 hours, 41 minutes of daylight.\nUsing 23\u00b026'N for the Tropic of Cancer, the tropic passes through the following 17 countries (including two disputed territories) and 8 water bodies, starting at the prime meridian and heading eastward:\nClimate.\nThe climate at the Tropic of Cancer is generally hot and dry, except for cooler highland regions in China, marine environments such as Hawaii, and easterly coastal areas, where orographic rainfall can be very heavy, in some places reaching annually. Most regions on the Tropic of Cancer experience two distinct seasons: an extremely hot summer with temperatures often reaching and a warm winter with maxima around . Much land on or near the Tropic of Cancer is part of the Sahara Desert, while to the east, the climate is torrid monsoonal with a short wet season from June to September, and very little rainfall for the rest of the year.\nThe highest mountain on or adjacent to the Tropic of Cancer is Yu Shan in Taiwan. It had glaciers descending as low as during the Last Glacial Maximum. At present glaciers still exist around the Tropic. The nearest currently surviving are the Minyong and Baishui in the Himalayas to the north and on Pico de Orizaba in Mexico to the south.\nCircumnavigation.\nAccording to the rules of the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration A\u00e9ronautique Internationale, for a flight to compete for a round-the-world speed record, it must cover a distance no less than the length of the Tropic of Cancer, cross all meridians, and end on the same airfield where it started.\nThe length of the Tropic of Cancer is :\nformula_1\nwhere \"\u03c6\" is the latitude of the Tropic of Cancer\nFor an ordinary circumnavigation the rules are somewhat relaxed and the distance is set to a rounded value of at least .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66677", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66677", "title": "Chiapas, Mexico", "text": ""}
{"id": "66679", "revid": "904197484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66679", "title": "Tropical", "text": ""}
{"id": "66680", "revid": "197202", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66680", "title": "Tropic of Capricorn", "text": "Line of southernmost latitude at which the Sun can be directly overhead\nThe Tropic of Capricorn (or the Southern Tropic) is the circle of latitude that contains the subsolar point at the December (or southern) solstice. It is thus the southernmost latitude where the Sun can be seen directly overhead. It also reaches 90 degrees below the horizon at solar midnight on the June Solstice. Its northern equivalent is the Tropic of Cancer.\nThe Tropic of Capricorn is one of the five major circles of latitude marked on maps of Earth. Its latitude is currently \u00b0\u2032\u2033\u00a0(or\u00a0\u00b0) south of the Equator, but it is very gradually moving northward, currently at the rate of 0.47 arcseconds, or 15 metres, per year.\nName.\nWhen this line of latitude was named, the Sun was in the constellation Capricornus at the December solstice. This is the date each year when the Sun reaches zenith at this latitude, the southernmost declination it reaches for the year. (Due to the precession of the equinoxes the Sun currently appears in Sagittarius at this solstice.)\nGeography and environment.\nThe Tropic of Capricorn is the dividing line between the Southern Temperate Zone to the south and the Tropics to the north. The Northern Hemisphere equivalent of the Tropic of Capricorn is the Tropic of Cancer.\nThe Tropic of Capricorn's position is not fixed, but constantly changes because of a slight wobble in the Earth's longitudinal alignment relative to its orbit around the Sun. Earth's axial tilt varies over a 41,000 year period from about 22.1 to 24.5 degrees and currently resides at about 23.4 degrees. This wobble means that the Tropic of Capricorn is currently drifting northward at a rate of almost half an arcsecond (0.468\u2033) of latitude, or 15 metres, per year (it was at exactly 23\u00b027\u2032S in 1917 and will be at 23\u00b026'S in 2045). Therefore, the distance between Arctic Circle and the Tropic of Capricorn is essentially constant moving in tandem. See under circles of latitude for information.\nThere are approximately 10 hours and 41 minutes of daylight during the June solstice (Southern Hemisphere winter). During the December solstice (Southern Hemisphere summer), there are 13 hours and 35 minutes of daylight. The length of the Tropic of Capricorn at 23\u00b026\u203211.7\u2033S is 36,788\u00a0km (22,859\u00a0mi).\nAfrica.\nIn most of this belt of southern Africa, a minimum of seasonal rainfall is reliable and farming is possible, though yields struggle to compete with for example the Mississippi basin, even against like-to-like soil fertilisers. Rivers have been successfully dammed particularly flowing from relief precipitation areas (high eminences) and those from the edge of the Great Rift Valley, such as the Zambezi, well within the Tropics. This, with alluvial or enriched soil, enables substantial yield grain farming in areas with good soil. Across this large region pasture farming is widespread, where intensive, brief and rotational it helps to fertilise and stabilise the soil, preventing run-off and desertification. This approach is traditional to many tribes and promoted by government advisors such as Allan Savory, a Zimbabwean-born biologist, farmer, game rancher, politician and international consultant and co-founder of the Savory Institute. According to the United Nations University Our World dissemination he is credited with developing \"holistic management\" in the 1960s and has led anti-desertification efforts in Africa for decades using a counterintuitive approach to most developed economies of increasing the number of livestock on grasslands rather than fencing them off for conservation. Such practices in this area have seen success and won generous awards; he gave the keynote speech at UNCCD's Land Day in 2018, and later that year a TED (conference) address, widely re-broadcast.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, areas around the Tropic have some of the world's most variable rainfall. In the east advanced plants such as flowering shrubs and eucalyptus and in most bioregions grasses have adapted to cope with means such as deep roots and little transpiration. Wetter areas, seasonally watered, are widely pasture farmed. As to animals, birds and marsupials are well-adapted. Naturally difficult arable agriculture specialises in dry fruits, nuts and modest water consumption produce. Other types are possible given reliable irrigation sources and, ideally, water-retentive enriched or alluvial soils, especially wheat; shallow irrigation sources very widely dry up in and after drought years. The multi-ridge Great Dividing Range brings relief precipitation enough to make hundreds of kilometres either side cultivable, and its rivers are widely dammed to store necessary water; this benefits the settled areas of New South Wales and Queensland.\nBehind the end of the green hills, away from the Pacific, which is subject to warm, negative phases of the El Ni\u00f1o\u2013Southern Oscillation (colloquially this is an \"El Ni\u00f1o year/season\") is a white, red and yellow landscape of 2,800 to 3,300 kilometres of rain shadow heading west in turn feature normally arid cattle lands of the Channel Country, the white Kati Thanda-Lake Eyre National Park, the mainly red Mamungari Conservation Park, then the Gibson Desert, after others the dry landscape settlement of Kalbarri on the west coast and its rest, northward. The Channel Country features an arid landscape with a series of ancient flood plains from rivers which only flow intermittently. The principal rivers are Georgina River, Cooper Creek and the Diamantina River. In most years, their waters are absorbed into the earth or evaporate, but when there is sufficient rainfall in their catchment area, these rivers flow into Lake Eyre, South Australia. One of the most significant rainfall events occurred in 2010 when a monsoonal low from ex-Cyclone Olga created a period of exceptional rainfall.\nEl Ni\u00f1o adverse phases cause a shift in atmospheric circulation; rainfall becomes reduced over Indonesia and Australia, rainfall and tropical cyclone formation increases over the tropical Pacific. The low-level surface trade winds, which normally blow from east to west along the equator, either weaken or start blowing from the other direction.\nSouth America.\nIn South America, whilst in the continental craton soils are almost as old as in Australia and Southern Africa, the presence of the geologically young and evolving Andes means that this region is on the western side of the subtropical anticyclones and thus receives warm and humid air from the Atlantic Ocean. As a result, areas in Brazil adjacent to the Tropic are impressively productive agricultural regions, producing large quantities of crops such as sugarcane, and the natural rainforest vegetation has been almost entirely cleared, except for a few remaining patches of Atlantic Forest. Further south in Argentina, the temperate grasslands of the Pampas region is equally influential in wheat, soybeans, maize, and beef, making the country one of the largest worldwide agricultural exporters, similar to the role played by the Prairies region in Canada.\nWest of the Andes, which creates a rain shadow, the air is further cooled and dried by the cold Humboldt Current which makes it very arid, creating the Atacama Desert, one of the driest in the world, so that no glaciers exist between Volc\u00e1n Sajama at 18\u02da30'S and Cerro Tres Cruces at 27\u02daS. Vegetation here is almost non-existent, though on the eastern slopes of the Andes rainfall is adequate for rainfed agriculture.\nAround the world.\nStarting at the Prime Meridian and heading eastwards, the Tropic of Capricorn passes through 10 countries:\n \nPlaces located along the Tropic of Capricorn.\nThe following cities and landmarks are either located near the Tropic of Capricorn, or the tropic passes through them.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nList of countries entirely south of the Tropic of Capricorn.\nAs most of Earth's land is in the Northern Hemisphere only four countries are wholly south of the Tropic of Capricorn (which contrasts with 73, about one third of the current total, wholly north of the Tropic of Cancer):\nSee also.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66681", "revid": "69423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66681", "title": "Frontier League", "text": "North American professional baseball league\nThe Frontier League (FL; French: \"Ligue Fronti\u00e8re\", LF) is a professional baseball league in North America composed of 15 teams in the United States and 3 in Canada. The league is an official MLB Partner League since 2020, and the level of play is comparable to Minor League Baseball's Single-A level. The FL is headquartered in Sauget, Illinois.\nThe Frontier League was organized by several men who got together in the winter of 1992\u20131993 and decided to start an independent baseball league to serve the West Virginia, eastern Kentucky and southeast Ohio areas. They believed they could bring professional baseball to areas that would never have a chance of affiliated professional baseball coming to their communities. The seed was planted and they named their project \"The Frontier League\".\nAt its inception, the FL had eight teams, all in the United States. The league expanded to Canada in 1999, when the London Werewolves joined, and has since consisted of both American and Canadian teams. From 2008 to 2019, the league operated with many different franchises, peaking with 14 in the league at one time. The league added five new teams as a result of the Can-Am and Frontier Leagues merger in 2020, then increased to 16 teams by 2021, and to 18 teams due to the 2025 expansion. Pearl, Mississippi and Kinston, North Carolina were awarded an expansion franchise in 2025; it acquired the baseball assets of the Mississippi Braves and the Down East Wood Ducks, which folded, and established the Mississippi Mud Monsters and the Down East Bird Dawgs that increased the total number of teams to 18.\nThe FL is the fifth-highest grossing professional minor sports league in the United States by revenue, after the American Hockey League (AHL), International League (IL), the Pacific Coast League (PCL) and the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball (ALPB). The league's headquarters have been in Sauget, Illinois since 2001, when the Gateway Grizzlies were formed. As of the 2024 season, the FL had players from 17 different countries.\nThe league's regular season is typically held from May to September, with each team playing 96 games. Following the conclusion of the regular season, 8 teams advance to the Frontier League playoffs, a three-round tournament that runs into late-September to determine the league champion. Since the league's founding in 1993, the Schaumburg Boomers have won the most combined FL titles with four, and the reigning league champions are the Qu\u00e9bec Capitales, who defeated the Washington Wild Things in the 2024 Frontier League Championship Series.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe Frontier League was founded in 1993. It initially struggled to retain franchises, with four of its eight founding teams folding within three seasons, though steadily grew to twelve teams within a decade. The first league champions were the Zanesville Greys. Eight teams have won more than one championship: Springfield in 1996 and 1998; Johnstown in 1995 (as the Steal) and in 2000 (as the Johnnies), Richmond Roosters in 2001 and 2002, Windy City in 2007 and 2008, the Joliet Slammers in 2011 and 2018, and the Evansville Otters in 2006 and 2016. With four titles, the Schaumburg Boomers have won the most league championships.\nOn June 20, 2000, Brian Tollberg debuted with the San Diego Padres, becoming the first FL player to make it to the Majors. A week later, Morgan Burkhart made his debut with the Boston Red Sox.\nAlthough the league does not have any teams located in the same city as Major League teams, it does nonetheless have teams located within the markets of Major League teams. The Chicago area has three teams (Joliet Slammers, Schaumburg Boomers and Windy City ThunderBolts), as does the New York area (New Jersey Jackals, Sussex County Miners, and New York Boulders), and St. Louis (Gateway Grizzlies), Cleveland (Lake Erie Crushers), Cincinnati (Florence Y'alls) and Pittsburgh (Washington Wild Things) each have one. The Wild Things, in particular, have been able to market themselves as a successful alternative to the Pittsburgh Pirates due to the latter franchise's long stretch of losing seasons, which lasted from the league's founding in 1993 until 2013 when the Pirates finished with a record of 94\u201368.\nLeague merger.\nOn October 16, 2019, it was announced that the Frontier League would be merging with the Can-Am League, absorbing five of its teams to form the largest independent professional baseball league. This added the New Jersey Jackals, New York Boulders, Qu\u00e9bec Capitales, Sussex County Miners, and Trois-Rivi\u00e8res Aigles to the league; the Ottawa Champions, the last remaining Can-Am League team, were not invited to participate. The divisions were renamed, with the easternmost teams playing in the Can-Am Division and the westernmost teams playing in the Midwest Division.\nOn September 24, 2020, Major League Baseball announced that it named the FL as an \"MLB Partner League\". This enables collaboration with MLB to jointly discuss marketing and promotional initiatives to grow, expand, and enhance the game and quality of baseball.\nBorder issues.\nFor the 2021 season, the league announced that they would be adding two new teams. The first announcement came around the same time as the announcement of the partnership with Major League Baseball, as Ottawa was granted an expansion franchise in the league. The team, as chosen by fans in a contest, was named the Titans and started playing at Ottawa Stadium. Then, on January 8, 2021, after the reorganization of Minor League Baseball, the league added the Tri-City ValleyCats, which were one of several teams that were orphaned or disbanded when the New York-Penn League was folded. The Titans, ValleyCats as well as the Washington Wild Things joined the five former Can-Am League teams in the Can-Am Division, to even the divisions at eight teams; Lake Erie was transferred to the Midwest Division.\nOn April 22, 2021, the league announced that the Qu\u00e9bec Capitales, the Trois-Rivi\u00e8res Aigles, and the Ottawa Titans would not compete in the 2021 season due to the prolonged closure of the Canada\u2013United States border as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. The Titans, Aigles and Capitales later joined forces to form a new team that competed as a member of the Atlantic Division in the Can-Am Conference. Known as \"\u00c9quipe Qu\u00e9bec\", they began the season as a traveling team, and starting on July 30, 2021, started sharing home games between Quebec City and Trois-Rivi\u00e8res following a loosening in border restrictions. 10 games were played in Qu\u00e9bec City and 11 in Trois-Rivi\u00e8res. They did not play in Ottawa due to COVID-19 restrictions in Ontario.\nExpansion era.\nOn October 6, 2021, the owners of the Southern Illinois Miners, Jayne and John Simmons, announced they would be retiring from professional baseball to spend more time with family and the Miners would be ceasing operations and dropping out of the FL. As a result, the league formed the Empire State Greys, to compete as a traveling team with a roster of players from the Empire Professional Baseball League.\nIn September 2023, the league announced a new team, the New England Knockouts, who were planned to play at Campanelli Stadium in Brockton, Massachusetts, beginning with the 2024 season. This brought the total number of permanent members of the league to sixteen teams. After playing one season as the Knockouts, the team was renamed as the Brockton Rox in January 2025.\nIn September 2024, the league announced an expansion to Mississippi and North Carolina. A franchise was awarded to Pearl, Mississippi, called the Mississippi Mud Monsters, following the departure of the Atlanta Braves Double-A affiliate, the Mississippi Braves. The Down East Bird Dawgs, a new team in Kinston, North Carolina, will play in Grainger Stadium, which was formerly home of the Texas Rangers-affiliated Down East Wood Ducks.\nSeason structure.\nThe Frontier League season is divided into a preseason (late April and early May), a regular season (from early May through early September) and a postseason (the Frontier League playoffs) that runs until late September.\nTeams usually hold a spring showcase for prospects in April and participate in prospect tournaments, full games that do not feature any veterans, in late April. Full training camps begin in late April, including a preseason consisting of a few exhibition games. Split squad games, in which parts of a team's regular season roster play separate games on the same day, are occasionally played during the preseason.\nDuring the regular season, clubs play each other in a predefined schedule. Since 2021, in the regular season, all teams play 96 games: 48 games each of home and road, playing 84 games in their own geographic division\u2014four series (12 games) against five of their eight intra-conference opponents, plus three series (9 games) against two others, and two series (6 games) against the remaining one; and only one series (3 games) against four of the nine teams in the other conference once\u2014home or road.\nThe league's regular season standings are based on a win percentage system. At the end of the regular season, the team that finishes with the highest win percentage in each divisions is crowned the division champion, and the league's overall leader are named the Frontier League regular season champions.\nThe Frontier League playoffs, which go from early to late September, are an elimination tournament where two teams play against each other to win a series in order to advance to the next round. The final remaining team is crowned the Frontier League champion. Four teams from each conference qualify for the playoffs: the top team in each division plus the two conference teams with the next highest win percentage. The two Wild Card Series winners proceed to the Frontier League Division Series (FLDS) as the league's conference finals, and the two conference champions proceed to the Frontier League Championship Series (FLCS). In all rounds, the higher-ranked team is awarded home-field advantage, with up to three of the five games played at this team's home venue. In the FLCS, the team with the most wins during the regular season has the home-field advantage.\nPlayers.\nTeams in the FL must recruit and sign their own players, who usually are undrafted college players or one-time prospects who have been released by their teams.\nThe league also has several other rules to give younger players more opportunities. This includes a maximum of eight veterans per team, and a minimum of ten rookies in their roster. The remaining six players on the 24-man roster can be classified as \"Experienced-1\" or \"Experienced-2\". Rosters are limited to a size of 24 players on the Opening Day series, although up to 10 additional players can be added to a team's roster during the regular season before the transactions limit.\nTeams.\nFor the 2021 season, the Frontier League consisted of 14 teams\u201413 based in the United States and 1 in Canada. The FL divided the 14 teams into two conferences: the Can-Am Conference and the Midwest Conference. Each conference was split into two divisions: the Can-Am Conference contained 6 teams (three per division), while the Midwest Conference had 8 teams (four per division). The league temporarily realigned from the 2022 to the 2024 seasons but returned to the previous alignment the following year. With the addition of the Empire State Greys in 2022\u201323 and the Brockton Rox in 2024, the league operated at 16 teams with only two divisions: East and West.\nThe league expanded for the first time in 9 years to 15 teams with the addition of the Ottawa Titans in 2020, then to 16 with the addition of the Tri-City ValleyCats in 2021. In September 2024, a new expansion team in Mississippi was created, after the ownership group of the Mississippi Braves sold the team. A few weeks later, a second new team in Kinston, North Carolina joined the FL, and started playing in 2025 as the Down East Bird Dawgs. The expansion of the two new teams marks the league's first expansion into the deep south, and largest expansion in history. The league reverted to the 2021 setup: two conferences with four divisions.\nFormer teams.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChampions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBroadcasting.\nOn February 24, 2022, the FL announced that all games for the 2022 season would be available through the streaming platform FloSports. They then announced a move to streaming platform HomeTeam Network for the 2025 season.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66683", "revid": "94900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66683", "title": "Canton Coyotes", "text": ""}
{"id": "66684", "revid": "49457617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66684", "title": "Chillicothe Paints", "text": "Collegiate summer baseball team in Ohio, US\nThe Chillicothe Paints are a collegiate summer baseball team based in Chillicothe, Ohio, in the United States. The team is a member of the summer collegiate Prospect League. The Paints previously played in the professional independent Frontier League from 1993 to 2008. The Paints play their home games at V.A. Memorial Stadium in Chillicothe.\nThe Paints play in the Prospect League's Eastern Conference \u2013 Northeast Division along with the Champion City Kings, Johnstown Mill Rats, and Lafayette Aviators.\nFrontier League era.\nThe Chillicothe Paints were one of the eight original franchises to begin Frontier League play in 1993. Two teams, the West Virginia Coal Sox and the Tri-State Tomahawks, did not complete the season as the league struggled with stability. In 1994, the Paints featured Brian Tollberg who went 7\u20134, 2.48 ERA, and was then signed by the Milwaukee Brewers organization. Tollberg would become the first Frontier League alumnus to make the majors when he started for the San Diego Padres on June 7, 2000, pitching 7 innings in a 3-1 Padres victory.\nThe league solidified and the Paints found their footing by 1996 when Chillicothe dominated the league with a 48-26 (.649) record, advancing to the Frontier League championship, losing to the Springfield Capitals 3\u20130 in the best of five series. This was the first of six championship series appearances for the Paints during the Frontier League era, none of which resulted in a championship. The 1996 Paints were led by a trio of power bats in Scott Pinoni (.384 BA, 11 HR, 65 RBI), Jackie Jempsen (.340 BA, 13 HR, 57 RBI) and Mitch House (.305 BA, 18 HR, 53 RBI).\nManager Roger Hanners had the team in the championship series again in both 1998 and 1999, dropping the 1998 series to Springfield 2-1 and the 1999 title series to the London Werewolves 2\u20130 in a best of three. The Paints were led at this time by the stellar hitting of Gator McBride, a former Atlanta Braves farmhand, who came to Chillicothe and would finish his Frontier League career with a .423 BA, .758 slugging percentage, 27 homers, and 111 RBI. The Boston Red Sox took notice of his resurrected career and signed him after 39 games of the 1999 season. His career was cut short by injuries sustained in an automobile accident in February 2000, forcing him into retirement.\nThe Paints returned to the Frontier League championship in 2001 with a division-winning 51-31 (.607) record, but were upset by the Richmond Roosters 2\u20130 in the series. Rick Blanc (13-1, 3.24 ERA), Matt McKay (.345 BA, 1 HR, 48 RBI), Darin Kinsolving (.327 BA, 10 HR, 62 RBI) and Joe Colameco (.325 BA, 10 HR, 60 RBI) paced the balanced Chillicothe squad.\nFormer major-leaguer Glenn Wilson took over as manager in 2005 and took the Paints to back-to-back championship appearances, dropping the 2005 series 3\u20132 to the Kalamazoo Kings and the 2006 series 3\u20130 to the Evansville Otters. John Martinez (16-4, 3.11 ERA), Jose Rodriguez (.380 BA, 5 HR, 36 RBI), and John Ramistella (.317 BA, 20 HR, 73 RBI) led the 2005 Paints, while Kurt Hartfelder (10-5, 16.7 ERA) and Travis Garcia (.289 BA, 11 HR, 66 RBI) led the 2006 team. VA Memorial Stadium had grass from 1993 to 2005, but the ballpark installed FieldTurf in 2006, the first baseball field in the United States to have a 100% FieldTurf playing surface, including base, mound and home plate areas.\nThe Frontier League had changed from predominately rural and smaller towns into a suburban league over the years, and the Paints faced financial and attendance challenges as a result. Following the 2008 season, the ownership announced that they would leave the Frontier League, becoming an amateur collegiate summer baseball team. The Paints were the longest tenured franchise in the Frontier League in 2008 and the last remaining original Frontier League team in the league.\nThe Paints are represented in the Frontier League Hall of Fame by owner Dr. Chris Hanners, 1B Scott Pinoni, infielder Mitch House, OF Willie Edwards, pitcher Bobby Chandler, OF Gator McBride, and 3B Travis Garcia.\nProspect League era.\nSince 2009, the Chillicothe Paints have competed in the Prospect League, an amateur collegiate summer league. In 2010, the Paints won their first Prospect League championship against the Danville Dans on an 11th inning walk off home run by Ian Nielsen. The 2010 Paints were led by OF Jeff Holm (.359 BA, 11 HR, 60 RBI), pitcher Blake Mascarello (7-1, 2.86 ERA) and closer Kyle Lindquist (4-1, 10 saves, 2.86 ERA).\nThe Paints celebrated their 25th season in 2017. As part of the festivities, the Paints retired longtime coach Marty Dunn's number 25 in a pregame ceremony that included former players and staff throughout the first 24 seasons of Paints baseball. That season, the Paints averaged 1,959 fans per game, setting a franchise record in both average attendance and total attendance. The 58,755 total attendance marked a new Prospect League record. The Paints ranked in the top 10 of all summer collegiate teams nationwide in per-game attendance in 2017.\nAfter missing the playoffs in 2016 and 2017, Chillicothe made a return to the playoffs in 2018, losing to the Kokomo Jackrabbits two games to one in the East Division Championship Series. It was the first playoff appearance for manager Brian Bigam since he took over the reins in 2016. Jack Raines was named the Prospect League's Galen Woods Fireman of the Year (Reliever of the Year).\nThe Paints began the 2019 season 2\u20137, but went 41-14 the rest of the campaign (including 3\u20131 in the playoffs) and defeated the Danville Dans in a one-game East Division Championship Game and then, after losing game one of the Prospect League Championship Series at home to the league's newest team, the Cape Catfish, the Paints won games two and three in Cape Girardeau, Mo., to capture the franchise's second league title. Trailing 2\u20131 in the middle of the game, Trey Smith hit a grand slam to put Chillicothe in the lead 5\u20132, the eventual final score. Closer Nate Haugh was named the Prospect League's Galen Woods Fireman of the Year (Reliever of the Year) and the team was paced by C Cole Andrews (.320 BA, 11 HR, 61 RBI) and pitcher Austin Calopietro (6-1, 2.47 ERA). For the first time in team history, the Paints averaged at least 2,000 fans per game (2,037) and totaled 57,040 for the season, leading the league and ranking 15th nationally in both categories among similar type teams nationwide.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66686", "revid": "1427077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66686", "title": "Cook County Cheetahs", "text": ""}
{"id": "66687", "revid": "50166619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66687", "title": "Quercus rubra", "text": "Species of flowering plant in the beech and oak family Fagaceae\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuercus rubra, the northern red oak or common red oak, is an oak tree in the red oak group (\"Quercus\" section \"Lobatae\"). It is a native of North America, in the eastern and central United States and southeast and south-central Canada. It has been introduced to small areas in Western Europe, where it can frequently be seen cultivated in gardens and parks. It prefers good soil that is slightly acidic. Often simply called red oak, northern red oak is so named to distinguish it from southern red oak (\"Q.\u00a0falcata\"), also known as the Spanish oak.\nDescription.\nIn many forests, \"Quercus rubra\" grows straight and tall, to , exceptionally to tall, with a trunk of up to in diameter. Open-grown trees do not get as tall, but can develop a stouter trunk, up to in diameter. It has stout branches growing at right angles to the stem, forming a narrow round-topped head.\nUnder optimal conditions and full sun, northern red oak is fast growing and a 10-year-old tree can be tall. Trees may live up to 400 years; a living example of 326 years was noted in 2001.&lt;ref name=\"people.eku.edu/pedersonn/OLDLISTeast\"&gt;http://&lt;/ref&gt;\nNorthern red oak is easy to recognize by its bark, which features ridges that appear to have shiny stripes down the center. A few other oaks have bark with this kind of appearance in the upper tree, but the northern red oak is the only tree with the striping all the way down the trunk.\nAs with most other deciduous oaks, leafout takes place in spring when day length has reached 13 hours, tied entirely to the photoperiod regardless of air temperature. As a consequence (see below), in cooler regions, northern red oaks often lose their flowers to late spring frosts, resulting in no seed crop for the year. The catkins and leaves emerge at the same time. The acorns develop on the tree for two growing seasons and are released from the tree in early October, and leaf drop begins when day length falls under 11 hours. The timing of leafout and leaf drop can vary by as much as three weeks in the northern and southern US. Seedlings emerge in spring when soil temperatures reach .\nRed oak acorns, unlike the white oak group, display epigeal dormancy and will not germinate without a minimum of three months' exposure to temperatures below . They also take two years of growing on the tree before development is completed.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe species grows from the north end of the Great Lakes, east to Nova Scotia, south as far as Georgia, Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana, and west to Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, and Minnesota.\nIt grows rapidly and is tolerant of many soils and varied situations, although it prefers the glacial drift and well-drained borders of streams. In the southeastern United States, it is frequently a part of the canopy in an oak-heath forest, but generally not as important as some other oaks.\nNorthern red oak is the most common species of oak in the northeastern US after the closely related pin oak (\"Q.\u00a0palustris\"). The red oak group as a whole are more abundant today than they were when European settlement of North America began as forest clearing and exploitation for lumber much reduced the population of the formerly dominant white oaks.\nReproduction.\n\"Northern red oak (\"Quercus rubra\" L.) is monoecious, dichogamous, wind-pollinated, and self-incompatible\". Pollination occurs in the first growing season, but fertilization and acorn maturation occur during the second growing season.\nEcology.\nOver the last few decades, the northern red oak has dealt with several environmental factors, mainly disease, predation by insects, and limited opportunities for dispersal. These stresses have impacted the species' ability to proliferate in both the Northeast and Europe. The various environmental responses observed in \"Quercus rubra\" across several temperate environmental conditions have allowed for it to serve as a model organism for studying symbiotic relationships, dispersal, and habituation between tree species.\nPests and diseases.\nCanker pathogen, \"Diplodia corticola,\" has become a major pathogen to the species over the last decade, causing leaf browning, bark cracking and bleeding, and high rates of tree mortality across the northeastern United States. The northern red oak is also characterized as one of the most susceptible species to plant fungi \"Phytophthora cinnamomi\" and \"Phytophthora ramorum,\" which have caused severe, red-black cankers in the trunk region of the species. Both \"P. cinnamomi\" and \"P. ramorum\" grow under warmer temperature conditions; as a result, northern red oak trees found in California, France, and northern Spain all have a higher incidence of fungal infection. Oak Wilt caused by the fungus \"Bretziella fagacearum\" is a major pathogen found in eastern North America that can kill trees quickly.\nThere has been a recent northern red oak decline in Arkansas which is \"unique in that it is associated with increases in red oak borer\" (Enaphalodes rufulus) which \"is native to the eastern United States and usually occurs in mixed oak forests\". \"It damages the phloem, sapwood, and heartwood which means the ability for growth and repair is attacked as well as the stability of the tree\".\nAbiotic stresses.\nNorthern red oak seedlings have been known to have a high mortality rate in northeast regions prone to spring freeze, particularly in Massachusetts. Acorns produced by oaks in this region are typically smaller in size as an adaptation to frost produced in high latitudes; however, the resulting smaller seedlings have produced limited opportunities for animal consumption and dispersal. Flooding along the continental United States has been shown to be a major issue for the northern red oak, in which decreased phloem transport and photosynthetic activity has been observed, but only after multiple days of flooding, indicating that the northern red oak has adapted moderate resistance to excess water exposure. The northern red oak has also developed tolerance mechanisms for heat stress, particularly observed in deciduous forests in the Southeastern United States, where, during summer heat waves, temperatures can exceed . The leaves of the northern red oak have been observed to have an acclimation to Rubisco activase activity that is directly correlated to acclimations with repeated exposure to heat waves. Consistent photosynthetic activity in the red oak has also been observed in the presence of high carbon dioxide levels that often occur as a result of elevated temperatures.\nAnimals.\nNorthern red oak kernels have highly concentrated amounts of bitter-tasting tannin, a biochemical classified as a predator deterrent, which has limited appeal for consumption among animals. Despite this, the acorns are eaten by deer, squirrels and birds. In Europe, the acorns are consumed by several moth species, particularly \"Cydia fagiglandana\" and \"Cydia splendana\", which increases their niche breadths and reduces their competition with \"Curculio\" weevils. Due to this, germination rates among the northern red oak acorns have decreased significantly and resulted in less seed dispersal by animals within Poland. In addition, limited opportunities for dispersal have become costly for the northern red oak in Europe. European animals known for dispersing tendencies, such as the European jay and wood mouse, have been found to be more attracted to local oak species.\nFungi.\n\"Quercus rubra\" has effective ectomycorrhizal relationships that have been correlated with increased growth rates. Northern red oak trees have been shown to increase growth in the presence of various ascomycetes that coil at the base of the oak trunk. The fungi, which eventually proliferate at the stumps of deciduous trees, have been found to be host-specific to both \"Quercus rubra\" and \"Quercus montana\" and primarily promote growth upon infection.\nInvasiveness in Europe.\nIt was introduced to Europe in the 1700s and has naturalized throughout most of western and central Europe.\nAcross western and central Europe, the northern red oak has become the fourth-most significant invasive species, colonizing several regions across Belgium, Germany, Northern Italy, Lithuania, Poland, Ukraine, European Russia, the Urals and Western Siberia. The northern red oak is primarily found on the edges of woodland reserves in Europe, where light availability, tannin concentration, and animal dispersal are the most necessary component for the species' longevity and survival. The high influx of the species in Europe is primarily based on its economic productivity as a fast-growing source of timber; however, it has been linked to lower percentages of trace elements and minerals found in the surrounding soil and reduced richness among native oak species such as \"Quercus robur\".\nUses.\nThe northern red oak is one of the most important oaks for timber production in North America. Quality red oak is of high value as lumber and veneer, while defective logs are used as firewood. Other related oaks are also cut and marketed as red oak, although their wood is not always of as high a quality. These include eastern black oak, scarlet oak, pin oak, Shumard oak, southern red oak and other species in the red oak group. Construction uses include flooring, veneer, interior trim, and furniture. It is also used for lumber, railroad ties, and fence posts.\nRed oak wood grain is so open that smoke can be blown through it from end-grain to end-grain on a flat-sawn board. For this reason, it is subject to moisture infiltration and is unsuitable for outdoor uses such as boatbuilding or exterior trim.\nThe acorns can be collected in autumn, shelled, tied up in a cloth, and leached to remove bitterness. They can then be eaten whole or ground into meal.\nOrnamental use.\n\"Quercus rubra\" is grown in parks and large gardens as a specimen tree. It is not planted as often as the closely related pin oak as it develops a taproot and quickly becomes difficult to transplant, however modern growing pots have made starting seedlings with taproots easier than in the past.\nCulture.\nIt is the state tree of New Jersey and the provincial tree of Prince Edward Island.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66688", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66688", "title": "Dubois County Dragons", "text": ""}
{"id": "66689", "revid": "53396", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66689", "title": "Evansville Otters", "text": "Frontier League baseball team in Evansville, Indiana\nMinor league baseball team&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox/mobileviewfix.css\"/&gt;\nThe Evansville Otters are a professional baseball team based in Evansville, Indiana. They compete in the Frontier League (FL) as a member of the Central Division. Since their relocation from Lancaster, Ohio in 1995, the Otters have played at Bosse Field, which originally opened in 1915. The Otters are the oldest current team in the Frontier League and have reached the postseason fourteen times, winning Frontier League championships in 2006 and 2016.\nHistory.\nThe Otters franchise history began with the Lancaster Scouts, a founding member of the Frontier League in 1993. After their second year playing in Lancaster, Ohio, and drawing a league-low 261 fans a game, the franchise relocated to Evansville, Indiana and renamed themselves the Otters. The name was chosen via a Name the Team contest, with Otters beating out Pioneers, River Pilots, and Wolves. Otters were extirpated from Southern Indiana in the late 19th century, but one had recently been spotted in the region and the Indiana Department of Natural Resources was working to re-introduce them.\nWhen the Otters began play in 1995, they returned professional baseball to Evansville for the first time in a decade. The city had been without a team since the Evansville Triplets of the American Association relocated to Nashville, Tennessee following the 1984 season.\nThe Otters named Boots Day their manager in December 1994. Day was a former Evansville Triplet and had previously managed for the Bristol Tigers of the Appalachian League from 1982 to 1983.\nThe Otters drew 90,943 fans in their first season, more than the entire Frontier League had in its inaugural season two years earlier. Their 2,675 fans a game was third among all independent baseball teams in 1995, behind only the St. Paul Saints, Winnipeg Goldeyes, and Sioux City Explorers. The Otters' general manager, Jim Miller, was awarded the Frontier League's 1995 Executive of the Year award.\nThe first Evansville Otters game was played on June 15, 1995. The Otters were awarded the Frontier League Organization of the Year Award in 1997, and the Commissioner's Award of Excellence in 2004. They earned their 689th win, a league record, on August 18, 2011. The team hosted the largest crowd ever at Bosse Field on July 24, 2013, with 8,253 fans in attendance. The Otters welcomed their 2,000,000th fan to the ballpark on August 18, 2013.\nThe Otters have promoted over 50 of their players to Major League Baseball franchises. Four Otters have gone on to careers at the major league level including George Sherrill, Andrew Werner, Brandyn Sittinger, and Randy Wynne.\nThe success of the Otters in Evansville led to the move of more Frontier League teams to larger cities, many of which have built new ballparks, leading to the increased stability and success of the league in recent years.\nOn May 27, 2014, the Otters became the first team in the Frontier League to reach 800 wins.\nThe Otters reached the Frontier League Championship Series in 2023 for the first time since 2016 but lost in five games to the Quebec Capitales.\nBallpark.\nThe Evansville Otters have played their home games at Bosse Field since they moved to Evansville in 1995. It was built in 1915 and is the third oldest ballpark still in use by a professional team, trailing Fenway Park and Wrigley Field.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66690", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66690", "title": "Gateway Grizzlies", "text": "Frontier League baseball team in Sauget, Illinois\nThe Gateway Grizzlies are a professional baseball team based in Sauget, Illinois. The Grizzlies compete in the Frontier League (FL) as a member of the West Division in the Midwest Conference. The franchise was founded in 2001 and they play their home games at the 6,000-seat Arsenal BG Ballpark, just 8 miles southeast of Downtown St. Louis. Some of the defining features of the stadium include lawn seats, bleacher seats, box seating, party suites, a hot tub suite, and more.\nThe Grizzlies won the Frontier Cup in 2003, defeating the Evansville Otters 3 games to 0.\nThe team have a rivalry with the Schaumburg Boomers, with whom they have shared a division since 2012.\n\"Baseball's Best Burger\".\nThe team offers their own version of the Luther burger named \"Baseball's Best Burger\". Featured on ESPN, Fortune, and Man v. Food, the 1,000 calorie burger uses a deep-fried doughnut in place of a traditional bun.\nBroadcasting.\nGrizzlies games are currently broadcast on Mixlr, and can be watched live on FloSports with a subscription. The team's current director of Broadcasting and Media Relations is Jason Guerette.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66691", "revid": "44328505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66691", "title": "Aircraft pilot", "text": "Person controlling an aircraft in flight\nAn aircraft pilot, or aviator, is an individual who controls an aircraft's flight by operating its directional controls. Other aircrew members, such as navigators and flight engineers, are also considered aviators because they assist in operating the aircraft\u2019s navigation and engine systems. Aircrew members like drone operators, flight attendants, mechanics, and ground crew are not classified as aviators.\nTo recognize pilots' qualifications and responsibilities, most militaries and many airlines around the world award aviator badges to their pilots.\nDefinition.\nThe first recorded use of the term \"aviator\" (\"aviateur\" in French) was in 1887, as a variation of \"aviation\", from the Latin \"avis\" (meaning \"bird\"), coined in 1863 by G. J. G. de La Landelle in \"Aviation Ou Navigation A\u00e9rienne\" (\"Aviation or Air Navigation\"). The term \"aviatrix\" (\"aviatrice\" in French), now archaic, was formerly used for a female pilot. The term \"aviator\" (\"aviateur\" in French), now archaic, was formerly used for a male pilot. People who operate aircraft obtain a \"pilot\" licence. Aviation regulations referred to \"pilots\". These terms were used more in the early days of aviation, when airplanes were extremely rare, and connoted bravery and adventure. For example, a 1905 reference work described the Wright brothers' first airplane: \"The weight, including the body of the aviator, is a little more than 700 pounds\".\nHistory.\nTo ensure the safety of people in the air and on the ground, early aviation soon required that aircraft be under the operational control of a properly trained, certified pilot at all times, who is responsible for the safe and legal completion of the flight. The A\u00e9ro-Club de France delivered the first certificate to Louis Bl\u00e9riot in 1908\u2014followed by Glenn Curtiss, L\u00e9on Delagrange, and Robert Esnault-Pelterie. The British Royal Aero Club followed in 1910 and the Aero Club of America in 1911 (Glenn Curtiss receiving the first).\nCivilian.\nCivilian pilots fly aircraft of all types privately for pleasure, charity, or in pursuance of a business, or commercially for non-scheduled (charter) and scheduled passenger and cargo air carriers (airlines), corporate aviation, agriculture (crop dusting, etc.), forest fire control, law enforcement, etc. When flying for an airline, pilots are usually referred to as airline pilots, with the pilot in command often referred to as the \"captain\".\nAirline.\nThere were 290,000 airline pilots in the world in 2017 and aircraft simulator manufacturer CAE Inc. forecasts a need for 255,000 new ones for a population of 440,000 by 2027, 150,000 for growth and 105,000 to offset retirement and attrition: 90,000 in Asia-Pacific (average pilot age in 2016: 45.8 years), 85,000 in Americas (48 years), 50,000 in Europe (43.7 years) and 30,000 in Middle East &amp; Africa (45.7 years).\nBoeing expects 790,000 new pilots in 20 years from 2018, 635,000 for commercial aviation, 96,000 for business aviation and 59,000 for helicopters: % in Asia Pacific (261,000), % in North America (206,000), % in Europe (146,000), % in the Middle East (64,000), % in Latin America (57,000), % in Africa (29,000) and % in Russia/ Central Asia (27,000). By November 2017, due a shortage of qualified pilots, some pilots were leaving corporate aviation to return to airlines. In one example a Global 6000 pilot, making $250,000 a year for 10 to 15 flight hours a month, returned to American Airlines with full seniority. A Gulfstream G650 or Global 6000 pilot might earn between $245,000 and $265,000, and recruiting one may require up to $300,000. At the other end of the spectrum, constrained by the available pilots, some small carriers hire new pilots who need 300 hours to jump to airlines in a year. They may also recruit non-career pilots who have other jobs or airline retirees who want to continue to fly.\nAutomation.\nThe number of airline pilots could decrease as automation replaces copilots and eventually pilots as well. In January 2017 Rhett Ross, CEO of Continental Motors said \"my concern is that in the next two decades\u2014if not sooner\u2014automated and autonomous flight will have developed sufficiently to put downward pressure on both wages and the number and kind of flying jobs available. So if a kid asks the question now and he or she is 18, 20 years from now will be 2037 and our would-be careerist will be 38\u2014not even mid-career. Who among us thinks aviation and especially for-hire flying will look like it does now?\" Christian Dries, owner of Diamond Aircraft Austria said \"Behind the curtain, aircraft manufacturers are working on a single-pilot cockpit where the airplane can be controlled from the ground and only in case of malfunction does the pilot of the plane interfere. Basically the flight will be autonomous and I expect this to happen in the next five to six years for freighters.\"\nIn August 2017 financial company UBS predicted pilotless airliners are technically feasible and could appear around 2025, offering around $35bn of savings, mainly in pilot costs: $26bn for airlines, $3bn for business jets and $2.1bn for civil helicopters; $3bn/year from lower pilot training and aviation insurance costs due to safer flights; $1bn from flight optimisation (1% of global airlines' $133bn jet fuel bill in 2016); not counting revenue opportunity from increased capacity utilization.\nRegulations have to adapt with air cargo likely at the forefront, but pilotless flights could be limited by consumer behaviour: 54% of 8,000 people surveyed are defiant while 17% are supportive, with acceptation progressively forecast.\nAVweb reporter Geoff Rapoport stated, \"pilotless aircraft are an appealing prospect for airlines bracing for the need to hire several hundred thousand new pilots in the next decade. Wages and training costs have been rapidly rising at regional U.S. airlines over the last several years as the major airlines have hired pilots from the regionals at unprecedented rates to cover increased air travel demand from economic expansion and a wave of retirements\".\nGoing to pilotless airliners could be done in one bold step or in gradual improvements like by reducing the cockpit crew for long haul missions or allowing single pilot cargo aircraft. The industry has not decided how to proceed yet. Present automated systems are not autonomous and must be monitored; their replacement could require artificial intelligence with machine learning while present certified software is deterministic. As the Airbus A350 would only need minor modifications, Air Caraibes and French Bee parent Groupe Dubreuil see two-pilot crews in long-haul operations, without a third pilot for rotation, happening around 2024\u20132025.\nSingle-pilot freighters could start with regional flights. The Air Line Pilots Association believe removing pilots would threaten aviation safety and opposes the April 2018 FAA Reauthorization Act's Section 744 establishing a research and development program to assist single-pilot cargo aircraft by remote and computer piloting.\nFor French aerospace research center Onera and avionics manufacturer Thales, artificial intelligence (AI) like consumer neural networks learning from large datasets cannot explain their operation and cannot be certified for safe air transport. Progress towards \u2018explainable\u2019 AIs can be expected in the next decade, as the Onera expects \"leads\" for a certifiable AI system, along EASA standards evolution.\nAfrica and Asia.\nIn some countries, such as Pakistan, Thailand and several African nations, there is a strong relationship between the military and the principal national airlines, and many airline pilots come from the military; however, that is no longer the case in the United States and Western Europe. While the flight decks of U.S. and European airliners do have ex-military pilots, many pilots are civilians. Military training and flying, while rigorous, is fundamentally different in many ways from civilian piloting.\nCanada.\nOperating an aircraft in Canada is regulated by the \"Aeronautics Act\" of 1985 and the Canadian Aviation Regulations provide rules for Pilot licensing in Canada.\nRetirement age is provided by each airline, with some set to age 60, but changes to the Canadian Human Rights Act have restricted the retirement age set by the airlines.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States in 2020, there were 691,691 active pilot certificates. This was down from a high of over 800,000 active pilots in 1980. Of the active pilot certificate holders, there were 160,860 Private, 103,879 Commercial, 164,193 Airline Transport, and 222,629 Student.\nIn 1930, the Air Commerce Act established pilot licensing requirements for American civil aviation.\nCommercial airline pilots in the United States have a mandatory retirement age of 65, having increased from age 60 in 2007.\nMilitary.\nMilitary pilots fly with the armed forces, primarily the air forces, of a government or nation-state. Their tasks involve combat and non-combat operations, including direct hostile engagements and support operations. Military pilots undergo specialized training, often with weapons. Examples of military pilots include fighter pilots, bomber pilots, transport pilots, test pilots, and astronauts.\nMilitary pilots are trained with a different syllabus than civilian pilots, which is delivered by military instructors. This is due to the different aircraft, flight goals, flight situations and chains of responsibility. Many military pilots do transfer to civilian-pilot qualification after they leave the military, and typically their military experience provides the basis for a civilian pilot's license.\nIt was in France that the world's first bombing group was created, on November 23, 1914. The Voisin III were the only aircraft available for this mission. These could only carry very light loads (between 55\u2013160\u00a0kg of bombs), the bombs were rudimentary and the aiming systems remained to be developed. Initially, the bombs were simply thrown overboard by the crew, with necessarily very limited accuracy.\nNevertheless, the beginnings of tactical and strategic bombing took place in the first days of the war. Thus, the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) carried out bombing missions of the hangars of the airports of D\u00fcsseldorf, Cologne and Friedrichhafen during the autumn of 1914. The formation of the Brieftauben Abteilung Ostende (\"Ostend Carrier Pigeon Detachment\", name of code of the first German bombing units) carried out bombing missions over the English Channel in December 1914.\nUnmanned aerial vehicles.\nUnmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs, also known as \"drones\") operate without a pilot on board and are classed into two categories: autonomous aircraft that operate without active human control during flight and remotely piloted UAVs which are operated remotely by one or more persons. The person controlling a remotely piloted UAV may be referred to as its pilot or operator. Depending on the sophistication and use of the UAV, pilots/operators of UAVs may require certification or training, but are generally not subject to the licensing/certification requirements of pilots of manned aircraft. Some UAV's can be bought online and are not in military use.\nMost jurisdictions have restrictions on the use of UAVs which have greatly limited their use in controlled airspace; UAVs have mostly been limited to military and hobbyist use. In the United States, use of UAVs is very limited in controlled airspace (generally, above 400\u00a0ft/122m and away from airports), and the FAA prohibits nearly all commercial use. Once regulations are made to allow expanded use of UAVs in controlled airspace, there is expected to be a large surge of UAVs in use and, consequently, high demand for pilots/operators of these aircraft.\nSpace.\nThe general concept of an airplane pilot can be applied to human spaceflight, as well. The pilot is the astronaut who directly controls the operation of a spacecraft. This term derives directly from the usage of the word \"pilot\" in aviation, where it is synonymous with \"aviator\".\nPilot certifications.\nPilots are required to go through many hours of flight training and theoretical study, that differ depending on the country. The first step is acquiring the Private Pilot License (PPL), or Private Pilot Certificate. In the United States of America, this includes a minimum of 35 to 40 hours of flight training, the majority of which with a Certified Flight Instructor.\nIn the United States, an LSA (Light Sport Aircraft) license can be obtained in at least 20 hours of flight time.\nGenerally, the next step in a pilot's progression is Instrument Rating (IR), or Multi-Engine Rating (MEP) addons. Pilots may also choose to pursue a Commercial Pilot License (CPL) after completing their PPL. This is required if the pilot desires to pursue a professional career as a pilot. To captain an airliner, one must obtain an Airline Transport Pilot License (ATPL). In the United States after 1 August 2013, an ATPL is required even when acting as a first officer. Some countries/carriers require/use a multi-crew cooperation (MCC) certificate.\nLife expectancy.\nThere is a popular belief that airline pilots die earlier than the general population. This belief was not supported by studies of American Airlines and British Airways pilots. A hoax claiming to show an inverse relationship between retirement age and life expectancy was refuted by Boeing. However, a study of several airline pilot associations' data found evidence of higher mortality.\nA 1978 study of military pilots found increased longevity, which was attributed to \"generally good socioeconomic background, the positive genetic influence of long-lived parents, the above average intelligence, and the health and fitness orientation of the military aviator\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66693", "revid": "49504230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66693", "title": "Quercus montana", "text": "Species of oak tree\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nQuercus montana, the chestnut oak, is a species of oak in the white oak group, \"Quercus\" sect. \"Quercus\". It is native to the eastern United States, where it is one of the most important ridgetop trees from southern Maine southwest to central Mississippi, with an outlying northwestern population in southern Michigan. It is also sometimes called rock oak because of its presence in montane and other rocky habitats.\nDescription.\nAs a consequence of its dry habitat and ridgetop exposure, \"Quercus montana\" is not usually a large tree, typically growing to tall; specimens growing in better conditions can grow up to tall. It tends to have a similar spread of . A 10-year-old sapling grown in full sun will stand about tall. This species is often an important canopy species in an oak-heath forest.\nIt is readily identified by its massively-ridged dark gray-brown bark, the thickest of any eastern North American oak. The leaves are long and broad, shallowly lobed with 10\u201315 rounded lobes on each margin; they are virtually identical to the leaves of swamp chestnut oak and chinkapin oak, but the trees can readily be distinguished by the bark, that of the chinkapin oak being a light ash-gray and somewhat peeling like that of the white oak and that of swamp chestnut oak being paler ash-gray and scaly. The chinkapin oak also has much smaller acorns than the chestnut oak. The chestnut oak is easily distinguished from the swamp white oak because that tree has whitened undersides on the leaves. Another important distinction between the chestnut oak and the swamp chestnut oak is by the habitat; if it grows on a ridge, it is chestnut oak, and if it grows in wet bottomlands, it is probably the more massive swamp chestnut oak; however, this is not fully reliable.\nCharacteristics include:\nThe acorns of the chestnut oak are long and broad, among the largest of Native American oaks, surpassed in size only by the bur oak and possibly swamp chestnut oak.\nTaxonomy and nomenclature.\nExtensive confusion between the chestnut oak (\"Quercus montana\") and the swamp chestnut oak (\"Quercus michauxii\") has occurred, and some botanists have considered them to be the same species in the past.\nThe name Quercus prinus was long used by many botanists and foresters for either the chestnut oak or the swamp chestnut oak, with the former otherwise called \"Q.\u00a0montana\" or the latter otherwise called \"Q.\u00a0michauxii\". The application of the name \"Q.\u00a0montana\" to the chestnut oak is now accepted, since \"Q.\u00a0prinus\" is of uncertain position, unassignable to either species.\nThe Latin specific epithet \"montana\" refers to mountains or coming from mountains which probably refers to the tree's habitat and its ability to grow on rocks.\nEcology.\nThis species is a predominant ridge-top tree in eastern North American hardwood forests. Young chestnut oaks are easily capable of reproducing from stump sprouts if cut. A significant amount of chestnut oaks in the Appalachians are trees that regrew from stump sprouts after being logged. It is a long-lived tree, with high-quality timber when well-formed. The acorns of the chestnut oak are a valuable wildlife food.\n\"Q. montana\" trees mast or produce more acorns under warmer summer temperatures rather than cooler summer temperatures. The results of a \"thin and burn treatment\" proved that increased light and resources correlated with a greater acorn yield. Associated with this, the Chestnut Oak drops it acorns around 2-5 weeks before many other native Oak species. This is due to the fact that Chestnut Oak acorns have no dormancy which means they must begin germinating instantly. This also helps with succession due to the acorns dropping before the peak foraging season. \nUses.\nChestnut oak trees are generally not the best timber trees because they are usually branched low and not very straight, but when they grow in better conditions, they are valuable for timber, which is marketed as 'mixed white oak'. The bark of chestnut oak has a high tannin content and prior to the 20th century was heavily used in the leather tanning industry, but the wood was usually discarded since it was considered inferior to that of \"Q.\u00a0alba\". By the late 19th century, as the population of mature white oaks in the eastern US was dwindling, loggers began exploiting chestnut oak wood more heavily. It serves many of the same applications as white oak wood and as it is fairly rot-proof, has also been used for fencing, railroad ties, and other uses where the wood comes into contact with soil. Due to a relatively high density ( per cu. ft), chestnut oak makes excellent firewood.\nThe acorns can be eaten by humans but, if bitter, may need to have the tannins leached.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66694", "revid": "18152109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66694", "title": "Johnstown Johnnies", "text": ""}
{"id": "66695", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66695", "title": "Kalamazoo Kings", "text": "Defunct professional baseball team in Kalamazoo, Michigan\nMinor league baseball team&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox/mobileviewfix.css\"/&gt;\nThe Kalamazoo Kings were a professional baseball team based in Kalamazoo, Michigan, in the United States between 2001-2010. The Kings were a member of the independent Frontier League. The Kings played their home games at Homer Stryker Field. A previous Frontier League team named the Kalamazoo Kodiaks had existed in Kalamazoo from 1996-1998, playing in the same stadium, before relocating to London, Ontario and being renamed the London Werewolves.\nTeam history.\nIn their second Frontier League season, Kalamazoo hosted the 2002 Frontier League All-Star game on July 10. The night before, the Major League Baseball All-Star game ended in a controversial 7-7 tie after 11 innings. The Frontier League owners in attendance determined that their league All-Star Game should never end in a tie and designed a Home Run Derby to be the tie breaker. The game did end in a tie and the Home Run Derby took place. Brody Jackson of the River City Rascals hit the eventual game winner for the West Division. The Derby drew national attention for the League immediately, with a 30-minute segment on Fox Sports Radio\u2019s national broadcast and continuing to have the television footage shown the following afternoon on ESPN\u2019s SportsCenter. Frontier League Commissioner Bill Lee did 12 radio interviews on stations throughout the country and interviews with several newspapers including The New York Times and Washington Post. A derby has settled a tie in four Frontier League All-Star games - 2002, 2003, 2006 and 2008.\nThe 2005 Kalamazoo season was the highlight for the franchise as the Kings won the Western division with a 53-43 (.552) record, advancing to the playoffs, defeating the Rockford RiverHawks 3-1 to advance to their first Frontier League championship series. Kalamazoo would take the best-of-five series 3-2 against the Chillicothe Paints to take the title. The Kings were managed by former Richmond Roosters manager Fran Riordan where had won back-to-back titles in 2002 and 2003. The 2005 Kings were led by pitcher Josh Beshears (13-3, 3.12 ERA), closer Josh Daws (7-2, 12 saves, 2.82 ERA), 1B Tim Brown (.323 BA, 16 HR, 71 RBI), and Frontier League MVP RF Pete Pirman (.347 BA, 23 HR, 100 RBI).\nThe Kings returned to the championship series again in 2008, winning the Eastern division with a dominating 60-36 (.625) record, but lost to the Windy City Thunderbolts 3-0. John Brownell (11-2, 3.87 ERA), Brandon Parillo (1-3, 20 saves, 2.93 ERA) and Brendan Murphy (.332 BA, 16 HR, 77 RBI) paced the Kings.\nWith financial and attendance pressures, the Kings franchise folded operations for the 2011 season.\nIn 2012, Kalamazoo Baseball, LLC sued Frontier Professional Baseball, Inc. claiming that they purposely interfered with the sale of the Kalamazoo Kings in 2011, in order to remove the Kings franchise from the league. In the suit, Kalamazoo Baseball, LLC requested $25,000 in damages, as well as interest and attorney fees.\nThe Kalamazoo Kings are represented in the Frontier League Hall of Fame by OF Pete Pirman, OF Willie Edwards, and manager Fran Riordan.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Kalamazoo Kings were referenced in the comic strip \"Gil Thorp\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66696", "revid": "1682772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66696", "title": "Richmond Roosters", "text": "Defunct professional baseball team in Richmond, Indiana\nMinor league baseball team&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox/mobileviewfix.css\"/&gt;\nThe Richmond Roosters were a professional baseball team based in Richmond, Indiana from 1995 to 2005. The Roosters played in the independent Frontier League, which at that time had no affiliation with Major League Baseball.\nThe Roosters began play in the third season of the Frontier League when the Kentucky Rifles franchise folded and Richmond was granted an expansion team. The team played at Don McBride Stadium in Richmond. The franchise was sold after the 2005 season, moved to Traverse City, Michigan and became the Traverse City Beach Bums.\nHistory.\nThe Richmond Roosters returned professional baseball to Richmond, Indiana in 1995, with the last professional team being the Class D Richmond Tigers of the Ohio-Indiana League, a Detroit Tigers affiliate, which folded in 1951. The team played at Municipal Stadium, which is now known as Don McBride Stadium.\nThe Roosters were led in the 1995 season by Morgan Burkhart, who would become the second Frontier League player to make a Major League Baseball team when he joined the Boston Red Sox in 2000. Brian Tollberg of the Chillicothe Paints was the first league alumnus to make the majors, beating Burkhart by a week in the 2000 season. Burkhart won three league Frontier League MVP awards (1995\u20131997) and the league MVP award is now named after him. On June 8, 1997, Roosters pitcher Christian Hess threw the first no-hitter in Frontier League history, defeating the Kalamazoo Kodiaks 9\u20130 in Kalamazoo.\nRichmond won back-to-back Frontier League championships in 2001 and 2002, led by player-manager Fran Riordan. In 2001, the Roosters upset the league-best Paints 2\u20130 in the best-of-three championship series to capture their first Frontier League title. The team was led by pitcher Steve Carver (10\u20133, 3.91 ERA), closer Mike Ziroli (1\u20131, 2.58 ERA, 16 saves), 1B Riordan (.299 BA, 14 HR, 74 RBI) and C-1B Steve Mitrovich (.304 BA, 12 HR, 65 RBI). The team repeated as Frontier League champions in 2002, again upsetting the league-best Washington Wild Things 3\u20131 in a best of five series for the title. The Roosters were led in 2002 by pitchers Enriques Baca (10\u20134, 2.87 ERA) and Matt Schweitzer (8\u20132, 4.29 ERA), Fran Riordan (.314 BA, 11 HR, 81 RBI), and league MVP OF Phil Willingham (.360 BA, 15 HR, 86 RBI, 36 SB).\nGrowth in the Frontier League challenged the small Richmond franchise and the ownership group elected to sell the franchise at the conclusion of the 2005 season. The last home game for the Roosters was a 9\u20133 loss to the Evansville Otters on September 2, 2005, and the team finished the season on the road with the last Richmond game being a 9\u20138 road loss to the Florence Freedom on September 5, 2005.\nIn 2005, the Roosters were purchased and the franchise moved to Traverse City, Michigan for the 2006 Frontier League season, playing at Wuerfel Park as the Traverse City Beach Bums.\nThe Roosters are represented in the Frontier League Hall of Fame by Richmond player-manager Fran Riordan, Richmond part-owner Duke Ward, along with Roosters first-basemen Morgan Burkhart, pitcher Matt Schweitzer, outfielder Pete Pirman, and pitcher Bobby Chandler.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66697", "revid": "1682772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66697", "title": "River City Rascals", "text": "American professional baseball team\nThe River City Rascals were a professional baseball team based in O'Fallon, Missouri, in the United States. The Rascals were a member of the West Division of the Frontier League, which is not affiliated with Major League Baseball. From the 1999 season to 2019, the Rascals played their home games at CarShield Field.\nHistory.\nZanesville Greys.\nThe franchise began in 1993 as one of the original six teams of the independent Frontier League with teams from Ohio, Kentucky, and West Virginia. The Greys played in Zanesville, Ohio, at Gant Municipal Stadium, a historic 4,000-seat multipurpose stadium built in 1940. The Greys were the first professional baseball team to play in Zanesville since 1950 and the Zanesville Indians.\nThe Greys won both halves of the 1993 season and defeated the Ohio Valley Redcoats in the playoffs to become the first champions of the Frontier League. Zanesville had five players hit over .300 as well as solid pitching; Kyle Shade was named Frontier League MVP and Tom Crowley was named Most Valuable Pitcher. The Greys also led the league in attendance with an average of 1,000 fans per game.\nDespite a 35\u201328 record in the 1994 season, the team finished in third place in the North Division behind Ohio Valley and Erie Sailors. The team returned to the playoffs in 1995 after a season characterized by solid pitching and baserunning. Despite only recording 12 home runs, the Greys led the league with 137 stolen bases. Zanesville swept the Newark Buffaloes two games to none in the Division Championship Series before falling to the Johnstown Steal in the Frontier League Championship Series. Closing pitcher, Don Wolfe was named League MVP and Playoff MVP in 1995. Wolfe had a league-leading 21 saves during the 1995 season.\nZanesville pitching was again strong in the 1996 season. The Greys were led by Matt Baxter with a 9\u20132 record and 2.47 ERA while the bullpen was led by Terry Pearson, who recorded 20 saves and a .50 ERA and stuck out 43 batters in 36 innings while only walking eight batters for the entire season. Pitching was not enough to make the playoffs and the team finished third in the FL East Division.\nAlthough the team had a winning record in each of the three seasons in Zanesville, the franchise fell into financial trouble. This was partially due to the Greys' market being one of the smallest in the league with a population around 25,000. The franchise was inactive during the 1997 and 1998 seasons.\nRiver City Rascals.\nOn Tuesday, October 27, 1998, O'Fallon, Missouri, Mayor Paul Renaud announced the new name of the team to be the \"River City Rascals\". Initial ownership of the Rascals consisted of a local group headed by Ken Wilson.\nThe Rascals began play in 1999 in the Western Division of the Frontier League under manager Jack Clark, pitching coach Greg Mathews, and first-base coach Dick Schofield Jr., all previous Major League Baseball players. The first game played was on Wednesday, June 2, 1999, on the road against the Cook County Cheetahs of Crestwood, Illinois. Pitcher Joey Pipes pitched a complete game in losing by a score of 1\u20130. The first home game was played on Tuesday, June 8, 1999, at T.R. Hughes Ballpark at the Ozzie Smith Sports Complex in front of an overflow crowd of 4,173 (3,500 seat capacity). The Rascals beat the Dubois County Dragons by a score of 6-5 by rallying from a 5\u20131 deficit with William Black scoring on Tim Still's sacrifice fly in the bottom of the ninth inning. This was the first minor league baseball game in Missouri since 1955. Under Clark, a former St. Louis Cardinals slugger, the team led the Frontier League in home runs, however only two pitchers had ERAs under 5.00. The move of the franchise from Zanesville to O'Fallon saw a major increase in attendance. The team averaged more than 150,000 fans in 1999 and set new franchise records in 2000 and again in 2002. The Rascals were named Frontier League Organization of the Year in 1999 and 2000; and Pat Daly was named Executive of the Year in 1999 followed by Matt Jones in 2002.\nClark left after the 1999 season to join the Los Angeles Dodgers as a hitting coach. He was replaced by Neil Fiala, who led the team to a West Division title in 2000 before losing in the first round of the playoffs to the Evansville Otters. The team just missed making the playoffs again in 2001, being eliminated on the last day of the season. The season was highlighted by outfielder Mike Robertson's 30-game hitting before being signed by the Boston Red Sox organization. Fiala resigned after the 2002 season and was replaced by former major-league catcher Marc Hill. Hill resigned after underperforming in the first half of the 2003 season and was replaced midseason by pitching coach Randy Martz.\nFormer pitcher Josh Kinney who played for the Rascals in 2001 (21 innings, 18 strikeouts, 1.71 ERA) became the first Rascal player, and second in franchise history, to make it to the Major Leagues. His contract was purchased from the Memphis Redbirds on July 2, 2006, by the St. Louis Cardinals where he appeared out of the bullpen during the 2006 regular season. His first major league pitch (July 3, 2006) was hit for a home run by Atlanta Braves left fielder Ryan Langerhans; Kinney finished the 2006 season winning a championship ring with the Cardinals as 2006 World Series Champions.\nIn 2005 the team auctioned off a \"one-day professional contract\" on eBay. Mark Skorlich, a 41-year-old Californian, won the auction with a $9,050 winning bid. The proceeds were donated to the local chapter of the United Way in nearby St. Louis. Coach Randy Martz started Skorlich in center field and the newly minted \"pro\" made a long throw from the right-center field gap into the cut-off man, but he saw no other action in the field. Local and national news outlets covered the story with the game being a sell-out.\nFollowing the 2006 season the franchise was acquired by the group \"PS and J Professional Baseball Club, LLC\" headed by Steve Malliet, an experienced minor league executive in both affiliated and independent baseball. After declining attendance and a number of seasons without a winning record Malliet hired former Cincinnati Reds farmhand Toby Rumfield as the Rascals' manager for the 2007 season. Rumfield began remaking the team, with only a few players from the 2006 remaining on the roster. The rebuilding was not immediate and the team finished with a record of 36\u201360. The 2007 Rascals finished last in the league in both fielding and pitching and offense suffered after the team lost first baseman Bobby Mosby in a trade to the Northern League and outfielder Phil Laurent, who was signed by the San Diego Padres. Under Rumfield, pitching improved in 2008 and closer Mike Benacka recorded 13 saves and a 0.35 ERA in 22 games before signing with Oakland Athletics halfway through the season. The Rascals finished 4th in the West Division with a record of 47\u201349. Despite the improvement from 2006 Rumfield was replaced by Chad Parker, who previously managed the Macon Music of the South Coast League.\nParker continued the rebuilding process and focused on adding speed and strengthen pitching. Under Parker, seven players reached double figures in steals, led by OF Scott Houin with 35. Offense was led by Chad Maddox (.307) and Ryan Wehrle (.317), and in August, Frontier League all-star Ernie Banks was acquired from the Washington Wild Things and hit .353 on the season. The Rascals clinched a division title late in the regular season, marking the first time since 2000. In the first round of the playoffs the team defeated the Windy City ThunderBolts, the first playoff series win since 1995 in Zanesville. In the Frontier League Championship Series the Rascals won the first two games of the series before Lake Erie Crushers rallied with three straight wins. The Rascals ended the 2009 season with a franchise-record 56 wins and Parker was named Frontier League Coach of the Year.\nParker resigned following the season and was replaced by former River City pitcher Steve Brook. Brook continued the rebuilding from Parker and the team finished second in the West Division. The team won the first round playoff series against the Southern Illinois Miners and entered the Frontier League Championship Series for the second straight season, a first in franchise history. The Rascals defeated the Traverse City Beach Bums in four games and won the franchise's second championship and first as the Rascals.\nIn 2013, the Rascals and the City of O'Fallon, Missouri came to an agreement to extend their lease at TR Hughes Ballpark through the 2022 season. However, in October 2018 the city of O'Fallon locked the Rascals out of CarShield Field and terminated the lease, citing a lack of payment. The team's ownership disputed the claims of unpaid bills in a statement, and said it would play ball in 2019. The dispute was resolved with a new one-year lease in January 2019, opening a path for the Rascals season to continue as scheduled.\nOn August 12, 2019, the team announced that they would cease operations after the 2019 season. The Rascals defeated the Florence Freedom in a decisive Game 5 winning 7-5 thus securing the 2019 Championship in their final season.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66698", "revid": "12517593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66698", "title": "Samara (fruit)", "text": "Non-opening dry fruit with a flattened wing\nA samara (, UK also: ) is a winged achene, a type of fruit in which a flattened wing of fibrous, papery tissue develops from the ovary wall. A samara is a simple dry fruit, and is indehiscent (not opening along a seam). The shape of a samara enables the wind to carry the seed further away from the tree than regular seeds would go, and is thus a form of anemochory.\nIn some cases the seed is in the centre of the wing, as in the elms (genus \"Ulmus\"), the hoptree (\"Ptelea trifoliata\"), and the bushwillows (genus \"Combretum\"). In other cases the seed is on one side, with the wing extending to the other side, making the seed autorotate as it falls, as in the maples (genus \"Acer\") and ash trees (genus \"Fraxinus\").\nThere are also single-wing samara such as mahogany (genus Swietenia) which have a shape that enables fluttering.\nSome species that normally produce paired samaras, such as \"Acer pseudoplatanus\", can also produce them in groups of three or four.\nIn culture.\nA samara is sometimes called a \"key\" and is often referred to as a \"wingnut\", \"helicopter\", \"whirlybird\", \"whirligig\", \"polynose\", or, in the north of England, a \"spinning jenny\". During the autumn months, they are a popular source of amusement for people that enjoy tossing them in the air and watching them spin to the ground.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66699", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66699", "title": "Rockford Aviators", "text": "The Rockford Aviators were a professional baseball team based in Rockford, Illinois that played in the independent Frontier League. Rockford previously had a team in the Frontier League called the RiverHawks (2002-2009). There was no Rockford team in the Frontier League in 2010 as the team played in the independent Northern League. A separate RiverHawks franchise then returned to the Frontier League in 2011 and changed the team name to the Aviators in 2013. The RiverHawks began play at Marinelli Field. In 2006, Rockford moved to RiverHawks Stadium, now known as Rivets Stadium, located in Loves Park, Illinois.\nHistory.\nThe Aviators Frontier League franchise was relocated from Springfield, Illinois, where the franchise played as the Springfield Capitals. The team moved to Rockford for the 2002 season. The RiverHawks franchise moved to the Northern League in 2010, but stayed for one season before a Rockford team returned to the Frontier League in 2011 when the Northern League folded. The team changed the name to the Aviators for 2013. The Aviators folded following the 2015 season.\nThe highlight for Rockford was the stellar 2004 Frontier League season with manager Bob Koopmann, winning the West division with a 59-37 (.615) record, advancing to the playoffs where they edged the Windy City Thunderbolts 3-2 in the best of five series to advance to the league championship series. Rockford would then sweep the Evansville Otters 3-0 to win the Frontier League title. The team was led by pitcher Josh Tomsu (10-3, 2.64 ERA), closer Josh Latimer (3-3, 15 saves, 2.47 ERA), Aaron McEachran (.332 BA, 11 HR, 62 RBI), Rico Santana (.284 BA, 5 HR, 65 RBI, 27 SB), Doug Schutt (.286 BA, 3 HR, 32 RBI, 39 SB) and Frontier League MVP Rich Austin (.359 BA, 15 HR, 77 RBI, 22 SB).\nThe franchise hit a difficult period in 2012 when the RiverHawks ballpark went through foreclosure. The stadium ultimately was sold through auction in 2015. The league had taken over management of the Aviators franchise late in the 2015 season, and with financial instability, the team disbanded.\nRockford is represented in the Frontier League Hall of Fame by outfielders Stephen Holdren, Jason James and Richard Austin.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66700", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66700", "title": "Washington Wild Things", "text": "Frontier League baseball team in Washington, Pennsylvania\nMinor league baseball team&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox/mobileviewfix.css\"/&gt;\nThe Washington Wild Things are a professional baseball team based in Washington, Pennsylvania. The Wild Things compete in the Frontier League (FL) as a member of the Central Division in the Midwest Conference.The team is owned by Stu and Francine Williams, and initially played its home games at the Thurman Munson Memorial Stadium in Akron, Ohio, before moving to EQT Park in Washington, Pennsylvania, in 2002.\nThe franchise was founded in 1997 as an expansion team as the Canton Crocodiles, and have won their only Frontier Cup in history during their inaugural season. They have the most playoff appearances in all Frontier League teams, with 15 since their founding, including nine division championships.\nManagers.\nFollowing the 2003 season, Jeff Isom resigned as manager and moved to the Joliet Jackhammers of the Northern League. After the 2007 season, Massarelli and the Wild Things parted ways. He took 2008 off and was named the first manager in Lake Erie Crushers history. In 2008, Greg Jelks was named the new manager of the Wild Things, but failed to lead them to the playoffs and finished the season at 48\u201348.\nMark Mason returned to the Wild Things in 2009 as manager after coaching the Paints for two seasons. In November 2009, Mason left the Wild Things to become pitching coach of the Atlantic League's York Revolution. On February 16, 2010, they announced Darin Everson as their new manager. After the 2011 season, Darin Everson and the Wild Things parted ways following an 80\u2013110 record over two seasons. On October 18, 2011, the Wild Things hired former MLB catcher and Triple-A coach Chris Bando as the 6th manager in Wild things history. In March 2013, Bando announced that due to complications from hip surgery in January he would resign as manager. Recently hired Bench coach Bart Zeller, who had managed the Joliet Slammers the last two seasons and won a championship, was promoted to manager. During the 2014 season at 31\u201319 headed into the All-Star break, manager Bart Zeller resigned due to health concerns. He was scheduled to manage the Eastern All-Stars. After the break, Bob Bozzuto took over as manager.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66702", "revid": "7401055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66702", "title": "Kenneth Thomson (disambiguation)", "text": "Kenneth Thomson, 2nd Baron Thomson of Fleet (1923\u20132006) was a Canadian billionaire businessman and art collector.\nKen or Kenneth Thomson may also refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "66706", "revid": "30585864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66706", "title": "Fraxinus", "text": "Genus of plants\nFraxinus (), commonly called ash, is a genus of plants in the olive and lilac family, Oleaceae, and comprises 45\u201365 species of usually medium-to-large trees, most of which are deciduous (dropping their leaves in autumn), although some subtropical species are evergreen. The genus is widespread throughout much of Europe, Asia, and North America.\nThe leaves are usually opposite, and mostly pinnately compound (divided into leaflets in a feather-like arrangement). The seeds, known as \"keys\", are botanically fruits of the type called samara. Some species are dioecious, having male and female flowers on separate plants.\nAsh wood is strong and elastic, and used for the handles of tools. Musical instrument makers use it for electric guitars and for drum shells. The Morgan Motor Company makes the frames of sports cars from ash wood. In Greek mythology, the Meliae were the nymphs of ash trees.\nEtymology.\nThe tree's common English name, \"ash\", derives from the Old English \"\u00e6sc\", from the Proto-Indo-European name for the tree, while the name of the genus originated in Latin \"fr\u0101xinus\", from a Proto-Indo-European word for birch. Both words also meant \"spear\", as ash wood was used for shafts.\nDescription.\nThe leaves of ash trees are usually opposite (rarely in whorls), and mostly pinnate. The seeds, known as \"keys\", are botanically single-winged fruits of the type called samara. Most \"Fraxinus\" species are dioecious, having male and female flowers on separate plants. The male flowers have two stamens. If a calyx is present, it has four lobes; if there is a corolla, it has four lobes or four petals, which are white or pale yellow.\nEvolution.\nFossil history.\nThe oldest fossils that are clearly \"Fraxinus\" are from the Middle Eocene (49\u201339 million years ago) of southeast North America, including the extinct species \"F. wilcoxiana\". Fossil pollen of \"F. angustifolia\" is known from the Upper Miocene (12 million years ago) of Europe. \"F. oishii\" winged fruits have been found in the Middle Miocene of Korea.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Fraxinus\" was described by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. The name remains accepted by taxonomists. Multiple authors have described other tree genera that are synonymous with \"Fraxinus\": \"Ornus\" by the German botanist and physician Georg Rudolf Boehmer in 1760; \"Fraxinoides\" by the German physician Friedrich Kasimir Medikus in 1791; \"Mannaphorus\" by the French polymath Constantine Samuel Rafinesque in 1818; \"Calycomelia\" by the Czech Vincenz Franz Kosteletzky in 1834; \"Leptalix\", \"Ornanthes\",\n\"Samarpsea\" (misspelt) and \"Samarpses\", \"Apilia\" and \"Aplilia\" by Rafinesque, all in 1838; \"Meliopsis\" by the German botanist Ludwig Reichenbach in 1841; and \"Petlomelia\" by the Belgian priest Julius Nieuwland in 1914.\nExternal phylogeny.\nThe Angiosperm Phylogeny Group has classified \"Fraxinus\" as part of the Oleaceae (the olive family of flowering woody plants), within the order Lamiales (the mint order, including many aromatic herbs).\nInternal phylogeny.\nSpecies are arranged into sections identified by phylogenetic analysis of clades within the \"Fraxinus\" genus:\nEcology and distribution.\nThe genus \"Fraxinus\" is widespread throughout much of Europe, Asia, and North America. The genus is primarily temperate or subtropical; 22 of the species occur in China, while for example Italy has 4 species. Both native and introduced \"Fraxinus\" species occur in almost every contiguous state of the United States and all the southern provinces of Canada.\nAsh species provide habitat and food for the larvae of many insects including long-horn beetles, plant bugs, lace bugs, aphids, and caterpillars, as well as birds and mammals.\nThe emerald ash borer (\"Agrilus planipennis\"), is a wood-boring beetle accidentally introduced to North America from eastern Asia via solid wood packing material in the late 1980s to early 1990s. It has killed tens of millions of trees in 22 states in the United States and neighbouring Ontario and Quebec in Canada. It threatens some seven billion ash trees in North America. Three native Asian wasp species, natural predators of the beetle, have been evaluated as possible biological controls. The public was cautioned to avoid transporting unfinished wood products, such as firewood, to slow the spread of the pest. Damage occurs when emerald ash borer larvae feed on the inner bark, phloem of ash trees, preventing nutrient and water transportation.\nThe European ash, \"Fraxinus excelsior\", has been affected by the fungus \"Hymenoscyphus fraxineus\", causing chalara ash dieback in a large number of trees since the mid-1990s, particularly in eastern and northern Europe. The disease has infected about 90% of Denmark's ash trees. In 2012 in the UK, ash dieback was found in mature woodland. The combination of emerald ash borer and ash dieback has threatened ash populations in Europe, but trees in mixed landscapes appear to have some resistance to the disease.\nUses.\nAsh is a hardwood and is dense, around 670\u00a0kg/m3 for \"Fraxinus americana\", the white ash, and 710\u00a0kg/m3 for \"Fraxinus excelsior\", the European ash. The wood of the European ash is strong and elastic, making it suitable for uses such as the handles of tools. It is a good firewood.\nThe Fender musical instrument company has used ash as a tonewood for its electric guitars since 1950. Species used for guitar building include swamp ash. Ash is in addition used for making drum shells. It has been described as resonant, providing a balanced tone for both high and low notes. Ash wood can be used for furniture, agricultural tools, and household objects such as bowls, candlesticks, and spoons. The Morgan Motor Company of Great Britain still manufactures sports cars with frames made from ash.\nThe green ash (\"F. pennsylvanica\") is widely planted as a street tree in the United States. The inner bark of the blue ash (\"F. quadrangulata\") has been used as a source for blue dye. In Sicily, Italy, a sugary manna is obtained from the resinous sap of the manna ash, extracted by making cuts in the bark. The young seedpods of the European ash, known as \"keys\", are edible; in Britain, they are traditionally pickled with vinegar, sugar and spices. A range of pharmacologically active compounds exist in \"Fraxinus\" species, with for example anti-inflammatory, antihypertensive, and antihyperglycaemic properties which might find practical applications.\nMythology and folklore.\nIn Greek mythology, the Meliae, their name meaning \"ash trees\", are nymphs associated with the ash, perhaps specifically of the manna ash (\"Fraxinus ornus\"), as dryads were nymphs associated with the oak. They appear in Hesiod's \"Theogony,\" which states that they were born when drops of Ouranos's blood fell on the earth (Gaia).\nIn Norse mythology, a vast, evergreen ash tree Yggdrasil (\"the steed (gallows) of Odin\"), watered by three magical springs, serves as axis mundi, sustaining the nine worlds of the cosmos in its roots and branches. \"Askr\", the first man in Norse myth, literally means 'ash'.\nIn Slavic folklore, an ash stake could be used to kill a vampire.\nIn the Old English Latin alphabet, \u00c6 was the letter , \"ash tree\". This transliterated the Anglo-Saxon futhorc rune \u16ab.\nThe Welsh folk song \"Llwyn Onn\", \"The Ash Grove\", sings in the English version by John Oxenford \"The ash grove, how graceful, how plainly 'tis speaking; The lark through its branches is gazing on me\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66709", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66709", "title": "Gun Politics/Balance of Power", "text": ""}
{"id": "66711", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66711", "title": "Baldcypress", "text": ""}
{"id": "66713", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66713", "title": "Zhou Dynasty (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "66715", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66715", "title": "Hindustani language", "text": "Indo-Aryan language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nHindustani is an Indo-Aryan language spoken in North India and Pakistan as the lingua franca of the region. It is also spoken by the Deccani-speaking community in the Deccan Plateau. Hindustani is a pluricentric language with two standard registers, known as Hindi (Prakritised and Sanskritised register written in the Brahmic script) and Urdu (Persianised and Arabised register written in the Perso-Arabic script) which serve as official languages of India and Pakistan, respectively. Thus, it is also called Hindi\u2013Urdu. Colloquial registers of the language fall on a spectrum between these standards.\nThe concept of a Hindustani language as a \"unifying language\" or \"fusion language\" that could transcend communal and religious divisions across the subcontinent was endorsed by Mahatma Gandhi, as it was not seen to be associated with either the Hindu or Muslim communities as was the case with Hindi and Urdu respectively, and it was also considered a simpler language for people to learn. The conversion from Hindi to Urdu (or vice versa) is generally achieved by merely transliterating between the two scripts. Translation, on the other hand, is generally only required for religious and literary texts.\nScholars trace the language's first written poetry, in the form of Old Hindi, to the Delhi Sultanate era around the twelfth and thirteenth century. During the period of the Delhi Sultanate, which covered most of today's India, eastern Pakistan, southern Nepal and Bangladesh and which resulted in the contact of Hindu and Muslim cultures, the Prakrit and Sanskrit base of Old Hindi became enriched with loanwords from Persian, evolving into the present form of Hindustani. The Hindustani vernacular became an expression of Indian national unity during the Indian Independence movement, and continues to be spoken as the common language of the people of the northern Indian subcontinent, which is reflected in the Hindustani vocabulary of Bollywood films and songs.\nThe language's core vocabulary is derived from Prakrit and Sanskrit (via Prakrit), with substantial loanwords from Persian and Arabic (via Persian). It is often written in the Devanagari script or Nastaliq script in the case of Hindi and Urdu respectively, with romanisation increasingly employed in modern times as a neutral script.\nAs of 2025, Hindi and Urdu together constitute the 3rd-most-spoken language in the world after English and Mandarin, with 855 million native and second-language speakers, according to \"Ethnologue\", though this includes millions who self-reported their language as 'Hindi' on the Indian census but speak a number of other Hindi languages than Hindustani. The total number of Hindi\u2013Urdu speakers was reported to be over 300 million in 1995, making Hindustani the third- or fourth-most spoken language in the world.\nHistory.\nEarly forms of present-day Hindustani developed from the Middle Indo-Aryan \"apabhra\u1e43\u015ba\" vernaculars of present-day North India in the 7th\u201313th centuries. Hindustani emerged as a contact language around the Ganges-Yamuna Doab (Delhi, Meerut and Saharanpur), a result of the increasing linguistic diversity that occurred during the Muslim period in the Indian subcontinent. Amir Khusrow, who lived in the thirteenth century during the Delhi Sultanate period in North India, used these forms (which was the \"lingua franca\" of the period) in his writings and referred to it as \"Hindavi\" (). By the end of the century, the military exploits of Alauddin Khalji, introduced the language in the Deccan region, which led to the development of its southern dialect Deccani, which was promoted by Muslim rulers in the Deccan. The Delhi Sultanate, which comprised several Turkic and Afghan dynasties that ruled much of the subcontinent from Delhi, was succeeded by the Mughal Empire in 1526 and preceded by the Ghorid dynasty and Ghaznavid Empire before that.\nAncestors of the language were known as \"Hindui\", \"Hindavi\", \"Zab\u0101n-e Hind\" (transl.\u2009'Language of India'), \"Zab\u0101n-e Hindustan\" (transl.\u2009'Language of Hindustan'), \"Hindustan ki boli\" (transl.\u2009'Language of Hindustan'), Rekhta, and Hindi. Its regional dialects became known as \"Zab\u0101n-e Dakhani\" in southern India, \"Zab\u0101n-e Gujari\" (transl.\u2009'Language of Gujars') in Gujarat, and as \"Zab\u0101n-e Dehlavi\" or Urdu around Delhi. It is an Indo-Aryan language, deriving its base from the Western Hindi dialect of the Ganges-Yamuna Doab (Delhi, Meerut and Saharanpur) known as Khariboli\u2014the contemporary form being classed under the umbrella of Old Hindi.\nAlthough the Mughals were of Timurid (\"Gurk\u0101n\u012b\") Turco-Mongol descent, they were Persianised, and Persian had gradually become the state language of the Mughal empire after Babur. Mughal patronage led to a continuation and reinforcement of Persian by Central Asian Turkic rulers in the Indian Subcontinent, since Persian was also patronized by the earlier Turko-Afghan Delhi Sultanate who laid the basis for the introduction and use of Persian in the subcontinent.\nHindustani began to take shape as a Persianised vernacular during the Delhi Sultanate (1206\u20131526 AD) and Mughal Empire (1526\u20131858 AD) in South Asia. Hindustani retained the grammar, as well as the core Sanskritic and Prakritic vocabulary, of the local Indian language of the Ganges-Yamuna Doab called Khariboli. However, as an emerging common dialect, Hindustani absorbed large numbers of Persian, Arabic, and Turkic loanwords, and as Mughal conquests grew it spread as a lingua franca across much of northern India; this was a result of the contact of Hindu and Muslim cultures in Hindustan that created a composite Ganga-Jamuni tehzeeb. The language was also known as \"Rekhta\", or 'mixed', which implies that the Sanskritic and Prakritic vocabulary base of Old Hindi was mixed with Persian loanwords. Written in the Perso-Arabic, Devanagari, and occasionally Kaithi or Gurmukhi scripts, it remained the primary lingua franca of northern India for the next four centuries, although it varied significantly in vocabulary depending on the local language. Alongside Persian, it achieved the status of a literary language in Muslim courts and was also used for literary purposes in various other settings such as Sufi, Nirgun Sant, Krishna Bhakta circles, and Rajput Hindu courts. Its major centres of development included the Mughal courts of Delhi, Lucknow, Agra and Lahore as well as the Rajput courts of Amber and Jaipur.\nIn the 18th century, towards the end of the Mughal period, with the fragmentation of the empire and the elite system, a variant of Hindustani, one of the successors of apabhra\u1e43\u015ba vernaculars at Delhi, and nearby cities, came to gradually replace Persian as the lingua franca among the educated elite upper class particularly in northern India, though Persian still retained much of its pre-eminence for a short period. The term \"Hindustani\" was given to that language. The Perso-Arabic script form of this language underwent a standardisation process and further Persianisation during this period (18th century) and came to be known as Urdu, a name derived from Persian: \"Zab\u0101n-e Urd\u016b-e Mualla\" ('language of the court') or \"Zab\u0101n-e Urd\u016b\" (, 'language of the camp'). The etymology of the word \"Urdu\" is of Chagatai origin, \"Ord\u016b\" ('camp'), cognate with English \"horde\", and known in local translation as \"Lashkari Zab\u0101n\" (), which is shortened to \"Lashkari\" (). This is all due to its origin as the common speech of the Mughal army. As a literary language, Urdu took shape in courtly, elite settings. Along with English, it became an official language of northern parts of British India in 1837.\nHindi as a standardised literary register of the Hindustani arose in the 19th century. While the first literary works (mostly translations of earlier works) in Sanskritised Hindustani were already written in the early 19th century as part of a literary project that included both Hindu and Muslim writers (e.g. Lallu Lal, Insha Allah Khan), the call for a distinct Sanskritised standard of Hindustani written in Devanagari under the name of Hindi became increasingly politicised in the course of the century and gained pace around 1880 in an effort to displace Urdu's official position.\nJohn Fletcher Hurst in his book published in 1891 mentioned that the Hindustani or camp language of the Mughal Empire's courts at Delhi was not regarded by philologists as a distinct language but only as a dialect of Hindi with admixture of Persian. He continued: \"But it has all the magnitude and importance of separate language. It is linguistic result of Muslim rule of eleventh &amp; twelfth centuries and is spoken by many Hindus in North India and by Musalman population in all parts of India.\" Next to English it was the official language of British Indian Empire, was commonly written in Arabic or Persian characters, and was spoken by approximately 100,000,000 people. The process of hybridization also led to the formation of words in which the first element of the compound was from Khari Boli and the second from Persian, such as \"rajmahal\" 'palace' (\"raja\" 'royal, king' + \"mahal\" 'house, place') and \"rangmahal\" 'fashion house' (\"rang\" 'colour, dye' + \"mahal\" 'house, place'). As Muslim rule expanded, Hindustani speakers traveled to distant parts of India as administrators, soldiers, merchants, and artisans. As it reached new areas, Hindustani further hybridized with local languages. In the Deccan, for instance, Hindustani blended with Telugu and came to be called Dakhani. In Dakhani, aspirated consonants were replaced with their unaspirated counterparts; for instance, \"dekh\" 'see' became \"dek\", \"ghula\" 'dissolved' became \"gula\", \"kuch\" 'some' became \"kuc\", and \"samajh\" 'understand' became \"samaj\".\nWhen the British colonised the Indian subcontinent from the late 18th through to the late 19th century, they used the words 'Hindustani', 'Hindi', and 'Urdu' interchangeably. They developed it as the language of administration of British India, further preparing it to be the official language of modern India and Pakistan. However, with independence, use of the word 'Hindustani' declined, being largely replaced by 'Hindi' and 'Urdu', or 'Hindi\u2013Urdu' when either of those was too specific. More recently, the word 'Hindustani' has been used for the colloquial language of Bollywood films, which are popular in both India and Pakistan and which cannot be unambiguously identified as either Hindi or Urdu.\nBritish rule over India also introduced some English words into Hindustani, with these influences increasing with the later spread of English as a world language. This has created a new variant of Hindustani known as Hinglish or Urdish.\nRegisters.\nAt the spoken level, Hindi and Urdu are considered registers of a single language, Hindustani or Hindi\u2013Urdu, as they share a common grammar and core vocabulary, they differ in literary and formal vocabulary; where literary Hindi draws heavily on Sanskrit and to a lesser extent Prakrit, literary Urdu draws heavily on Persian and Arabic loanwords. The grammar and base vocabulary (most pronouns, verbs, adpositions, etc.) of both Hindi and Urdu, however, are the same and derive from a Prakritic base, and both have Persian/Arabic influence.\nThe standardised registers Hindi and Urdu are collectively known as \"Hindi\u2013Urdu\". Hindustani is the \"lingua franca\" of the north and west of the Indian subcontinent, though it is understood fairly well in other regions also, especially in the urban areas. This has led it to be characterised as a continuum that ranges between Hindi and Urdu. A common vernacular sharing characteristics with Sanskritised Hindi, regional Hindi and Urdu, Hindustani is more commonly used as a vernacular than highly Sanskritised Hindi or highly Persianised Urdu.\nThis can be seen in the popular culture of Bollywood or, more generally, the vernacular of North Indians and Pakistanis, which generally employs a lexicon common to both Hindi and Urdu speakers. Minor subtleties in region will also affect the 'brand' of Hindustani, sometimes pushing the Hindustani closer to Urdu or to Hindi. One might reasonably assume that the Hindustani spoken in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh (known for its usage of Urdu) and Varanasi (a holy city for Hindus and thus using highly Sanskritised Hindi) is somewhat different.\nIn modern times, a third variety of Hindustani with significant English influences has also appeared, which is sometimes called Hinglish or Urdish.\nStandard Hindi.\nStandard Hindi, one of the 22 officially recognized languages of India and the official language of the Union, is usually written in the indigenous Devanagari script of India and exhibits less Persian and Arabic influence than Urdu. It has a literature of 500 years, with prose, poetry, religion and philosophy. One could conceive of a wide spectrum of dialects and registers, with the highly Persianised Urdu at one end of the spectrum and a heavily Sanskritised variety spoken in the region around Varanasi, at the other end. In common usage in India, the term \"Hindi\" includes all these dialects except those at the Urdu spectrum. Thus, the different meanings of the word \"Hindi\" include, among others:\nStandard Urdu.\nUrdu is the national language and state language of Pakistan and one of the 22 officially recognised languages of India. It is written, except in some parts of India, in the Nastaliq style of the Urdu alphabet, an extended Perso-Arabic script incorporating Indic phonemes. It is heavily influenced by Persian vocabulary and was historically also known as Rekhta.\nAs Dakhini (or Deccani) where it also draws words from local languages, it survives and enjoys a rich history in the Deccan and other parts of South India, with the prestige dialect being Hyderabadi Urdu spoken in and around the capital of the Nizams and the Deccan Sultanates.\nEarliest forms of the language's literature may be traced back to the 13th\u201314th century works of Am\u012br Khusrau Dehlav\u012b, often called the \"father of Urdu literature\", while Wal\u012b Deccani is seen as the progenitor of Urdu poetry.\nBazaar Hindustani.\nThe term \"bazaar Hindustani\", in other words, the 'street talk' or literally 'marketplace Hindustani', also known as \"Colloquial Hindi\" or \"Simplified Urdu\", has arisen to denote a colloquial register of the language that uses vocabulary common to both Hindi and Urdu while eschewing high-register and specialized Arabic or Sanskrit derived words. It has emerged in various South Asian cities where Hindustani is not the main language, in order to facilitate communication across language barriers. It is characterized by loanwords from local languages.\nNames.\nAmir Khusro c.\u20091300 referred to this language of his writings as \"Dehlavi\" ( / , 'of Delhi') or \"Hindavi\" ( / ). During this period, Hindustani was used by Sufis in promulgating their message across the Indian subcontinent. After the advent of the Mughals in the subcontinent, Hindustani acquired more Persian loanwords. \"Rekhta\" ('mixture'), \"Hindi\" ('Indian'), Hindustani, Hindvi, Lahori, and Dakni (amongst others) became popular names for the same language until the 18th century. The name \"Urdu\" (from \"Zab\u0101n-i-Ordu\", or \"Orda\") appeared around 1780. It is believed to have been coined by the poet Mashafi. In local literature and speech, it was also known as the \"Lashkari Zab\u0101n\" (military language) or \"Lashkari\". Mashafi was the first person to simply modify the name \"Zab\u0101n-i-Ordu\" to \"Urdu\".\nDuring the British Raj, the term \"Hindustani\" was used by British officials. In 1796, John Borthwick Gilchrist published \"A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language\". Upon partition, India and Pakistan established national standards that they called \"Hindi\" and \"Urdu,\" respectively, and attempted to make distinct, with the result that \"Hindustani\" commonly, but mistakenly, came to be seen as a \"mixture\" of Hindi and Urdu.\nGrierson, in his highly influential \"Linguistic Survey of India\", proposed that the names \"Hindustani, Urdu,\" and \"Hindi\" be separated in use for different varieties of the Hindustani language, rather than as the overlapping synonyms they frequently were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We may now define the three main varieties of Hind\u014dst\u0101n\u012b as follows:\u2014Hind\u014dst\u0101n\u012b is primarily the language of the Upper Gangetic Doab, and is also the \"lingua franca\" of India, capable of being written in both Persian and D\u0113va-n\u0101gar\u012b characters, and without purism, avoiding alike the excessive use of either Persian or Sanskrit words when employed for literature. The name 'Urd\u016b' can then be confined to that special variety of Hind\u014dst\u0101n\u012b in which Persian words are of frequent occurrence, and which hence can only be written in the Persian character, and, similarly, 'Hind\u012b' can be confined to the form of Hind\u014dst\u0101n\u012b in which Sanskrit words abound, and which hence can only be written in the D\u0113va-n\u0101gar\u012b character.\nOfficial status.\nBefore 1947, Hindustani was officially recognised by the British Raj. In the post-independence period however, the term Hindustani has lost currency and is not given any official recognition by the Indian or Pakistani governments. The language is instead recognised by its standard forms, Hindi and Urdu.\nHindi.\nHindi is declared by Article 343(1), Part 17 of the Indian Constitution as the \"official language (, ) of the Union.\" (In this context, \"Union\" means the Federal Government and not the entire country\u2014India has 23 official languages.) At the same time, however, the definitive text of federal laws is officially the English text and proceedings in the higher appellate courts must be conducted in English.\nAt the state level, Hindi is one of the official languages in 10 of the 29 Indian states and three Union Territories, respectively: Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal; Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Delhi.\nIn the remaining states, Hindi is not an official language. In states like Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, studying Hindi is not compulsory in the state curriculum. However, an option to take the same as second or third language does exist. In many other states, studying Hindi is usually compulsory in the school curriculum as a third language (the first two languages being the state's official language and English), though the intensiveness of Hindi in the curriculum varies.\nUrdu.\nUrdu is the national language (, ) of Pakistan, where it shares official language status with English. Although English is spoken by many, and Punjabi is the native language of the majority of the population, Urdu is the \"lingua franca\". In India, Urdu is one of the languages recognised in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India and is an official language of the Indian states of Jharkhand, Bihar, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, and also the Union Territories of Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir. Although the government school system in most other states emphasises Standard Hindi, at universities in cities such as Lucknow, Aligarh and Hyderabad, Urdu is spoken and learnt.\nGeographical distribution.\nBesides being the \"lingua franca\" of North India and Pakistan in South Asia, Hindustani is also spoken by many in the South Asian diaspora and their descendants around the world, including North America (e.g., in Canada, Hindustani is one of the fastest growing languages), Europe, and the Middle East.\nPhonology.\nHindustani phonology, shared by both Hindi and Urdu, is characterized by a symmetrical ten-vowel system, where vowels are distinguished by length, with long vowels typically being tense and short vowels lax. The language also includes nasalized vowels, as well as a wide array of consonants, including aspirated and murmured sounds. Hindustani maintains a four-way phonation distinction among plosives, unlike the two-way distinction in English.\nVocabulary.\nHindi\u2013Urdu's core vocabulary has an Indic base, being derived from Prakrit and Classical Sanskrit, which in turn both derive from Vedic Sanskrit, as well as a substantial number of loanwords from Persian and Arabic (via Persian). Hindustani contains around 5,500 words of Persian and Arabic origin. There are also quite a few words borrowed from English, as well as some words from other European languages such as Portuguese and Dutch.\nHindustani also borrowed Persian prefixes to create new words. Persian affixes became so assimilated that they were used with original Khari Boli words as well.\nWriting system.\nHistorically, Hindustani was written in the Urdu, Devanagari and sometimes in the Kaithi script. During the British Raj, Hindustani was offiicially generally written in a derivation of the Perso-Arabic script, now known as the Urdu alphabet (written in the Nasta\u02bfl\u012bq style). Kaithi and Devanagari are two of the Brahmic scripts which were employed alongside the Urdu alphabet.\nThis remained to be the case until the 20th century when Hindi in the Devanagari script was sanctioned as an official language in India. In India, the Hindi register is officially written in Devanagari, and Urdu in the Urdu alphabet, to the extent that these standards are partly defined by their script. \nToday, it continues to be written in the Urdu alphabet in Pakistan. Popular publications in India, Urdu is also written in Devanagari, with slight variations in attempts to establish a Devanagari Urdu alphabet alongside the Devanagari Hindi alphabet.\nBecause of anglicisation in South Asia and the international use of the Latin script, Hindustani is occasionally written in the Latin script. This adaptation is called Roman Urdu or Romanised Hindi, depending upon the register used. Since Urdu and Hindi are mutually intelligible when spoken, Romanised Hindi and Roman Urdu (unlike Devanagari Hindi and Urdu in the Urdu alphabet) are mostly mutually intelligible as well.\nSample text.\nColloquial Hindustani.\nAn example of colloquial Hindustani:\nThe following is a sample text, Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in the two official registers of Hindustani, Hindi and Urdu. Because this is a formal legal text, differences in vocabulary are most pronounced.\nHindustani and Bollywood.\nThe predominant Indian film industry Bollywood, located in Mumbai, Maharashtra, uses Standard Hindi, colloquial Hindustani, Bombay Hindi, Urdu, Awadhi, Rajasthani, Bhojpuri, and Braj Bhasha, along with Punjabi and with the liberal use of English or Hinglish in scripts and soundtrack lyrics.\nFilm titles are often screened in three scripts: Latin, Devanagari and occasionally Perso-Arabic. The use of Urdu or Hindi in films depends on the film's context: historical films set in the Delhi Sultanate or Mughal Empire are almost entirely in Urdu, whereas films based on Hindu mythology or ancient India make heavy use of Hindi with Sanskrit vocabulary.\nIn recent years, boycotts have been launched against Bollywood films by Hindu nationalists partially on the basis that the films feature too much Urdu, with some critics employing the epithet \"Urduwood\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66717", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66717", "title": "Pashto (disambiguation)", "text": "Pashto is an Eastern Iranian language, spoken by the Pashtun tribes in Pakistan and Afghanistan.\nPashto or Poshtu may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66718", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66718", "title": "The Arabian Nights", "text": ""}
{"id": "66719", "revid": "51019345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66719", "title": "Evergreen", "text": "Plant that has leaves in all seasons\nIn botany, an evergreen is a plant which has foliage that remains green and functional throughout the year. This contrasts with deciduous plants, which lose their foliage completely during the winter or dry season. Consisting of many different species, the unique feature of evergreen plants lends itself to various environments and purposes.\nEvergreen species.\nThere are many different kinds of evergreen plants, including trees, shrubs, and vines. Evergreens include:\nThe Latin binomial term , meaning \"always green\", refers to the evergreen nature of the plant, for instance:\n\"Cupressus sempervirens\" (a cypress)\n\"Lonicera sempervirens\" (a honeysuckle)\n\"Sequoia sempervirens\" (a sequoia)\nThe longevity of individual leaves in evergreen plants varies from a few months to several decades, up to a maximum of 45 years in the Great Basin bristlecone pine \"Pinus longaeva\".\nDifferences between evergreen and deciduous species.\nEvergreen and deciduous species vary in a range of morphological and physiological characters. Generally, broad-leaved evergreen species have thicker leaves than deciduous species, with a larger volume of parenchyma and air spaces per unit leaf area. They have larger leaf biomass per unit leaf area, and hence a lower specific leaf area. Construction costs do not differ between the groups. Evergreens have generally a larger fraction of total plant biomass present as leaves (LMF), but they often have a lower rate of photosynthesis.\nReasons for being evergreen or deciduous.\nDeciduous trees shed their leaves usually as an adaptation to a cold or dry/wet season. Evergreen trees also lose leaves, but each tree loses its leaves gradually and not all at once. Most tropical rainforest plants are considered to be evergreens, replacing their leaves gradually throughout the year as the leaves age and fall, whereas species growing in seasonally arid climates may be either evergreen or deciduous. Most warm temperate climate plants are also evergreen. In cool temperate climates, fewer plants are evergreen. In such climates, there is a predominance of conifers because few evergreen broadleaf plants can tolerate severe cold below about . In addition, evergreen foliage experiences significant leaf damage in these cold, dry climates. Root systems are the most vulnerable aspect of many plants. Even though roots are insulated by soil, which tends to be warmer than average air temperatures, soil temperatures that drop too low can kill the plant. The exact temperature which evergreen roots can handle depends on the species, for example, \"Picea glauca\" (White Spruce) roots are killed at .\nIn areas where there is a reason for being deciduous, e.g. a cold season or dry season, evergreen plants are usually an adaptation of low nutrient levels. Additionally, they usually have hard leaves and have an excellent water economy due to scarce resources in the area in which they reside. The excellent water economy within the evergreen species is due to high abundance when compared to deciduous species, whereas deciduous trees lose nutrients whenever they lose their leaves. In warmer areas, species such as some pines and cypresses grow on poor soils and disturbed ground. In \"Rhododendron\", a genus with many broadleaf evergreens, several species grow in mature forests but are usually found on highly acidic soil where the nutrients are less available to plants. In taiga or boreal forests, it is too cold for the organic matter in the soil to decay rapidly, so the nutrients in the soil are less easily available to plants, thus favoring evergreens.\nIn temperate climates, evergreens can reinforce their own survival; evergreen leaf and needle litter has a higher carbon\u2013nitrogen ratio than deciduous leaf litter, contributing to a higher soil acidity and lower soil nitrogen content. This is the case with Mediterranean evergreen seedlings, which have unique C and N storages that allow stored resources to determine fast growth within the species, limiting competition and bolstering survival. These conditions favor the growth of more evergreens and make it more difficult for deciduous plants to persist. In addition, the shelter provided by existing evergreen plants can make it easier for younger evergreen plants to survive cold and/or drought.\nUses.\nEvergreen plants can have decorative as well as functional uses. In months where most other plants are dormant, evergreens with their sturdy structure, and vibrant foliage are popular choices to beautify a landscape. Additionally, evergreens can serve as a windbreak, stopping heat loss from buildings during cold months when placed on the (latitude/hemisphere specific) side of a structure. e.g. the northwest in Virginia, USA.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66720", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66720", "title": "Perennial (disambiguation)", "text": "A perennial is a plant that lives for more than two years.\nPerennial or perennials may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66722", "revid": "47289615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66722", "title": "Deciduous", "text": "Plants that shed leaves seasonally\nIn the fields of horticulture and botany, the term deciduous () means \"falling off at maturity\" and \"tending to fall off\", in reference to trees and shrubs that seasonally shed leaves, usually in the autumn; to the shedding of petals, after flowering; and to the shedding of ripe fruit. The antonym of deciduous in the botanical sense is evergreen.\nGenerally, the term \"deciduous\" means \"the dropping of a part that is no longer needed or useful\" and the \"falling away after its purpose is finished\". In plants, it is the result of natural processes. \"Deciduous\" has a similar meaning when referring to animal parts, such as deciduous antlers in deer, deciduous teeth (baby teeth) in some mammals (including humans); or decidua, the uterine lining that sheds off after birth.\nBotany.\nIn botany and horticulture, deciduous plants, including trees, shrubs and herbaceous perennials, are those that lose all of their leaves for part of the year. This process is called abscission. In some cases leaf loss coincides with winter\u2014namely in temperate or polar climates. In other parts of the world, including tropical, subtropical, and arid regions, plants lose their leaves during the dry season or other seasons, depending on variations in rainfall.\nThe converse of deciduous is evergreen, where foliage is shed on a different schedule from deciduous plants, therefore appearing to remain green year round because not all the leaves are shed at the same time. Plants that are intermediate may be called semi-deciduous; they lose old foliage as new growth begins. Other plants are semi-evergreen and lose their leaves before the next growing season, retaining some during winter or dry periods.\nMany deciduous plants flower during the period when they are leafless, as this increases the effectiveness of pollination. The absence of leaves improves wind transmission of pollen for wind-pollinated plants and increases the visibility of the flowers to insects in insect-pollinated plants. This strategy is not without risks, as the flowers can be damaged by frost or, in dry season regions, result in water stress on the plant.\nSpring leafout and fall leaf drop are triggered by a combination of daylight and air temperatures. The exact conditions required will vary with the species, but generally more cold-tolerant genera such as \"Salix\" will leaf-out earlier and lose their leaves later, while genera such as \"Fraxinus\" and \"Juglans\" can only grow in warm, frost-free conditions so they need at least 13 hours of daylight and air temperatures of around 70\u00a0\u00b0F (21\u00a0\u00b0C) to leaf out. They will be among the earliest trees to lose their leaves in the fall. In sub-Arctic climates such as Alaska, leaves begin turning colors as early as August. However, for most temperate regions it takes place in late September through early November and in subtropical climates such as the southern United States, it may be November into December.\nLeaf drop or abscission involves complex physiological signals and changes within plants. When leafout is completed (marked by the transition from bright green spring leaves to dark green summer ones) the chlorophyll level in the leaves remains stable until cool temperatures arrive in autumn. When autumn arrives and the days are shorter or when plants are drought-stressed, the chlorophyll steadily breaks down, allowing other pigments present in the leaf to become apparent and resulting in non-green colored foliage. The brightest leaf colors are produced when days grow short and nights are cool, but remain above freezing. These other pigments include carotenoids that are yellow, brown, and orange. Anthocyanin pigments produce red and purple colors, though they are not always present in the leaves. Rather, they are produced in the foliage in late summer, when sugars are trapped in the leaves after the process of abscission begins. Parts of the world that have showy displays of bright autumn colors are limited to locations where days become short and nights are cool. The New England region of the United States and southeastern Canada tend to produce particularly good autumn colors for this reason, with Europe producing generally poorer colors due to the humid maritime climate and lower overall species diversity . It is also a factor that the continental United States and southern Canada are at a lower latitude than northern Europe, so the sun during the fall months is higher and stronger. This combination of strong sun and cool temperatures leads to more intense fall colors. The Southern United States also has poor fall colors due to warm temperatures during the fall months and the Western United States as it has more evergreen and fewer deciduous plants, combined with the West Coast and its maritime climate. (\"See also\": Autumn leaf color) Most of the Southern Hemisphere lacks deciduous plants due to its milder winters and smaller landmass, most of which is nearer the equator with only southern South America, the South island of New Zealand, and southern Australia, particularly Tasmania and Victoria, producing distinct fall colors.\nThe beginnings of leaf drop starts when an abscission layer is formed between the leaf petiole and the stem. This layer is formed in the spring during active new growth of the leaf; it consists of layers of cells that can separate from each other. The cells are sensitive to a plant hormone called auxin that is produced by the leaf and other parts of the plant. When auxin coming from the leaf is produced at a rate consistent with that from the body of the plant, the cells of the abscission layer remain connected; in autumn, or when under stress, the auxin flow from the leaf decreases or stops, triggering cellular elongation within the abscission layer. The elongation of these cells breaks the connection between the different cell layers, allowing the leaf to break away from the plant. It also forms a layer that seals the break, so the plant does not lose sap.\nSome trees, particularly oaks and beeches, exhibit a behavior known as \"marcescence\" whereby dead leaves are not shed in the fall and remain on the tree until being blown off by the weather. This is caused by incomplete development of the abscission layer. It is mainly seen in the seedling and sapling stage, although mature trees may have marcescence of leaves on the lower branches.\nA number of deciduous plants remove nitrogen and carbon from the foliage before they are shed and store them in the form of proteins in the vacuoles of parenchyma cells in the roots and the inner bark. In the spring, these proteins are used as a nitrogen source during the growth of new leaves or flowers.\nFunction.\nPlants with deciduous foliage have advantages and disadvantages compared to plants with evergreen foliage.&lt;br&gt;\nSince deciduous plants lose their leaves to conserve water or to better survive winter weather conditions, they must regrow new foliage during the next suitable growing season; this uses resources which evergreens do not need to expend.&lt;br&gt;\nEvergreens suffer greater water loss during the winter and they also can experience greater predation pressure, especially when small. Deciduous trees experience much less branch and trunk breakage from glaze ice storms when leafless, and plants can reduce water loss due to the reduction in availability of liquid water during cold winter days.\nLosing leaves in winter may reduce damage from insects; repairing leaves and keeping them functional may be more costly than just losing and regrowing them. Removing leaves also reduces cavitation which can damage xylem vessels in plants. This then allows deciduous plants to have xylem vessels with larger diameters and therefore a greater rate of transpiration (and hence CO2 uptake as this occurs when stomata are open) during the summer growth period.\nDeciduous woody plants.\nThe deciduous characteristic has developed repeatedly among woody plants. Trees include maple, many oaks and nothofagus, elm, beech, aspen, and birch, among others, as well as a number of coniferous genera, such as larch and \"Metasequoia\". Deciduous shrubs include honeysuckle, viburnum, and many others. Most temperate woody vines are also deciduous, including grapes, poison ivy, Virginia creeper, wisteria, etc. The characteristic is useful in plant identification; for instance in parts of Southern California and the American Southeast, deciduous and evergreen oak species may grow side by side.\nPeriods of leaf fall often coincide with seasons: winter in the case of cool-climate plants or the dry-season in the case of tropical plants, however there are no deciduous species among tree-like monocotyledonous plants, e.g. palms, yuccas, and dracaenas. The hydrangea hirta is a deciduous woody shrub found in Japan.\nRegions.\nForests where a majority of the trees lose their foliage at the end of the typical growing season are called deciduous forests. These forests are found in many areas worldwide and have distinctive ecosystems, understory growth, and soil dynamics.\nTwo distinctive types of deciduous forests are found growing around the world.\nTemperate deciduous forest biomes are plant communities distributed in North and South America, Asia, Southern slopes of the Himalayas, Europe and for cultivation purposes in Oceania. They have formed under climatic conditions which have great seasonable temperature variability. Growth occurs during warm summers, leaf drop in autumn, and dormancy during cold winters. These seasonally distinctive communities have diverse life forms that are impacted greatly by the seasonality of their climate, mainly temperature and precipitation rates. These varying and regionally different ecological conditions produce distinctive forest plant communities in different regions.\nTropical and subtropical deciduous forest biomes have developed in response not to seasonal temperature variations but to seasonal rainfall patterns. During prolonged dry periods the foliage is dropped to conserve water and prevent death from drought. Leaf drop is not seasonally dependent as it is in temperate climates. It can occur any time of year and varies by region of the world. Even within a small local area there can be variations in the timing and duration of leaf drop; different sides of the same mountain and areas that have high water tables or areas along streams and rivers can produce a patchwork of leafy and leafless trees.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66723", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66723", "title": "Respiratory system", "text": "Biological system in animals and plants for gas exchange\nThe respiratory system (also respiratory apparatus, ventilatory system) is a biological system consisting of specific organs and structures used for gas exchange in animals and plants.\nIn land animals, the respiratory surface is internalized as linings of the lungs. Gas exchange in the lungs occurs in millions of small air sacs. In mammals and reptiles, these are called alveoli, and in birds, they are known as atria. These microscopic air sacs have a rich blood supply, bringing the air into close contact with the blood. A system of airways, or hollow tubes, allow the air sacs to interface with the external environment; the largest of these is the trachea, which branches in the middle of the chest into the two main bronchi, which enter the lungs and branch into progressively narrower secondary and tertiary bronchi, which in turn branch into numerous smaller tubes known as the bronchioles in mammals and reptiles. In birds, the bronchioles are termed parabronchi. The bronchioles, or parabronchi, generally open into the microscopic alveoli (in mammals) and atria (in birds). Air has to be pumped from the environment into the alveoli or atria by the process of breathing which involves the muscles of respiration.\nIn most fish, and a number of other aquatic animals (both vertebrates and invertebrates), the respiratory system consists of gills, which are either partially or completely external organs, bathed in the watery environment. This water flows over the gills by a variety of active or passive means. Gas exchange takes place in the gills which consist of thin or very flat filaments and lammellae which expose a very large surface area of highly vascularized tissue to the water.\nOther animals, such as insects, have respiratory systems with very simple anatomical features, and in amphibians, even the skin plays a vital role in gas exchange. Plants also have respiratory systems but the directionality of gas exchange can be opposite to that in animals. The respiratory system in plants includes anatomical features such as stomata, that are found in various parts of the plant.\nMammals.\nAnatomy.\nIn humans and other mammals, the anatomy of a typical respiratory system is the respiratory tract. The tract is divided into an upper and a lower respiratory tract. The upper tract includes the nose, nasal cavities, sinuses, pharynx and the part of the larynx above the vocal folds. The lower tract (Fig.\u00a02.) includes the lower part of the larynx, the trachea, bronchi, bronchioles and the alveoli.\nThe branching airways of the lower tract are often described as the respiratory tree or tracheobronchial tree (Fig.\u00a02). The intervals between successive branch points along the various branches of \"tree\" are often referred to as branching \"generations\", of which there are, in the adult human, about 23. The earlier generations (approximately generations 0\u201316), consisting of the trachea and the bronchi, as well as the larger bronchioles which simply act as air conduits, bringing air to the respiratory bronchioles, alveolar ducts and alveoli (approximately generations 17\u201323), where gas exchange takes place. Bronchioles are defined as the small airways lacking any cartilaginous support.\nThe first bronchi to branch from the trachea are the right and left main bronchi. Second, only in diameter to the trachea (1.8\u00a0cm), these bronchi (1\u20131.4\u00a0cm in diameter) enter the lungs at each hilum, where they branch into narrower secondary bronchi known as lobar bronchi, and these branch into narrower tertiary bronchi known as segmental bronchi. Further divisions of the segmental bronchi (1 to 6\u00a0mm in diameter) are known as 4th order, 5th order, and 6th order segmental bronchi, or grouped together as subsegmental bronchi.\nCompared to the 23 number (on average) of branchings of the respiratory tree in the adult human, the mouse has only about 13 such branchings.\nThe alveoli are the dead end terminals of the \"tree\", meaning that any air that enters them has to exit via the same route. A system such as this creates dead space, a volume of air (about 150\u00a0ml in the adult human) that fills the airways after exhalation and is breathed back into the alveoli before environmental air reaches them. At the end of inhalation, the airways are filled with environmental air, which is exhaled without coming in contact with the gas exchanger.\nVentilatory volumes.\nThe lungs expand and contract during the breathing cycle, drawing air in and out of the lungs. The volume of air moved in or out of the lungs under normal resting circumstances (the resting tidal volume of about 500\u00a0ml), and volumes moved during maximally forced inhalation and maximally forced exhalation are measured in humans by spirometry. A typical adult human spirogram with the names given to the various excursions in volume the lungs can undergo is illustrated below (Fig.\u00a03):\nNot all the air in the lungs can be expelled during maximally forced exhalation (ERV). This is the residual volume (volume of air remaining even after a forced exhalation) of about 1.0\u20131.5\u00a0liters which cannot be measured by spirometry. Volumes that include the residual volume (i.e. functional residual capacity of about 2.5\u20133.0\u00a0liters, and total lung capacity of about 6\u00a0liters) can therefore also not be measured by spirometry. Their measurement requires special techniques.\nThe rates at which air is breathed in or out, either through the mouth or nose or into or out of the alveoli are tabulated below, together with how they are calculated. The number of breath cycles per minute is known as the respiratory rate. An average healthy human breathes 12\u201316 times a minute.\nMechanics of breathing.\nIn mammals, inhalation at rest is primarily due to the contraction of the diaphragm. This is an upwardly domed sheet of muscle that separates the thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity. When it contracts, the sheet flattens, (i.e. moves downwards as shown in Fig.\u00a07) increasing the volume of the thoracic cavity in the antero-posterior axis. The contracting diaphragm pushes the abdominal organs downwards. But because the pelvic floor prevents the lowermost abdominal organs from moving in that direction, the pliable abdominal contents cause the belly to bulge outwards to the front and sides, because the relaxed abdominal muscles do not resist this movement (Fig.\u00a07). This entirely passive bulging (and shrinking during exhalation) of the abdomen during normal breathing is sometimes referred to as \"abdominal breathing\", although it is, in fact, \"diaphragmatic breathing\", which is not visible on the outside of the body. Mammals only use their abdominal muscles during forceful exhalation (see Fig.\u00a08, and discussion below) and never during any form of inhalation.\nAs the diaphragm contracts, the rib cage is simultaneously enlarged by the ribs being pulled upwards by the intercostal muscles as shown in Fig.\u00a04. All the ribs slant downwards from the rear to the front (as shown in Fig.\u00a04); but the lowermost ribs \"also\" slant downwards from the midline outwards (Fig.\u00a05). Thus the rib cage's transverse diameter can be increased in the same way as the antero-posterior diameter is increased by the so-called pump handle movement shown in Fig.\u00a04.\nThe enlargement of the thoracic cavity's vertical dimension by the contraction of the diaphragm, and its two horizontal dimensions by the lifting of the front and sides of the ribs, causes the intrathoracic pressure to fall. The lungs' interiors are open to the outside air and being elastic, therefore expand to fill the increased space, pleura fluid between double-layered pleura covering of lungs helps in reducing friction while lungs expand and contract. The inflow of air into the lungs occurs via the respiratory airways (Fig. 2). In a healthy person, these airways begin with the nose. (It is possible to begin with the mouth, which is the backup breathing system. However, chronic mouth breathing leads to, or is a sign of, illness.) It ends in the microscopic dead-end sacs called alveoli, which are always open, though the diameters of the various sections can be changed by the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The alveolar air pressure is therefore always close to atmospheric air pressure (about 100\u00a0kPa at sea level) at rest, with the pressure gradients because of lungs contraction and expansion cause air to move in and out of the lungs during breathing rarely exceeding 2\u20133\u00a0kPa.\nDuring exhalation, the diaphragm and intercostal muscles relax. This returns the chest and abdomen to a position determined by their anatomical elasticity. This is the \"resting mid-position\" of the thorax and abdomen (Fig.\u00a07) when the lungs contain their functional residual capacity of air (the light blue area in the right hand illustration of Fig.\u00a07), which in the adult human has a volume of about 2.5\u20133.0\u00a0liters (Fig.\u00a03). Resting exhalation lasts about twice as long as inhalation because the diaphragm relaxes passively more gently than it contracts actively during inhalation.\nThe volume of air that moves in \"or\" out (at the nose or mouth) during a single breathing cycle is called the tidal volume. In a resting adult human, it is about 500\u00a0ml per breath. At the end of exhalation, the airways contain about 150\u00a0ml of alveolar air which is the first air that is breathed back into the alveoli during inhalation. This volume air that is breathed out of the alveoli and back in again is known as dead space ventilation, which has the consequence that of the 500\u00a0ml breathed into the alveoli with each breath only 350\u00a0ml (500\u00a0ml \u2013 150\u00a0ml = 350\u00a0ml) is fresh warm and moistened air. Since this 350\u00a0ml of fresh air is thoroughly mixed and diluted by the air that remains in the alveoli after a normal exhalation (i.e. the functional residual capacity of about 2.5\u20133.0\u00a0liters), it is clear that the composition of the alveolar air changes very little during the breathing cycle (see Fig. 9). The oxygen tension (or partial pressure) remains close to 13\u201314\u00a0kPa (about 100\u00a0mm\u00a0Hg), and that of carbon dioxide very close to 5.3\u00a0kPa (or 40\u00a0mm\u00a0Hg). This contrasts with composition of the dry outside air at sea level, where the partial pressure of oxygen is 21\u00a0kPa (or 160\u00a0mm\u00a0Hg) and that of carbon dioxide 0.04\u00a0kPa (or 0.3\u00a0mmHg).\nDuring heavy breathing (hyperpnea), as, for instance, during exercise, inhalation is brought about by a more powerful and greater excursion of the contracting diaphragm than at rest (Fig. 8). In addition, the \"accessory muscles of inhalation\" exaggerate the actions of the intercostal muscles (Fig. 8). These accessory muscles of inhalation are muscles that extend from the cervical vertebrae and base of the skull to the upper ribs and sternum, sometimes through an intermediary attachment to the clavicles. When they contract, the rib cage's internal volume is increased to a far greater extent than can be achieved by contraction of the intercostal muscles alone. Seen from outside the body, the lifting of the clavicles during strenuous or labored inhalation is sometimes called clavicular breathing, seen especially during asthma attacks and in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.\nDuring heavy breathing, exhalation is caused by relaxation of all the muscles of inhalation. But now, the abdominal muscles, instead of remaining relaxed (as they do at rest), contract forcibly pulling the lower edges of the rib cage downwards (front and sides) (Fig.\u00a08). This not only drastically decreases the size of the rib cage, but also pushes the abdominal organs upwards against the diaphragm which consequently bulges deeply into the thorax (Fig.\u00a08). The end-exhalatory lung volume is now well below the resting mid-position and contains far less air than the resting \"functional residual capacity\". However, in a normal mammal, the lungs cannot be emptied completely. In an adult human, there is always still at least 1 liter of residual air left in the lungs after maximum exhalation.\nThe automatic rhythmical breathing in and out, can be interrupted by coughing, sneezing (forms of very forceful exhalation), by the expression of a wide range of emotions (laughing, sighing, crying out in pain, exasperated intakes of breath) and by such voluntary acts as speech, singing, whistling and the playing of wind instruments. All of these actions rely on the muscles described above, and their effects on the movement of air in and out of the lungs.\nAlthough not a form of breathing, the Valsalva maneuver involves the respiratory muscles. It is, in fact, a very forceful exhalatory effort against a tightly closed glottis, so that no air can escape from the lungs. Instead, abdominal contents are evacuated in the opposite direction, through orifices in the pelvic floor. The abdominal muscles contract very powerfully, causing the pressure inside the abdomen and thorax to rise to extremely high levels. The Valsalva maneuver can be carried out voluntarily but is more generally a reflex elicited when attempting to empty the abdomen during, for instance, difficult defecation, or during childbirth. Breathing ceases during this maneuver.\nGas exchange.\n \nThe primary purpose of the respiratory system is the equalizing of the partial pressures of the respiratory gases in the alveolar air with those in the pulmonary capillary blood (Fig. 11). This process occurs by simple diffusion, across a very thin membrane (known as the blood\u2013air barrier), which forms the walls of the pulmonary alveoli (Fig.\u00a010). It consists of the alveolar epithelial cells, their basement membranes and the endothelial cells of the alveolar capillaries (Fig.\u00a010). This blood gas barrier is extremely thin (in humans, on average, 2.2\u00a0\u03bcm thick). It is folded into about 300 million small air sacs called alveoli (each between 75 and 300\u00a0\u03bcm in diameter) branching off from the respiratory bronchioles in the lungs, thus providing an extremely large surface area (approximately 145\u00a0m2) for gas exchange to occur.\nThe air contained within the alveoli has a semi-permanent volume of about 2.5\u20133.0\u00a0liters which completely surrounds the alveolar capillary blood (Fig.\u00a012). This ensures that equilibration of the partial pressures of the gases in the two compartments is very efficient and occurs very quickly. The blood leaving the alveolar capillaries and is eventually distributed throughout the body therefore has a partial pressure of oxygen of 13\u201314\u00a0kPa (100\u00a0mmHg), and a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 5.3\u00a0kPa (40\u00a0mmHg) (i.e. the same as the oxygen and carbon dioxide gas tensions as in the alveoli). As mentioned in the section above, the corresponding partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the ambient (dry) air at sea level are 21\u00a0kPa (160\u00a0mmHg) and 0.04\u00a0kPa (0.3\u00a0mmHg) respectively.\nThis marked difference between the composition of the alveolar air and that of the ambient air can be maintained because the functional residual capacity is contained in dead-end sacs connected to the outside air by fairly narrow and relatively long tubes (the airways: nose, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi and their branches down to the bronchioles), through which the air has to be breathed both in and out (i.e. there is no unidirectional through-flow as there is in the bird lung). This typical mammalian anatomy combined with the fact that the lungs are not emptied and re-inflated with each breath (leaving a substantial volume of air, of about 2.5\u20133.0\u00a0liters, in the alveoli after exhalation), ensures that the composition of the alveolar air is only minimally disturbed when the 350\u00a0ml of fresh air is mixed into it with each inhalation. Thus the animal is provided with a very special \"portable atmosphere\", whose composition differs significantly from the present-day ambient air. It is this portable atmosphere (the functional residual capacity) to which the blood and therefore the body tissues are exposed \u2013 not to the outside air.\nThe resulting arterial partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide are homeostatically controlled. A rise in the arterial partial pressure of CO2 and, to a lesser extent, a fall in the arterial partial pressure of O2, will reflexly cause deeper and faster breathing until the blood gas tensions in the lungs, and therefore the arterial blood, return to normal. The converse happens when the carbon dioxide tension falls, or, again to a lesser extent, the oxygen tension rises: the rate and depth of breathing are reduced until blood gas normality is restored.\nSince the blood arriving in the alveolar capillaries has a partial pressure of O2 of, on average, 6\u00a0kPa (45\u00a0mmHg), while the pressure in the alveolar air is 13\u201314\u00a0kPa (100\u00a0mmHg), there will be a net diffusion of oxygen into the capillary blood, changing the composition of the 3\u00a0liters of alveolar air slightly. Similarly, since the blood arriving in the alveolar capillaries has a partial pressure of CO2 of also about 6\u00a0kPa (45\u00a0mmHg), whereas that of the alveolar air is 5.3\u00a0kPa (40\u00a0mmHg), there is a net movement of carbon dioxide out of the capillaries into the alveoli. The changes brought about by these net flows of individual gases into and out of the alveolar air necessitate the replacement of about 15% of the alveolar air with ambient air every 5\u00a0seconds or so. This is very tightly controlled by the monitoring of the arterial blood gases (which accurately reflect composition of the alveolar air) by the aortic and carotid bodies, as well as by the blood gas and pH sensor on the anterior surface of the medulla oblongata in the brain. There are also oxygen and carbon dioxide sensors in the lungs, but they primarily determine the diameters of the bronchioles and pulmonary capillaries, and are therefore responsible for directing the flow of air and blood to different parts of the lungs.\nIt is only as a result of accurately maintaining the composition of the 3\u00a0liters of alveolar air that with each breath some carbon dioxide is discharged into the atmosphere and some oxygen is taken up from the outside air. If more carbon dioxide than usual has been lost by a short period of hyperventilation, respiration will be slowed down or halted until the alveolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide has returned to 5.3\u00a0kPa (40\u00a0mmHg). It is therefore strictly speaking untrue that the primary function of the respiratory system is to rid the body of carbon dioxide \"waste\". The carbon dioxide that is breathed out with each breath could probably be more correctly be seen as a byproduct of the body's extracellular fluid carbon dioxide and pH homeostats\nIf these homeostats are compromised, then a respiratory acidosis, or a respiratory alkalosis will occur. In the long run these can be compensated by renal adjustments to the H+ and HCO3\u2212 concentrations in the plasma; but since this takes time, the hyperventilation syndrome can, for instance, occur when agitation or anxiety cause a person to breathe fast and deeply thus causing a distressing respiratory alkalosis through the blowing off of too much CO2 from the blood into the outside air.\nOxygen has a very low solubility in water, and is therefore carried in the blood loosely combined with hemoglobin. The oxygen is held on the hemoglobin by four ferrous iron-containing heme groups per hemoglobin molecule. When all the heme groups carry one O2 molecule each the blood is said to be \"saturated\" with oxygen, and no further increase in the partial pressure of oxygen will meaningfully increase the oxygen concentration of the blood. Most of the carbon dioxide in the blood is carried as bicarbonate ions (HCO3\u2212) in the plasma. However the conversion of dissolved CO2 into HCO3\u2212 (through the addition of water) is too slow for the rate at which the blood circulates through the tissues on the one hand, and through alveolar capillaries on the other. The reaction is therefore catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme inside the red blood cells. The reaction can go in both directions depending on the prevailing partial pressure of CO2. A small amount of carbon dioxide is carried on the protein portion of the hemoglobin molecules as carbamino groups. The total concentration of carbon dioxide (in the form of bicarbonate ions, dissolved CO2, and carbamino groups) in arterial blood (i.e. after it has equilibrated with the alveolar air) is about 26\u00a0mM (or 58\u00a0ml/100 ml), compared to the concentration of oxygen in saturated arterial blood of about 9\u00a0mM (or 20\u00a0ml/100 ml blood).\nControl of ventilation.\nVentilation of the lungs in mammals occurs via the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata and the pons of the brainstem. These areas form a series of neural pathways which receive information about the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood. This information determines the average rate of ventilation of the alveoli of the lungs, to keep these pressures constant. The respiratory center does so via motor nerves which activate the diaphragm and other muscles of respiration.\nThe breathing rate increases when the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood increases. This is detected by central blood gas chemoreceptors on the anterior surface of the medulla oblongata. The aortic and carotid bodies, are the peripheral blood gas chemoreceptors which are particularly sensitive to the arterial partial pressure of O2 though they also respond, but less strongly, to the partial pressure of CO2. At sea level, under normal circumstances, the breathing rate and depth, is determined primarily by the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide rather than by the arterial partial pressure of oxygen, which is allowed to vary within a fairly wide range before the respiratory centers in the medulla oblongata and pons respond to it to change the rate and depth of breathing.\nExercise increases the breathing rate due to the extra carbon dioxide produced by the enhanced metabolism of the exercising muscles. In addition, passive movements of the limbs also reflexively produce an increase in the breathing rate.\nInformation received from stretch receptors in the lungs' limits tidal volume (the depth of inhalation and exhalation).\nResponses to low atmospheric pressures.\nThe alveoli are open (via the airways) to the atmosphere, with the result that alveolar air pressure is exactly the same as the ambient air pressure at sea level, at altitude, or in any artificial atmosphere (e.g. a diving chamber, or decompression chamber) in which the individual is breathing freely. With expansion of the lungs the alveolar air occupies a larger volume, and its pressure falls proportionally, causing air to flow in through the airways, until the pressure in the alveoli is again at the ambient air pressure. The reverse happens during exhalation. This \"process\" (of inhalation and exhalation) is exactly the same at sea level, as on top of Mt. Everest, or in a diving chamber or decompression chamber.\nHowever, as one rises above sea level the density of the air decreases exponentially (see Fig.\u00a014), halving approximately with every 5500\u00a0m rise in altitude. Since the composition of the atmospheric air is almost constant below 80\u00a0km, as a result of the continuous mixing effect of the weather, the concentration of oxygen in the air (mmols O2 per liter of ambient air) decreases at the same rate as the fall in air pressure with altitude. Therefore, in order to breathe in the same amount of oxygen per minute, the person has to inhale a proportionately greater volume of air per minute at altitude than at sea level. This is achieved by breathing deeper and faster (i.e. hyperpnea) than at sea level (see below).\nThere is, however, a complication that increases the volume of air that needs to be inhaled per minute (respiratory minute volume) to provide the same amount of oxygen to the lungs at altitude as at sea level. During inhalation, the air is warmed and saturated with water vapor during its passage through the nose passages and pharynx. Saturated water vapor pressure is dependent only on temperature. At a body core temperature of 37\u00a0\u00b0C it is 6.3\u00a0kPa (47.0\u00a0mmHg), irrespective of any other influences, including altitude. Thus at sea level, where the ambient atmospheric pressure is about 100\u00a0kPa, the moistened air that flows into the lungs from the trachea consists of water vapor (6.3\u00a0kPa), nitrogen (74.0\u00a0kPa), oxygen (19.7\u00a0kPa) and trace amounts of carbon dioxide and other gases (a total of 100\u00a0kPa). In dry air the partial pressure of O2 at sea level is 21.0\u00a0kPa (i.e. 21% of 100\u00a0kPa), compared to the 19.7\u00a0kPa of oxygen entering the alveolar air. (The tracheal partial pressure of oxygen is 21% of [100\u00a0kPa \u2013 6.3\u00a0kPa] = 19.7\u00a0kPa). At the summit of Mt. Everest (at an altitude of 8,848\u00a0m or 29,029\u00a0ft), the total atmospheric pressure is 33.7\u00a0kPa, of which 7.1\u00a0kPa (or 21%) is oxygen. The air entering the lungs also has a total pressure of 33.7\u00a0kPa, of which 6.3\u00a0kPa is, unavoidably, water vapor (as it is at sea level). This reduces the partial pressure of oxygen entering the alveoli to 5.8\u00a0kPa (or 21% of [33.7\u00a0kPa \u2013 6.3\u00a0kPa] = 5.8\u00a0kPa). The reduction in the partial pressure of oxygen in the inhaled air is therefore substantially greater than the reduction of the total atmospheric pressure at altitude would suggest (on Mt Everest: 5.8\u00a0kPa \"vs.\" 7.1\u00a0kPa).\nA further minor complication exists at altitude. If the volume of the lungs were to be instantaneously doubled at the beginning of inhalation, the air pressure inside the lungs would be halved. This happens regardless of altitude. Thus, halving of the sea level air pressure (100\u00a0kPa) results in an intrapulmonary air pressure of 50\u00a0kPa. Doing the same at 5500\u00a0m, where the atmospheric pressure is only 50\u00a0kPa, the intrapulmonary air pressure falls to 25\u00a0kPa. Therefore, the same change in lung volume at sea level results in a 50\u00a0kPa difference in pressure between the ambient air and the intrapulmonary air, whereas it result in a difference of only 25\u00a0kPa at 5500\u00a0m. The driving pressure forcing air into the lungs during inhalation is therefore halved at this altitude. The \"rate\" of inflow of air into the lungs during inhalation at sea level is therefore twice that which occurs at 5500\u00a0m. However, in reality, inhalation and exhalation occur far more gently and less abruptly than in the example given. The differences between the atmospheric and intrapulmonary pressures, driving air in and out of the lungs during the breathing cycle, are in the region of only 2\u20133\u00a0kPa. A doubling or more of these small pressure differences could be achieved only by very major changes in the breathing effort at high altitudes.\nAll of the above influences of low atmospheric pressures on breathing are accommodated primarily by breathing deeper and faster (hyperpnea). The exact degree of hyperpnea is determined by the blood gas homeostat, which regulates the partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the arterial blood. This homeostat prioritizes the regulation of the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide over that of oxygen at sea level. That is to say, at sea level the arterial partial pressure of CO2 is maintained at very close to 5.3\u00a0kPa (or 40\u00a0mmHg) under a wide range of circumstances, at the expense of the arterial partial pressure of O2, which is allowed to vary within a very wide range of values, before eliciting a corrective ventilatory response. However, when the atmospheric pressure (and therefore the partial pressure of O2 in the ambient air) falls to below 50\u201375% of its value at sea level, oxygen homeostasis is given priority over carbon dioxide homeostasis. This switch-over occurs at an elevation of about 2500\u00a0m (or about 8000\u00a0ft). If this switch occurs relatively abruptly, the hyperpnea at high altitude will cause a severe fall in the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide, with a consequent rise in the pH of the arterial plasma. This is one contributor to high altitude sickness. On the other hand, if the switch to oxygen homeostasis is incomplete, then hypoxia may complicate the clinical picture with potentially fatal results.\nThere are oxygen sensors in the smaller bronchi and bronchioles. In response to low partial pressures of oxygen in the inhaled air these sensors reflexively cause the pulmonary arterioles to constrict. (This is the exact opposite of the corresponding reflex in the tissues, where low arterial partial pressures of O2 cause arteriolar vasodilation.) At altitude this causes the pulmonary arterial pressure to rise resulting in a much more even distribution of blood flow to the lungs than occurs at sea level. At sea level, the pulmonary arterial pressure is very low, with the result that the tops of the lungs receive far less blood than the bases, which are relatively over-perfused with blood. It is only in the middle of the lungs that the blood and air flow to the alveoli are ideally matched. At altitude, this variation in the ventilation/perfusion ratio of alveoli from the tops of the lungs to the bottoms is eliminated, with all the alveoli perfused and ventilated in more or less the physiologically ideal manner. This is a further important contributor to the acclimatatization to high altitudes and low oxygen pressures.\nThe kidneys measure the oxygen \"content\" (mmol\u00a0O2/liter blood, rather than the partial pressure of O2) of the arterial blood. When the oxygen content of the blood is chronically low, as at high altitude, the oxygen-sensitive kidney cells secrete erythropoietin (EPO) into the blood. This hormone stimulates the red bone marrow to increase its rate of red cell production, which leads to an increase in the hematocrit of the blood, and a consequent increase in its oxygen carrying capacity (due to the now high hemoglobin content of the blood). In other words, at the same arterial partial pressure of O2, a person with a high hematocrit carries more oxygen per liter of blood than a person with a lower hematocrit does. High altitude dwellers therefore have higher hematocrits than sea-level residents.\nOther functions of the lungs.\nLocal defenses.\nIrritation of nerve endings within the nasal passages or airways, can induce a cough reflex and sneezing. These responses cause air to be expelled forcefully from the trachea or nose, respectively. In this manner, irritants caught in the mucus which lines the respiratory tract are expelled or moved to the mouth where they can be swallowed. During coughing, contraction of the smooth muscle in the airway walls narrows the trachea by pulling the ends of the cartilage plates together and by pushing soft tissue into the lumen. This increases the expired airflow rate to dislodge and remove any irritant particle or mucus.\nRespiratory epithelium can secrete a variety of molecules that aid in the defense of the lungs. These include secretory immunoglobulins (IgA), collectins, defensins and other peptides and proteases, reactive oxygen species, and reactive nitrogen species. These secretions can act directly as antimicrobials to help keep the airway free of infection. A variety of chemokines and cytokines are also secreted that recruit the traditional immune cells and others to the site of infections.\nSurfactant immune function is primarily attributed to two proteins: SP-A and SP-D. These proteins can bind to sugars on the surface of pathogens and thereby opsonize them for uptake by phagocytes. It also regulates inflammatory responses and interacts with the adaptive immune response. Surfactant degradation or inactivation may contribute to enhanced susceptibility to lung inflammation and infection.\nMost of the respiratory system is lined with mucous membranes that contain mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue, which produces white blood cells such as lymphocytes.\nPrevention of alveolar collapse.\nThe lungs make a surfactant, a surface-active lipoprotein complex (phospholipoprotein) formed by type II alveolar cells. It floats on the surface of the thin watery layer which lines the insides of the alveoli, reducing the water's surface tension.\nThe surface tension of a watery surface (the water-air interface) tends to make that surface shrink. When that surface is curved as it is in the alveoli of the lungs, the shrinkage of the surface decreases the diameter of the alveoli. The more acute the curvature of the water-air interface the greater the tendency for the alveolus to collapse. This has three effects. Firstly, the surface tension inside the alveoli resists expansion of the alveoli during inhalation (i.e. it makes the lung stiff, or non-compliant). Surfactant reduces the surface tension and therefore makes the lungs more compliant, or less stiff, than if it were not there. Secondly, the diameters of the alveoli increase and decrease during the breathing cycle. This means that the alveoli have a greater tendency to collapse (i.e. cause atelectasis) at the end of exhalation than at the end of inhalation. Since surfactant floats on the watery surface, its molecules are more tightly packed together when the alveoli shrink during exhalation. This causes them to have a greater surface tension-lowering effect when the alveoli are small than when they are large (as at the end of inhalation, when the surfactant molecules are more widely spaced). The tendency for the alveoli to collapse is therefore almost the same at the end of exhalation as at the end of inhalation. Thirdly, the surface tension of the curved watery layer lining the alveoli tends to draw water from the lung tissues into the alveoli. Surfactant reduces this danger to negligible levels, and keeps the alveoli dry.\nPre-term babies who are unable to manufacture surfactant have lungs that tend to collapse each time they breathe out. Unless treated, this condition, called respiratory distress syndrome, is fatal. Basic scientific experiments, carried out using cells from chicken lungs, support the potential for using steroids as a means of furthering the development of type II alveolar cells. In fact, once a premature birth is threatened, every effort is made to delay the birth, and a series of steroid injections is frequently administered to the mother during this delay in an effort to promote lung maturation.\nContributions to whole body functions.\nThe lung vessels contain a fibrinolytic system that dissolves clots that may have arrived in the pulmonary circulation by embolism, often from the deep veins in the legs. They also release a variety of substances that enter the systemic arterial blood, and they remove other substances from the systemic venous blood that reach them via the pulmonary artery. Some prostaglandins are removed from the circulation, while others are synthesized in the lungs and released into the blood when lung tissue is stretched.\nThe lungs activate one hormone. The physiologically inactive decapeptide angiotensin I is converted to the aldosterone-releasing octapeptide, angiotensin II, in the pulmonary circulation. The reaction occurs in other tissues as well, but it is particularly prominent in the lungs. Angiotensin II also has a direct effect on arteriolar walls, causing arteriolar vasoconstriction, and consequently a rise in arterial blood pressure. Large amounts of the angiotensin-converting enzyme responsible for this activation are located on the surfaces of the endothelial cells of the alveolar capillaries. The converting enzyme also inactivates bradykinin. Circulation time through the alveolar capillaries is less than one second, yet 70% of the angiotensin I reaching the lungs is converted to angiotensin II in a single trip through the capillaries. Four other peptidases have been identified on the surface of the pulmonary endothelial cells.\nVocalization.\nThe movement of gas through the larynx, pharynx and mouth allows humans to speak, or \"phonate\". Vocalization, or singing, in birds occurs via the syrinx, an organ located at the base of the trachea. The vibration of air flowing across the larynx (vocal cords), in humans, and the syrinx, in birds, results in sound. Because of this, gas movement is vital for communication purposes.\nTemperature control.\nPanting in dogs, cats, birds and some other animals provides a means of reducing body temperature, by evaporating saliva in the mouth (instead of evaporating sweat on the skin).\nClinical significance.\nDisorders of the respiratory system can be classified into several general groups:\nDisorders of the respiratory system are usually treated by a pulmonologist and respiratory therapist.\nWhere there is an inability to breathe or insufficiency in breathing, a medical ventilator may be used.\nExceptional mammals.\nHorses.\nHorses are obligate nasal breathers which means that they are different from many other mammals because they do not have the option of breathing through their mouths and must take in air through their noses. A flap of tissue called the soft palate blocks off the pharynx from the mouth (oral cavity) of the horse, except when swallowing. This helps to prevent the horse from inhaling food, but does not allow use of the mouth to breathe when in respiratory distress, a horse can only breathe through its nostrils.\nElephants.\nThe elephant is the only mammal known to have no pleural space. Instead, the parietal and visceral pleura are both composed of dense connective tissue and joined to each other via loose connective tissue. This lack of a pleural space, along with an unusually thick diaphragm, are thought to be evolutionary adaptations allowing the elephant to remain underwater for long periods while breathing through its trunk which emerges as a snorkel.\nIn the elephant the lungs are attached to the diaphragm and breathing relies mainly on the diaphragm rather than the expansion of the ribcage.\nBirds.\nThe respiratory system of birds differs significantly from that found in mammals. Firstly, they have rigid lungs which do not expand and contract during the breathing cycle. Instead an extensive system of air sacs (Fig.\u00a015) distributed throughout their bodies act as the bellows drawing environmental air into the sacs, and expelling the spent air after it has passed through the lungs (Fig.\u00a018). Birds also do not have diaphragms or pleural cavities.\nBird lungs are smaller than those in mammals of comparable size, but the air sacs account for 15% of the total body volume, compared to the 7% devoted to the alveoli which act as the bellows in mammals.\nInhalation and exhalation are brought about by alternately increasing and decreasing the volume of the entire thoraco-abdominal cavity (or coelom) using both their abdominal and costal muscles. During inhalation the muscles attached to the vertebral ribs (Fig.\u00a017) contract angling them forwards and outwards. This pushes the sternal ribs, to which they are attached at almost right angles, downwards and forwards, taking the sternum (with its prominent keel) in the same direction (Fig.\u00a017). This increases both the vertical and transverse diameters of thoracic portion of the trunk. The forward and downward movement of, particularly, the posterior end of the sternum pulls the abdominal wall downwards, increasing the volume of that region of the trunk as well. The increase in volume of the entire trunk cavity reduces the air pressure in all the thoraco-abdominal air sacs, causing them to fill with air as described below.\nDuring exhalation the external oblique muscle which is attached to the sternum and vertebral ribs anteriorly, and to the pelvis (pubis and ilium in Fig.\u00a017) posteriorly (forming part of the abdominal wall) reverses the inhalatory movement, while compressing the abdominal contents, thus increasing the pressure in all the air sacs. Air is therefore expelled from the respiratory system in the act of exhalation.\nDuring inhalation air enters the trachea via the nostrils and mouth, and continues to just beyond the syrinx at which point the trachea branches into two primary bronchi, going to the two lungs (Fig.\u00a016). The primary bronchi enter the lungs to become the intrapulmonary bronchi, which give off a set of parallel branches called ventrobronchi and, a little further on, an equivalent set of dorsobronchi (Fig.\u00a016). The ends of the intrapulmonary bronchi discharge air into the posterior air sacs at the caudal end of the bird. Each pair of dorso-ventrobronchi is connected by a large number of parallel microscopic air capillaries (or parabronchi) where gas exchange occurs (Fig.\u00a016). As the bird inhales, tracheal air flows through the intrapulmonary bronchi into the posterior air sacs, as well as into the \"dorso\"bronchi, but not into the \"ventro\"bronchi (Fig.\u00a018). This is due to the bronchial architecture which directs the inhaled air away from the openings of the ventrobronchi, into the continuation of the intrapulmonary bronchus towards the dorsobronchi and posterior air sacs. From the dorsobronchi the inhaled air flows through the parabronchi (and therefore the gas exchanger) to the ventrobronchi from where the air can only escape into the expanding anterior air sacs. So, during inhalation, both the posterior and anterior air sacs expand, the posterior air sacs filling with fresh inhaled air, while the anterior air sacs fill with \"spent\" (oxygen-poor) air that has just passed through the lungs.\nDuring exhalation the pressure in the posterior air sacs (which were filled with fresh air during inhalation) increases due to the contraction of the oblique muscle described above. The aerodynamics of the interconnecting openings from the posterior air sacs to the dorsobronchi and intrapulmonary bronchi ensures that the air leaves these sacs in the direction of the lungs (via the dorsobronchi), rather than returning down the intrapulmonary bronchi (Fig.\u00a018). From the dorsobronchi the fresh air from the posterior air sacs flows through the parabronchi (in the same direction as occurred during inhalation) into ventrobronchi. The air passages connecting the ventrobronchi and anterior air sacs to the intrapulmonary bronchi direct the \"spent\", oxygen poor air from these two organs to the trachea from where it escapes to the exterior. Oxygenated air therefore flows constantly (during the entire breathing cycle) in a single direction through the parabronchi.\nThe blood flow through the bird lung is at right angles to the flow of air through the parabronchi, forming a cross-current flow exchange system (Fig.\u00a019). The partial pressure of oxygen in the parabronchi declines along their lengths as O2 diffuses into the blood. The blood capillaries leaving the exchanger near the entrance of airflow take up more O2 than do the capillaries leaving near the exit end of the parabronchi. When the contents of all capillaries mix, the final partial pressure of oxygen of the mixed pulmonary venous blood is higher than that of the exhaled air, but is nevertheless less than half that of the inhaled air, thus achieving roughly the same systemic arterial blood partial pressure of oxygen as mammals do with their bellows-type lungs.\nThe trachea is an area of dead space: the oxygen-poor air it contains at the end of exhalation is the first air to re-enter the posterior air sacs and lungs. In comparison to the mammalian respiratory tract, the dead space volume in a bird is, on average, 4.5\u00a0times greater than it is in mammals of the same size. Birds with long necks will inevitably have long tracheae, and must therefore take deeper breaths than mammals do to make allowances for their greater dead space volumes. In some birds (e.g. the whooper swan, \"Cygnus cygnus\", the white spoonbill, \"Platalea leucorodia\", the whooping crane, \"Grus americana\", and the helmeted curassow, \"Pauxi pauxi\") the trachea, which in some cranes can be 1.5\u00a0m long, is coiled back and forth within the body, drastically increasing the dead space ventilation. The purpose of this extraordinary feature is unknown.\nReptiles.\nThe anatomical structure of the lungs is less complex in reptiles than in mammals, with reptiles lacking the very extensive airway tree structure found in mammalian lungs. Gas exchange in reptiles still occurs in alveoli however. Reptiles do not possess a diaphragm. Thus, breathing occurs via a change in the volume of the body cavity which is controlled by contraction of intercostal muscles in all reptiles except turtles. In turtles, contraction of specific pairs of flank muscles governs inhalation and exhalation.\nAmphibians.\nBoth the lungs and the skin serve as respiratory organs in amphibians. The ventilation of the lungs in amphibians relies on positive pressure ventilation. Muscles lower the floor of the oral cavity, enlarging it and drawing in air through the nostrils into the oral cavity. With the nostrils and mouth closed, the floor of the oral cavity is then pushed up, which forces air down the trachea into the lungs. The skin of these animals is highly vascularized and moist, with moisture maintained via secretion of mucus from specialised cells, and is involved in cutaneous respiration. While the lungs are of primary organs for gas exchange between the blood and the environmental air (when out of the water), the skin's unique properties aid rapid gas exchange when amphibians are submerged in oxygen-rich water.\nSome amphibians have gills, either in the early stages of their development (e.g. tadpoles of frogs), while others retain them into adulthood (e.g. some salamanders).\nFish.\nOxygen is poorly soluble in water. Fully aerated fresh water therefore contains only 8\u201310\u00a0ml O2/liter compared to the O2 concentration of 210\u00a0ml/liter in the air at sea level. Furthermore, the coefficient of diffusion (i.e. the rate at which a substances diffuses from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration, under standard conditions) of the respiratory gases is typically 10,000 faster in air than in water. Thus oxygen, for instance, has a diffusion coefficient of 17.6\u00a0mm2/s in air, but only 0.0021\u00a0mm2/s in water. The corresponding values for carbon dioxide are 16\u00a0mm2/s in air and 0.0016\u00a0mm2/s in water. This means that when oxygen is taken up from the water in contact with a gas exchanger, it is replaced considerably more slowly by the oxygen from the oxygen-rich regions small distances away from the exchanger than would have occurred in air. Fish have developed gills deal with these problems. Gills are specialized organs containing filaments, which further divide into lamellae. The lamellae contain a dense thin walled capillary network that exposes a large gas exchange surface area to the very large volumes of water passing over them.\nGills use a countercurrent exchange system that increases the efficiency of oxygen-uptake from the water. Fresh oxygenated water taken in through the mouth is uninterruptedly \"pumped\" through the gills in one direction, while the blood in the lamellae flows in the opposite direction, creating the countercurrent blood and water flow (Fig. 22), on which the fish's survival depends.\nWater is drawn in through the mouth by closing the operculum (gill cover), and enlarging the mouth cavity (Fig. 23). Simultaneously the gill chambers enlarge, producing a lower pressure there than in the mouth causing water to flow over the gills. The mouth cavity then contracts, inducing the closure of the passive oral valves, thereby preventing the back-flow of water from the mouth (Fig. 23). The water in the mouth is, instead, forced over the gills, while the gill chambers contract emptying the water they contain through the opercular openings (Fig. 23). Back-flow into the gill chamber during the inhalatory phase is prevented by a membrane along the ventroposterior border of the operculum (diagram on the left in Fig. 23). Thus the mouth cavity and gill chambers act alternately as suction pump and pressure pump to maintain a steady flow of water over the gills in one direction. Since the blood in the lamellar capillaries flows in the opposite direction to that of the water, the consequent countercurrent flow of blood and water maintains steep concentration gradients for oxygen and carbon dioxide along the entire length of each capillary (lower diagram in Fig.\u00a022). Oxygen is, therefore, able to continually diffuse down its gradient into the blood, and the carbon dioxide down its gradient into the water. Although countercurrent exchange systems theoretically allow an almost complete transfer of a respiratory gas from one side of the exchanger to the other, in fish less than 80% of the oxygen in the water flowing over the gills is generally transferred to the blood.\nIn certain active pelagic sharks, water passes through the mouth and over the gills while they are moving, in a process known as \"ram ventilation\". While at rest, most sharks pump water over their gills, as most bony fish do, to ensure that oxygenated water continues to flow over their gills. But a small number of species have lost the ability to pump water through their gills and must swim without rest. These species are \"obligate ram ventilators\" and would presumably asphyxiate if unable to move. Obligate ram ventilation is also true of some pelagic bony fish species.\nThere are a few fish that can obtain oxygen for brief periods of time from air swallowed from above the surface of the water. Thus lungfish possess one or two lungs, and the labyrinth fish have developed a special \"labyrinth organ\", which characterizes this suborder of fish. The labyrinth organ is a much-folded suprabranchial accessory breathing organ. It is formed by a vascularized expansion of the epibranchial bone of the first gill arch, and is used for respiration in air. This organ allows labyrinth fish to take in oxygen directly from the air, instead of taking it from the water in which they reside through the use of gills. The labyrinth organ helps the oxygen in the inhaled air to be absorbed into the bloodstream. As a result, labyrinth fish can survive for a short period of time out of water, as they can inhale the air around them, provided they stay moist. Labyrinth fish are not born with functional labyrinth organs. The development of the organ is gradual and most juvenile labyrinth fish breathe entirely with their gills and develop the labyrinth organs when they grow older.\nInvertebrates.\nArthropods.\nSome species of crab use a respiratory organ called a branchiostegal lung. Its gill-like structure increases the surface area for gas exchange which is more suited to taking oxygen from the air than from water. Some of the smallest spiders and mites can breathe simply by exchanging gas through the surface of the body. Larger spiders, scorpions and other arthropods use a primitive book lung.\nInsects.\nMost insects breath passively through their spiracles (special openings in the exoskeleton) and the air reaches every part of the body by means of a series of smaller and smaller tubes called 'trachaea' when their diameters are relatively large, and 'tracheoles' when their diameters are very small. The tracheoles make contact with individual cells throughout the body. They are partially filled with fluid, which can be withdrawn from the individual tracheoles when the tissues, such as muscles, are active and have a high demand for oxygen, bringing the air closer to the active cells. This is probably brought about by the buildup of lactic acid in the active muscles causing an osmotic gradient, moving the water out of the tracheoles and into the active cells. Diffusion of gases is effective over small distances but not over larger ones, this is one of the reasons insects are all relatively small. Insects which do not have spiracles and trachaea, such as some Collembola, breathe directly through their skins, also by diffusion of gases.\nThe number of spiracles an insect has is variable between species, however, they always come in pairs, one on each side of the body, and usually one pair per segment. Some of the Diplura have eleven, with four pairs on the thorax, but in most of the ancient forms of insects, such as Dragonflies and Grasshoppers there are two thoracic and eight abdominal spiracles. However, in most of the remaining insects, there are fewer. It is at the level of the tracheoles that oxygen is delivered to the cells for respiration.\nInsects were once believed to exchange gases with the environment continuously by the simple diffusion of gases into the tracheal system. More recently, however, large variation in insect ventilatory patterns has been documented and insect respiration appears to be highly variable. Some small insects do not demonstrate continuous respiratory movements and may lack muscular control of the spiracles. Others, however, utilize muscular contraction of the abdomen along with coordinated spiracle contraction and relaxation to generate cyclical gas exchange patterns and to reduce water loss into the atmosphere. The most extreme form of these patterns is termed discontinuous gas exchange cycles.\nMolluscs.\nMolluscs generally possess gills that allow gas exchange between the aqueous environment and their circulatory systems. These animals also possess a heart that pumps blood containing hemocyanin as its oxygen-capturing molecule. Hence, this respiratory system is similar to that of vertebrate fish. The respiratory system of gastropods can include either gills or a lung.\nPlants.\nPlants use carbon dioxide gas in the process of photosynthesis, and exhale oxygen gas as waste. The chemical equation of photosynthesis is 6 CO2 (carbon dioxide) and 6 H2O (water), which in the presence of sunlight makes C6H12O6 (glucose) and 6 O2 (oxygen). Photosynthesis uses electrons on the carbon atoms as the repository for the energy obtained from sunlight. Respiration is the opposite of photosynthesis. It reclaims the energy to power chemical reactions in cells. In so doing the carbon atoms and their electrons are combined with oxygen forming CO2 which is easily removed from both the cells and the organism. Plants use both processes, photosynthesis to capture the energy and oxidative metabolism to use it.\nPlant respiration is limited by the process of diffusion. Plants take in carbon dioxide through holes, known as stomata, that can open and close on the undersides of their leaves and sometimes other parts of their anatomy. Most plants require some oxygen for catabolic processes (break-down reactions that release energy). But the quantity of O2 used per hour is small as they are not involved in activities that require high rates of aerobic metabolism. Their requirement for air, however, is very high as they need CO2 for photosynthesis, which constitutes only 0.04% of the environmental air. Thus, to make 1\u00a0g of glucose requires the removal of all the CO2 from \"at least\" 18.7\u00a0liters of air at sea level. But inefficiencies in the photosynthetic process cause considerably greater volumes of air to be used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66724", "revid": "38557371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66724", "title": "Formosa (disambiguation)", "text": "Formosa is a former name for the island of Taiwan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFormosa may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66728", "revid": "1319285970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66728", "title": "Trail", "text": "Path for mostly non-motorized travel through a natural area\nA trail, also known as a path or track, is an unpaved lane or a small paved road (though it can also be a route along a navigable waterways) generally not intended for usage by motorized vehicles, usually passing through a natural area. However, it is sometimes applied to highways in North America. \nIn the United Kingdom and Ireland, a path or footpath is the preferred term for a pedestrian or hiking trail. In the US, the term was historically used for a route into or through wild territory used by explorers and migrants (e.g. the Oregon Trail). In the United States, \"trace\" is a synonym for trail, as in Natchez Trace.\nSome trails are restricted to use by only walkers, or cyclists, or equestrians, or for snowshoeing, or cross-country skiing, others, for example bridleways in the UK, are shared, and can be used by walkers, cyclists and equestrians. Although most ban motorized use, there are unpaved trails used by dirt bikes, quad bikes and other off-road vehicles, usually for extreme sports and rally races. In some places, like the Alps, trails are used by alpine agrarian communities for moving cattle and other livestock.\nUsage.\nIn Australia, the term track can be used interchangeably with trail or walk, and can refer to anything from a dirt road to an unpaved pedestrian path.\nIn New Zealand, the terms track or walkway are used almost exclusively except when referring to cross-country skiing: \"walkways vary enormously in nature, from short urban strolls, to moderate coastal locations, to challenging tramps [hikes] in the high country [mountains]\". Walkway is used similarly in St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada, where the \"Grand Concourse\", is an integrated walkway system.\nIn the United Kingdom, the term trail is in common usage. Longer distance walking routes, and government-promoted long-distance paths, collectively known as National Trails, are also frequently called ways as in the Pennine Way and South Downs Way. Generally, the term footpath is preferred for pedestrian routes, including long-distance trails, and is used for urban paths and sometimes in place of pavement. Track is used for wider paths (wide enough for vehicles), often used for hiking. The terms bridleway, byway, restricted byway are all recognised legal terms and to a greater or lesser extent in general usage.\nThe increased popularity of mountain biking has led to a proliferation of mountain bike trails in many countries. Often these will be grouped to form larger complexes, known as trail centers.\nIn the early years of the 20th\u00a0century, the term auto trail was used for a marked highway route, and trail is now used to designate routes, including highway routes, designated for tourist interest like the Cabot Trail, Nova Scotia, Canada and the Quilt Trails in the US. The term trail has been used by developers and urban planners for a variety of modern paved roads, highways, and boulevards, in these countries, and some highways continue to be officially called a trail, such as the Susquehanna Trail in Pennsylvania, a designation that varies from a two-lane road to a four-lane freeway. An unusual use of the term is in the Canadian province of Alberta, which has multi-lane freeways called trails.\nHistory.\nAnimals created the first trails, which were \"later adapted by humans\". Subsequently, farmers moved cattle to market along drove roads and between winter and summer grazing creating trails. More recently, former industrial routes, such as railway rights of way and canal towpaths, have been turned into recreational trails.\nMany historic routes, like the Silk Road, the Amber Road and the Royal Road of the Persian Empire, existed before the Christian era and covered great distances.\nThe Post Track, a prehistoric causeway in the valley of the River Brue in the Somerset Levels, England, is one of the oldest known constructed trackways and dates from around 3838 BC.\nThe idea of following a path or track for exercise or pleasure developed during the 18th\u00a0century in Europe and arose because of changing attitudes to the landscape and nature associated with the Romantic movement. In earlier times, walking generally indicated poverty and was associated with vagrancy. In previous centuries long walks were undertaken as part of religious pilgrimages and this tradition continues throughout the world.\nThe first footpath built specifically for recreational hiking in America, and likely the world, is the Crawford Path in the White Mountains of New Hampshire. The path was blazed in 1819 by Abel Crawford and his son, Ethan Allen. Originally 8.25 miles in length (now 8.5 miles), the trail leads to the summit of Mt. Washington.\nTypes.\nTrails can be located in different settings for various uses. These can include:\nSegregated.\nTrail segregation, the practice of designating certain trails as having a specific preferred or exclusive use, is increasingly common and diverse. For example, bike trails are used not only on roads open to motor vehicles but also in trail systems open to other trail users. Some trails are segregated for use by both equestrians and mountain bikes or by equestrians or mountain bikes alone. Designated \"wilderness area\" trails may be segregated for non-wheeled use permitting backpacking and horses but not permitting mountain bikes and motorized vehicles.\nOften, trail segregation for a particular use is accompanied by prohibitions against that use on other trails within the trail system. Trail segregation may be supported by signage, markings, trail design and construction (especially the selection of tread materials), and by separation between parallel treads. Separation may be achieved by \"natural\" barriers including distance, ditching, banking, grading, and vegetation, and by \"artificial\" barriers including fencing, curbing, and walls.\nBicycle.\nBicycle trails encompass a wide variety of trail types, including shared-use paths used for commuting, off-road cross-country trails and downhill mountain bike trails. \nThe number of off-road cycle trails has increased significantly, along with the popularity of mountain bikes. Off-road bicycle trails are generally function-specific and most commonly waymarked along their route. They may take the form of single routes or form part of larger complexes, known as trail centers. Off-road trails often incorporate a mix of challenging terrain, singletrack, smooth fireroads, and even paved paths. Trails with an easy or moderate technical complexity are generally deemed cross-country trails, while trails difficult even to experienced riders are more often dubbed all-mountain, freeride, or downhill. Downhilling is popular at ski resorts like Mammoth Mountain in California, or Whistler Blackcomb in British Columbia, where ski lifts are used to get bikes and riders to the top of the mountain.\nEuroVelo bicycle routes are a network of (currently 17) long-distance cycling routes criss-crossing Europe in various stages of completion; more than was in place by 2020. EuroVelo is a project of the European Cyclists' Federation (ECF).\nEuroVelo routes can be used for bicycle touring across the continent, and by local people making short journeys. The routes comprise both existing national bike routes, such as the Dutch LF-Routes, the German D-Routes, and the British National Cycle Network, and existing general-purpose roads, together with new stretches of cycle routes to connect them.\nOff-road cycling can cause soil erosion and habitat destruction if not carried out on established trails. This is true when trails are wet, though overall, cycling may not have more of an impact as other trail users.\nCross-country skiing.\nIn cross-country skiing, a trail is also called a track or piste. Recreational cross-country skiing is also called touring, especially in Europe. Some skiers stay out for extended periods using tents and equipment similar to bushwalkers and hikers, whereas others take shorter trips from ski resorts on maintained trails. In some countries, organizations maintain a network of huts for use by cross-country skiers in wintertime. For example, the Norwegian Mountain Touring Association maintains over 400 huts stretching across hundreds of kilometres of trails hikers use in the summer and skiers use in the winter.\nEquestrian.\nHorse riding and other equestrian uses of trails continue to be a popular activity for many trail users. Horses can usually negotiate much the same grades as hikers, but not always, although they can more easily clear obstacles in the path such as logs.\nThe Bicentennial National Trail (BNT) in Australia is one of the longest marked multi-use trail in the world, stretching from Cooktown, Queensland, through New South Wales to Healesville, Victoria. This trail runs the length of the rugged Great Dividing Range through national parks, private property and alongside of wilderness areas. One of the objectives was to develop a trail that linked up the brumby tracks, mustering and stock routes along the Great Dividing Range, thus providing an opportunity to legally ride the routes of stockmen and drovers who once travelled these areas with pack horses. This Trail provides access to some of the wildest, most remote country in the world. The Bicentennial National Trail is suitable for self-reliant horse riders, fit walkers and mountain bike riders.\nWithin the United States National Trail Classification System, equestrian trails include simple day-use bridle paths and others built to accommodate long strings of pack animals on journeys lasting many days. Trail design parameters for these uses include trail base width and material, trail clear width, trail clear height, access to water suitable for stock (not human) use, and trail routing.\nPedestrian.\nA footpath is a type of thoroughfare that is intended for use only by pedestrians either within an urban area or through the countryside. An urban footpath is usually called an alley or lane and often paved (see also: sidewalk and pavement). Other public rights of way, such as bridleways, byways, towpaths, and green lanes are also used by pedestrians.\nIn England and Wales, there are rights of way on which pedestrians have a legally protected right to travel. National parks, nature preserves, conservation areas and other protected wilderness areas may have trails that are restricted to pedestrians.\nFootpaths can be connected to form a long-distance trail or way, which can be used by both day hikers and backpackers. Some trails are over long.\nIn the US and Canada, where urban sprawl has reached rural communities, developers and local leaders are currently striving to make their communities more conducive to non-motorized transportation through the use of less traditional trails. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation in the US has established the Active Living by Design program to improve the livability of communities in part through developing trails, The Upper Valley Trails Alliance in Vermont has done similar work on traditional trails, while the Somerville Community Path in Somerville, Massachusetts, and related paths, are examples of urban initiatives. In St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada the \"Grand Concourse\", is an integrated walkway system that has over of walkways, which link every major park, river, pond and green space in six municipalities.\nMotor.\n \nA motorized trail is a trail intended for off-road vehicles, potentially including 4\u00d74 cars, dirt bikes, and all-terrain vehicles (ATV), although trails may restrict the nature of vehicles that are permitted to operate upon them.\nMany motorized trails are maintained on federal land within the United States. The Recreational Trails Program defined as part of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 mandates that states must use a minimum of 30 percent of these funds for motorized trail uses.\nSome members of the US government and environmental organizations, including the Sierra Club and The Wilderness Society. have criticized off-road vehicle use on public land. They have noted several consequences of illegal ORV use such as pollution, trail damage, erosion, land degradation, possible species extinction, and habitat destruction which can leave hiking trails impassable. ORV proponents argue legal use taking place under planned access along with the multiple environmental and trail conservation efforts by ORV groups will mitigate these issues. Groups such as the BlueRibbon Coalition advocate Treadlightly, which is the responsible use of public lands used for off-road activities.\nNoise pollution is also a concern, and several studies conducted by Montana State University, California State University, the University of Florida and others have cited possible negative behavioral changes in wildlife as the result of some ORV use. Several US states such as Washington have laws to reduce noise generated by off-road and non-highway vehicles.\nWater.\nWater trails, also referred to as blueways or paddling trails, are marked routes on navigable waterways such as rivers, lakes, canals and coastlines for people using small non-motorized boats such as kayaks, canoes, rafts, or rowboats. Some trails may be suitable for float tubing or developed in concert with motorized use. They include: signs and route markers; maps; facilities for parking, boat ramps or docks, and places to camp and picnic. There are also state programs and other promotion for water trails in the United States. The American Canoe Association has compiled a database of water trails in the United States. The National Park Service Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance Program has compiled a list of water trail resources, success stories, and statewide contacts for water trails.\nShared-use.\nShared use may be achieved by sharing a trail easement, but maintaining segregated and sometimes also separated trail treads within it. This is common with rail trails. Shared use may also refer to alternate day arrangements, whereby two uses are segregated by being permitted every other day. This is increasingly common on long-distance trails shared by equestrians and mountain bike users; these two user communities have similar trail requirements but may experience difficult encounters with each other on the trail.\nThe Trans Canada Trail can be used by cyclists, hikers, horseback riders, and walkers, as well as cross-country skiers, snowmobilers and snowshoers in winter.\nIn the United States, the East Coast Greenway\u2014 from Key West to the Canadian border\u2014 and the 11 September National Memorial Trail, a triangular loop connecting the three 9/11 memorial sites, are two long-distance multi-use paths for cyclists, runners, walkers, even equestrians.\nIn Belgium RAVeL, French for \"r\u00e9seau autonome de voies lentes\" (\"autonomous network of slow ways\"), is a Walloon initiative aimed at creating a network of route itineraries reserved for pedestrians, cyclists, horse riders and people with reduced mobility. The network makes use of towpaths on river banks and disused railway or vicinal tramway lines ( narrow-gauge tramways). Old railway lines have been leased by the Walloon Government for 99 years using emphyteutic lease contracts. Where necessary, new paths are created to link parts of the network.\nIn England and Wales a bridleway is a trail intended for use by equestrians, but walkers also have a right of way, and Section 30 of the Countryside Act 1968, permits the riding of bicycles (but not motor-cycles) on public bridleways, though the act says it \"shall not create any obligation to facilitate the use of the bridleway by cyclists\". Thus the right to cycle exists even though it may be difficult to exercise on occasion, especially in winter. Cyclists using a bridleway must give way to other users on foot or horseback.\nThe seawall in Stanley Park, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada is popular for walking, running, cycling, and inline skating. There are two paths, one for skaters and cyclists and the other for pedestrians. The lane for cyclists and skaters goes one-way in a counterclockwise loop.\nForeshoreway (also oceanway) is a term used in Australia for a type of greenway that provides a public right-of-way along the edge of the sea open to both walkers and cyclists.\nForest road.\nA forest road is a type of rudimentary access road, built mainly for the forest industry. In some cases they are used for backcountry recreation access.\nThere is open access to most Forestry Commission roads and land in Great Britain for walkers, cyclists and horse riders and, since the Countryside Bill of 1968, it has become the largest provider of outdoor recreation in Britain. The commission works with associations involved in rambling, cycling, mountain biking and horse riding to promote the use of its land for recreation. The trails open to the public are not just forest roads. A notable example of the commission's promotion of outdoor activity is the 7stanes project in Scotland, where seven purpose built areas of mountain bike trails have been laid, including facilities for disabled cyclists.\nHolloway.\nA Holloway (also hollow way) is a sunken path or lane, i.e., a road or track that is significantly lower than the land on either side, not formed by the (recent) engineering of a road cutting but possibly of much greater age. Various mechanisms have been proposed for how holloways may have been formed, including erosion by water or traffic; the digging of embankments to assist with the herding of livestock; and the digging of double banks to mark the boundaries of estates. These mechanisms are all possible and could apply in different cases.\nRail.\n \nRail trails or paths are shared-use paths that take advantage of abandoned railway corridors. They can be used for walking, cycling and horseback riding. They exist throughout the world. RailTrails Australia describes them as:Following the route of the railways, they cut through hills, under roads, over embankments and across gullies and creeks. Apart from being great places to walk, cycle or horse ride, rail trails are linear conservation corridors protecting native plants and animals. They often link remnant vegetation in farming areas and contain valuable flora and fauna habitat. Wineries and other attractions are near many trails as well as B&amp;B's and other great places to stay.\nMost trails have a gravel or dirt surface suitable for walking, mountain bikes and horses. In the USA the Cheshire Rail Trail, in New Hampshire, can be used by hikers, horseback riders, snowmobilers, cross-country skiers, cyclists, and even dogsledders.\nIn Canada, following the abandonment of the Prince Edward Island Railway in 1989, the government of Prince Edward Island purchased the right-of-way to the entire railway system. The Confederation Trail was developed as a tip-to-tip walking/cycling gravel rail trail which doubles as a monitored and groomed snowmobile trail during the winter months, operated by the PEI Snowmobile Association. A considerable part of the Trans Canada trail is repurposed defunct rail lines donated to provincial governments by the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National railways rebuilt as walking trails. Much of the Trans Canada Trail development emulated the successful Rails-to-Trails initiative in the United States. The Trail is multi-use and depending on the section may allow hikers, bicyclists, horseback riders, cross-country skiers and snowmobilers.\nTowpath.\nA towpath is a road or path on the bank of a river, canal, or other inland waterway. The original purpose of a towpath was to allow a horse or a team of human pullers to tow a boat, often a barge. They can be paved or unpaved and are popular with cyclists and walkers; some are suitable for equestrians. Equestrians have legal access to all towpaths in Scotland, and there is a campaign for similar rights in England and Wales. In snowy winters in the USA they are popular with cross-country skiers and snowmobile users.\nMost canals were owned by private companies in Britain, and the towpaths were deemed to be private for the benefit of legitimate users of the canal. The nationalisation of the canal system in 1948 did not result in the towpaths becoming public rights of way, and subsequent legislation, such as the Transport Act of 1968, which defined the government's obligations to the maintenance of the inland waterways for which it was now responsible, did not include any commitment to maintain towpaths for use by anyone. Ten years later, British Waterways started to relax the rule that a permit was required to give access to a towpath and began to encourage leisure usage by walkers; anglers; and, in some areas, cyclists. The British Waterways Act 1995 still did not enshrine any right of public access although it encouraged recreational access of all kinds to the network. However, the steady development of the leisure use of the canals and the decline of commercial traffic had resulted in a general acceptance that towpaths are open to everyone, not just boat users. The concept of free access to towpaths is enshrined in the legislation which transferred responsibility for the English and Welsh canals from British Waterways to the Canal &amp; River Trust in 2012.\nNot all towpaths are suitable for use by cyclists, but on those that are on canals owned by British Waterways, a permit is required. There is no charge for a permit, but it acts as an opportunity to inform cyclists about safe and unsafe areas to cycle. Some areas including London are exempt from this policy but are covered by the London Towpath Code of Conduct, and cyclists must have a bell, which they ring twice when approaching pedestrians. Parts of some towpaths have been incorporated into the National Cycle Network, and in most cases, this has resulted in the surface being improved.\nIn France, it is possible to cycle, rollerblade, and hike along the banks of the Canal du Midi. A paved stretch of from Toulouse to Avignonet-Lauragais and another between B\u00e9ziers and Portiragnes are particularly suited to cycling and rollerblading. It is possible to cycle or walk the entire Canal des Deux Mers from S\u00e8te to Bordeaux. Other French canals provide walkers \"with many excellent routes, as they are always accompanied by a towpath, which makes a pleasant off-road track, and have the added virtues of flatness, shade and an abundance of villages along the way\", though walking a canal can be monotonous, so that \"a long trip beside a canal is better done by bicycle\".\nUrban.\nAn urban trail is a citywide network of non-motorized, multi-use pathways that are used by bicyclists, walkers and runners for transportation and recreation. Urban trails have a variety of surfaces, and some designated for two-way traffic. \nAlley.\nUrban pedestrian footpaths are sometimes called alleys or lanes and in older cities and towns in Europe and are often what is left of a medieval street network or rights-of-way or ancient footpaths. Similar paths also exist in some older North American towns and cities, like Charleston, South Carolina, New Castle, Delaware, and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Such urban trails or footpaths are narrow, usually paved and often between the walls of buildings. This type is usually short and straight, and on steep ground can consist partially or entirely of steps. Some are named. Because of geography steps are a common form of footpath in hilly cities and towns. This includes Pittsburgh (see Steps of Pittsburgh), Cincinnati (see Steps of Cincinnati), Seattle, and San Francisco in the United States, as well as Hong Kong, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, and Rome. Stairway trails are found in a number of hilly American cities. This includes the Stairway Trails in Bernal Heights, East San Francisco.\nSystem layout.\nLinear.\nA linear trail goes from one point to another without connecting trails. These trails are also known as \"out-and-back\" or \"destination\" trails. Rail trails and long-distance trails are examples of linear trails. Linear trails usually follow long distances. A shorter linear trail is a spur trail, which takes a user to a particular point-of-interest, such as a waterfall or mountain summit.\nLooped.\nA looped trail allows a user to end up where they started with either minimal or no repeating parts of the trail. Looped-trail systems come in many permutations. A single-looped trail system is often used around lakes, wetlands, and other geological features. A series of looped trails is a stacked-loop trail system. A stacked loop trail system has several interconnected looped trails. This creates an efficient, compact design with many route options. In a multiple-loop system, each loop extends from a single trailhead.\nTrail systems often combine linear trails with looped trails. In a spoked-wheel system, linear trails connect a central trailhead with an outer loop. In a primary-and-secondary loop system, linear trails connect a primary loop with secondary loops. Last, a maze system incorporates both loops and linear trails. Maze systems provide users many choices; some users may find navigation difficult.\nAdministration.\nEurope.\nA group of public and private organisations from the eight Alpine countries in Europe created the Via Alpina in 2000, receiving EU funding from 2001 until 2008. It was initiated by the Association Grande Travers\u00e9e des Alpes in Grenoble, which hosted the Via Alpina international secretariat until January 2014, when it was transferred to the International Commission for the Protection of the Alps CIPRA, in Liechtenstein. There are national secretariats (hosted by public administrations or hiking associations) in each country. Its aim is to support sustainable development in remote mountain areas and promote the Alpine cultures and cultural exchanges.\nThe Grande Randonn\u00e9e (French), \"Grote Routepaden\" or \"Lange-afstand-wandelpaden\" (Dutch), \"Grande Rota\" (Portuguese) or \"Gran Recorrido\" (Spanish) is a network of long-distance footpaths in Europe, mostly in France, Belgium, the Netherlands and Spain. Many GR routes make up part of the longer European walking routes which cross several countries. In France alone, the trails cover approximately . In France, the network is maintained by the \"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Fran\u00e7aise de la Randonn\u00e9e P\u00e9destre\" (French Hiking Federation), and in Spain by the Spanish Mountain Sports Federation.\nUK and Ireland.\nIn England and Wales, many trails and footpaths are of ancient origin and are protected under law as rights of way. In Ireland, the Keep Ireland Open organization is campaigning for similar rights. Local highway authorities, in England and Wales, (usually county councils or unitary authorities) are required to maintain the definitive map of all public rights of way in their areas, and these can be inspected at council offices. If a path is shown on the definitive map, and no subsequent order (e.g. a stopping up) exists, the right of way is conclusive in law. However, a path that is not on that map may still be a public path, as the rights may not have been recorded. The Countryside Agency estimated that over 10% of public paths are not yet listed on the definitive map. The Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 provides that paths that are not recorded on the definitive map by 2026 and that were in use prior to 1949 will automatically be deemed stopped-up on 1\u00a0January 2026.\nIn Scotland, a right of way is a route over which the public has passed unhindered for at least 20 years. The route must link two \"public places\", such as villages, churches or roads. Unlike in England and Wales, there is no obligation on Scottish local authorities to signpost or mark a right of way. The charity Scotways, formed in 1845 to protect rights of way, records and signs the routes. There is no legal distinction between footpaths and bridleways in Scotland, as there is in England and Wales, though it is generally accepted that cyclists and horseback riders may follow rights of way with suitable surfaces.\nThe Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 established a general presumption of access to all land in Scotland, making the existence of rights of way less important in terms of access to land in Scotland. Certain categories of land are excluded from this presumption of open access such as railway land, airfields and private gardens.\nNorthern Ireland has very few public rights of way, and access to land there is more restricted than other parts of the UK. In many areas, walkers can enjoy the countryside only because of the goodwill and tolerance of landowners. Northern Ireland shares the same legal system as England, including concepts about the ownership of land and public rights of way, but it has its own court structure, system of precedents and specific access legislation.\nIn England and Wales, a National Trails system of long-distance footpaths also exists administered by Natural England and the Natural Resources Wales, statutory agencies of the UK and the Welsh Governments, respectively. These include Hadrian's Wall Path, the Pembrokeshire Coast Path, the Pennine Bridleway (bridleway), the South West Coast Path (South West Way) (the longest), and the Thames Path, and many more. Together these are over long.\nIn Scotland, the equivalent trails are called Scotland's Great Trails and are administered by NatureScot. The first, and probably the most popular, is the West Highland Way, which is long and was opened in 1980.\nSustrans is a British charity that promotes sustainable transport, and it works on projects to encourage people to walk, cycle, and use public transport, to give people the choice of \"travelling in ways that benefit their health and the environment\". Sustrans' flagship project is the National Cycle Network, which has created over of signed cycle routes throughout the UK.\nUnited States.\nIn 1968, the United States' National Trails System, which includes National Scenic Trails, National Historic Trails and National Recreation Trails, was created under the National Trails System Act. The most famous American long trails are the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, generally known as the Appalachian Trail and the Pacific Crest Trail. The Appalachian Trail is a marked hiking route in the eastern United States extending between Springer Mountain, Georgia, and Mount Katahdin, Maine. The trail is approximately long. The Pacific Crest Trail is a long-distance hiking and equestrian trail closely aligned with the highest portion of the Sierra Nevada and Cascade mountain ranges, which lie east of the US Pacific coast. The trail's southern terminus is on the US border with Mexico and its northern terminus on the US-Canada border on the edge of Manning Park in British Columbia, Canada; its corridor through the US is in the states of California, Oregon, and Washington. It is long.\nThe land management agency in charge of a trail writes and enforces the rules and regulations for it. A trail may be completely contained within one administration (e.g. a State Park) or it may pass through multiple administrations, leading to a confusing array of regulations, allowing dogs or mountain bikes in one segment but not in another, or requiring Wilderness Permits for a portion of the trail, but not everywhere.\nIn the United States agencies administering trails include the National Park Service, the US Forest Service, the Bureau of Land Management, State Park systems, County Parks, cities, private organizations such as land trusts, businesses and individual property owners.\nNew trail construction by an agency must often be assessed for its environmental impact and conformance with State or Federal laws. For example, in California new trails must undergo reviews specified by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).\nUniversal access.\nAll trails and shared use paths\u2014indeed, any areas open to pedestrians\u2014that are owned or operated by a public or private entity covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 are subject to federal regulations on Other Power-Driven Mobility Devices (\"OPDMDs\"). These rules potentially greatly expand the types of vehicular devices that must be permitted on trails, shared use paths, other routes, and other areas open to the public. This publication discusses ways to manage access by these vehicles.\nThere are many types of non-motorized, land-based recreational trails and shared use paths: hiker and pedestrian trails, mountain biking trails, equestrian trails, and multi-use trails designed for several user types. The companion guide to this publication, the \"2013 Pennsylvania Trail Design and Development Principles: Guidelines for Sustainable, Non-Motorized Trails\" (the \"Pennsylvania Trail Design Manual\"), provides guidance and detailed information about the characteristics of the various types of trails and paths. The publication is a resource to help evaluate, plan, design, construct, and manage a route on a site. The publication \"Universal Access Trails and Shared Use Paths: Design, Management, Ethical and Legal Considerations\" focuses on the accessibility aspects of the most commonly constructed types.\nConstruction.\nWhile most trails have arisen through common usage, the design and construction of good quality new paths is a complex process that requires certain skills.\nWhen a trail passes across a flat area that is not wet, brush, tree limbs and undergrowth are removed to create a clear, walkable trail. A bridge is built when a stream or river is sufficiently deep to make it necessary. Other options are culverts, stepping stones, and shallow fords. For equestrian use, shallow fords may be preferred. In wet areas an elevated trailway with fill or a boardwalk is often used, though boardwalks require frequent maintenance and replacement, because boards in poor condition can become slippery and hazardous.\nSlopes.\nTrail gradients are determined based on a site specific assessment of soils and geology, drainage patterns of the slope, surrounding vegetation types, position on the slope of a given trail segment (bottom, mid-slope, ridgeline), average precipitation, storm intensities, types of use, volume and intensity of use, and a host of other factors affecting the ability of the trail substrate to resist erosion and provide a navigable surface. Trails that ascend steep slopes may use switchbacks, but switchback design and construction is a specialized topic.\nTrails that are accessible by users with disabilities are mandated by the U.S. Federal Government to have slope of less than 12%, with no more than 30% of the trail having slope greater than 8.33%.\nTrails outside of wilderness areas have outward side-to-side gradients less than 8%. A flat or inward-sloping trail collects water and causes extra trail maintenance. The ideal path is built almost, but not quite, level in cross-section.\nTo achieve a proper slope in hilly terrain, a sidehill trail is excavated. This type of trailway is created by establishing a line of a suitable slope across a hillside, which is then dug out by means of a mattock or similar tool. This may be a full-bench trail, where the treadway is only on the firm ground surface after the overlying soil is removed and sidecast (thrown to the side as waste), or a half-bench trail, where soil is removed and packed to the side so that the treadway is half on firm old ground and half on new packed fill. In areas near drainages, creeks and other waterways, excavation spoils are taken away in bulk and deposited in an environmentally benign area. Trails are established entirely on fill in problem areas. In such cases, the soil is packed down firmly and the site is periodically checked to maintain the stability of the trail.\nCycle trails built for commuting may be built to a different set of standards than pedestrian-only trails and, in some cases, may require a harder surface, fewer changes in grade and slope, increased sight visibility, and fewer sharp changes in direction. On the other hand, the cross-slope of a bicycle trail may be significantly greater than a foot trail, and the path may be narrower in some cases. The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials recommends different widths for different types of bicycle facilities. For example, a shared use path has a recommended one directional width of , while a bidirectional path should be significantly wider () to accommodate bidirectional traffic and users. The US Department of Transportation provides additional guidance on recreational bicycle and pedestrian trail planning and design standards.\nA well designed recreational mountain bike path for the exclusive use of bicycles has an average grade of less than 10% and generally follows a contour line, rather than straight downhill.\nDrainage.\nTrail construction requires proper drainage. If drainage is inadequate, three issues may occur: water may accumulate on flat terrain to the point that the trail becomes unusable; moving water can erode trails on slopes; or inadequate drainage may create local mud spots. Mountain bike trails slope out or across the trail 3\u20135% downhill to encourage water to run off the side, rather than down the trail bed.\nTo remedy the first problem, water accumulation on flat terrain, raised walkways are often built. They include turnpikes, causeways, embankments, stepping stones, and bridges (or deckwalks). The earthen approaches are often done by cutting poles from the woods, staking parallel poles in place on the ground, then filling between them with whatever material is available to create the raised walkway. The more elaborate option of the deckwalk is by necessity reserved for shorter stretches in very high-traffic areas. Water accumulation is particularly common in the North Country of England.\nThe second problem, water erosion, is caused because trails, by their nature, tend to become drainage channels and eventually gullies when the drainage is poorly controlled. Where a trail is near the top of a hill or ridge, this is usually a minor issue, but when it is farther down, it can become a very major one.\nIn areas of heavy water flow along a trail, a ditch is often dug on the uphill side of the trail with drainage points across the trail. The cross-drainage is also accomplished by means of culverts cleared on a semi-annual basis, or by means of cross-channels, often created by placing logs or timbers across the trail in a downhill direction, called \"thank-you-marms\", \"deadmen\", or waterbars. Timbers or rocks are also used for this purpose to create erosion barriers. Rock paving in the bottom of these channels and in the trailside ditches is sometimes used to maintain stability. The creation of water bars, with or without ditching, at major points of water flow on or along the trail, and in conjunction with existing drainage channels below the trail, is a technique that can be applied. Another technique that has been adopted is the construction of coweeta dips, or drain dips, points on the trail where it falls briefly (for a meter or so) and then rises again. These provide positive drainage points that are almost never clogged by debris.\nThe third type of problem can occur both on bottomlands and on ridgetops and a variety of other spots. A local spot or short stretch of the trail may be chronically wet. If the trail is not directly on rock, then a mud pit forms. Trail users go to the side of the trail to avoid the mud pit, and the trail becomes widened. A \"corduroy\" is a technique used when an area cannot be drained. This ranges from random sticks to split logs being laid across the path. Some early turnpikes in the United States were corduroy roads, and these can still be found in third-world forested areas. With recreational trails, it is common for the sticks to be one to three inches thick and laid in place, close together. Sometimes, a short bridge is used.\nMaintenance.\nNatural surface, single-track trails will require some ongoing maintenance. If the trail is properly designed and constructed, maintenance should be limited to clearing downed trees, trimming back brush and clearing drainages. Depending on location, if the trail is properly designed, there should be no need for major rework such as grading or erosion control efforts. Mountain trails which see both significant rainfall and human traffic may require \"trail hardening\" efforts to prevent further erosion. Most of the seemingly natural rock steps on the mountain trails of the northeast United States are the work of professional and volunteer trail crews.\nNavigation.\nFor long-distance trails, or trails where there is any possibility of someone taking a wrong turn, blazing or signage is provided (the term waymarking is used in Britain). This is accomplished by using either paint on natural surfaces or by placing pre-made medallions or sometimes cairns. Horseshoe-shaped blazes are used frequently for bridle trails. The Appalachian Trail is blazed with white rectangles, and blue is often used for side trails. European long-distance walking paths are blazed with yellow points encircled with red. Other walking paths in European countries are blazed in a variety of manners.\nWhere bike trails intersect with pedestrian or equestrian trails, signage at the intersections and high visibility onto the intersecting trails are needed to prevent collisions between fast-moving cyclists and slower moving hikers and horses. Bicycles and horses can share the same trails where the trail is wide enough with good visibility. The US Department of Transportation provides standards and guidelines for traffic control, including signage and striping, for bicycle facilities.\nClassification.\nA simple colored symbol to classify a trail's difficulty in the USA was first used for ski trails and is now being used for hiking, bicycle, other trails.\nOther systems may be used in different locations.\nIn Switzerland, paths are classified by three levels of difficulties: Hiking paths (yellow markers), mountain paths (white-red-white markers) and alpine paths (white-blue-white markers).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66729", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66729", "title": "Shaivaite", "text": ""}
{"id": "66730", "revid": "30425052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66730", "title": "Canadian Broadcasting Corporation", "text": "Canadian public broadcaster\nThe Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (), branded as CBC/Radio-Canada, is the Canadian public broadcaster for both radio and television. It is a Crown corporation that serves as the national public broadcaster, with its English-language and French-language service units known as CBC and Radio-Canada, respectively.\nAlthough some local stations in Canada predate its founding, the CBC is the oldest continually-existing broadcasting network in Canada. The CBC was established on November 2, 1936. The CBC operates four terrestrial radio networks: The English-language CBC Radio One and CBC Music, and the French-language Ici Radio-Canada Premi\u00e8re and Ici Musique (international radio service Radio Canada International historically transmitted via shortwave radio, but since 2012 its content is only available as podcasts on its website). The CBC also operates two terrestrial television networks, the English-language CBC Television and the French-language Ici Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9, along with the satellite/cable networks CBC News Network, Ici RDI, Ici Explora, Documentary Channel (partial ownership), and Ici ARTV. The CBC operates services for the Canadian Arctic under the names CBC North, and Radio-Canada Nord. The CBC also operates digital services including CBC.ca/Ici.Radio-Canada.ca, CBC Radio 3, CBC Music/ICI.mu, and Ici.TOU.TV.\nCBC/Radio-Canada offers programming in English, French, and eight indigenous languages on its domestic radio service, and in five languages on its web-based international radio service, Radio Canada International (RCI). However, budget cuts in the early 2010s have contributed to the corporation reducing its service via the airwaves, discontinuing RCI's shortwave broadcasts as well as terrestrial television broadcasts in all communities served by network-owned rebroadcast transmitters, including communities not subject to Canada's over-the-air digital television transition.\nThe CBC's funding is supplemented by revenue from commercial advertising on its television broadcasts. The radio service employed commercials from its inception to 1974, but since then its primary radio networks have been commercial-free. In 2013, the CBC's secondary radio networks, CBC Music and , introduced limited advertising of up to four minutes an hour, but this was discontinued in 2016.\nHistory.\nIn 1929, the Aird Commission on public broadcasting recommended the creation of a national radio broadcast network. \nIn 1929, the Aird Commission on public broadcasting recommended the termination of private broadcasting in Canada and its replacement by a limited number of high-power stations owned and operated by a Crown corporation. A major concern was the growing influence of American radio broadcasting as U.S.-based networks began to expand into Canada. Meanwhile, Canadian National Railways was making a radio network to entertain its passengers and give it an advantage over its rival, CP. This, the CNR Radio, is the forerunner of the CBC. Graham Spry and Alan Plaunt lobbied intensely for the project on behalf of the Canadian Radio League. In 1932, the government of R. B. Bennett established the CBC's predecessor, the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (CRBC).\nThe CRBC took over a network of radio stations formerly set up by a federal Crown corporation, the Canadian National Railway. The network was used to broadcast programming to riders aboard its passenger trains, with coverage primarily in central and eastern Canada. On November 2, 1936, the CRBC was reorganized under its present name. While the CRBC was a state-owned company, the CBC was a Crown corporation on the model of the British Broadcasting Corporation, which had been reformed from a private company into a statutory corporation in 1927. Leonard Brockington was the CBC's first chairman.\nFor the next few decades, the CBC was responsible for all broadcasting innovation in Canada. This was partly because, until 1958, it was not only a broadcaster but the chief regulator of Canadian broadcasting. It used this dual role to snap up most of the clear-channel licences in Canada. It began a separate French-language radio network in December 1937. It introduced FM radio to Canada in 1946, though a distinct FM service was not launched until 1960.\nTelevision broadcasts from the CBC began on September 6, 1952, with the opening of a station in Montreal, Quebec (CBFT), and a station in Toronto, Ontario (CBLT) opening two days later. The CBC's first privately owned affiliate television station, CKSO in Sudbury, Ontario, launched in October 1953. At the time, all private stations were expected to affiliate with the CBC, a condition that relaxed in 1960\u201361 with the launch of CTV.\nFrom 1944 to 1962, the CBC split its English-language radio network into two services known as the Trans-Canada Network and the Dominion Network. The latter, carrying lighter programs including American radio shows, was dissolved in 1962, while the former became known as CBC Radio. (In the late 1990s, CBC Radio was rebranded as CBC Radio One and CBC Stereo as CBC Radio Two. The latter was rebranded slightly in 2007 as CBC Radio 2.)\nOn July 1, 1958, the CBC's television signal was extended from coast to coast. The first Canadian television show shot in colour was the CBC's own \"The Forest Rangers\" in 1963. Colour television broadcasts commenced on July 1, 1966, and full-colour service began in 1974. In 1978, the CBC became the first broadcaster in the world to use an orbiting satellite for television service, linking Canada \"from east to west to north\". The mission of CBC is contributing to the \"moral economy of the nation\".\nFrontier Coverage Package.\nStarting in 1967 and continuing until the mid-1970s, the CBC offered a \"Frontier Coverage Package\" of limited television service to remote northern communities. Low-power television transmitters carried a four-hour selection of black-and-white videotaped programs each day. The tapes were recorded in Calgary and flown into a community with a transmitter, put on the air, and then transported to another community, often by the \"bicycle\" method used in television syndication. Transportation delays ranged from one week for larger centres to almost a month for small communities.\nThe first stations were started in Yellowknife, Northwest Territories; Lynn Lake, Manitoba; and Havre-Saint-Pierre, Quebec, in 1967. Another station began operating in Whitehorse, Yukon in November 1968. Additional stations were added from 1969 to 1972.\nMost of the stations were reconfigured in 1973 to receive CBC Television programming from the Anik satellite in colour and live with the rest of Canada. Those serving the largest centres signed on with colour broadcasts on February 5, 1973, and most of the others were added before spring of that year. Broadcasts were geared to either the Atlantic Time Zone (UTC\u22124 or \u22123), originating from Halifax and later St. John's, or the Pacific Time Zone (UTC\u22128 or \u22127), originating from Vancouver, even though the audience resided in communities in time zones varying from UTC\u22125 to UTC\u22128; the reason for this was that the CBC originated its programs for the Atlantic Time Zone, and a key station in each time zone would record the broadcast for the appropriate delay of one, two or three hours; the programs were originated again for the Pacific zone. The northern stations picked up one of these two feeds, with the western NWT stations picking up the Pacific feed. Some in northern areas of the provinces were connected by microwave to a CBC broadcast centre within their own province.\nSome of these stations used non-CBC call signs such as CFWH-TV in Whitehorse, CFYK in Yellowknife, CFFB in Frobisher Bay and CHAK in Inuvik, while some others used the standard CB_T callsign but with five letters (e.g. CBDHT). Uplinks in the North were usually a temporary unit brought in from the south. A ground station uplink was later established in Yellowknife, and then in Whitehorse and Iqaluit.\nTelevision programs originating in the North began in 1979 with the monthly news magazine \"Our Ways\", produced in Yellowknife, and graduated to half-hour newscasts (\"Northbeat\" and ) on weekdays in 1995. Until then, there were occasional temporary uplinks for such things as territorial election returns coverage; Yukon had the first such coverage in 1985, though because it happened during the Stanley Cup playoffs, equipment was already spoken for, so CBC rented the equipment of CITV-TV Edmonton to use in Whitehorse that evening.\n2011 transition to digital television.\nThe CRTC ordered that in 28 \"mandatory markets\", full power over-the-air analogue television transmitters had to cease transmitting by August 31, 2011. Broadcasters could either continue serving those markets by transitioning analogue transmitters to digital or cease broadcasting over-the-air. Cable, IPTV, and satellite services are not involved or affected by this digital transition deadline.\nWhile its fellow Canadian broadcasters converted most of their transmitters to digital by the Canadian digital television transition deadline of August 31, 2011, the CBC converted only about half of the analogue transmitters mandatory to digital (15 of 28 markets with CBC TV, and 14 of 28 markets with SRC). Due to financial difficulties reported by the corporation, the corporation published a plan whereby communities that receive analogue signals by re-broadcast transmitters in mandatory markets would lose their over-the-air (OTA) signals as of the deadline. Rebroadcast transmitters account for 23 of the 48 CBC and SRC transmitters in mandatory markets. Mandatory markets losing both CBC and SRC over-the-air signals include London, Ontario (metropolitan area population 457,000) and Saskatoon, Saskatchewan (metro area 257,000). In both of those markets, the corporation's television transmitters are the only ones that were not converted to digital.\nOn July 31, 2012, the CBC shut down all of its approximately 620 analogue television transmitters, following an announcement of these plans on April 4, 2012. This reduced the total number of the corporation's television transmitters across the country to 27. According to the CBC, this would reduce the corporation's yearly costs by $10\u00a0million. No plans have been announced to use subchannels to maintain over-the-air signals for both CBC and SRC in markets where the corporation has one digital transmitter. In fact, in its CRTC application to shut down all of its analogue television transmitters, the CBC communicated its opposition to the use of subchannels, citing, amongst other reasons, costs. CBC/R-C claims that only 1.7 percent of Canadian viewers actually lost access to CBC and Radio-Canada programming due to the very high penetration of cable and satellite. In some areas (particularly remote and rural regions), cable or satellite have long been essential for acceptable television.\nFallout over the Ghomeshi affair.\nIn 2015, after allegations that CBC Radio host Jian Ghomeshi had harassed colleagues, Ghomeshi was placed on leave; his employment was terminated in October when the CBC indicated that they had \"graphic evidence\" that he had injured a female employee. The corporation commissioned an independent investigation. The resulting report by Janice Rubin, a partner at the law firm Rubin Thomlinson LLP, discussed employee complaints about Ghomeshi that were not seriously considered by the CBC. Rubin concluded that CBC management had \"failed to take adequate steps\" when it became aware of Ghomeshi's \"problematic behaviour\".\nGhomeshi was charged by police with multiple counts of sexual assault but was found not guilty of all but one of these in March 2016. He was to be tried in June on the last remaining charge, relating to a complainant who had also worked at CBC; her name was later revealed to be Kathryn Borel. On May 11, 2016, however, the Crown withdrew the charge after Ghomeshi signed a peace bond (which does not include an admission of guilt) and apologized to Borel. Borel was critical of the CBC for its handling of her initial complaint about Ghomeshi's behaviour. \"When I went to the CBC for help, what I received in return was a directive that, yes, he could do this and, yes, it was my job to let him\", she told the assembled media representatives.\nThe CBC apologized to Borel publicly on May 11 in a statement by the head of public affairs Chuck Thompson. \"What Ms. Borel experienced in our workplace should never have happened and we sincerely apologize\u00a0...\", he stated. The corporation has also maintained that it had accepted Rubin's report and had \"since made significant progress\" on a revised policy of improved training and methods for handling bullying and harassment complaints.\nThe Rubin report \"contained several recommendations on how the CBC can change its workplace culture. One of those recommendations included the creation of a work and human rights ombudsperson whom employees could use to raise concerns about the workplace.\" The CBC also severed its relationship \"with two top executives, Chris Boyce, the former head of CBC Radio, and Todd Spencer, the head of human resources for English services\".\nIn a \"Toronto Star\" article by Jacques Gallant from May 11, 2016, public relations expert Martin Waxman spoke of a \"damning indictment\" of the CBC which included the following comment. \"Yes, they did their inquiry, but if I were the CBC, I would think strongly about what is wrong with the culture and what they can do to repair it\", he said. \"The Star\" also quoted employment lawyer Howard Levitt stating that \"harassment has not been fully addressed at the CBC\" in his estimation. Levitt called the Rubin report a \"whitewash\" and reiterated his suggestion that a federal commission should conduct a more detailed inquiry into workplace issues at the public broadcaster.\nFederal elections and copyright claims.\n42nd Canadian Parliament: lawsuit threats.\nDuring the 2015 Canadian federal election campaign, the CBC issued cease-and-desist letters to the Broadbent Institute, the Conservative Party of Canada (CPC), the Liberal Party of Canada, and the New Democratic Party of Canada, accusing them of using copyrighted footage from CBC news programming in their campaign advertising without permission. The Liberals and NDP complied with the letters, pulling the ads in question, while the Broadbent Institute and the Conservatives persisted. Eventually, however, rather than go to court, the Broadbent Institute and the Conservatives agreed to remove the offending material, and as such, the CBC did not pursue them further for these alleged infractions in 2015.\n43rd Canadian Parliament: trial of suit.\nIn October 2019, two weeks before the 2019 Canadian federal election, the CBC sued the CPC for using excerpts from its leaders' debates in campaign material. The CBC petitioned for an injunction against the CPC continuing to use the excerpts as well as seeking an acknowledgement from the CPC and its executive director, Dustin Van Vugt, that the party had \"engaged in the unauthorized use of copyright-protected material\". Furthermore, the CBC indicated that the clips in question were \"taken out of context and are edited and relied on to make partisan points for the benefit\" of the CPC. In response, the CPC stated that 17 seconds of footage had been used and the video in question had been removed before the lawsuit was filed, and expressed \"grave concern that this decision was made on the eve of an election that CBC is to be covering fairly and objectively\".\nIntellectual property academic Michael Geist stated that the use of the footage was likely covered by fair dealing provisions. Then-CBC President and CEO Catherine Tait contended that she did not believe that the use of journalistic material for partisan ads was covered by the \"fair dealing\" exemption of the \"Copyright Act\".\nResolution: court allows fair dealing.\nOn May 13, 2021, the CPC lawsuit was dismissed in the Federal Court of Canada, with Justice Phelan's clarification that the CPC's use was fair and allowable. The decision made precedent. \"Prior to this decision, Canadian jurisprudence held that to meet the requirements of criticism and review, the copyrighted work in use must be critiqued and analyzed. Furthermore, the Court held that for attribution of the source and author, the inclusion of the CBC's logo was sufficient\" to meet \"Copyright Act\" requirements.\nLogos and slogans.\nThe original logo of the CBC, designed by \u00c9cole des Beaux Arts student Hortense Binette and used between 1940 and 1958, featured a map of Canada (and from 1940 to 1949, Newfoundland) and a thunderbolt design used to symbolize broadcasting.\nIn 1958, the CBC adopted a new logo for use at the end of network programs. Designed by scale model artist Jean-Paul Boileau, it consisted of the legends \"CBC\" and \"Radio-Canada\" overlaid on a map of Canada. For French programming, the \"Radio-Canada\" was placed on top.\nThe \"Butterfly\" logo was designed for the CBC by Hubert Tison in 1966 to mark the network's progressing transition from black-and-white to colour television, much in the manner of the NBC peacock logo. It was used at the beginning of programs broadcast in colour and was used until all CBC television programs had switched to colour. A sketch on the CBC Television program \"Wayne &amp; Shuster\" once referred to this as the logo of the \"Cosmic Butterfly Corporation\".\nThe fourth logo, known internally as \"the gem\", was designed for the CBC by graphic artist Burton Kramer in December 1974, and it is the most widely recognized symbol of the corporation. The main on-air identification featured the logo kaleidoscopically morphing into its form while radiating outward from the centre of the screen on a blue background. This animated version, which went to air in December 1974, is also known colloquially as \"The Exploding Pizza\". The appearance of this logo marked the arrival of full-colour network television service. The large shape in the middle is the letter C, which stands for Canada; the radiating parts of the C symbolize broadcasting, and the blue circle the logo was placed in represented the world, so the entire logo, according to Kramer, represented the idea of \"Canada broadcasting to the world\". The original theme music for the 1974 CBC ident was a three-note woodwind orchestral fanfare accompanied by the voiceover \"This is CBC\" or \"Ici Radio-Canada\". This was later replaced by a different, and more familiar 11-note woodwind orchestral jingle, which was used until December 31, 1985.\nThe updated one-colour version of the gem/pizza logo, created by Hubert Tison and Robert Innes, was introduced on January 1, 1986, and with it was introduced a new series of computer graphic-generated television idents for the CBC and Radio-Canada. These idents consisted of different background colours corresponding to the time of the day behind a translucent CBC gem logo, accompanied by different arrangements of the CBC's new, synthesized five-note jingle. The logo was changed to one colour, generally dark blue on white, or white on dark blue, in 1986. Print ads and most television promos, however, have always used a single-colour version of this logo since 1974. During 1986, they use gold platings on their idents to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the CBC.\nIn 1992, the CBC updated its logo design to make it simpler and more red (or white on a red background). The new logo design, created by Swiss-Canadian design firm Gottschalk + Ash, reduces the number of geometric sections in the logo to 13 instead of the previous logo's 25, and the \"C\" in the centre of the logo became a simple red circle. According to graphic designer Todd Falkowsky, the logo's red colour also represents Canada in a symbolic way. With the launch of the current design, new television idents were introduced in November of that year, also using CGI. Since the early 2000s, it has also appeared in white (sometimes red) on a textured or coloured background. It is now CBC/Radio-Canada's longest-used logo, surpassing the original incarnation of the Gem logo and the CBC's 1940 logo.\nCBC television slogans have been periodically updated:\nPersonalities.\nCBC alumni have included future Governors General of Canada Jeanne Sauv\u00e9, Adrienne Clarkson, Micha\u00eblle Jean, and Mary Simon as well as Quebec premier Ren\u00e9 L\u00e9vesque.\nKnowlton Nash, whose career at the CBC spanned the years between 1965 and 1992, was a news anchor for the news programme \"The National\". Peter Mansbridge then took over the reins at the premiere Canadian news broadcast until July 1, 2017. For a time Mansbridge shared the anchor position with Wendy Mesley, who was forced to retire after a 38-year career under a cloud for inappropriate use of language in two closed editorial meetings.\nSince 1952, CBC has produced the weekly Saturday night broadcast \"Hockey Night in Canada\". Personalities like Foster Hewitt, Dick Irvin Jr., Harry Neale were amongst the light-blue jacketed commentators of the 20th century. Ron MacLean and Don Cherry were famous for their commentary during the first intermission \"Coach's Corner\" until Cherry was fired for remarks during broadcast on Remembrance Day 2019 that were widely condemned as anti-immigrant.\nOrganization.\nMandate.\nThe 1991 \"Broadcasting Act\" states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, as the national public broadcaster, should provide radio and television services incorporating a wide range of programming that informs, enlightens and entertains;\n... the programming provided by the Corporation should:\nManagement.\nAs a Crown corporation, the CBC operates at arm's length (autonomously) from the government in its day-to-day business. The corporation is governed by the \"Broadcasting Act\" of 1991, under a board of directors and is directly responsible to Parliament through the Department of Canadian Heritage. General management of the organization is in the hands of a president, who is appointed by the Governor General of Canada in Council, on the advice of the prime minister.\nAccording to \"The Hill Times\", a clause in Bill C-60\u2014an omnibus budget implementation bill introduced by the government of Stephen Harper in 2013\u2014\"appears to contradict a longstanding arm's-length relationship between the independent CBC and any government in power\". The clause allows the \"prime minister's cabinet to approve salaries, working conditions and collective bargaining positions for the CBC\".\nOn September 1, 2007, the CBC became subject to the federal \"Access to Information Act\".\nBoard of directors.\nIn accordance with the \"Broadcasting Act\", a board of directors is responsible for the management of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. The board is made up of 12 members, including the chair and the president and CEO. A current list of directors is available from the Canadian Governor in Council here.\nAs of April\u00a02025[ [update]], the CBC's board of directors page lists:\nOmbudsmen.\nEnglish (CBC)\nFrench (Radio-Canada)\nFinancing.\nFor the fiscal year 2006, the CBC received a total of $1.53\u00a0billion from all revenue sources, including parliamentary funding via taxes, subscription fees, advertising revenue, and other revenue (e.g., real estate). Expenditures for the year included $616\u00a0million for English television, $402\u00a0million for French television, $126\u00a0million for specialty channels, a total of $348\u00a0million for radio services in both languages, $88\u00a0million for management and technical costs, and $124\u00a0million for \"amortization of property and equipment\". Some of this spending was derived from amortization of funding from previous years.\nAmong its revenue sources for the year ending March 31, 2006, the CBC received $946\u00a0million in its annual funding from parliament, as well as $60\u00a0million in \"one-time\" supplementary funding for programming. However, this supplementary funding has been repeated annually for a number of years. This combined total is just over a billion dollars annually and is a source of heated debate. To supplement this funding, the CBC's television networks and websites sell advertising, while cable/satellite-only services such as CBC News Network additionally collect subscriber fees, in line with their privately owned counterparts. The CBC's radio services do not sell advertising except when required by law (for example, to political parties during federal elections).\nCBC's funding differs from that of the public broadcasters of many European nations, which collect a licence fee, or those in the United States, such as PBS and NPR, which receive some public funding but rely to a large extent on voluntary contributions from individual viewers and listeners. A Nanos Research poll from August 2014 conducted for Asper Media (\"National Post\", \"Financial Post\") showed 41% of Canadians wanted funding increased, 46% wanted it maintained at current levels, and only 10% wanted to see it cut.\nThe network's defenders note that the CBC's mandate differs from private media's, particularly in its focus on Canadian content; that much of the public funding actually goes to the radio networks; and that the CBC is responsible for the full cost of most of its prime-time programming, while private networks can fill up most of their prime-time schedules with American series acquired for a fraction of their production cost. CBC supporters also point out that additional, long-term funding is required to provide better Canadian dramas and improved local programming to attract and sustain a strong viewership.\nAccording to the Canadian Media Guild, the $115-million deficit reduction action plan cuts to CBC which started with the 2012 budget and were fully realized in 2014, amounted to \"one of the biggest layoffs of content creators and journalists in Canadian history\". The 2014 cuts combined with earlier ones totalled \"3,600 jobs lost at CBC since 2008. The CMG asked the federal government to reverse the cuts and to repeal Clause 17 of omnibus budget bill C-60 \"to remove government's interference in CBC's day-to-day operations\".\nIn September 2015, the Canadian Media Guild announced that the CBC planned to sell all of its properties across Canada to gain a temporary increase in available funds. Media relations manager Alexandra Fortier denied this and stated that the corporation planned to sell only half of its assets.\nIn September 2015, Hubert Lacroix, then-president of CBC/Radio-Canada, spoke at the international public broadcasters' conference in Munich, Germany. He claimed for the first time that public broadcasters were \"at risk of extinction\". The Canadian Media Guild responded that Lacroix had \"made a career of shredding\" the CBC by cutting one quarter of its staff\u2014approximately 2,000 jobs since 2010 under Lacroix's tenure. More than 600 jobs were cut in 2014 in order \"to plug a $130-million budget shortfall\". Isabelle Montpetit, president of Syndicat des communications de Radio-Canada (SCRC), observed that Lacroix was hand-picked by Stephen Harper for the job as president of the CBC. For the fiscal year 2015, the CBC received $1.036\u00a0billion in public funding and took 5% funding cuts from the previous year.\nIn 2015, the Liberal Party was returned to power. As part of its election platform, it promised to restore the $115\u00a0million of funding to the CBC that was cut by the Harper Government, over three years, and add $35\u00a0million, for a total extra funding of $150\u00a0million.\nOn November 28, 2016, the CBC issued a request for $400\u00a0million in additional funding, which it planned to use towards removing advertising from its television services, production and acquisition of Canadian content, and \"additional funding of new investments to face consumer and technology disruption\". The broadcaster argued that it had operated \"[under] a business model and cultural policy framework that is profoundly broken\", while other countries \"[reaped] the benefits of strong, stable, well-funded public broadcasters\".\nCBC has received $1.2 billion of annual public funding since fiscal 2018. Parliamentary funding increased to almost $1.4 billion for 2020\u20132021 to cover 'retroactive salary inflation' and potential issues arising from the pandemic. It returned to $1.2 billion the following year.\nIn the 2025 federal election, the Liberal party indicated 'an initial $150 million increase in annual funding' https://.\nCBC Pension Plan.\nThe CBC Pension Plan was established in 1961, and is administered by the CBC Pension Board of Trustees. In 2023, there were 10,283 retired members and 7,641 active members. Both the employer and employee contribute 50% each. Active members contribute 7.72% of their salary up to yearly maximum pensionable earnings (YMPE) and 10.16% above YMPE. Benefits are determined by an employee's earnings and years of service. The fund made a 7.8% return and had $7.9 billion in net assets in 2023. The asset allocation was as follows: 43.5% in fixed income; 42% in equities; 14.5% in real assets; and, 7% in bond overlay. Within real assets, almost 79% is in real estate, with 40% of this invested in multifamily residential dwellings. Since 2018, the fund has moved away from office and retail spaces into more industrial and multifamily sectors. Significant investments made by the fund include: $970 million invested in BlackRock Canada CorePlus Long Bond Fund; $376 million in the SPDR S&amp;P 500 ETF Trust; and, $356 million in various Brookfield Corporation funds.\nUpon retirement, members can apply to join The CBC Pensioners National Association, established in 1985. This association has successfully fought to have part of pension surpluses distributed to retirees. A refund amount of $127.1 million for 2021 and 2022 surpluses was dispersed in 2024.\nUnions.\nUnions representing employees at CBC/Radio-Canada include:\nLabour issues.\nDuring the summer of 1981 there was a major disruption of CBC programming as the technicians union, the National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians, went on strike. Local newscasts were cut back to the bare minimum. This had the effect of delaying the debut of \"The Journal\", which had to wait until January 1982.\nThe CBC has been affected by a number of other labour disputes since the late 1990s:\n2005 lock-out.\nOn August 15, 2005, 5,500 employees of the CBC (about 90%) were locked out by CBC CEO Robert Rabinovitch in a dispute over future hiring practices. At issue were the rules governing the hiring of contract workers in preference to full-time hires. The locked-out employees were members of the Canadian Media Guild, representing all production, journalistic and on-air personnel outside Quebec and Moncton, including several foreign correspondents. While CBC services continued during the lock-out, they were primarily made up of repeats, with news programming from the BBC and newswires. Major CBC programs such as \"The National\" and \"Royal Canadian Air Farce\" were not produced during the lock-out; some non-CBC-owned programs seen on the network, such as \"The Red Green Show\", shifted to other studios. Meanwhile, the locked-out employees produced podcasts and websites such as \"CBCunplugged.com\".\nAfter a hiatus, talks re-opened. On September 23, Joe Fontana, the federal minister of labour, called Rabinovitch and Arnold Amber\u2014the president of the CBC branch of the Canadian Media Guild\u2014to his office for talks aimed at ending the dispute. Late in the evening of October 2, 2005, it was announced that the CBC management and staff had reached a tentative deal which resulted in the CBC returning to normal operations on October 11. Some speculated that the looming October 8 start date for the network's most important television property, \"Hockey Night in Canada\", had acted as an additional incentive to resolve the dispute.\nWhile all labour disputes resulted in cut-back programming and numerous repeat airings, the 2005 lock-out may have been the most damaging to CBC. All local programming in the affected regions was cancelled and replaced by abbreviated national newscasts and national radio morning shows. BBC World (television) and World Service (radio), as well as Broadcast News feeds, were used to provide the remainder of original news content, and the CBC website consisted mainly of rewritten wire copy. Some BBC staff protested against their material being used during the CBC lock-out. \"The NUJ and BECTU will not tolerate their members' work being used against colleagues in Canada\", said a joint statement by BBC unions. The CMG questioned whether, with its limited Canadian news content, the CBC was meeting its legal requirements under the \"Broadcasting Act\" and its CRTC licences.\nGalaxie (which CBC owned at the time) supplied some music content for the radio networks. Tapes of aired or produced documentaries, interviews and entertainment programs were also aired widely. Selected television sports coverage, including that of the Canadian Football League, continued, but without commentary.\nAs before, French-language staff outside of Quebec were also affected by the 2005 lock-out, although with Quebec producing the bulk of the French networks' programming, those networks were not as visibly affected by the dispute apart from local programs.\nServices.\nNews.\nCBC News is the largest broadcast newsgathering operation in Canada, providing services to CBC radio as well as CBC News Network, local supper-hour newscasts, CBC News Online, and Air Canada's in-flight entertainment. Recent CBC News services are also proving popular, such as news alerts to mobile phones and PDAs. Desktop news alerts, e-mail alerts, and digital television alerts are also available.\nRadio.\nCBC Radio has six separate services: three in English, known as CBC Radio One, CBC Music, and CBC Radio 3; and three in French, known as \"Ici Radio-Canada Premi\u00e8re\", \"Ici Musique\", and \"Ici Musique Classique\". Over the years, a number of CBC radio transmitters, with a majority of them on the AM band, have either moved to FM or have shut down completely. The CBC plans to phase out more CBC AM transmitters across Canada. This goal however remains to be seen in light of the CBC budget cutbacks.\nCBC Radio One and Premi\u00e8re focus on news and information programming, though they also air some music programs, variety shows, and comedy; in the past, they aired some sports programming as well. Both of these services used to broadcast primarily on the AM band, but many stations have moved over to FM. CBC Music and \"Ici musique\" is found exclusively on FM, airing arts and cultural programming, with a focus on music. CBC Radio 3, found only online, plays exclusively-independent Canadian music.\nCBC Radio also operated two shortwave services. The first, Radio Nord Qu\u00e9bec, broadcast domestically to Northern Quebec on a static frequency of 9.625 MHz; and the other, Radio Canada International, provided broadcasts to the United States and around the world in eight languages. Both shortwave services were shut down in 2012 due to budget cuts; the Sackville transmitter site was dismantled in 2014. Additionally, the Radio One stations in St. John's and Vancouver operated shortwave relay transmitters, broadcasting at 6.16\u00a0MHz. Some have suggested that CBC/Radio-Canada create a new high-power shortwave digital radio service for more effective coverage of isolated areas.\nIn November 2004, the CBC, in partnership with Standard Broadcasting and Sirius Satellite Radio, applied to the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) for a licence to introduce satellite radio service to Canada. The CRTC approved the subscription radio application, as well as two others for satellite radio service, on June 16, 2005. Sirius Canada launched on December 1, 2005, with a number of CBC Radio channels, including the new services CBC Radio 3 and \"Bande \u00e0 part\". The CBC once owned a stake in Sirius XM Canada, but exited from ownership following a reorganization announced in 2016.\nIn some areas, especially national or provincial parks, the CBC also operates an AM or FM transmitter rebroadcasting weather alerts from the Meteorological Service of Canada's Weatheradio Canada service.\nLong-range radio plan.\nThe CBC's long-range radio plan (LRRP) was developed by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) in collaboration with the CBC to identify those FM frequencies that would likely be required to deliver the CBC's radio services to the maximum number of Canadians. The CBC is not subject to any conditions or expectations concerning its LRRP. The CBC noted that Premi\u00e8re Cha\u00eene (now Ici Radio-Canada Premi\u00e8re) and CBC Radio One were available to about 99% of the Canadian population. The CBC stated that it plans to maintain its radio service but has no plans to grow the coverage area. It described the LRRP as a planning vehicle and indicated that it would no longer use it. Given reductions in public funding to the CBC and given that Premi\u00e8re Cha\u00eene and Radio One are available to the vast majority of Canadians, the Commission considers that the CBC's plan to maintain current coverage and discontinue the LRRP is reasonable. Accordingly, the Commission accepted the CBC's proposal to discontinue the LRRP.\n\"Radio Guide\".\nBeginning in 1981, CBC Radio launched the monthly magazine Radio Guide, which included CBC Radio program listings alongside feature content, such as profiles of musicians and writers and behind the scenes looks at CBC programs. The magazine was released both by subscription and as a newsstand title. In 1984, due to budgetary pressures at the CBC, the magazine began accepting paid advertising from outside clients; in 1985, due to further budget cuts, the magazine was discontinued as a standalone title, and instead became a supplement in \"Saturday Night\". In 1988, the magazine was sold to Core Group Publishers of Vancouver, and continued in this format until 1997, when it was discontinued due to a declining subscriber base.\nTelevision.\nThe CBC operates two national broadcast television networks: CBC Television in English, and ICI Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9 in French. Like private broadcasters, both of these networks sell advertising but offer more Canadian-produced programming. All CBC television stations are owned and operated by the CBC itself and carry a common schedule, aside from local programming and other regional variation (such as the CBC North stations in Nunavut, the Northwest Territories, and the Yukon carrying an additional newscast in the Inuktitut language and a weekly Cree program), and CBET-DT in Windsor amending its non-primetime schedule at various points due to program rights conflicts with Detroit stations.\nBoth CBC's English and French networks previously had a number of private affiliates owned by third-party owners. However, the majority of them have either been bought by the CBC and subsequently shut down during the transition to digital television, or have switched to other networks and program services.\nOne of the most popular shows is the weekly Saturday night broadcast of NHL hockey games. In English, the program is known as \"Hockey Night in Canada\", and in French, it was called \"La Soir\u00e9e du hockey\". Both shows began in 1952. The French edition was discontinued in 2004, though Radio-Canada stations outside of Quebec simulcast some Saturday night games produced by RDS until 2006. The network suffered considerable public embarrassment when it lost the rights to the show's theme music following a protracted lawsuit launched by the song's composer and publishers. In 2013, the exclusive national media rights to the NHL were acquired by Rogers Media, although Rogers would reach an agreement with the CBC to license the \"Hockey Night in Canada\" brand for use in its coverage of Saturday-night games, and broker a version of the broadcasts to CBC at no charge.\nThe CBC also wholly owns and operates four specialty television channels\u2014the news channels CBC News Network and Ici RDI, and the French-language networks Ici Explora and Ici ARTV (the latter since 2015 after buying the remaining 15% of the channel from Arte France). It also owns a managing interest in Documentary Channel.\nCBC provides viewers with interactive on-demand television programs every year through digital-cable services like Rogers Cable.\nChildren's programming air under the commercial-free preschool programming block called CBC Kids. In French, the children's programming block is \"Zone Jeunesse\" on ICI Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9.\nOnline.\nThe CBC has two main websites: \"CBC.ca\" is in English and was established in 1996; and \"Radio-Canada.ca\" is in French. The websites allow the CBC to produce sections that complement the various programs on television and radio.\nIn May 2012, as part of an initiative to improve its service in \"underserved\" markets, the CBC launched a CBC Hamilton news operation for Hamilton, Ontario. With the Hamilton area already within the broadcast range of CBC Radio and CBC Television's services in Toronto, the outlet focuses exclusively on digital content, including a section of the CBC News website oriented towards the market. CBC Hamilton reporters have occasionally filed reports for the CBC's television news output, in the event of major stories centred upon the city.\nAlso in 2012, the corporation launched CBC Music, an internet radio service that produces and distributes 40 music-related channels, including the existing audio streams of CBC Radio 2 and CBC Radio 3. In October 2019, the CBC launched a successor to the CBC Music platform known as CBC Listen, which encompasses the CBC's radio, music, as well as podcast output.\nCBC offers feature-length documentary films through the \"documentary Channel\" [\"sic\"], a digital television station.\nIn February 2023, the CBC indicated for the first time that it has begun preliminary planning toward the prospect that future broadcasting will take place entirely on internet streaming platforms rather than traditional radio or television transmissions, although it has not yet announced a specific target date for any changeover.\nMerchandising.\nEstablished in 2002, CBC Merchandising operates retail locations and CBCshop.ca; its educational sales department, CBC Learning, sells CBC content and media to educational institutions; as well as licensing brands such as \"Hockey Night in Canada\" (whose branding is still owned by the CBC) and \"Coronation Street\" (as a Canadian licensee under arrangement from ITV Studios).\nMiscellaneous.\nCBC Records is a Canadian record label that distributes CBC programming, including live concert performances and album transcripts of news and information programming such as the Massey Lectures, in album format. Music albums on the label, predominantly in the classical and jazz genres, are distributed across Canada in commercial record stores, while albums containing spoken word programming are predominantly distributed by the CBC's own retail merchandising operations.\nCBC provides news, business, weather and sports information on Air Canada's inflight entertainment as Enroute Journal.\nInternational broadcasts.\nCBC Television, Ici Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9, CBC News Network, and all other CBC channels can be received through cable and satellite TV channel providers across Canada, such as Bell Satellite TV, Telus Optik TV, Rogers Cable, Videotron, Cogeco, and other smaller TV providers. The CBC and Radio-Canada channel signals can also be obtained free of charge, over-the-air, through antenna receivers in Canada's largest markets as well as in some border states along the Canada\u2013U.S. border; however, CBC is not obtainable as a \"free-to-air\" (FTA) channel on FTA satellites.\nCaribbean.\nSeveral Caribbean Countries carry feeds of CBC TV, including in:\nUnited States.\nCBC radio and television stations can be received over-the-air and have a significant audience in U.S. border communities such as Bellingham and Seattle, Washington; Buffalo, New York; Detroit, Michigan; and Burlington, Vermont. Farther from the border, some American fans of the network have acquired Canadian IP addresses to stream its sports broadcasts. Some CBC programming is also rebroadcast on local public radio, such as New Hampshire Public Radio, Vermont Public Radio and the Maine Public Broadcasting Network. CBC television channels are available on cable systems located near the Canada\u2013U.S. border. For example, CBET Windsor is available on cable systems in the Detroit, Michigan, and Toledo, Ohio, areas; much of the rest of the state of Michigan receives CBMT Montreal on cable. CBUT Vancouver is broadcast on Comcast in the Seattle area. At night, the AM radio transmissions of both CBC and Radio-Canada services can be received over much of the northern portion of the United States, from stations such as CBW in Winnipeg, CBK in Saskatchewan, and CJBC in Toronto.\nOn September 11, 2001, several American broadcasters without their own news operations, including C-SPAN, carried the CBC's coverage of the September 11 attacks in New York City and Washington, D.C. In the days after September 11, C-SPAN carried CBC's nightly newscast, \"The National\", anchored by Peter Mansbridge. The quality of this coverage was recognized specifically by the Canadian Journalism Foundation; editor-in-chief Tony Burman later accepted the Excellence in Journalism Award (2004), for \"rigorous professional practice, accuracy, originality and public accountability\", on behalf of the service.\nC-SPAN has also carried CBC's coverage of major events affecting Canadians, including: Canadian federal elections, key proceedings in Parliament of Canada, Six days in September 2000 that marked the death and state funeral of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the power outage crisis in summer 2003, U.S. presidential elections (e.g. in 2004, C-SPAN picked up \"The National\" the day after the election for the view from Canadians), state visits and official visits of American presidents to Canada, and Barack Obama inauguration in 2009.\nSeveral PBS stations also air some CBC programming. However, these programs are syndicated by independent distributors, and are not governed by the PBS \"common carriage\" policy. Other American broadcast networks sometimes air CBC reports, especially for Canadian events of international significance. For example, in the early hours after the Swissair Flight 111 disaster, CNN aired CBC's live coverage of the event. Also in the late 1990s, CNN Headline News aired a few CBC reports of events that were not significant outside Canada.\nNewsworld International and Trio.\nFrom 1994 to 2000, the CBC, in a venture with Power Broadcasting (former owner of CKWS in Kingston), jointly owned two networks:\nIn 2000, the CBC and Power Broadcasting sold these channels to Barry Diller's USA Networks. Diller's company was later acquired by Vivendi Universal, which in turn was partially acquired by NBC to form NBCUniversal. NBCUniversal still owns the Trio brand, which no longer has any association with the CBC (and became an Internet-only broadband channel which was later folded into Bravo.) The channel was shut down and was replaced with the NBCUniversal channel Sleuth (later known as Cloo).\nHowever, the CBC continued to program NWI, with much of its programming simulcast on the domestic Newsworld service. In late 2004, as a result of a further change in NWI's ownership to the INdTV consortium (including Joel Hyatt and former U.S. Vice President Al Gore), NWI ceased airing CBC programming on August 1, 2005, when it became Current TV. Current later folded and became Al Jazeera America on August 20, 2013.\nInternational broadcast of radio programs.\nSome CBC Radio One programs, such as \"Definitely Not the Opera\", \"WireTap\", \"Q\", and \"As It Happens\", also air on some stations associated with American Public Media or Public Radio International. CBC Radio One (with a special feed that exclusively contains CBC-produced content and no regional programs) and Ici Radio-Canada Premi\u00e8re (a simulcast of its Montreal flagship CBF-FM) are available to SiriusXM subscribers in the United States.\nControversies.\nAllegations of bias.\nSeveral outlets and politicians over many years have accused CBC News of bias. Surveys have found the Canadian public perceives a centre-left/Liberal Party bias in CBC News coverage.\nFalun Gong and \"Beyond the Red Wall\".\nIn November 2007, the CBC replaced its documentary about persecution of Falun Gong members in China, Beyond the Red Wall: Persecution of Falun Gong, at the last minute with a rerun episode regarding President Pervez Musharraf in Pakistan. The broadcaster had said to the press that \"the crisis in Pakistan was considered more urgent and much more newsworthy\", but sources from within the network itself had stated that the Chinese government had called the Canadian Embassy and demanded repeatedly that the program be taken off the air. The documentary in question was to air on Tuesday, November 6, 2007, on CBC Newsworld, but was replaced. The documentary aired two weeks later on November 20, 2007, after editing.\nCBC President's comparison of Netflix's influence to colonialism.\nIn January 2019 CBC President Catherine Tait came under fire for comparing Netflix to colonial imperialism in India and parts of Africa. Tait did not offer an apology and Heather Mallick defended her comparison. Tait's comments made American headlines with J.J. McCullough of \"The Washington Post\" suggesting that \"the state-sponsored\" corporation shielded her from criticism and that the Canadian industry \"was built in part as a bulwark against American influence\". Canadian TV critic John Doyle, who has long criticized what he perceives as the low standards of Canadian programming, claimed that CBC had a problem of complacency rather than imperialism.\nClosed captioning.\nCBC Television was an early leader in broadcasting programming with closed captioning for the hearing impaired, airing its first captioned programming in 1981. Captioned programming in Canada began with the airing of \"Clown White\" in English-language and French-language versions on CBC Television and Radio-Canada, respectively. Most sources list that event as occurring in 1981, while others list the year as 1982.\nIn 1997, Henry Vlug, a deaf lawyer in Vancouver, filed a complaint with the Canadian Human Rights Commission (CHRC) alleging that an absence of captioning on some programming on CBC Television and Newsworld infringed on his rights as a person with a disability. A ruling in 2000 by the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal, which later heard the case, sided with Vlug and found that an absence of captioning constituted discrimination on the basis of disability. The Tribunal ordered CBC Television and Newsworld to caption the entirety of their broadcast days, \"including television shows, commercials, promos, and unscheduled news flashes, from sign-on until sign off\".\nThe ruling recognized that \"there will inevitably be glitches with respect to the delivery of captioning\", but that \"the rule should be full captioning\". In a negotiated settlement to avoid appealing the ruling to the Federal Court of Canada, the CBC agreed to commence 100% captioning on CBC Television and Newsworld beginning November 1, 2002. CBC Television and Newsworld are the only broadcasters in the world required to caption the entire broadcast day. However, published evidence asserts that CBC is not providing the 100% captioning ordered by the Tribunal.\nIn 2004, Canadian retired senator Jean-Robert Gauthier, a hard-of-hearing person, filed a complaint with the CHRC against Radio-Canada concerning captioning, particularly the absence of real-time captioning on newscasts and other live programming. As part of the settlement process, Radio-Canada agreed to submit a report on the state of captioning, especially real-time captioning, on Radio-Canada and RDI. The report, which was the subject of some criticism, proposed an arrangement with Cit\u00e9 Coll\u00e9giale, a college in Ottawa, to train more French-language real-time captioners.\nEnglish-language specialty networks owned or co-owned by CBC, including documentary, have the lower captioning requirements typical of larger Canadian broadcasters (90% of the broadcast day by the end of both networks' licence terms). ARTV, the French-language specialty network co-owned by CBC, has a minimum captioning requirement of 53%.\n2013 Radio-Canada rebranding.\nOn June 5, 2013, the CBC announced that it would be phasing out the Radio-Canada brand from its French-language broadcast properties, and unifying them under names prefixed with \"\"Ici\" ('this is' or literally 'here'). For instance, the CBC planned to re-brand \"T\u00e9l\u00e9vision de Radio-Canada\" as \"Ici T\u00e9l\u00e9\", \"Premi\u00e8re Cha\u00eene\" as \"Ici Premi\u00e8re\", and move its French-language website from \"Radio-Canada.ca\" to \"ici.ca\". Radio-Canada vice-president Louis Lalande stated that the new name complemented its multi-platform operations, while also serving as an homage to the broadcaster's historic station identification slogan since the 1930s, \"ici Radio-Canada\"\" ('this is Radio-Canada').\nThe announcement was criticized by politicians (such as Minister of Canadian Heritage James Moore), who felt that the new \"Ici\" brand was too confusing, and that the CBC was diminishing the value of the Radio-Canada name through its plans to downplay it. The re-branding was also criticized for being unnecessary spending, reportedly costing $400,000, in the midst of budget cuts at the CBC. On June 10, in response to the criticism, Hubert Lacroix apologized for the decision and announced that the new brands for its main radio and television networks would be revised to restore the Radio-Canada name alongside Ici, such as \"Ici Radio-Canada Premi\u00e8re\".\nIn March 2013, the CBC also filed a trademark lawsuit against Sam Norouzi, founder of CFHD-DT\u2014a new multicultural station in Montreal\u2014seeking to have Norouzi's registration on the name \"ICI\" (as an abbreviation of \"International Channel/Canal International\") cancelled because it was too similar to its own \"Ici\"-related trademarks. Despite Norouzi's trademark having been registered prior to the registration of CBC's, the corporation argued that Norouzi's application contained incorrect information surrounding his first use of the name in commerce, and also asserted the long-time use of \"Ici Radio-Canada\" as part of its imaging. Norouzi stated that he planned to fight the CBC in court.\nSuspension of local newscasts during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nOn March 18, 2020, in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, CBC News suspended all of its English-language local newscasts (excluding those carried by CBC North, which include an English-language newscast and a second in Inuktitut), replacing them in their time slots with simulcasts of CBC News Network. The CBC stated that this was done in order to pool its local resources to CBC News Network as a \"core news offering\". An employee memo suggested that a lack of staff at the Canadian Broadcasting Centre and \"much stricter newsgathering protocols\" were another factor in the decision. CBC News editor-in-chief Brodie Fenlon similarly stated that the broadcaster had decided to consolidate news production because their outbreak had \"place[d] incredible demands on our staff and our infrastructure\", and not all jobs associated with television production were capable of being done remotely. These consolidations only affect news programming on CBC Television; CBC Radio and Ici Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9 have continued to carry local content.\nThe CBC's decision faced criticism for its lack of clear justification, and resulting reduction of local news coverage during a major news event\u2014especially in markets where CBC's local newscasts are the only news programming specific to the region (such as Prince Edward Island, which resulted in criticism of the move by Premier Dennis King). The Canadian Media Guild stated that the decision \"flies in the face of past experience which has proven time and again that in times of significant events, Canadians trust and rely on CBC news coverage, particularly for its widespread coverage of regional and local impact, something no other Canadian network can match\". \"Montreal Gazette\" media writer Steve Faguy questioned whether this change was in compliance with the individual stations' CRTC licences, as all CBC stations are required to produce local newscasts daily, and a minimum amount of local programming per-week.\nIn an editorial for \"The Globe and Mail\", former CTV News president Robert Hurst stated that it was unusual for a journalistic operation to cut back on its operations during a crisis, and suggested that decision was the culmination of \"decades of CBC News mismanagement\" and low ratings in comparison to competitors (such as CTV, Global, and Citytv) in most markets. The \"Toronto Star\" similarly wrote that the CBC had \"decided to bail on local communities across the country\".\nOn March 24, the CBC announced that it would introduce \"an expanded 30-minute local news segment on CBC News Network\" beginning March 25, and would \"make every effort to have all of the dedicated local shows back up on the main network\".\nIn May 2021, Radio-Canada commissioned a documentary to better understand the dissident movement led by Dave Leduc and three other Quebec personalities that rejected the health measures imposed by the government surrounding COVID-19 pandemic in Quebec. The documentary was a finalist for the Prix G\u00e9meaux.\nCBC Tandem and branded content.\nSince 2016, the CBC has utilized branded content, publishing advertisements that are designed to look, read or sound similarly to news produced by the CBC itself. In 2020 the CBC formally launched a division called Tandem that focused its branded content marketing efforts, promising corporate clients they can \"leverage\" the CBC's reputation by aligning their message with the \"trust Canadians have in our brand\". Over 500 current and former employees called on CBC management to end Tandem, saying \"in an era of 'fake news', where misinformation is already rife, it undermines trust\u00a0... what's worse, it uses [Canadians'] tax dollars to do it.\" In November 2020 former employees requested that the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission investigate Tandem as part of the public broadcaster's upcoming licence renewal, concerned the content blurs the lines between advertising and news, adding that \"Canadians have a right to a national public broadcaster that puts their news and information needs ahead of the desires of corporate clients.\"\nPrivate sector media criticized the CBC's ability to dominate the Canadian advertising market, using tax-funded subsidies to unfairly compete with local newspapers and broadcasters, driving them out of business.\nCBC President and CEO Catherine Tait states that the CBC has since put \"guardrails\" in place that will ensure there is no confusion between CBC journalism and commercial advertising.\nThe CRTC integrated its investigation of Tandem into its hearings on the renewal of CBC's federal broadcast licences, ultimately renewing the CBC's licence from 2022 to 2027 and approving the Tandem program. The CRTC required that the CBC must establish, maintain, and publicize their guidelines on branded content as well as measure whether branded content is confusing to Canadians.\nThe CRTC decision has been criticized as allowing the CBC to disregard its mandate as a public broadcaster, transforming into a \"publicly funded commercial broadcaster\".\nKenneth Muzik verdict.\nOn December 15, 2021, Manitoba Bench Justice Herbert Rempel ordered the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation to pay investment advisor Kenneth Wayne Muzik nearly $1.7 million in damages for a story it had aired in June 2012 featuring a former client, William Worthington, who complained about the performance of his investment portfolio. Muzik was represented by William Gange of Gange Collins Holloway. In March 2022, Rempel ordered CBC to pay nearly $300 thousand to cover Muzik's legal fees. \nIn 2023, the Manitoba court of appeal overturned Rempel's decision, stating that the CBC acted in the public interest when reporting on the investment adviser. \n\"Given the public interest aspect of the story, the CBC performed a satisfactory investigation into the status and reliability of its main source, the Worthingtons,\" the appeal court decision says. \nhttps:// the appeal court's decision said regarding Justice Rempel's assessment of Muzik's history as an advisor.\nWhile the appeal court agreed that the stories were defamatory, it found that the trial judge erred by failing to appreciate that there was a public interest element to the stories, given that they dealt with risks to investors and the regulation of financial planners. \n\"WE Charity v. CBC\".\nOn February 8, 2022, WE Charity's New York-based affiliate filed a lawsuit against the CBC for defamation. The 230-page complaint was filed in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, where the case was assigned to district judge Randolph D. Moss.\nThe lawsuit alleges that, in an hour-long piece for its series The Fifth Estate, the CBC broadcast claims by reporters Mark Kelly and Harvey Cashore that the CBC knew to be false, including that WE Charity had exaggerated the number of schoolhouses it had built in Kenya and deceived donors about how their money had been spent. WE Charity accused the CBC of fabricating quotes and using misleading editing to support what WE called a \"preconceived narrative\".\nJoe Patrice of the Above the Law website, which covers legal news, reviewed the details of the lawsuit and called it a \"mirror image\" of Dominion Voting Systems v. Fox News Network. Dominion Voting Systems, originally a Canadian company, choose to sue Fox News Network in the United States, ultimately settling for $787.5 million. Similarly, WE Charity, whose American operations are incorporated in Williamsville, New York, sued the CBC in the United States, in both instances despite the hurdle of the \"actual malice\" standard established in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, which is unique to American law and requires that the defendant either knew that or did not care if its representations were false. Pattrice writes, \"The CBC produced segments claiming that the charity misappropriated donor money\u2026 it did not.\"\nOn May 4, the CBC's attorneys filed a motion to dismiss the case per \"forum non conveniens\", saying that it would be more appropriately heard before a Canadian court. WE Charity replied on June 10, countering that the CBC's allegations had hindered its fundraising efforts in the United States, where many of its donors are located. On June 27, Judge Moss denied the CBC's motion, ruling that the case would proceed in the District Court. Moss rejected the CBC's assertion that travel from Canada to the United States was unduly burdensome, and held that the relative ease of modern electronic discovery and document transfer between jurisdictions made the existence of documentary evidence in Canada a negligible hurdle to litigation in the United States. Patrice suggests that, even ten years prior, the CBC's motion might have succeeded, and sees the decision as an example of how the rise of digital media is revolutionizing the legal profession.\nTwitter label.\nOn April 17, 2023, the main CBC account on Twitter was labeled as \"government-funded media\". In response, CBC announced they would cease its usage of Twitter, similarly to NPR after the initial controversy surrounding Elon Musk's decisions as Twitter CEO. Later, Elon Musk tweeted that in response to CBC's claim that they were \"less than 70% government-funded\", Twitter was changing the label to \"69% government-funded media\". According to the CBC annual revenue report, 70.6% of revenue came from parliamentary spending in 2019\u20132020, while 65.6% of revenue came in 2021\u20132022, and 66.7% came in 2023.\nOn May 9, 2023, the CBC announced that it would resume partial activity on some of its Twitter accounts.\nTravis Dhanraj resignation.\nTravis Dhanraj, the former host of CBC News program \"Canada Tonight\", alleged in 2025 that he was forced to resign by CBC after he raised issues such as a lack of diversity of opinion and editorial imbalance in its political coverage. CBC spokesperson Kerry Kelly said the corporation \"categorically rejects\" Dhanraj's allegations. Dhanraj's lawyer, Kathryn Marshall, said that the CBC did not want him booking \"Conservative voices\" on his show.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66732", "revid": "50039304", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66732", "title": "CTV Television Network", "text": "Canadian television network\nThe CTV Television Network, short for Canadian Television, and commonly known as CTV, is a Canadian English-language terrestrial television network. Launched in 1961 and acquired by BCE Inc. in 2000, CTV is Canada's largest privately owned television network and is now a division of the Bell Media subsidiary of BCE. It is Canada's largest privately or commercially owned network consisting of 22 owned-and-operated stations nationwide and two privately owned affiliates, and has consistently been placed as Canada's top-rated network in total viewers and in key demographics since 2002, after several years trailing the rival Global Television Network in key markets.\nBell Media also operates additional CTV-branded properties, including the 24-hour national cable news network CTV News Channel and the secondary CTV 2 television system.\nThere has never been an official full name corresponding to the initials \"CTV\"; prior to CTV's launch in 1961, it was given the proposed branding of \"Canadian Television Network\" (CTN), but that branding was dropped before the network's launch when the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) objected to it, claiming exclusive rights to the term \"Canadian\".\nHistory.\nFormation.\nIn 1958, Prime Minister John Diefenbaker's government passed the \"Broadcasting Act\", which established the Board of Broadcast Governors (BBG), a forerunner to the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC), as the governing body of Canadian broadcasting, effectively ending the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's (CBC) dual role as regulator and broadcaster. The new board's first act was to take applications for \"second\" television stations in Halifax, Montreal (in both English and French), Ottawa, Toronto, Winnipeg, Calgary, Edmonton, and Vancouver in response to an outcry for an alternative to the CBC's television service. Calgary and Edmonton were served by privately owned CBC affiliates; the other six markets by CBC owned-and-operated stations (O&amp;Os).\nIn order of their first sign-on, the newly-licensed stations were:\nThe first eight stations were privately owned; the Edmonton station was a CBC O&amp;O, thus CFRN-TV, the existing local station which had launched in 1954, would lose its CBC affiliation once CBXT signed on.\nEven before his station was licensed, John W. H. Bassett, the chief executive of the ultimately successful Toronto applicant Baton Aldred Rogers Broadcasting, had expressed interest in participating in the creation of a second television network, \"of which we see the Toronto station as anchor\". Indeed, Baton had already begun quietly contacting the successful applicants in other cities to gauge their interest in forming a cooperative group to share Canadian programming among the stations. This led to the July 1960 formation of the Independent Television Organization (ITO), consisting of the eight newly licensed private stations and CFRN, each having one vote in the ITO's operations regardless of the size of its audience (CFTM, being a French-language station and therefore having little reason to collaborate with the other stations, would soon withdraw from the group; it would later emerge as the flagship of the first private French-language network, TVA). The ITO soon resolved to apply for a network licence to link these second stations.\nHowever, the ITO faced opposition from Spence Caldwell, a former CBC executive and one of the unsuccessful applicants for the Toronto licence, who had first approached the BBG in April 1960 to pitch a second-station network proposal of his own. Under his plan, at least 51% of the shares of the network would be owned by various prominent Bay Street investors who had previously backed his Toronto station bid; only 49% would be reserved for the network's affiliates to purchase, if they wished. The BBG \u2013 and particularly its chair Andrew Stewart (who at the time also served as the president of the University of Alberta) \u2013 was not in favour of a station-owned network, fearing that any such network would be dominated by Toronto's CFTO. Although it did not immediately approve Caldwell's proposal, it soon set several conditions on such a network that effectively made Caldwell's group the only feasible applicant.\nThat fall, the Caldwell group (now named the Canadian Television Network, or CTN) and the ITO faced off in a series of meetings with the BBG. The ITO decided not to follow through with a formal network application, but the stations \u2013 particularly Baton, which said it had no interest in participating in CTN and believed it could still be successful without one \u2013 continued to indicate various concerns with the viability of Caldwell's proposal. Ultimately, the BBG granted a licence to CTN, conditional on securing the affiliation of six of the eight ITO stations.\nBaton's opposition to the CTN reversed in early 1961, soon after CFTO won the broadcast rights to the Canadian Football League Eastern Conference for the 1961 and 1962 seasons. Baton's original plan was to operate a temporary network to distribute the games incorporating CFTO, other independent stations, and CBC affiliates in smaller markets (assuming the public network released its affiliates to carry the game). Although the plan was neither officially rejected or approved, various uncertainties eventually led John Bassett to decide to sign an affiliation agreement with CTN instead to ensure the games would air. Most of the other second stations followed suit, with the exception of CHAN in Vancouver, which agreed to carry several network programs but never officially signed on as an affiliate for the duration of the Caldwell era, yet nonetheless would later claim to have been a \"charter member\" of the network.\nEarly years.\nThe network finally launched as the CTV Television Network on October 1, 1961. The CBC had objected to the network's initial name, apparently claiming it had exclusive rights to the term \"Canadian\", and therefore the letters \"CTV\" have no official expanded meaning.\nThe CTV network's first night on-air began with Harry Rasky's promotional documentary on the new network. That was followed by a fall season preview program.\nCTV's initial 1961\u20131962 season began with the following programs, five of which were Canadian productions:\nOther series such as \"Telepoll\" and \"A Kin to Win\" were introduced later in the inaugural season.\nAt first, flagship CFTO was the only station that carried programming live. During CBC's off-hours, CTV used CBC's microwave system to send programming to the rest of the country on tape delay. Eventually, a second microwave channel opened up, enabling live programming from coast to coast.\nThe Caldwell-led management team immediately ran into financial trouble, and relations between the network and its stations were not smooth at first since CTV had essentially been the product of a forced marriage. For example, most of the rights to American programming rested with the ITO, not CTV. In many cases, CTV found itself competing with its own stations for the rights to programming.\nReorganization and expansion.\nCaldwell's departure in 1965 did little to alleviate the situation, and CTV soon found itself on the verge of bankruptcy. In 1966, the network's affiliates (which by this time included CJON-TV in St. John's, CKCO-TV in Kitchener, CHAB-TV/CHRE-TV in Moose Jaw/Regina, and the network's first and only U.S. affiliate, WNYP-TV in Jamestown, New York) sought permission to buy the network and run it as a cooperative. The BBG was initially skeptical of the proposal. Since CFTO was by far the largest and richest station (it was more than double the size of the next-largest station, Montreal's CFCF-TV), the BBG feared that CFTO would dominate CTV if the stations were allowed to buy the network. To alleviate these concerns, the affiliates promised that each station owner would have one vote regardless of its audience share. The board readily approved the proposal, and by the start of the 1966\u201367 season, the stations owned their network. The network also began broadcasting in colour on September 1, 1966.\nBy the mid-1970s, CTV had expanded its footprint across Canada, mostly by twinstick arrangements in smaller cities, and with CBC affiliates switching to CTV once the CBC opened its own stations or added rebroadcasters of nearby O&amp;O stations. In a unique twist, the original Saskatchewan affiliate, CHAB/CHRE, was bought by the CBC in 1969 (and eventually changed its calls to CBKT, with the Regina station as the main station), allowing Regina's original station, CKCK-TV, to join CTV. Its attempt to expand to the United States ended when Buffalo's three network affiliates threatened legal action, forcing WNYP off the air.\nCTV made a name for itself in news coverage when it convinced star CBC news anchor Lloyd Robertson to switch networks in 1976. (Robertson served as the network's main anchorman until 2011). Its weekly newsmagazine series, \"W5\", has been a fixture on the network since 1966, predating the similar American program \"60 Minutes\" by two years.\nIn the 1970s, CTV often bought rights to pop and rock songs to serve as theme music for its programming, rather than commissioning original themes. Most notably, \"W5\" used an instrumental portion of Supertramp's \"Fool's Overture\", \"Canada AM\" used an instrumental version of The Moody Blues' \"Ride My See-Saw\", the game show \"Definition\" used Quincy Jones' \"Soul Bossa Nova\" and the \"CTV Movie\" used the Keith Mansfield instrumental \"Statement\" from the KPM Musichouse library.\nFor most of its first four decades, CTV did not have what could be considered a main schedule outside of news programming. The differences were enough that Ottawa's CJOH used a rebroadcaster in Cornwall to feed cable systems in Montreal from the early 1980s through the mid-1990s despite the presence of CFCF; the CJOH rebroadcaster reaches the western portion of the Montreal area.\nConflict and consolidation.\nCTV's cooperative structure regularly led to conflicts between the network's owner-affiliates. In particular, the owners of CFCF, CJOH, and especially CHAN felt that Baton Broadcasting, owners of flagship CFTO in Toronto, dominated production of network programming.\nIn the mid-1980s, Baton began a drive to take over CTV by buying as many affiliates as possible. Having already bought CFQC-TV in Saskatoon in 1971, Baton purchased additional stations in Saskatchewan \u2013 including CTV affiliates CKCK-TV Regina, CICC-TV Yorkton, and CIPA-TV Prince Albert \u2013 in 1986. Baton then purchased CJOH in 1988, followed by the MCTV and Huron Broadcasting stations, which included four CTV affiliates in Northern Ontario, in 1990.\nOne caveat, however, was the \"one owner, one vote\" provision of the cooperative's bylaws. Any acquisition of one station by an existing station owner triggered an automatic redistribution of the acquired station's shares among the other owners. As a result, even though it owned 11 of CTV's 24 affiliates, Baton still had only had one vote out of eight.\nAround the same time, several CTV owner-affiliates were expanding their holdings outside of the network. CHAN owner Western International Communications purchased Selkirk Communications and Allarcom, which together owned several independent stations in Alberta and Ontario. CHUM Limited, owner of the CTV-affiliated ATV system serving the Maritimes, already owned independent station CITY-TV in Toronto, and by this point had begun launching national cable channels like MuchMusic. Even Baton added some stations outside of CTV, with the purchase or launch of three independent stations in southwestern Ontario in 1992\u201393. It also began competing with the network for some program acquisitions in 1992, and in 1994 launched the Baton Broadcast System (BBS) as a parallel programming brand for both its CTV affiliates and independent stations.\nAfter several years of contentious negotiations between the eight remaining owner-affiliates, by late 1992 they had reached an agreement to recapitalize the network, and provide a path for a single company to eventually take control. The restructuring took effect in January 1993, and CTV converted from a cooperative to a corporation. Seven of the owner-affiliates invested equally, yielding a 14.3% stake in the network for each; however, Newfoundland Broadcasting, owner of CJON, decided not to invest further and effectively relinquished its vote, reducing the number of active voting members to seven. As part of the restructuring, the stations also agreed to reduce the number of hours of network programming, allowing Baton and WIC to program more of their stations' schedules with their own acquisitions.\nIn 1996, Baton acquired CFCN from Rogers Communications. Significantly, Baton also acquired Rogers' CTV vote. It also started a joint venture with Electrohome, owner of CFRN and CKCO. As part of the deal, Baton was allowed to vote Electrohome's shares in addition to its own. The following year, Baton acquired Electrohome's share of the joint venture, and separately acquired ATV from CHUM. This gave Baton a 57.2% controlling interest in the network, triggering a put option allowing the remaining affiliates, WIC (which by this time owned both CHAN and CFCF) and Moffat (owner of CKY), to sell their CTV shares to Baton without selling their stations, which they did. Baton was now full owner of the CTV network and immediately began plastering the CTV brand across its stations, even on non-network programming, and dropped its secondary BBS brand. The company changed its name to CTV Inc. in 1998, and eventually acquired two of the final three large-market stations, CKY and CFCF (it replaced the third, CHAN, as discussed below).\nCTV has attracted some controversy in the past because of cutbacks to its small-market stations. In the late 1990s, cuts were made to the news staff and productions at CTV's two small-market Saskatchewan stations, CICC-TV in Yorkton and CIPA-TV in Prince Albert. These stations currently simulcast supper-hour and late-night news from CKCK and CFQC respectively, placing local inserts into the newscasts. Similarly, the four Maritime stations, known collectively as \"CTV Atlantic\" (then known as ATV), and the four Northern Ontario stations, known collectively as \"CTV Northern Ontario\" (then known as MCTV), each had their local news production cut back in the early 2000s to one single centrally produced newscast for each region, with only brief inserts for news of strictly local interest. This was a controversial move in all of the affected communities, especially in Northern Ontario where MCTV's newscasts were the only locally oriented news programs in those markets.\nBell Canada era.\nIn 2000, typical of the ownership consolidation trend at the time, BCE Inc. acquired CTV, Netstar Communications, and \"The Globe and Mail\" newspaper, combining them into a media division known as Bell Globemedia (BGM). BGM also subsequently acquired a minority share in the French-language network TQS, which broadcasts in Quebec.\nCTV has legally been a \"television service\" in the eyes of the CRTC since 2000, when it allowed its network licence to expire. CBC, Radio-Canada, TVA and Aboriginal Peoples Television Network are the only official television networks in Canada (CTV was issued a separate network licence in 2001 to continue to provide programming to CHFD Thunder Bay, CJBN Kenora, and CITL Lloydminster).\nCTV lost significant coverage in British Columbia and Newfoundland and Labrador at the beginning of the 21st century, starting with a major television realignment in Vancouver. In 2000, Canwest Global bought the television stations of Western International Communications, which owned long-standing CTV affiliates CHAN in Vancouver and CHEK-TV in Victoria. A year later, after its CTV contract ran out, Canwest made CHAN the Global owned-and-operated station for British Columbia, taking advantage of CHAN's massive network of repeaters that cover 97% of the province. CTV shifted its programming to CIVT-TV, an independent station it already owned. Unlike CHAN, CIVT has only one transmitter covering the metropolitan areas of Vancouver and Victoria, and has to rely on cable and satellite to reach the rest of the province. CIVT is either carried on a higher channel number or unavailable altogether in the Mountain Time Zone portion of British Columbia, where CTV relies on CFCN-DT or CFRN-DT as its main carriers.\nMeanwhile, in 2002, CJON-TV (known as \"NTV\") in St. John's dropped its 38-year CTV affiliation after the network attempted to alter its affiliation agreement in a way that Newfoundland Broadcasting found unfair. Since joining CTV, CJON had aired the base network schedule essentially for free since CTV paid it for the airtime. The station then bought additional CTV programming and sold all advertising. However, CTV tried to make CJON pay for the base schedule as well, with no possibility of airtime payments. It also increased the fees for additional CTV programming beyond what CJON claimed it could pay. Newfoundland Broadcasting also did not want to continue to carry CTV's national advertising during these programs. At the start of the 2002\u201303 season, CJON became an independent station and dropped most CTV programming except for national newscasts; in exchange, it provides news coverage of Newfoundland and Labrador events to CTV. In recent years, all of CTV's non-news programming has disappeared from the station, and since then virtually all primetime programs aired on that station are from rival Global. CTV does not currently have a \"de facto\" affiliate in that province, with most Newfoundlanders having to rely on cable and satellite (usually from CTV Atlantic) for its programming.\nIn September 2005, CTV announced an agreement with MTV Networks that saw the launch of MTV Canada.\nIn July 2006, CTV parent Bell Globemedia announced plans to acquire CHUM Limited, itself a former partner in CTV (via ATV), and at that point one of Canada's largest broadcasters. While CTVglobemedia kept CHUM's radio stations along with the A-Channel television stations and most of CHUM's specialty channels, the Citytv stations were sold off to Rogers as required by the conditions the CRTC placed upon CTV when approving the CHUM purchase. Bell Globemedia was renamed CTVglobemedia on January 1, 2007. In March 2009, CTV became the first Canadian television network to offer its programming online in high definition.\nCTV affiliate CHFD in Thunder Bay, Ontario left the network on February 12, 2010, after being unable to reach an agreement on new affiliation terms; CHFD instead became a full-time Global affiliate. CFTO was offered as part of the basic package to Thunder Bay cable subscribers for the duration of the 2010 Winter Olympics; the station had otherwise been available only on the digital cable timeshifting package, leaving CTV without a presence on basic cable in the market.\nOn September 10, 2010, BCE Inc. announced it would purchase the remaining shares of CTVglobemedia for $1.3\u00a0billion (CAD). On April 1, 2011, CTVglobemedia was officially renamed Bell Media. On December 1, 2011, CJBN-TV in Kenora, Ontario dropped all CTV programming and became a full Global station, adopting a schedule similar to nearby Global station CKND-DT in Winnipeg. The move left CITL-DT in Lloydminster as the sole remaining CTV affiliate not owned by the network until 2014. It was announced in June 2014, that CKPR-DT in Thunder Bay, Ontario would change affiliations from CBC to CTV on September 1, 2014, resulting in Thunder Bay having a CTV affiliate again.\nOn May 20, 2015, Corus Entertainment announced an agreement with Bell Media to switch its three CBC affiliates in Ontario to CTV: CHEX-DT Peterborough, CHEX-TV-2 Oshawa, and CKWS-DT Kingston. The affiliation switch went into effect on August 31, 2015. The stations would later become owned-and-operated Global affiliates on August 27, 2018, following the end of CTV's program supply agreements with the stations and Corus' acquisition of Global's former parent company Shaw Media in 2016.\nProgramming.\nThe network's programming consists mainly of hit American series (such as \"The Amazing Race\", \"The Big Bang Theory\", \"Blue Bloods\", \"Castle\", ', \"The Good Doctor\", \"Grey's Anatomy\", \"The Mentalist\", \"The Michael J. Fox Show\", \"Unforgettable\" and \"The X Factor\"), but it has also had success with Canadian-made shows such as \"Due South\", \"Power Play\", ', \"Corner Gas\", \"Instant Star\", \"The Eleventh Hour\", \"Flashpoint\", \"The Listener\", \"Canadian Idol\", \"MasterChef Canada\" and \"The Amazing Race Canada\".\nCTV also regularly produces and airs Canadian-made television movies, often based on stories from Canadian news or Canadian history, under the banners CTV Signature Series or CTV Movie.\nNews programming consists of the nightly \"CTV National News\"; national morning program \"Your Morning\" on CTV stations in Eastern Canada; local morning program \"CTV Morning Live\" on CTV stations in Western Canada; local newscasts branded as \"CTV News\"; and newsmagazines \"W-Five\" and \"Question Period\", which interviews politicians and recaps political events during the week.\nAs well, in recent years, CTV has purchased Canadian broadcast rights to a number of American cable series, such as \"The Sopranos\", \"Nip/Tuck\", \"Punk'd\", \"The Daily Show\", \"The Colbert Report\", and \"The Osbournes\". In many cases, CTV has been one of the few conventional broadcast networks in the world to air these series in prime time, which has attracted some controversy from Canadian media watchdogs and parents groups who object to the profanity, violence and sexual content of \"Nip/Tuck\", \"The Sopranos\" and \"The Osbournes\"\u2014which, unlike originating broadcaster MTV, CTV aired uncensored. It has broadcast MTV programming live, starting with the \"MTV's New Year of Music\" special during New Year's 2005/2006.\nIn late 2003, CTV started broadcasting select American programmes in 16:9 (widescreen) high definition. It later began airing Canadian programs in this format, such as \"Degrassi\". Currently, only CFTO and CIVT have dedicated HD feeds (sometimes marketed as \"CTV HD East\" and \"West\" respectively), but both are available nationally via cable and satellite, and do not differ otherwise from their analog counterparts.\nOn July 2, 2005, CTV broadcast 20 hours of the Live 8 concerts, which was watched by over 10.5\u00a0million people \u2013 nearly one-third the country's population \u2013 at some point during the day; however, the average audience was much lower. According to at least one source, it was the most-watched program by this standard in Canadian history.\nOn June 27, 2007, CTV and The Comedy Network gained exclusive Canadian rights to the entire Comedy Central library of past and current programs on all electronic platforms, under a multi-year agreement with Viacom, expanding on past programming agreements between the two channels. Canadian users attempting to visit Comedy Central websites are redirected to The Comedy Network's website, and vice versa for American users. The Canadian channel kept its own brand name, but the agreement is otherwise very similar to the earlier CTV/Viacom deal for MTV Canada.\nOn June 5, 2025, CTV announced that the locally produced morning show, \"CTV Morning Live\", was going to be rebranded starting September 15. Each local broadcast evolves into CTV YOUR MORNING VANCOUVER, CTV YOUR MORNING CALGARY, CTV YOUR MORNING EDMONTON, CTV YOUR MORNING SASKATCHEWAN, CTV YOUR MORNING WINNIPEG, CTV YOUR MORNING OTTAWA, and CTV YOUR MORNING ATLANTIC. While the national show CTV YOUR MORNING continues to serve its audience on CTV East (Ontario, Quebec, Atlantic) and CTV News Channel. All versions of the show continue weekdays from 6 a.m. \u2013 9 a.m..\nSports programming.\nHistorically, CTV Sports existed as a stand-alone division; with CTV's purchase of cable network TSN in 2001, TSN has assumed responsibility for all sports output on CTV since.\nIn early 2005, CTV was part of the consortium that won the Canadian broadcast rights to Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics hosted by Canada itself and the London 2012 Summer Olympics. CBC had consistently won Olympic broadcast rights from the 1996 Summer Olympics through to the 2008 Summer Olympics, the 1996 Summer Olympics being held in their main fiction TV series source, the United States. CTV and V (now Noovo and previously TQS) were the primary broadcasters, with TSN, RDS and Sportsnet providing supplementary coverage. CTV promised to broadcast 22 hours per day of event coverage during the 2012 Olympics; regular CTV programming was reallocated to CTV's secondary television system CTV Two during the Olympics.\nOn May 22, 2007, it was announced that CTV had acquired the broadcast rights to the National Football League early-afternoon Sunday games, the full NFL playoffs, and the Super Bowl, starting with the 2007 NFL season, effectively ending a lengthy association between the NFL and Global. TSN, a sports channel co-owned with CTV, airs primetime NFL games and produces the CTV broadcasts in tandem with CBS and Fox.\nDuring the 2024 CFL season, CTV exclusively aired 7 CFL games during Saturday afternoons in the Fall. CTV also simulcast the Eastern Semi-final, the Eastern Final and the 111th Grey Cup with TSN.\nCTV high-definition and digital transition.\nCTV carries its high-definition feed broadcasting at 1080i. The following CTV stations are available in HD on digital terrestrial television (DTT):\nOn November 19, 2003, CTV launched an HD simulcast of its Toronto station CFTO-DT, with the free-to-air feed launching in 2005. CTV has since launched HD simulcasts of CIVT-DT Vancouver on June 1, 2004 (the terrestrial feed followed suit in 2006), CFCN-DT Calgary on January 8, 2009, CFCF-DT Montreal on December 1, 2009 (the free-to-air feed followed suit on January 28, 2011), CJOH-DT Ottawa on December 1, 2009 (BDU only), CFRN-DT Edmonton in January 2011, CKY-DT Winnipeg in February 2011, and CJCH-DT Halifax on May 11, 2011.\nLocal newscasts in high definition.\nOn May 12, 2009, Toronto's CFTO-DT became the first station in the CTV network to broadcast its local newscasts in high definition (the first station in Canada to broadcast its local newscasts in high definition was fellow Toronto station CITY-DT). CTV-owned CIVT-DT in Vancouver followed, becoming the second station in the CTV network to broadcast its local newscasts in high definition as of November 23, 2009. CFCN-DT in Calgary began broadcasting its local newscasts in HD in October 2011, while CFRN-DT in Edmonton upgraded its local news production to HD in October 2012.\nCTV stations.\nCTV owned-and-operated stations.\nAs of mid-October 2005, all CTV-owned and operated stations have adopted a single on-air brand of \"CTV\", rather than use their official callsigns or channel numbers on-air (although some stations, most notably CIVT, promote their cable channel number). When further differentiation is needed, for example during regional programming, the city or region they serve (for example, \"CTV Ottawa\" or \"CTV British Columbia\") may be used as well. Under CRTC regulations, however, the callsign is still the station's legal name.\n\"Note:&lt;br&gt;\"\n\"1) Italicized channel numbers indicate a digital channel allocated for future use by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission.\"\nRegional affiliates.\nAs CTV does not presently operate as a \"de jure\" television network using a CRTC-issued network license, these stations acquire CTV programming from Bell Media by way of program supply agreements, not network affiliation agreements. Although they currently carry the vast majority of CTV programs and generally use a similar schedule to CTV-owned stations, the stations retain all advertising inventory, and have final authority over carriage and scheduling of CTV programming.\nOther CTV-branded channels.\nIn addition to CTV News Channel, several other spin-offs have been launched under the CTV branding. \nFormer specialty channels that have used the CTV brand (and formerly had ownership stakes by the parent company) include CTV Sportsnet (now Sportsnet) and CTV Travel (now T+E) and Discovery Canada (now owned by Rogers).\nFollowing the 2007 acquisition of A-Channel by CTVglobemedia as part of the takeover of CHUM Limited, media analysts had speculated that CTV may potentially extend its market-leading CTV brand to that television network. Bell officially announced on May 30, 2011, that the A-Channel television network would be rebranded as \"CTV Two\", a change that took effect on August 29, 2011. CTV Two currently consists of four over-the-air O&amp;Os in Ontario and three in British Columbia, as well as regional cable-only channels in Atlantic Canada and Alberta, providing complementary programming which have smaller audiences than those on the mainline CTV network.\nIn June 2018, Bell Media announced plans to rename four of its existing specialty channels under the CTV branding. The original Bravo, The Comedy Network, Gusto, and Space were respectively relaunched as CTV Drama Channel, CTV Comedy Channel, CTV Life Channel, and CTV Sci-Fi Channel on September 12, 2019. In December 2018, Bell launched two ad-supported video on demand (AVOD) services, CTV Movies and CTV Throwback (originally announced as \"CTV Vault\"), respectively offering second-run feature films and classic TV series. Their programming would primarily be drawn from an agreement with Sony Pictures Television; Sony's video service Crackle would exit Canada on June 28, 2018, with its content being assumed by the two services.\nIt was also announced that content from CTV, its four genre channels, as well as CTV Movies and CTV Throwback, would be eventually accessible within a unified \"super-hub\" for streaming video platforms. The new CTV app was released in July 2020, subsuming the TV Everywhere apps for the aforementioned channels. It would also subsume the streaming apps for most other Bell Media networks.\nIn October 2024, due to the end of Bell Media's licensing agreement with Warner Bros. Discovery for its factual networks, it was announced that Animal Planet, Discovery Science, and Discovery Velocity would be relaunched as CTV Wild Channel, CTV Nature Channel, and CTV Speed Channel respectively on January 1, 2025.\nLogos.\nThe network's original logo was an oval-shaped letter \"C\", the inside shaped like a television tube. Contained within the C were the initials \"CTV\". In 1966, colour programming was ushered in with a new logo, depicting a red circle containing the initial \"C\", a blue square with a \"T\", and a green inverted triangle with a \"V\". This logo has been used to the present day, albeit with minor variation. \nIn 1967, the letters \"CTV\" were redesigned and made thicker, making them easier to see. The letters in turn became rounded, with the \"base/TV\" graphic added later. In 1975, the shapes were brightened. In 1990, the letters \"CTV\" were angled and tweaked with any additional designs dropped from it. In 1998, CTV introduced a new \"ribbons\" identity which lasted until 2018 with various minor adjustments before then. \nInitially, CTV used the three coloured ribbons and shapes of its logo to represent its different divisions. In the network branding, the red ribbon and circle represented entertainment programming, the blue ribbon and square represented news programming, and the green ribbon and inverted triangle referred to sports programming. For a period, the identity featured bumper idents featuring CTV personalities manipulating the logo's shapes as physical objects. Later, in 1998, the network added colour gradients to the shapes to create a 3D effect. That variant became CTV's official logo in 2004; the 3D shapes then obtained a more realistic appearance on August 29, 2011 to reflect the name change from A to CTV Two.\nOn September 24, 2018, CTV introduced a new logo and branding elements with a flatter \"digital\" appearance, as well as a new promotional campaign, \"Get into it\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66733", "revid": "6200168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66733", "title": "Snorkeling", "text": "Swimming while inhaling through a snorkel\nSnorkeling (British and Commonwealth English spelling: snorkelling) is the practice of swimming face down in a body of water while breathing the ambient air through a shaped tube called a snorkel, usually with swimming goggles or a diving mask, and swimfins. In cooler waters, a wetsuit is also worn. The use of this equipment allows the snorkeler (British and Commonwealth English spelling: snorkeller) to observe the underwater environment for extended periods with relatively little effort, and to breathe while face-down at the surface.\nSnorkeling is a popular recreational activity, particularly at tropical resort locations. It provides the opportunity to observe underwater life in a natural setting without the complicated equipment and training required for scuba diving. It appeals to all ages because of how little effort is involved and is the basis of the two surface disciplines of the underwater sport of finswimming.\nSnorkeling is also used by scuba divers when at the surface, in underwater sports such as underwater hockey and underwater rugby, and as part of water-based searches conducted by search and rescue teams.\nEquipment.\nEssential equipment includes the snorkel for breathing, and a diving mask or swimming goggles for vision. Swimfins for more efficient propulsion are common. Environmental protection against cold, sunburn, and marine stings and scratches is also regionally popular, and may be in the form of a wetsuit, dry suit, dive skins, or rash vest. Some snorkelers rely on waterproof sunscreen lotions, but some of these are environmentally damaging. If necessary, the snorkeler may wear a weightbelt to facilitate freediving, or an inflatable snorkeling vest, a form of buoyancy aid, for safety.\nSnorkel.\nA snorkel is a device used for breathing air from above the surface when the wearer's head is facing downwards in the water with the mouth and the nose submerged. It may be either separate or integrated into a swimming or diving mask. The integrated version is only suitable for surface snorkeling, while the separate device may also be used for underwater activities such as spearfishing, freediving, finswimming, underwater hockey, underwater rugby and for surface breathing with scuba equipment. A swimmer's snorkel is a tube bent into a shape often resembling the letter \"L\" or \"J\", fitted with a mouthpiece at the lower end and constructed of light metal, rubber or plastic. The snorkel may come with a rubber loop or a plastic clip enabling the snorkel to be attached to the outside of the head strap of the diving mask. Although the snorkel may also be secured by tucking the tube between the mask strap and the head, this alternative strategy can lead to physical discomfort, mask leakage or even snorkel loss.\nSnorkels constitute respiratory dead space. When the user takes in a fresh breath, some of the previously exhaled air which remains in the snorkel is inhaled again, reducing the amount of fresh air in the inhaled volume, and increasing the risk of a buildup of carbon dioxide in the blood, which can result in hypercapnia. The greater the volume of the tube, and the smaller the tidal volume of breathing, the more this problem is exacerbated. A smaller diameter tube reduces the dead volume, but also increases resistance to airflow and so increases the work of breathing. Including the internal volume of the mask in the breathing circuit greatly expands the dead space. Occasional exhalation through the nose while snorkeling with a separate snorkel will slightly reduce the buildup of carbon dioxide, and may help in keeping the mask clear of water, but in cold water, it will increase fogging. To some extent the effect of dead space can be counteracted by breathing more deeply and slowly, as this reduces the dead space ratio and work of breathing.\nSnorkels come in two orientations: Front-mounted and side-mounted. The first snorkel to be patented in 1938 was front-mounted, worn with the tube over the front of the face, and secured with a bracket to the diving mask. Front-mounted snorkels proved popular in European snorkeling until the late 1950s when side-mounted snorkels came into the ascendancy. Front-mounted snorkels experienced a comeback a decade later as a piece of competitive swimming equipment to be used in pool workouts and in finswimming races, where they outperform side-mounted snorkels in streamlining.\nPlain snorkel.\nA plain snorkel consists essentially of a tube with a mouthpiece to be inserted between the lips.\nThe barrel is the hollow tube leading from the supply end at the top of the snorkel to the mouthpiece at the bottom. The barrel is made of a relatively rigid material such as plastic, light metal or hard rubber. The bore is the interior chamber of the barrel; bore length, diameter and bends all affect breathing resistance.\nThe top of the barrel may be open to the elements or fitted with a valve designed to shut off the air supply from the atmosphere when the top is submerged. There may be a high visibility band around the top to alert other water users of the snorkeler's presence. The simplest way of attaching the snorkel to the head is to slip the top of the barrel between the mask strap and the head. This may cause the mask to leak, however, and alternative means of attachment of the barrel to the head include threading the mask strap a molded on the barrel, using a figure-8 rubber snorkel keeper pulled down over the barrel, or a rotatable plastic snorkel keeper clipped to the barrel.\nThe mouthpiece helps to keep the snorkel in the mouth. It is made of soft and flexible material, originally natural rubber and more recently silicone or PVC. The commonest of the multiple designs available features a slightly concave flange with two lugs to be gripped between the teeth. The tighter the teeth grip the mouthpiece lugs, the smaller the air gap between the teeth and the harder it will be to breathe. A tight grip with the teeth can also cause jaw fatigue and pain.\nFull-face snorkel mask.\nAn integrated snorkel consists essentially of a tube topped with a shut-off valve and opening at the bottom into the interior of a diving mask. Integrated snorkels must be fitted with valves to shut off the snorkel's air inlet when submerged. Water will otherwise pour into the opening at the top and flood the interior of the mask. Snorkels are attached to sockets on the top or the sides of the mask.\nNew-generation snorkel masks are full-face masks covering the eyes, the nose, and the mouth. They enable surface snorkelers to breathe nasally or orally and may be a workaround in the case of surface snorkelers who gag in response to the presence of standard snorkel mouthpieces in their mouths. Some early snorkel masks are full-face masks covering the eyes, nose, and mouth, while others exclude the mouth, covering the eyes and the nose only. The 1950s US Divers \"Marino\" hybrid comprised a single snorkel mask with eye and nose coverage and a separate snorkel for the mouth.\nFull-face snorkel masks use an integral snorkel with separate channels for intake and exhaled gases theoretically ensuring the user is always breathing untainted fresh air whatever the respiratory effort. They come with a built-in dry top snorkel system. In addition to a standard ball float system that stops the water from entering the tube when submerged, full-face masks are designed in such a way that even if a small amount of water does get into the snorkel, it will be channeled away from the face and into the chin area of the mask. A special valve located on the bottom of the chin allows to drain the water out. The main problem is that it must fit the whole face well enough to make a reliable seal and since no two faces are the same shape, it may not seal adequately on any specific user. In the event of accidental flooding, the whole mask must be removed to continue breathing. Unless the snorkeler is able to equalize without pinching their nose it can only be used on or within several feet of the surface, since the mask covers the nose with a rigid plastic structure, which makes it impossible to pinch the nose if needed to equalize pressure at greater depth. Trained scuba divers are likely to avoid such devices, however, snorkel masks are a boon for those with medical conditions that preclude taking part in scuba diving.\nAs a result of a short period with an unusually high number of snorkeling deaths in Hawaii there is some suspicion that the design of the masks can result in buildup of excess CO2. It is far from certain that the masks are at fault, but the state of Hawaii has begun to track the equipment being used in cases of snorkeling fatalities. Besides the possibility that the masks, or at least some brands of the mask, are a cause, other theories include the possibility that the masks make snorkeling accessible to people who have difficulty with traditional snorkeling equipment. That ease of access may result in more snorkelers who lack experience or have underlying medical conditions, possibly exacerbating problems that are unrelated to the type of equipment being used.\nDuring the 2019\u201320 coronavirus pandemic related shortages, full-face snorkel masks were adapted to create oxygen dispensing emergency respiratory masks by deploying 3D printing and carrying out minimal modifications to the original mask. Italian healthcare legislation required patients to sign a declaration of acceptance of use of an uncertified biomedical device when they were given the modified snorkel mask for respiratory support interventions in the country's hospitals. France's main sportwear and snorkel masks producer Decathlon paused its sale of snorkel masks, redirecting them instead toward medical staff, patients and 3D printer operations.\nDiving mask.\nSnorkelers normally wear the same kind of mask as those worn by scuba divers. By creating an airspace, the mask enables the snorkeler to see clearly underwater. All scuba diving masks consist of the lenses also known as a faceplate, a soft rubber skirt, which encloses the nose and seals against the face, and a head strap to hold it in place. There are different styles and shapes. These range from oval shaped models to lower internal volume masks and may be made from different materials; common choices are silicone and rubber. A snorkeler who remains at the surface can use swimmer's goggles which do not enclose the nose.\nSwimfins.\nSwimfins, fins or flippers are fin-like accessories worn on the feet, and usually made from rubber or plastic, to aid movement through the water in water sports activities. Swimfins help the wearer to move through water more efficiently, as human feet are too small and inappropriately shaped to provide much thrust, especially when the wearer is carrying equipment that increases hydrodynamic drag. Very long fins and monofins used by freedivers as a means of underwater propulsion do not require high-frequency leg movement. This improves efficiency and helps to minimize oxygen consumption. Short, stiff-bladed fins are effective for short bursts of acceleration and maneuvering. Open-backed fins allow the wearer to wear them over the top of wetsuit socks or boots which can be useful in cooler water.\nExposure protection.\nA wetsuit is a garment, usually made of foamed neoprene with a knit fabric facing, which is worn by people engaged in water sports and other activities in or on water, primarily providing thermal insulation, but also buoyancy and protection from abrasion, ultraviolet exposure and stings from marine organisms. The insulation properties depend on bubbles of gas enclosed within the material, which reduce its ability to conduct heat. The bubbles also give the wetsuit a low density, providing buoyancy in water. The thickness, fit and coverage of the suit are important factors for insulation. Wetsuit protection can be extended to cover the head, feet and hands with the addition of a hood, gloves, socks or boots.\nBack in the 1950s and early 1960s, snorkeling was often undertaken wearing a one-piece or two-piece thin-rubber valveless dry suit. In the new millennium, the use of drysuits in snorkelling is seeing something of a resurgence, thanks to the growing popularity of \"wilderness swimming\" or \"wildswimming\" in seas, lakes and rivers.\nDive skins are used when diving in water temperatures above . They are usually one piece full length garments made from spandex or Lycra and provide little thermal protection, but do protect the skin from jellyfish stings, abrasion and sunburn. This kind of suit is also known as a 'Stinger Suit'. Some divers wear a dive skin under a wetsuit, which allows easier donning and (for those who experience skin problems from neoprene) provides additional comfort.\nA rash guard, also known as rash vest or rashie, is an athletic shirt made of spandex and nylon or polyester. The name rash guard reflects the fact that the shirt protects the wearer against rashes caused by abrasion, or by sunburn from extended exposure to the sun. These shirts can be worn by themselves, or under a wetsuit. A rash guard by itself is used for light coverage in warm to extreme summer temperatures for several watersports including snorkeling. There are also lower body rash guards, which are similar to compression shorts to be worn under the surfers' boardshorts.\nWeight belt.\nWeight belts are the most common weighting system currently in use for snorkeling. They are generally made of tough nylon webbing, but other materials such as rubber can be used. Weight belts for snorkeling are generally fitted with a quick release buckle to allow the dumping of weight rapidly in an emergency.\nThe most common design of weight used with a belt is rectangular lead blocks with two slots in them threaded onto the belt. These blocks can be coated in plastic, which increases corrosion resistance. The plastic coated weights may be marketed as being less abrasive to wetsuits. The weights may be constrained from sliding along the webbing by metal or plastic belt sliders. Another popular style has a single slot through which the belt can be threaded. These are sometimes locked in position by squeezing the weight to grip the webbing, but this makes them difficult to remove when less weight is needed. There are also weight designs which may be added to the belt by clipping on when needed. The amount of weight needed depends mainly on the buoyancy of the wet suit.\nSnorkeling vest.\nAn inflatable personal buoyancy aid designed for surface swimming applications. In shape, often like a horse-collar buoyancy compensator, or airline life jacket, but only with oral inflation or a CO2 cartridge for emergencies.\nOperation.\nThe simplest type of snorkel is a plain tube that is allowed to flood when underwater. The snorkeler expels water from the snorkel either with a sharp exhalation on return to the surface (\"blast clearing\") or by tilting the head back shortly before reaching the surface and exhaling until reaching or breaking the surface (\"displacement method\") and facing forward or down again before inhaling the next breath. The displacement method expels water by filling the snorkel with air; it is a technique that takes practice but clears the snorkel with less effort, but only works when surfacing. Clearing splash water while at the surface requires blast clearing.\nExperienced users tend to develop a surface breathing style which minimizes work of breathing, carbon dioxide buildup and risk of water inspiration, while optimizing water removal. This involves a sharp puff in the early stage of exhalation, which is effective for clearing the tube of remaining water, and a fairly large but comfortable exhaled volume, mostly fairly slowly for low work of breathing, followed by an immediate slow inhalation, which reduces entrapment of any residual water, to a comfortable but relatively large inhaled volume, repeated without delay. Elastic recoil is used to assist with the initial puff, which can be made sharper by controlling the start of exhalation with the tongue. This technique is most applicable to relaxed cruising on the surface. Racing finswimmers may use a different technique as they need a far greater level of ventilation when working hard. \nSome snorkels have a sump at the lowest point to allow a small volume of water to remain in the snorkel without being inhaled when the snorkeler breathes. Some also have a non-return valve in the sump, to drain water in the tube when the diver exhales. The water is pushed out through the valve when the tube is blocked by water and the exhalation pressure exceeds the water pressure on the outside of the valve. This is almost exactly the mechanism of blast clearing which does not require the valve, but the pressure required is marginally less, and effective blast clearing requires a higher flow rate. The full face mask has a double airflow valve which allows breathing through the nose in addition to the mouth. A few models of snorkel have float-operated valves attached to the top end of the tube to keep water out when a wave passes, but these cause problems when diving as the snorkel must then be equalized during descent, using part of the diver's inhaled air supply. Some recent designs have a splash deflector on the top end that reduces entry of any water that splashes over the top end of the tube, thereby keeping it relatively free from water.\nFinswimmers do not normally use snorkels with a sump valve, as they learn to blast clear the tube on most if not all exhalations, which keeps the water content in the tube to a minimum as the tube can be shaped for lower work of breathing, and elimination of water traps, allowing greater speed and lowering the stress of eventual swallowing of small quantities of water, which would impede their competition performance.\nA common problem with all mechanical clearing mechanisms is their tendency to fail if infrequently used, or if stored for long periods, or through environmental fouling, or owing to lack of maintenance. Many also either slightly increase the flow resistance of the snorkel, or provide a small water trap, which retains a little water in the tube after clearing.\nModern designs use silicone rubber in the mouthpiece and one-way clearing and float valves due to its resistance to degradation and its long service life. Natural rubber was formerly used, but slowly oxidizes and breaks down due to ultraviolet light exposure from the sun. It eventually loses its flexibility, becomes brittle and cracks, which can cause clearing valves to stick in the open or closed position, and float valves to leak due to a failure of the valve seat to seal. In even older designs, some snorkels were made with small \"ping pong\" balls in a cage mounted to the open end of the tube to prevent water ingress. These are no longer sold or recommended because they are unreliable and considered hazardous. Similarly, diving masks with a built-in snorkel are considered unsafe by scuba diving organizations such as PADI, BSAC because they can engender a false sense of security and can be difficult to clear if flooded.\nA snorkel may be either separate or integrated into a swim mask. Usage of the term \"snorkel\" in this section excludes devices integrated with, and opening into, swimmers' or divers' masks. A separate snorkel typically comprises a tube for breathing and a means of attaching the tube to the head of the wearer. The tube has an opening at the top and a mouthpiece at the bottom. Some tubes are topped with a valve to prevent water from entering the tube when it is submerged.\nThe total length, inner diameter and/or inner volume of a snorkel tube are matters of utmost importance because they affect the user's ability to breathe normally while swimming or floating head downward on the surface of the water. These dimensions also have implications for the user's ability to blow residual water out of the tube when surfacing. An overlong snorkel tube may cause breathing resistance, while an overwide tube may prove hard to clear of water. A high-volume tube is liable to encourage a build-up of stale air, including exhaled carbon dioxide, because it constitutes respiratory dead space.\nPractice of snorkeling.\nSnorkeling is an activity in its own right, as well as an adjunct to other activities, such as breath-hold diving, spearfishing and scuba diving, and several competitive underwater sports, such as underwater hockey and finswimming. In all cases, the use of a snorkel facilitates breathing while swimming at the surface and observing what is going on under the water.\nBeing non-competitive, snorkeling is considered more a leisure activity than a sport. Snorkeling requires no special training, only the very basic swimming abilities and being able to breathe through the snorkel. Some organizations, such as the British Sub-Aqua Club, recommend that for snorkeling safety one should not snorkel alone, but rather with a \"buddy\", a guide or a tour group. Snorkelers may progress to free-diving or recreational scuba diving, which should be preceded by at least some training from a dive instructor or experienced free-diver.\nUnderwater photography.\nUnderwater photography has grown in popularity since the early 2000s as waterproof cameras became affordable to recreational users. Many snorkelers now carry a waterproof camera with them while they snorkel and may record photographs or video clips and later share them on social media platforms or post them to other websites. \nThis mass of documentation has enormous scientific potential, as millions of tourists are able to cover greater areas than professional scientists whose field-study time is limited. Various citizen science programs have emerged to realize this potential. Thus underwater photographs of natural subjects become database records of geo-located and time-stamped species observations. The observed species may be identified by the contributor or by other website users or team members, depending on the platform. Various protocols for organization and self-directed study for snorkelers interested in natural science also exist. In R\u00e9union, these approaches have resulted in many new records and even the discovery of new species.\nMany underwater photographs taken by snorkelers can be seen and used by scientists via the website iNaturalist.org. There, website users identify and verify the subjects of the photographs. This creates valuable data for the use of professional scientists and environmental managers around the world.\nSafety.\nSome commercial snorkelling organizations require snorkelers at their venue to wear an inflatable vest, similar to a personal flotation device. They are usually bright yellow or orange and have a device that allows users to inflate or deflate the device to adjust their buoyancy. However, these devices hinder and prevent a snorkeler from free diving to any depth. Especially in cooler water, a wetsuit of appropriate thickness and coverage may be worn; wetsuits do provide some buoyancy without as much resistance to submersion. In the tropics, snorkelers (especially those with pale skin) often wear a rashguard or a shirt and/or board shorts to help protect the skin of the back and upper legs against sunburn.\nThe greatest danger to snorkelers are inshore and leisure craft such as jet skis, speed boats and the like. A snorkeler is often submerged in the water with only the tube visible above the surface. Since these craft can ply the same areas snorkelers visit, the chance for accidental collisions exists. Sailboats and sailboards are a particular hazard as their quiet propulsion systems may not alert the snorkeler of their presence. A snorkeler may surface underneath a vessel and/or be struck by it. Few locations demarcate small craft areas from snorkeling areas, unlike that done for regular beach-bathers, with areas marked by buoys. Snorkelers may therefore choose to wear bright or highly reflective colors/outfits and/or to tow dive flags on floats to enable easy spotting by boaters and others.\nSnorkelers' backs, ankles, and rear of their thighs can be exposed to the sun for extended periods, and can burn badly (even if slightly submerged), without being noticed in time. Wearing appropriate covering such as a \"rash guard\" with SPF (in warmer waters), a T-shirt, a wetsuit, and especially \"waterproof\" sunblock will mitigate this risk.\nDehydration is another concern. Hydrating well before entering the water is highly recommended, especially if one intends to snorkel for several hours. Proper hydration also prevents cramps. Snorkelers who hyperventilate to extend sub-surface time can experience hypocapnia if they hyperventilate prior to submerging. This can in turn lead to \"shallow water blackout\". Snorkeling with a buddy and remaining aware of the buddy's condition at all times may help avoid these difficulties.\nWhen snorkeling on or near coral reefs, care must be exercised to avoid contact with the delicate (and sometimes sharp or stinging) coral, and its venomous inhabitants, usually by wearing protective gloves and being careful of one's environment. Coral scrapes and cuts often require specialized first aid treatment and potentially, emergency medical treatment to avoid infection. Booties and surf shoes are especially useful as they allow trekking over reefs exposed by low tide, to access drop-offs or deeper waters of the outer reef\u2014practices which are, however, considered ecologically irresponsible.\nContact with coral should always be avoided, because even boulder corals are fragile. Fin contact is a well-known cause of coral reef degradation.\nAnother safety concern is interaction and contact with the marine life during encounters. While seals and sea turtles can seem harmless and docile, they can become alarmed if approached or feel threatened. Some creatures, like moray eels, can hide in coral crevices and holes and may bite fingers in response to prodding. For these reasons, snorkeling websites often recommend an \"observe but don't touch\" etiquette when snorkeling.\nSnorkeling locations.\nSnorkeling is possible in almost any body of water, but snorkelers are more likely to be found in locations where the water is warm, waves are small and there is something particularly interesting to see near the surface such as a reef or a shipwreck.\nGenerally shallow reefs ranging from are favored by snorkelers. Enough water cover to swim over the top without kicking the bottom is needed, but isolated shallow structure can be approached from the sides. Deeper reefs can also be explored, but repeated breath-holding to dive to those depths limits the number of practitioners, and raises the bar on the required fitness and skill level. Risk increases with increased depth and duration of the breath-hold excursions from the surface.\nSome less commonly snorkeled bodies of water include sinkholes, lakes and rivers.\nSnorkeling locations are often listed and described in publications promoting both diving and snorkeling in a particular region. Lonely Planet has published many of these, including several focusing on nations in the Caribbean. The Great Barrier Reef, Mexico, Belize, Bonaire, the Bahamas, Gal\u00e1pagos Islands, Hawaiian Islands and Indonesia are some of the most loved snorkeling destinations in the world.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66734", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66734", "title": "Logical fallacy/Slippery slope", "text": ""}
{"id": "66737", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66737", "title": "Saint John NB", "text": ""}
{"id": "66739", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66739", "title": "One China", "text": "Policy of only recognizing one state of China\nOne China is a phrase with variant meanings, adopted by many states and other actors to describe their stance on the relationship between the People's Republic of China (PRC) based on mainland China, and the Republic of China (ROC) based on the Taiwan Area. \"One China\" asserts that there is only one \"de jure\" Chinese nation, despite the \"de facto\" division between the two rival governments in the aftermath of the Chinese Civil War. The term may refer, in alphabetical order, to one of the following:\nAfter the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) defeated the Kuomintang (KMT) in the Chinese Civil War and the subsequent retreat of the ROC to Taiwan, the CCP established the PRC in mainland China while the ROC ruled over Taiwan and several outlying islands. During this time, both governments continued to claim legitimacy as the government of all of China. The KMT legally designated the Chinese Communist Party as a \"rebellious group\". Initially, international recognition of the two was split, but most countries began to recognize the PRC over the ROC in the 70s, including the United States in 1979. The language in the United States' One China policy first arose in its joint 1972 Communiqu\u00e9 with the PRC.\nUnder ROC President Lee Teng-hui in the 1990s, the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China were passed which effectively transformed Taiwan from a one-party state into a democracy, and limited civil and political rights to citizens in the \"free area\" (the area under its \"de facto\" control, consisting of the island groups of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu and some minor islands), but did not alter language regarding territorial claims or national territory.\nAlthough the 1991 constitutional amendments localized governance to the \"free area,\" the 1947 Constitution still claims all of China as ROC territory, aligning with the Kuomintang's (KMT) original \"One China\" stance. The Constitution defines ROC territory as encompassing all of China, based on its \"existing national boundaries\" at the time of adoption (Article 4), asserting the ROC as the legitimate government of the entirety of China, not solely Taiwan. This constitutional stance supports the KMT's historical vision, creating a legal-political disconnect under Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) governance. Despite the DPP's political dominance, it has not legally amended the Constitution to formally redefine Taiwan as a separate nation or change the national boundaries to exclude the mainland, not least because this could provoke PRC retaliation or even invasion. This deadlock reflects a split along party lines: Pan-Blue coalition parties (including the Kuomintang) adhere to \"One China with respective interpretations\", while Pan-Green coalition parties (including the Democratic Progressive Party) reject it. Meanwhile, the PRC has maintained its One China principle.\nBackground.\nThe Dutch established a colony on Taiwan in 1624 based in present-day Tainan. Shortly after, the Spanish established a colony in Northern Taiwan in 1626, but were driven out by the Dutch in 1642. It was during this time that large-scale Chinese migration from nearby Fujian Province began. The Dutch colony was later conquered by Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga), a Ming-loyalist, in 1662 as the Kingdom of Tungning, before being incorporated by the Qing dynasty in 1683 as part of Fujian Province. In 1887, it was officially made a separate Fujian-Taiwan Province. Taiwan remained a province for eight years until it was ceded to Japan under the Treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895 following the First Sino-Japanese War.\nWhile Taiwan remained under Japanese control, the Qing dynasty was ousted and the First and Second Republic of China (ROC) were established from the Beiyang regime to the Kuomintang (KMT) from 1928. After the conclusion of World War II in 1945, the Republic of China was given control of Taiwan. In 1949, after losing control of most of mainland China following the Chinese Civil War, and before the post-war peace treaties had come into effect, the ROC government under the KMT withdrew to Taiwan, and Chiang Kai-shek declared martial law.\nAn argument has been made that Japan formally renounced all territorial rights to Taiwan in 1952 in the San Francisco Peace Treaty, but neither in that treaty nor in the peace treaty signed between Japan and China was the territorial sovereignty of Taiwan awarded to the Republic of China. The treaties left the status of Taiwan\u2014as ruled by the ROC or PRC\u2014deliberately vague, and the question of legitimate sovereignty over China is why China was not included in the San Francisco Peace Treaty. This argument is not accepted by those who view the sovereignty of Taiwan as having been legitimately returned to the Republic of China at the end of the war. Some argue that the ROC is a government in exile, while others maintain it is a rump state.\nThe ROC continued to claim itself as the rightful ruler of the entirety of China under the single-party KMT regime, and the PRC made a symmetric claim. In 1971, the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 replaced the ROC's seat in the United Nations with the PRC. From 30 April 1991, the ROC officially recognized the PRC, thus abandoning the Hallstein Doctrine, while maintaining the claim of an exclusive mandate as the legitimate ruler of China. The ROC transformed into a free and democratic state in the 1990s following decades of martial law with the passage of the Additional Articles of the Constitution of the Republic of China. Afterwards, the legal and political status of Taiwan has become more contentious, with increasing public expressions in favor of Taiwan independence, which were formerly outlawed.\nViewpoints within Taiwan.\nWithin Taiwan, there is a distinction between the positions of the Kuomintang (KMT) and the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP).\nThe Kuomintang holds the \"One-China principle\" and maintains its claim that under the ROC Constitution (passed by the Kuomintang government in 1947 in Nanjing) the ROC has sovereignty over most of China, including, by their interpretation, both mainland China and Taiwan. After the Chinese Communist Party expelled the ROC in the Chinese Civil War from most of Chinese territory in 1949 and founded the PRC, the ROC's Chinese Nationalist government, which still held Taiwan, continued to claim legitimacy as the government of all of China. Under former President Lee Teng-hui, additional articles were appended to the ROC constitution in 1991 so that it applied effectively only to the Taiwan Area. The Kuomintang proclaims a modified form of the \"One-China\" principle known as the \"1992 Consensus\". Under this \"consensus\", both governments \"agree\" that there is only one single sovereign state encompassing both mainland China and Taiwan, but disagree about which of the two governments is the legitimate government of this state. Former ROC President Ma Ying-jeou had re-asserted claims on mainland China as late as 8 October 2008.\nThe Democratic Progressive Party rejects the One China principle, and its official position currently is that Taiwan is an independent and sovereign country whose territory consists of Taiwan and its surrounding smaller islands and whose sovereignty derives only from the ROC citizens living in Taiwan (similar to the philosophy of self-determination), based on the 1999 \"Resolution on Taiwan's Future\". It considers Taiwan as an independent nation under the name of Republic of China, making a formal declaration of independence unnecessary. Though calls for drafting a new constitution and a declaration of a Republic of Taiwan was written into the party charter in 1991, the 1999 resolution has practically superseded the earlier charter.\nAt least one observer of the Taiwan independence movement believes it runs counter to the PRC's sovereignty claims over Taiwan. A Brookings Institution survey indicates that while Taiwan people overwhelmingly reject unification with the PRC, the vast majority do not support immediate formal independence of a Republic of Taiwan.\nEvolution of the One China principle.\nOne interpretation, which was adopted during the Cold War, is that either the PRC or the ROC is the sole rightful government of all China and that the other government is illegitimate. While much of the western bloc maintained relations with the ROC until the 1970s under this policy, much of the eastern bloc maintained relations with the PRC. While the government of the ROC considered itself the remaining holdout of the legitimate government of a country overrun by what it thought of as \"Communist bandits\", the PRC claimed to have succeeded the ROC in the Chinese Civil War. Though the ROC no longer portrays itself as the sole legitimate government of China, the position of the PRC remained unchanged until the early 2000s, when the PRC began to soften its position on this issue to promote Chinese unification.\nOne interpretation of one China is that only one geographical region of China exists, which was split between two Chinese governments during the Chinese Civil War. This is largely the position of current supporters of Chinese unification in mainland China, who believe that \"one China\" should eventually unite under a single government. Starting in 2005, this position has become close enough to the position of the PRC, allowing high-level dialogue between the CCP and the Pan-Blue Coalition of the ROC.\nThe revised position of the PRC was made clear in the Anti-Secession Law of 2005, which although stating that there is one China whose sovereignty is indivisible, does not explicitly identify this China with the PRC. Almost all PRC laws have a suffix \"of the People's Republic of China\" (prefix in Chinese grammar) in their official names, but the Anti-Secession Law is an exception. Beijing has made no major statements after 2004 which identify one China with the PRC and has shifted its definition of one China slightly to encompass a concept called the '1992 Consensus': both sides of the Taiwan strait recognize there is only one China\u2014both mainland China and Taiwan belong to the same China but agree to differ on the definition of which China. According to Taiwanese lawyer Chen Chang-wen, the new version changed from a subordinate relationship to an equal relationship, and the legislation only legalized its constitutional obligations. Placing less emphasis on which government should represent One China is more compatible with KMT's position as well as the current ROC Constitution. This reformulation was also reflected in the 2022 PRC white paper on Taiwan.\nPolicy position in the PRC.\nIn practice, official sources and state-owned media never refer to the \"ROC government\", and seldom to the \"government of Taiwan\". Instead, the government in Taiwan is referred to as the \"Taiwan authorities\". The PRC does not accept or stamp Republic of China passports. Instead, a Taiwan resident visiting Mainland China must use a Taiwan Compatriot Entry Permit. Hong Kong grants visa-free entry to holders of a Permit, while holders of a ROC passport must apply for a Pre-arrival Registration. Macau grants visa-free entry to holders of both the permit and the passport.\nThe United Front, which consists of the eight other political parties in the PRC subordinate to the CCP, has adhered to the One-China policy and opposes Taiwan independence. Among the parties that accepted it are the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Kuomintang (a splinter left-wing party that broke away from the main Kuomintang) and the Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League.\nIn 1950, Premier Zhou Enlai stated that the principle that Taiwan is part of China is \"not only a historical fact but affirmed by the Cairo Declaration, the Potsdam Declaration, and the conditions after Japan's surrender.\"\nIn its foreign relations, the PRC does not object to other countries having Taiwan trade offices, so long as those countries are not formally engaged in diplomatic activity.34\nPolicy position in the ROC.\nChiang Kai-shek held the view that there was One China that should be united under the government of the Republic of China; his adversary Mao praised him for rejecting the idea of 'two Chinas,' stating that Chiang \"dared to defy the U.S. policy for 'two Chinas' in front of [John Foster] Dulles, proving that he is still a great nationalist.\"43\nOn 1 August 1992, the ROC's National Unification Council passed the \"Definition of One China Resolution\", stating: \"The two sides of the Taiwan Strait uphold the One China principle, but the interpretations of the two sides are different ... Our side believes that one China should mean the Republic of China, established in 1912 and existing today, and its sovereignty extends throughout China, but its current governing authority is only over Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matzu. Admittedly, Taiwan is part of China, but the mainland is also a part of China.\"229 This resolution provided the basis for quasi-governmental talks between the ROC's Strait Exchange Foundation (SEF) and the PRC's Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits (ARATS).229\nDuring these discussions, SEF stated that \"each side expresses its own interpretation verbally in order to solve this sticky problem of [one China] and thereby reaffirmed the August 1st NUC resolution as SEF's interpretation of one China.\"229 ARATS agreed to expressing these interpretations verbally and stated that \"both sides of the strait uphold the principle of one China, and actively seek national unification, but the political interpretation of the one China will not be referred to in the cross-strait negotiations on functional issues.\" This position later became known as the 1992 Consensus, a phrase coined in early 2000 by Su Chi.230\nThere is significant difference on Taiwan regarding recognition and understanding of the One-China principle. The Pan-Blue Coalition parties, led by the Kuomintang, generally accept the One-China principle. In particular, former president Ma Ying-jeou has stated that \"One China is the Republic of China\". The Pan-Green Coalition parties, led by the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), do not accept the policy and view Taiwan as a country separate from China. Former DPP president Chen Shui-bian believes the 1992 Consensus forsakes Taiwan's national sovereignty, effectively ceding it to the PRC. President Tsai Ing-wen rejected the 1992 Consensus categorically in 2019.\nWhen the ROC established diplomatic relations with Kiribati in 2003, it did not require that Kiribati sever relations with the PRC. However, the PRC did not accept dual recognition and severed ties with Kiribati as a result. In 2024, the ROC Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that it had no preconditions for maintaining diplomatic relations with other countries, in particular that it was not opposed to simultaneous recognition of the ROC and PRC.\nThe ROC does not recognize or stamp PRC passports. Instead, mainland Chinese residents visiting Taiwan and other territories under ROC jurisdiction must use an Exit and Entry Permit issued by the ROC authorities.\nOther countries' One China policies.\nNot formally recognizing the ROC is a requirement for any political entity to establish diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China, in effect forcing other governments to choose between Beijing and Taipei. At times, the PRC has used financial incentives to entice smaller countries to recognize it over the ROC, and both the ROC and PRC have accused each other of dollar diplomacy. Most countries that recognize Beijing circumvent the diplomatic language by establishing trade and cultural missions that represent their interests on Taiwanese soil, while the ROC government represents its interests abroad with reciprocal missions.\nThe PRC has, in the past, attempted to get nations to recognize that \"the Government of the People's Republic of China is the sole legal government of China ... and Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of the People's Republic of China.\" However, many nations are unwilling to make this particular statement and there was often a protracted effort to find language acceptable to both sides, for example that they \"respect\", \"acknowledge\", \"understand\", or \"take note of\" the PRC's One China principle (but do not say they \"recognize\" it). This strategic ambiguity in the language used provides the basis for countries to have formal ties with People's Republic of China and maintain unofficial ties to the Republic of China.\nNames such as \"Chinese Taipei\" (e.g. in the Olympics) or \"Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu\" (e.g. in the World Trade Organization) are sometimes used in some international arenas since \"Taiwan\" suggests that Taiwan is a separate country and \"Republic of China\" suggests that there are two Chinas, and thus both violate the One-China principle.\nUnited States policy.\nThe United States' One-China policy was first stated in the Shanghai Communiqu\u00e9 of 1972: \"the United States acknowledges that Chinese on either side of the Taiwan Strait maintain there is but one China and that Taiwan is a part of China. The United States does not challenge that position.\" The United States has not expressed an explicitly immutable statement regarding whether it believes Taiwan is independent or not. Instead, Washington simply states that they understand the PRC's claims on Taiwan as its own. Nancy Bernkopf Tucker asserts that U.S. One-China policy was not intended to please the PRC government, but as a way for Washington to conduct international relations in the region, which Beijing fails to state. A more recent study suggests that this wording reflected the Nixon administration's desire to shift responsibility for resolving the dispute to the \"people most directly involved\" \u2013 that is, China and Taiwan. At the same time, the United States would avoid \"prejudic[ing] the ultimate outcome\" by refusing to explicitly support the claims of one side or the other.\nAt the height of the Sino-Soviet split and Sino-Vietnamese conflict, and at the start of the reform and opening of the PRC, the United States strategically switched diplomatic recognition from the Republic of China (ROC) to the People's Republic of China (PRC) on 1 January 1979 under the administration of Jimmy Carter. Congress quickly responded by passing the Taiwan Relations Act that defined relations with the ROC, but stopped short of full recognition. It also required the United States to provide Taiwan with arms sufficient to maintain its self-defense, but did not commit to defending Taiwan in the event of an invasion.\nIn 1982, President Ronald Reagan also saw that the Six Assurances were adopted, the fifth being that the United States would not formally recognize Chinese sovereignty over Taiwan. Still, United States policy has remained ambiguous. In the House International Relations Committee on 21 April 2004, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, James A. Kelly, was asked by Rep. Grace Napolitano (D-CA) whether the United States government's commitment to Taiwan's democracy conflicted with the so-called One-China policy. He stated \"In my testimony, I made the point \"our One China,\" and I didn't really define it, and I'm not sure I very easily could define it. I can tell you what it is not. It is not the One-China policy or the One-China principle that Beijing suggests, and it may not be the definition that some would have in Taiwan. But it does convey a meaning of solidarity of a kind among the people on both sides of the straits that has been our policy for a very long time.\"\nWhen President Bill Clinton visited Shanghai during his June 1998 visit to China, Clinton articulated the \"three nos\" for United States foreign policy towards China: (1) not recognizing two Chinas, (2) not supporting Taiwanese independence, and (3) not supporting Taiwanese efforts to join international organizations for which sovereignty is a membership requirement.\nThe position of the United States, as clarified in the \"China/Taiwan: Evolution of the \"One China\" Policy\" report of the Congressional Research Service (date: 9 July 2007) is summed up in five points:\nThese positions remained unchanged in a 2013 report of the Congressional Research Service.\nOn 2 December 2016, US President-elect Donald Trump and ROC President Tsai Ing-wen conducted a short phone call regarding \"the close economic, political and security ties between Taiwan and the US\". On 6 December, a few days after the call, Trump said that the US is not necessarily bound by its \"one China\" policy. On 9 February 2017, in a lengthy phone call, US President Donald Trump and PRC Paramount leader Xi Jinping discussed numerous topics and President Trump agreed, at the request of Xi Jinping, to honor the \"one China\" policy.\nOn 23 May 2022, U.S. President Joe Biden announced the United States would intervene militarily if China were to unilaterally invade Taiwan. Speaking in Japan, President Biden stated, \"That\u2019s the commitment we made,\" an apparent reference to the Taiwan Relations Act, which ensures military support for Taiwan, although the Act does not specifically guarantee direct military action by the United States in Taiwan. President Biden emphasized that Russia's military invasion of Ukraine created an \"even stronger\" burden to protect Taiwan. China criticized Biden's statement as part of a \"hypocritical and futile\" pattern of encouragement to \"'Taiwan independence' forces.\" Biden later stated that his remarks did not represent a change from the status quo and the U.S. position of strategic ambiguity. Secretary of State Antony Blinken also delivered a speech in which he stated that U.S. policy regarding the island had not changed, and the State Department updated its fact sheet to reinstate a line stating \"we do not support Taiwan independence.\"\nJapanese position.\nThe 1972 Japan-China Joint Communiqu\u00e9 entered into as the basis of diplomatic normalization in Sino-Japanese relations states that the Government of Japan fully understands and respects the stance of the Government of the People's Republic of China that \"Taiwan is an inalienable part of the territory of the People's Republic of China.\" and that it firmly maintains its stand under Article 8 of the Potsdam Declaration.\nJapan has recognized the People's Republic of China \"as the sole legal Government of China\" since 1975 but has maintained an ambiguous stance regarding the PRC's sovereignty claim over the island of Taiwan.\nRussian position.\nIn 1949, the Soviet Union recognized the People's Republic of China as the only lawful government of China. The ROC on Taiwan had cancelled the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance treaty in response. The Soviet Union voted to admit the PRC into the UN in 1971.\nAs with the past leaderships, the Russian government has accepted its support for the One-China policy that Taiwan is \"an inalienable part of China, and [the Russian side] opposes any forms of independence\", as stated in Article 5 of the 2001 Sino-Russian Treaty of Friendship. This was reaffirmed in January 2022, when Russian and PRC leaders Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping discussed the situation in the prelude to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and again in July 2022, by Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov, as United States Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi visited Taiwan.\nPhilippine policy.\nSimilar to other countries, the Philippines maintain a One-China policy. However, despite officially recognizing the People's Republic of China as the sole legitimate government of China since 1975, the country also maintains economic and cultural relations with the Republic of China (or Taiwan). Lito Banayo, chair of the Manila Economic and Cultural Office in Taiwan remarked that the country's One-China policy only proscribes the Philippines to enter into political and military agreements with the ROC.\nAfrican countries.\nThe One China principle is an important factor in China-Africa relations.34 In 1971, 26 African countries supported the United Nations General Assembly vote through which the PRC became the sole representative of China.34 The sole African country which does not recognize the PRC (and consequently which the PRC maintains no relations with) is Eswatini.22 All African countries except Eswatini recognize the People's Republic of China as the sole government of China and Taiwan as an integral part of Chinese territory, and support all efforts by the PRC to \"achieve national reunification\". \nCross-strait relations.\nThe People's Republic of China demands Taiwan acknowledge the One-China principle as a prerequisite to resume any cross-strait dialogue. The PRC offers the chance for open talks and \"unobstructed exchanges\" with Taiwan as long as it moves to accept the 1992 Consensus. The PRC's One-China policy rejects formulas which call for \"two Chinas\" or \"one China, one Taiwan\" and has stated that efforts to divide the sovereignty of China could be met with military force.\nThe PRC has explicitly stated that it is flexible about the meaning \"one China\", and that \"one China\" may not necessarily be synonymous with the PRC, and has offered to talk with parties on Taiwan and the government on Taiwan on the basis of the Consensus of 1992 which states that there is one China, but that there are different interpretations of that one China. For example, in Premier Zhu Rongji's statements prior to the 2000 Presidential Election in Taiwan, he stated that as long as any ruling power in Taiwan accepts the One-China principle, they can negotiate and discuss anything freely.\nHowever, the One-China principle would apparently require that Taiwan formally give up any possibility of Taiwanese independence, and would preclude any \"one nation, two states\" formula similar to ones used in German \"Ostpolitik\" or in Korean reunification. Chen Shui-bian, president of the Republic of China between 2000 and 2008 repeatedly rejected the demands to accept the One-China principle and instead called for talks to discuss One China itself. With the January and March 2008 elections in Taiwan, and the election of Ma Ying-jeou as the President of the ROC, who was inaugurated on 20 May, a new era of better relations between both sides of the Taiwan Strait was established. KMT officials visited mainland China, and the Chinese ARATS met in Beijing with its Taiwanese counterpart, the Straits Exchange Foundation. Direct charter flights were therefore established.\nOne China was the formulation held by the ROC government before the 1990s, but it was asserted that the one China was the Republic of China rather than PRC. However, in 1991, President Lee Teng-hui indicated that he would not challenge the Communist authorities to rule mainland China. This is a significant point in the history of Cross-Strait relations in that a president of the ROC no longer claims administrative authority over mainland China. Henceforth, the Taiwan independence movement gained a political boost, and under Lee's administration the issue is no longer who rules mainland China, but who claims legitimacy over Taiwan and the surrounding islands. Over the course of the 1990s, President Lee appeared to drift away from the One-China formulation, leading many to believe that he was actually sympathetic to Taiwan independence. In 1999, Lee proposed a special state-to-state relations for mainland China\u2013Taiwan relations which was received angrily by Beijing, which ended semi-official dialogue until June 2008, when ARATS and SEF met, and in which President Ma Ying-jeou reiterated the 1992 Consensus and the different interpretation on \"One China\".\nAfter the election of Chen Shui-bian in 2000, the policy of the ROC government was to propose negotiations without preconditions. While Chen did not explicitly reject Lee's two states theory, he did not explicitly endorse it either. Throughout 2001, there were unsuccessful attempts to find an acceptable formula for both sides, such as agreeing to \"abide by the 1992 consensus\". Chen, after assuming the Democratic Progressive Party chairmanship in July 2002, moved to a somewhat less ambiguous policy, and stated in early August 2002 that \"it is clear that both sides of the straits are separate countries\". This statement was strongly criticized by opposition Pan-Blue Coalition parties on Taiwan, which support a One-China principle, but oppose defining this \"One China\" as the PRC.\nThe One-China policy became an issue during the 2004 ROC Presidential election. Chen Shui-bian abandoned his earlier ambiguity and publicly rejected the One-China principle claiming it would imply that Taiwan is part of the PRC. His opponent Lien Chan publicly supported a policy of \"one China, different interpretations\", as done in 1992. At the end of the 2004 election, Lien Chan and his running mate, James Soong, later announced that they would not put ultimate unification as the goal for their cross-strait policy and would not exclude the possibility of an independent Taiwan in the future. In an interview with Time Asia bureau prior to the 2004 presidential elections, Chen used the model of Germany and the European Union as examples of how countries may come together, and the Soviet Union as illustrating how a country may fragment.\nIn March 2005, the PRC passed an Anti-Secession Law which authorized the use of force to prevent a \"serious incident\" that breaks the One-China policy, but which at the same time did not identify one China with the People's Republic and offered to pursue political solutions. At the same session of the PRC Congress, a large increase in military spending was also passed, leading blue team members to interpret those measures as forcing the ROC to adhere to the One-China policy or else the PRC would attack.\nIn April and May 2005, Lien Chan and James Soong made separate trips to mainland China, during which both explicitly supported the Consensus of 1992 and the concept of one China and in which both explicitly stated their parties' opposition to Taiwan independence. Although President Chen at one point supported the trips of Lien and Soong for defusing cross-strait tensions, he also attacked them for working with the \"enemy\" PRC. On 28 April 2008, Honorary Chairman Lien Chan of the then opposition Kuomintang visited Beijing and met with Hu Jintao for the fourth time since their historic encounter on 29 April 2005 in their respective capacity as party leaders of both the Chinese Communist Party and the KMT. Lien also met Chen Yunlin, director of the PRC's Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council.\nOn 28 May 2008, Kuomintang Chairman Wu Po-hsiung made a landmark visit to Beijing, and met and shook hands with the Communist General Secretary Hu Jintao, at the Great Hall of the People. He also visited the mausoleum of Sun Yat-sen. Hu Jintao called for resuming exchanges and talks, based on the 1992 Consensus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66740", "revid": "33", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66740", "title": "Greek etymology", "text": ""}
{"id": "66743", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66743", "title": "New Jersey Devils", "text": "National Hockey League team in Newark\nThe New Jersey Devils are a professional ice hockey team based in Newark, New Jersey. The Devils compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Metropolitan Division in the Eastern Conference. The club was founded as the Kansas City Scouts in Kansas City, Missouri, in 1974. The Scouts moved to Denver in 1976 and became the Colorado Rockies. In 1982, they moved to East Rutherford, New Jersey, and took their current name, which is derived from the legendary Jersey Devil creature. For their first 25 seasons in New Jersey, the Devils were based at the Meadowlands Sports Complex in East Rutherford and played their home games at Brendan Byrne Arena (later renamed Continental Airlines Arena). Before the 2007\u201308 season, the team moved to Prudential Center in Newark. The Devils are owned and managed by Harris Blitzer Sports &amp; Entertainment (HBSE), with founders Josh Harris and David Blitzer acquiring the team in 2013.\nThe franchise was poor to mediocre in the eight years before moving to New Jersey, a pattern that continued during the first five years in New Jersey as they failed to make the Stanley Cup playoffs and never finished higher than fifth in their division, which had six teams at the time. Their fortunes began to turn around following the hiring of the president and general manager Lou Lamoriello in 1987. Under Lamoriello's stewardship, the Devils made the playoffs all but three times between 1988 and 2012, including 13 berths in a row from 1997 to 2010, and finished with a winning record every season from 1992\u201393 to 2009\u201310. They have won the Atlantic Division regular season title nine times, most recently in 2009\u201310, before transferring to the newly created Metropolitan Division as part of the NHL's realignment in 2013. The Devils have reached the Stanley Cup Final five times, winning in 1994\u201395, 1999\u20132000 and 2002\u201303, and losing in 2000\u201301 and 2011\u201312. The Devils were known for their defense-first approach throughout their years of Cup contention, and were one of the teams credited with popularizing the neutral zone trap in the mid-1990s.\nThe Devils have a rivalry with their cross-Hudson River neighbor, the New York Rangers, as well as a rivalry with the Philadelphia Flyers. The Devils are one of three NHL teams in the New York metropolitan area; the others are the Rangers and the New York Islanders. The Devils are one of four major professional sports teams that play their home games in New Jersey; the others are the National Football League's New York Giants and New York Jets, and the New York Red Bulls of Major League Soccer. Since the relocation of the New Jersey Nets to Brooklyn in 2012, the Devils have been the only major league team in any sport to bill themselves as solely representing the state of New Jersey.\nHistory.\nKansas City and Colorado.\nIn 1972, the NHL announced plans to add two expansion teams, including one in Kansas City, Missouri, owned by a group headed by Edwin G. Thompson. The new team was officially named the Scouts in reference to Cyrus E. Dallin's statue of the same name which stands in that city's Penn Valley Park. In the team's inaugural season, 1974\u201375, the Scouts were forced to wait until the ninth game to play in Kansas City's Kemper Arena, and did not post a win until beating the Washington Capitals, their expansion brethren, in their tenth contest. With 41 points in their inaugural season, the Scouts finished last in the Smythe Division; only the Capitals had fewer points in the NHL. Kansas City fell to 36 points the following season, and had a 27-game win-less streak, three short of the NHL record, which was set when the 1980\u201381 Winnipeg Jets went 30 games without a win. The Scouts had difficulty drawing fans to home games, and National Hockey League Players' Association (NHLPA) leader Alan Eagleson publicly expressed concerns about whether Scouts players would be paid.\nAfter two seasons in Kansas City, the franchise moved to Denver and was renamed the Colorado Rockies it played at the McNichols Sports Arena. The team won its first game as the Rockies, 4\u20132, against the Toronto Maple Leafs. The Rockies were in position to qualify for the playoffs 60 games into the 1976\u201377 season, but a streak of 18 games without a win caused them to fall from contention. The Rockies ended the campaign last in the division with a 20\u201346\u201314 record and 54 points, and improved to 59 points the next season. Despite having the sixth-worst record in the League, the Rockies beat-out the Vancouver Canucks for second in the Division by two points and gained a playoff berth. The Philadelphia Flyers eliminated the Rockies from the playoffs in the preliminary round.\nA lack of stability continually plagued the team. In their first eight years, the Scouts/Rockies went through ten coaches, none lasting two full seasons.\nThe franchise never won more than 22 games and did not return to the playoffs after 1977\u201378 in its six seasons in Colorado. Prior to the 1978\u201379 season, the team was sold to New Jersey trucking tycoon Arthur Imperatore, who intended to move the team to his home state. The plan was criticized due to the existence of three other NHL teams in the region. In any event, their intended home in the Meadowlands was still under construction, and there was no nearby facility suitable even for temporary use; the franchise ultimately stayed in Denver. In 1979, the team hired Don Cherry as head coach and featured forward Lanny McDonald. The Rockies still posted the worst record in the NHL, and Cherry was subsequently fired after the season. After two more years in Denver, the Rockies were sold to a group headed by Jersey City native John McMullen (who also owned Major League Baseball's Houston Astros) on May 27, 1982, and the franchise moved to New Jersey. As part of the relocation deal, the Devils had to compensate the three existing teams in the region \u2013 the New York Islanders, New York Rangers and Flyers \u2013 for encroaching on their territory.\nNew Jersey.\n1982\u20131993: Building the foundation.\nOn June 30, 1982, the team was renamed the New Jersey Devils, after the legend of the Jersey Devil, a creature that allegedly inhabited the Pine Barrens of South Jersey. Over 10,000 people voted in a contest held to select the name. The team began play in East Rutherford, New Jersey, at the Brendan Byrne Arena, later renamed the Continental Airlines Arena and then the Izod Center, where they called home through the 2006\u201307 season. With their relocation, the newly christened Devils were placed in the Wales Conference's Patrick Division. Their first game ended in a 3\u20133 tie against the Pittsburgh Penguins, with their first goal scored by Don Lever. Their first win, a 3\u20132 victory, came in New Jersey at the expense of the Rangers. The team finished with a 17\u201349\u201314 record, putting them three points above last place in the Patrick Division.\nIn the following season, on November 19, 1983, the Devils were criticized by Wayne Gretzky after a 13\u20134 loss to the Edmonton Oilers. In a post-game interview, Gretzky said that the Devils were \"putting a Mickey Mouse operation on the ice.\" Later, Gretzky said that his comment was \"blown out of proportion.\" In response, many Devils fans wore Mickey Mouse apparel when the Oilers returned to New Jersey on January 15, 1984, despite a 5\u20134 loss. Also in the 1983\u201384 season, the Devils hosted the annual NHL All-Star Game. New Jersey's Chico Resch was the winning goaltender, and Devils defenseman Joe Cirella tallied a goal as the Wales Conference beat the Campbell Conference 7\u20136. Overall, the team did not achieve much success. Head coach Bill MacMillan was fired 20 games into the season, whereupon Tom McVie was named the new coach. The Devils won only 17 games and after the season, Doug Carpenter succeeded McVie.\nOn January 22, 1987, a massive blizzard hit the New York metropolitan area resulting in only 334 fans attending the game between the Devils and the Calgary Flames at Brendan Byrne Arena where the Devils rallied to win 7\u20135. The Devils officially recognized the fans that made the journey to the game the \"334 Club\". The fans received a letter that read, \"You are hereby inducted and given lifetime membership to a club that cannot grow \u2013 the 334 Club\".\nThe Devils assembled a core of players that included John MacLean, Bruce Driver, Ken Daneyko, Kirk Muller and Pat Verbeek, with Resch as their goaltender. Their record improved each season between 1983\u201384 and 1986\u201387. However, they were unable to reach the playoffs. Despite their improvement, the Devils remained last in the Patrick Division in 1985\u201386 and 1986\u201387. McMullen hired Providence College athletic director Lou Lamoriello as team president in April 1987. To gain greater control over franchise operations, Lamoriello appointed himself general manager before the 1987\u201388 season.\nThe 1987\u201388 Devils garnered the franchise's first winning record. On the final day of the regular season, they were tied with their rivals, the Rangers, for the final playoff spot in the Patrick Division. After New York defeated the Quebec Nordiques 3\u20130, the Devils needed to defeat the Chicago Blackhawks for a postseason berth. The Devils were trailing 3\u20132 midway through the third period when John MacLean tied the game, and with 2:39 left in overtime, he added the winning goal. Although the Rangers and Devils both finished with 82 points, the Devils had two more wins, sending them to the playoffs for the first time in franchise history as the New Jersey Devils. The team made it all the way to the conference finals in the 1988 Stanley Cup playoffs, but lost to the Boston Bruins in seven games. In that series, head coach Jim Schoenfeld verbally abused referee Don Koharski after the third game in the Devils' 6\u20131 loss. During the exchange, Koharski fell and Schoenfeld said to him \"Good, 'cause you fell, you fat pig! Have another doughnut! Have another doughnut!\" Schoenfeld was given a suspension by the NHL, but due to a favorable court order, he was able to coach in the fourth game of the series. In protest, referee Dave Newell and linesmen Gord Broseker and Ray Scapinello refused to work the game. Three off-ice officials \u2013 Paul McInnis, Jim Sullivan and Vin Godleski \u2013 were tracked down to work the game. After the injunction was lifted, Schoenfeld's suspension was imposed in the following game.\nIn the next season, the Devils once again slipped below .500 and missed the playoffs. Among the postseason player changes Lamoriello made in the off-season was the signing of two Soviet stars \u2013 Viacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov. The Devils drafted Fetisov years earlier in the 1983 NHL entry draft, but the Soviet Government did not allow Fetisov, who was a member of the national team, to leave the country. Shortly after, the Devils signed Fetisov's defense partner, Alexei Kasatonov.\nThe team changed coaches midway through each of the next two seasons. Schoenfeld was replaced with John Cunniff in 1989\u201390, and Tom McVie was hired midway through the 1990\u201391 season and helmed the team through its third-straight division semifinals' elimination in 1991\u201392. Herb Brooks, who coached the 1980 U.S. Olympic \"Miracle on Ice\" team, was brought in for the 1992\u201393 season, but when the team yet again was eliminated in the division semifinals, he was fired and replaced by former Montreal Canadiens head coach Jacques Lemaire.\n1993\u20132000: A Championship franchise.\nUnder Lemaire, the team played during the 1993\u201394 regular season as members of the Eastern Conference's Atlantic Division (with the NHL renaming its divisions to better reflect geography that season) with a lineup that included defensemen Scott Stevens, Scott Niedermayer and Ken Daneyko; forwards Stephane Richer, John MacLean, Bobby Holik and Claude Lemieux; and goaltenders Chris Terreri and Martin Brodeur, the latter goaltender was honored as the NHL's top rookie with the Calder Memorial Trophy. The Devils scored 330 times in the regular season and set a franchise record with 106 points, second behind the New York Rangers in the Atlantic Division. The Devils and Rangers met in a conference finals match-up, which went seven games. Going into game 6 in New Jersey, the Devils led the series three games to two. Before the game, Rangers captain Mark Messier guaranteed that the Rangers would win game 6. Messier led his team back, netting a natural hat-trick to help the Rangers overcome an early 2\u20130 Devils lead and force a decisive contest. In game 7, the Devils' Valeri Zelepukin tied the score at 1\u20131 with 7.7 seconds remaining, but the Devils were defeated in double overtime on a goal by Stephane Matteau.\nDespite the setback, the team returned to the conference finals during the lockout-shortened 1994\u201395 season and defeated the Philadelphia Flyers four games to two. They swept the heavily favored Detroit Red Wings to win the team's first-ever Stanley Cup, as they brought the Cup across the Hudson River from New York, after the Rangers had won it the year before. The 1994\u201395 Devils team became the first to give the players a day with the Stanley Cup, a tradition that lives on with each Cup winner. Claude Lemieux was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoffs MVP. The success came amid constant rumors that the team would move for the third time in its history to Nashville.\nStaring at the prospect of losing the team, the state agreed to fund a renovation of the Devils' arena. Nashville eventually received an NHL franchise three years later, when the Nashville Predators joined the league as an expansion team.\nThe Devils missed the playoffs by two points the following season, with a 37\u201333\u201312 record and finishing twelfth overall in the league. While they finished with more points than all but three teams in the Western Conference, they were beaten by the Tampa Bay Lightning for the eighth and final playoff spot in the East after a 5\u20132 loss to the Ottawa Senators on the last day of the regular season. It marked the first time in 26 years that a defending Cup champion failed to reach the playoffs. For the remainder of the decade the Devils won the Atlantic Division and finished as the first overall team in the Eastern Conference all three seasons, but were unable to make a deep playoff run. Despite posting 104 points in the 1996\u201397 season and 107 in 1997\u201398, they were ousted by the Rangers 4\u20131 in the conference semifinals of the 1997 playoffs and in the conference quarterfinals by the Senators four games to two in 1998 playoffs. Lemaire resigned after that season and was replaced by assistant coach Robbie Ftorek. However, the next season ended as the previous one, with a conference quarterfinals' loss, this time to the Pittsburgh Penguins in seven games.\nLate in the 1999\u20132000 season, Lamoriello made the decision to fire Ftorek and replace him with assistant coach Larry Robinson, which the \"New York Post\"'s Mark Everson described as \"pure panic\" at the prospect of another early-round playoff elimination. The Devils were in position to reach the playoffs, but Lamoriello reacted to a stretch of 17 games in which the team went 5\u201310\u20132. New Jersey followed the move by defeating the Florida Panthers, the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Philadelphia Flyers during the postseason to make the 2000 Stanley Cup Final. In the Stanley Cup Final, the Devils reached the top again, defeating the defending champion Dallas Stars in six games to win the Stanley Cup for the second time. Veterans such as Stevens, Holik, Niedermayer, Daneyko, and Brodeur were joined by new players acquired in the intervening five years, including Patrik Elias, Petr Sykora, Jason Arnott, Alexander Mogilny and Calder Trophy recipient Scott Gomez. The Devils' second championship run included a come-from-behind victory in the conference finals. They trailed the Flyers three games to one, but rebounded to win three straight games and the series. This was the first time in conference finals history that a 3\u20131 series deficit was erased. This series featured a hit that captain Scott Stevens laid on Flyers center Eric Lindros in the seventh game, which effectively ended Lindros' career in Philadelphia. Stevens was named the winner of the Conn Smythe Trophy, as the Devils clinched the Stanley Cup on Arnott's goal in double-overtime of game 6 in Dallas.\nIn 2000, McMullen sold the team to Puck Holdings, an affiliate of YankeeNets (now Yankee Global Enterprises) for $176 million. The owners wanted to program Devils games on what eventually became the YES Network and move the team to a new arena in Newark. Neither of these proposals became reality under Puck Holdings' ownership. For the start of the next season, Lamoriello was appointed CEO of both the Devils and the New Jersey Nets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He remained at the helm of the basketball team until it was sold with the intention of moving it to Brooklyn in 2004, a move that did not come to pass at that time.\n2001\u20132007: Third Cup and lockout.\nLed by the Elias-Arnott-Sykora line (The A Line) on offense and the goaltending of Brodeur (who appeared in a record 97 games between the regular season and playoffs), the Devils won their division, finished first overall in the East, led the entire league in scoring, and reached the Stanley Cup Final for the second-straight year in 2001. They lost the series to the Colorado Avalanche in seven games despite holding a 3\u20132 series lead after game 5. John Madden became the first player in franchise history to win the Frank J. Selke Trophy for top defensive forward. In the 2001\u201302 season, they were expected to be contenders once again, and they finished the season as the third-best team in the Atlantic Division, with 95 points. The Devils entered the playoffs as a sixth seed, but lost in the conference quarterfinals to the third-seeded Carolina Hurricanes.\nPrior to the 2002\u201303 season, the Devils traded A-Line stars Arnott and Sykora in two separate transactions. Arnott and Randy McKay were sent to Dallas to acquire forwards Joe Nieuwendyk and Jamie Langenbrunner, while Sykora was part of a package to receive Jeff Friesen from Anaheim. The revitalized forward group would ultimately lead the team to first in the Atlantic Division with 108 points. Their playoff run included victories over Boston and Tampa Bay in the first two rounds, followed by a game seven conference finals series victory over the Presidents' Trophy-winning Ottawa Senators; decided by a goal from Friesen in the final three minutes. In the Stanley Cup Final, the Devils faced the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in a back-and-forth battle, as both teams won all of their home games. After defeating the Mighty Ducks in the seventh game of the finals in New Jersey, the franchise won their third Stanley Cup. After the series, Daneyko, a long-time fan favorite who spent his entire two-decade career with the Devils, announced his retirement. Brodeur was awarded the Vezina Trophy as outstanding goaltender in the regular season for the first time in his career, having won 41 games in the regular season to top the NHL.\nIn the 2003\u201304 season, Brodeur took home the Vezina Trophy again. Despite losing team captain Scott Stevens in the 38th game of the season to a concussion, the Devils finished second in the Atlantic Division with 100 points. With the sixth seed in the Stanley Cup playoffs, the Devils lost in the conference quarterfinals to the Philadelphia Flyers four games to one. In March 2004, near the end of the season, Lehman Brothers executive Jeff Vanderbeek purchased a controlling interest from Puck Holdings and resigned from Lehman Brothers to assume full-time ownership. He had been a minority owner since the 2000 sale. Like Puck Holdings/YankeeNets, Vanderbeek largely left the Devils in Lamoriello's hands.\nVanderbeek was a strong proponent of the proposed arena in Newark, which first received funding from the city council during Puck Holdings' ownership in 2002. After legal battles over both eminent domain and the city's financial participation in the arena project, the final deal was approved by council in October 2004, during the early months of the lockout, and the groundbreaking occurred almost exactly a year later. Nonetheless, in January 2006, financial issues threatened to halt the deal, as the Devils did not provide the city with a required letter of credit until the last possible day.\nThough construction was well underway, in late summer 2006, new Mayor of Newark Cory Booker promised to reevaluate the deal and considered backing out. In October, Booker conceded there would be \"a first-class arena built in the city of Newark, whether we like it or not,\" and soon after the Devils struck a deal including both property and monetary givebacks that appeased city officials. The arena, which was named the Prudential Center when Newark-based Prudential Financial purchased naming rights in early 2007, opened shortly after the start of the 2007\u201308 season.\nThe 2004\u201305 season was canceled due to the lockout; many Devils players played in European leagues and in the hockey world championships. Patrik Elias, who was playing in the Russian Superleague, contracted hepatitis A. Faced with Elias' indefinite recovery timetable, plus the loss of defensive stalwarts Scott Niedermayer to free agency and Scott Stevens to retirement, Lamoriello signed veteran defenseman Dan McGillis and two former Devils, winger Alexander Mogilny and defenseman Vladimir Malakhov, none of whom finished the season on the ice. In July 2005, the team announced that head coach Pat Burns would not return for the 2005\u201306 season after being diagnosed with cancer for the second time in little more than a year. Assistant coach Larry Robinson, the team's head coach from 2000 to 2002, was promoted to start the season.\nThe Devils struggled early in the 2005\u201306 season, ending the 2005 calendar year with a 16\u201318\u20135 record. Robinson resigned as head coach on December 19, and Lamoriello moved down to the bench. Once Elias returned from his bout with hepatitis, the team quickly turned around, finishing 46\u201327\u20139 after a season-ending 11-game winning streak capped with a 4\u20133 win over the Montreal Canadiens. During that final victory, which clinched the Devils' sixth division title, Brian Gionta set a new team record for goals in a season with 48, topping Pat Verbeek's 46. The win streak to close the year was also an NHL record. The Devils swept the Rangers in four games in the conference quarterfinals, and were then eliminated by the Carolina Hurricanes in five games in the conference semifinals.\nIn the off-season, the Devils hired former Montreal Canadiens head coach Claude Julien to replace Lamoriello behind the bench. However, in the last week of the 2006\u201307 season, with just three games left, Julien was fired, and Lamoriello once again reprised his coaching role. The Devils went on to win their seventh Atlantic Division title and earn the second seed in the Eastern Conference after finishing ahead of the Pittsburgh Penguins by two points. They then defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning in six games in the conference quarterfinals, but fell to the Ottawa Senators in the conference semifinals in five. The conclusion of the series marked the end of the Devils' time at the Continental Airlines Arena.\n2007\u20132013: Move to Newark and return to Stanley Cup Final.\nBefore the move to Newark, the Devils hired their 14th coach in a 26-season span, Brent Sutter. As the Devils' pre-season came to an end, prospects Nicklas Bergfors and David Clarkson made the final roster. The Devils opened their new arena, the Prudential Center, on October 27, 2007, against Ottawa after opening the season with a nine-game road trip. The game ended with a 4\u20131 win for Ottawa. In the last game of the 2007\u201308 season against the Rangers, the Devils won in a shootout, giving them home-ice advantage over the Rangers in the playoffs. The Devils lost the series against the Rangers 4\u20131, losing all three games at home. Brodeur won the Vezina Trophy for the fourth time in five years for his performance in the regular season.\nFor the 2008\u201309 season, the Devils signed Brian Rolston and Bobby Holik, both making their second stints with the team. The Devils were forced to play without Brodeur for over three months after he tore a biceps tendon in November, but strong play by backup goaltender Scott Clemmensen kept the Devils atop the Atlantic Division. After his return, Brodeur broke Patrick Roy's record for regular season wins on March 17, 2009, with his 552nd victory, while Patrik Elias became the franchise's all-time leading scorer with his 702nd point. The season also served as a break-out year for 24-year-old Zach Parise, who led the team with an impressive 45 goals and 94 points. In the conference quarterfinals of the 2009 playoffs, the Devils were eliminated in a game 7 loss in which the Hurricanes scored two goals in the last minute and 20 seconds to erase a 3\u20132 Devils lead.\nIn the off-season, the Devils announced that Sutter was stepping down from his position, citing personal and family reasons; he became the coach of the Calgary Flames shortly afterward. Jacques Lemaire returned to the head coach position. During the 2009\u201310 season, the Devils made a trade to acquire star left wing Ilya Kovalchuk from the Atlanta Thrashers. The Devils had their 12th 100-point season in their last 15 attempts. They finished the season in first place in the Atlantic Division, second in the Eastern Conference, and played in the postseason for the 13th-straight time. Their seeding matched them up against Philadelphia in the conference quarterfinals, and they were eliminated four games to one.\nAfter Lemaire retired from coaching, the Devils announced that the team's all-time leading scorer, John MacLean, would become their new head coach. During the off-season, the Devils signed Kovalchuk to a 15-year, $100 million contract, keeping him in New Jersey until the conclusion of the 2024\u201325 season; the move came after the NHL had rejected a 17-year contract for allegedly circumventing the NHL Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA). The League still penalized the Devils for trying to circumvent the NHL salary cap with a money fine, a third-round draft pick in 2011 and one future first-round pick within the next four seasons. MacLean led the team to a record of 9\u201322\u20132, and after sitting in last place in the NHL on December 23, he was removed in favor of Lemaire, coming out of retirement for his third stint as head coach of the Devils and second in less than two seasons. Just a few days later, struggling captain Jamie Langenbrunner was traded back to Dallas after nine seasons with New Jersey. With the injured Parise missing most of the regular season, the team struggled offensively, finishing last in goals scored. Despite this, the Devils managed a mid-season turnaround, winning 22 out of the next 25 games. However, the Devils still failed to qualify for the playoffs for the first time since 1996, ending their 13-year streak.\nIn the 2011 off-season, Lemaire once again retired and was replaced by former Florida Panthers head coach Peter DeBoer. DeBoer's new system helped develop a strong offense, which had seven 40-point scorers by the season's end and broke an NHL record for the best regular season penalty kill since before the expansion era. Four players \u2013 Kovalchuk, Elias, Clarkson and newly named captain Zach Parise \u2013 scored 30 or more goals, with Kovalchuk and Elias also finishing the season among the NHL's top ten-point scorers. Rookie forward Adam Henrique totaled 51 points and earned a Calder Trophy nomination for rookie of the year. The Devils entered the 2012 playoffs as the sixth seed in the Eastern Conference. They defeated Southeast champions Florida before overcoming both divisional rivals, the Flyers and Rangers, to win the conference and return to the Stanley Cup Final after nine years. Facing the Los Angeles Kings in the 2012 Stanley Cup Final, the Devils lost the first three games, but won the next two while facing elimination. In game 6, the Kings defeated the Devils and captured the series.\nDuring the 2012 off-season, Zach Parise signed a 13-year, $98 million contract with the Minnesota Wild, leaving the Devils after one season as team captain. The Devils entered the lockout-shortened season with Bryce Salvador as their new captain. However, the Devils failed to repeat the performance of the prior year, finishing 19\u201319\u201310 in 48 games and missed the playoffs.\n2013\u2013present: Harris\u2013Blitzer era.\nThe Devils' longtime financial struggles worsened during the 2012\u201313 season, and at one point the team needed to borrow $30 million to meet their payroll. This prompted owner Jeff Vanderbeek to sell the team. Andrew Barroway, the attorney who loaned the team the $30 million, was one potential buyer. Ultimately, the team was sold to Philadelphia 76ers owners Josh Harris and David Blitzer for over $320 million. The sale was formally announced on August 15, 2013. During the off-season, Kovalchuk announced he would retire from the NHL, expressing a desire to return home to Russia along with his family. In addition, 30-goal scorer Clarkson also left the Devils, signing a seven-year deal with Toronto. With the departures of Parise and now Kovalchuk and Clarkson, the Devils were in desperate need of offensive help. In an effort to fill the void, the Devils signed veteran Jaromir Jagr, who despite being 41 years old, led the team scoring in the 2013\u201314 season. During the 2013 NHL entry draft, hosted in Newark, the Devils acquired goaltender Cory Schneider from Vancouver in exchange for the Devils' first-round draft pick. Schneider split goaltending duties with the 41-year-old Brodeur, which led to some controversy over who should be the starting goaltender for the Devils. Despite Schneider's 1.97 goals against average leading the NHL, the Devils missed the playoffs by five points due to lagging offensive production. In the 2014 off-season, the Devils saw the departure of NHL all-time wins leader Martin Brodeur, who was not re-signed and subsequently joined the St. Louis Blues. Brodeur, who had spent his entire 21-year career with the Devils, played only seven games with St. Louis before announcing his retirement.\nThe 2014\u201315 season opened with the Devils' roster suffering with injuries, and consequently the team accumulated losses. On December 26, Peter DeBoer was fired from the head coach position. To replace him, Lamoriello invested in two head coaches, former Devils player Scott Stevens (who had been DeBoer's assistant for two years) and Adam Oates, with Lamoriello himself supervising the team during the first months. The Devils finished the season as the sixth-worst team in the League, 20 points away from a playoff spot and with just one victory in the last 11 games.\nDuring the 2015 off-season, Ray Shero was named the Devils' new general manager, and John Hynes was named as the new head coach. Among Shero's first moves as general manager was trading with the Anaheim Ducks to acquire Kyle Palmieri, who would become a key forward for the Devils in future seasons. Lou Lamoriello resigned as team president and became the general manager of the Toronto Maple Leafs, replacing Dave Nonis, who was fired at the end of the season. In the 2015\u201316 season, the Devils finished seventh in the Metropolitan Division with 84 points, missing the playoffs for the fourth consecutive season. That off-season, the Devils attempted to bolster its forward strength in a blockbuster trade with the Edmonton Oilers, sending defenseman and former first-round draft pick Adam Larsson to Edmonton in exchange for Taylor Hall. This did not turn the Devils' fortunes, and the team finished in last place in the Eastern Conference the following season with 70 points; this was the first time that they finished last in the conference since the 1985\u201386 season. However, they won the ensuing draft lottery to secure the first overall selection in the 2017 NHL entry draft, which they used to select center Nico Hischier.\nIn the 2017\u201318 season, the team recorded its best start in franchise history, going 9\u20132\u20130 in their first 11 games of the season. Hall set the franchise record for points in consecutive games, recording a point in 26 straight appearances. Hall finished the season sixth in the NHL in points (93) and earned nominations for the Hart Memorial Trophy for the league's most valuable player and the Ted Lindsay Award for the NHL's most outstanding player. On the back of Hall's impressive performance and with aid from goaltender Keith Kinkaid and rookie Hischier, the Devils clinched a playoff spot for the first time since the 2011\u201312 season with a win over the Toronto Maple Leafs. The Devils' playoff run ended in the first round where they lost 4\u20131 to the Tampa Bay Lightning in a seven-game series. After the conclusion of the playoffs, Hall became the first player in franchise history to win the Hart Memorial Trophy.\nThe Devils failed to return to the playoffs in the 2018\u201319 season as they struggled. Plagued by injuries, including reigning league MVP Hall being sidelined with a knee injury for nearly 50 games; the Devils finished 15th in the Eastern Conference with 72 points. In the subsequent draft lottery, the team received the first overall selection in the 2019 NHL entry draft for the second time in three years. The Devils used this pick to select Jack Hughes first overall.\nIn the 2019 off-season, the Devils acquired P. K. Subban, Nikita Gusev, and Wayne Simmonds. The Devils started the 2019\u201320 season with a six-game losing streak, going 0\u20134\u20132, and after having a 9\u201313\u20134 record in December, head coach John Hynes was fired and replaced by assistant coach Alain Nasreddine in the interim. However, the Devils continued to struggle and Hall was traded to the Arizona Coyotes, longtime captain Andy Greene was traded to the New York Islanders, and Wayne Simmonds was traded to the Buffalo Sabres. Shero was fired on January 12, 2020, and replaced by interim general manager Tom Fitzgerald. On March 12, the regular season was suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Then, on May 26, the regular season was declared finished and the Devils missed the playoffs for the second year in a row. On July 9, Lindy Ruff was named the Devils' head coach; Nasreddine was retained as an assistant coach. In the off-season, the Devils also attempted to find a permanent goaltending solution by signing longtime Chicago Blackhawks netminder Corey Crawford; however, Crawford retired prior to the start of the 2020\u201321 season, never having played a game with New Jersey. After a good start with great play from goaltender Mackenzie Blackwood and center Jack Hughes, the Devils would suffer an outbreak of COVID-19, which sidelined the team for two weeks. Once they returned, they struggled, and Palmieri was traded alongside longest-tenured Devil Travis Zajac to the Islanders. The Devils would go on to miss the playoffs for the third consecutive season.\nDuring the 2021 off-season, the Devils signed free agent defenseman Dougie Hamilton from the Carolina Hurricanes. General manager Tom Fitzgerald would also succeed in his goal to sign a backup goaltender and top 6 winger by signing veterans Jonathan Bernier and Tomas Tatar. However, the 2021\u201322 season fared to be no better as the Devils once again missed the playoffs. At the end of the season, Nasreddine was not tendered a contract extension, and Mark Recchi was fired from his assistant coach position.\nIn the 2022\u201323 season, the team rebounded by recording its best regular season in franchise history. Spurred on by a franchise-record 13-game winning streak in October and November, the Devils finished third in the entire league and set a franchise record for wins (52) and points (112). The team's climb from 63 points the prior season to 112 points marked the largest single-season increase by any NHL team in an 82-game season. In addition to a breakout season from newly acquired goaltender Vitek Vanecek, the Devils were led by impressive offensive performances from Hughes, Hischier, Hamilton, and Jesper Bratt. All four players eclipsed the 70-point mark, while Hughes set a franchise record for most points in a single season by a Devils player with 99 points. Devils general manager Tom Fitzgerald built further on this impressive offensive core by acquiring All-Star forward Timo Meier in a mid-season trade from the San Jose Sharks. In the first round of the 2023 Stanley Cup playoffs, the Devils faced their rivals across the Hudson River, the New York Rangers. After falling behind 2\u20130 in the series with two home losses, the Devils rebounded to win the series in seven games behind the stellar play of rookie goaltender, Akira Schmid. After advancing to the second round for the first time since 2012, the Devils were defeated by the Carolina Hurricanes in five games.\nIn the 2023\u201324 season, the Devils took part in the 2024 Stadium Series at MetLife Stadium on February 17, 2024, defeating the Philadelphia Flyers 6\u20133 in front of 70,328 fans. The event was the Devils' first game at the Meadowlands since 2007. However, the 2023\u201324 season turned out to be a disappointing one for the Devils as they missed the playoffs.\nThe Devils returned to the playoffs in the 2024\u201325 season, but they fell in the first round to the Hurricanes in five games.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Devils. For the full season-by-season history, see List of New Jersey Devils seasons\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nTeam identity.\nJerseys.\nThe team colors are red, black and white, and they can be seen on both the home and road jerseys. The home jersey, which was the team's road jersey until the NHL swapped home and road colors in 2003, is dominantly red in color. There are three black and white stripes, one across each arm and prior to the 2017\u201318 season, one across the waist. The road jersey (the team's former home jersey) is white in color with a similar design, except that the three stripes are black and red. The shoulders are draped with black on both uniforms. Before the 1992\u201393 season, the uniforms were green and red with slightly different striping, leading some fans to affectionately refer to them as \"Christmas colors\". The color green was chosen to reflect New Jersey's nickname as \"The Garden State\" and the New Jersey Pine Barrens, home of the Jersey Devil.\nDuring the Lou Lamoriello era, the Devils refused to join the trend of teams unveiling third jerseys, and continued to do so well after Lamoriello left in 2015. Lamoriello had stated that he did not ever intend to introduce a third jersey for the Devils, saying, \"I don't believe in it\", Lamoriello said. \"I strongly believe that you have to have one identity as a team. We want to create a feeling that our home and away jerseys are special and that it means something special to wear one.\" Unlike most teams, the Devils kept the same uniform design when the NHL switched to the jerseys by Reebok for the 2007\u201308 season.\nOn August 20, 2009, Lamoriello announced that the Devils would wear their classic red, white and green jerseys on their Saint Patrick's Day 2010 game against the Pittsburgh Penguins. Lamoriello stated, \"The original red, green and white jerseys are a part of our history here in New Jersey. We have always been an organization that takes great pride in its tradition. This is something we believe our fans will enjoy for that one special night.\" Martin Brodeur wore a special replica helmet of the one from his first NHL game. The throwback jerseys continued to be used, including for games on or around St. Patrick's Day over three different seasons and in the 2014 Stadium Series against the Rangers, on January 26.\nOn June 20, 2017, the Devils revealed updated uniforms for the 2017\u201318 season. Made by Adidas, the new sweaters are the first major change to the team's look since they replaced green with black. They feature the removal of the stripes on the bottom of the sweater, and also thicker sleeve stripes with equal width bands of white and black.\nThe Devils wore their classic white, red and green uniforms for four home games in the 2018\u201319 season.\nThe Devils rolled out a \"Reverse Retro\" alternate uniform in collaboration with Adidas during the 2020\u201321 season. The team used the original uniform template worn from 1982 to 1992, but green served as the base color instead of red.\nAfter eschewing the trend of \"third jerseys\" under Lou Lamoriello, the Devils finally unveiled a full-time alternate uniform early in the 2021\u201322 season. This uniform featured a black base and white stripes spread across the shoulders and sleeves. \"Jersey\" in white script lettering and red drop shadows is stitched in front with lacing at the neck. The uniform was designed by Devils legend Martin Brodeur and was largely influenced by the history of ice hockey in New Jersey.\nDuring the 2022\u201323 season, the Devils unveiled a new \"Reverse Retro\" alternate uniform in collaboration with Adidas. The team again used the original uniform template worn from 1982 to 1992, with white as the base color, but with red, navy and gold striping. The color palette was chosen to honor the Devils' previous identities, the Kansas City Scouts and the Colorado Rockies, and the club's 40th anniversary.\nIn the 2024 Stadium Series, the Devils went with a red and black-based uniform minus the white trim. The \"NJ\" logo was modified and enlarged without the circle.\nLogo.\nThe Devils' logo is a ligature of the letters \"N\", and \"J\", rendered with devil horns at the top of the \"J\" and a pointed tail at the bottom. The ligature was red with a green outline when the team began playing in New Jersey, but the outline color was changed to black in 1992, due to difficulties in making the green color consistent between its logo and jerseys. The logo sits inside an open black circle, and lies on a field of white in the middle of the chest on both uniforms. Before the Devils' move from Colorado in 1982, then-owner John McMullen's wife designed a prototype logo, which was then modified by a professional graphic design and marketing firm, and became the green-and-red logo used by the team for the first ten years in New Jersey.\nMascot.\nThe mascot is \"NJ Devil\", a tall devil who plays into the myth of the Jersey Devil. NJ Devil keeps the crowd excited, signs autographs, participates in entertainment during the intermissions, skates across the ice, throws T-shirts and runs throughout the aisles of the arena to high five fans. Prior to 1993, the mascot was \"Slapshot\", a large Devils hockey puck that interacted with the fans. The man inside the costume resigned after he was accused of touching three women inappropriately while in costume. The man agreed to undergo psychological counseling for a year as part of his agreement to avoid trial. To remove the stigma of the lawsuit, Slapshot was retired and has not returned since.\nTraditions.\nArlette Roxburgh has been the team's primary national anthem singer at home games since 1996 and is a favorite among Devils fans. Pete Cannarozzi has been the team's organist since 2001. His organ playing has been instrumental in bridging the Devils' tradition from the Meadowlands to Prudential Center. In addition to playing during breaks in play and at the end of a period, he also provides Arlette or another local performer with accompanying music during the national anthem.\nSome of Prudential Center's most vociferous fans can be found in Sections 233 and 122, home to groups of Devils fans whom self-identify as the Crazies and the Diablos, respectively. The 233 Crazies were originally created in 1993 as the 228 Crazies at the Meadowlands. They are known for their custom, triple-digit Devils jerseys reflecting their section number with \"CRAZIES\" on the nameplate, and are the source of many chants and generally enthusiastic behavior. A handful of 233 Crazies typically attend every Devils home game and some road games as well. The Diablos of Section 122 were originally conceived in part by the Devils' management in 2011 by extending a special season ticket offer to and actively seeking input from fans seeking to participate in a European-style supporters' section similar to those popular in Major League Soccer, ultimately in an effort to liven-up in the in-arena atmosphere following a poor campaign on the ice. While the Diablos have ultimately ceased to be supported directly by the organization and the following ownership group has focused on different methods of enhancing the fan experience, Section 122 and its general vicinity continues to be a source of more raucous behavior and general hostility towards opposing teams.\nMark Baumann, simply known to fans by his last name, Baumann, is a long-time season ticket holder familiar to many Devils fans for starting the D-E-V-I-L-S chant, dating back to 1995. He commonly wears a white Devils jersey with his name and the number 00.\nRivalries.\nThe Devils developed strong rivalries with two teams out of geographical proximity and frequent playoff confrontations. The \"Battle of the Hudson River\" with the New York Rangers is so-called as the Devils' arenas in the New York metropolitan area were always less than ten miles and across the Hudson River from Madison Square Garden. New Jersey's proximity with Pennsylvania also led to a rivalry with the Philadelphia Flyers, the \"Battle of the Jersey Turnpike\". The Flyers have a large following in South Jersey and train in Voorhees Township. Both teams had the most titles of the Atlantic Division prior to the 2013 realignment, with nine to the Devils and six to the Flyers.\nStyle of play.\nThe Devils have been known as a defense-first team since head coach Jacques Lemaire's first tenure, although the Devils have twice led the Eastern Conference in goals scored, once leading the NHL in goals scored (295 goals for in 2000\u201301). Lemaire gave the Devils their defensive mantra when he implemented a system commonly called the \"neutral zone trap\". This system is designed to force teams to turn over the puck in the neutral zone leading to a counterattack. This style of play led the team to be chastised by the media and hockey purists for \"making the NHL boring.\" Nevertheless, the Devils were successful using this style of play, and Devils head coach Larry Robinson asserted that the Montreal Canadiens teams he played on in the 1970s (who also won the Cup many times) used a form of the trap, though it did not have a name.\nUnder head coach Brent Sutter, the team adopted less of a trap and more of a transitional, aggressive forechecking style of play which also emphasized puck possession and instilled the cycle to start the 2007\u201308 season. This led to many high scoring games early in the season for New Jersey. The Devils went on to score 244 goals in the 2008\u201309 season, the most the team had scored in eight seasons. However, with the return of Lemaire as head coach, the Devils resumed a more defense-oriented playing style, scoring just 222 goals and allowing only 191, an NHL best in the 2009\u201310 season, earning Martin Brodeur his fifth William M. Jennings Trophy.\nLemaire has since re-entered retirement, and was replaced by former Florida head coach Peter DeBoer on July 19, 2011. The team showed greater offensive prowess during the 2011\u201312 season, employing a more aggressive forecheck centered on Ilya Kovalchuk. Under DeBoer's system, according to Lamoriello, the Devils' defenseman were often sent into the offensive zone to apply pressure on the opposing team's defense. After DeBoer's dismissal, Adam Oates had a similar approach improving the Devils' offense, investing on the versatility of the forwards. Oates left the organization in 2015, and the head coaching position was filled by John Hynes, who shifted the focus to a more \"fast, attacking, supportive\" style of play in an effort to score more goals. Hynes remained as head coach until he was dismissed in 2020, replaced by long-term assistant Alain Nasreddine, who kept the same general strategy intact with a slight increase to offensive execution. In 2021, Nasreddine was replaced by Lindy Ruff. Under Ruff, the Devils were known to play with an up-tempo style that highlighted the speed of their young talent. Ruff remained as head coach until he was replaced by his assistant Travis Green during the 2023\u201324 season, who maintained a similar style of play as interim, but with a focus on encouraging the players to adopt a stronger mentality.\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHonored members.\nRetired numbers.\nThe Devils have retired five numbers.\nNotes:\nHall of Fame honorees.\nTwelve Devils players have been inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame. Peter Stastny, who played for the Devils from 1989 to 1993, was inducted in 1998. A center who defected from Czechoslovakia, Stastny was one of the NHL's top goal scorers in the 1980s. In 2001, Stastny was joined in the Hall of Fame by Devils defenseman Viacheslav Fetisov, who was one of the first Soviet players in the NHL. Fetisov played for the team in the 1989\u201390 season and again from 1990 to 1995. Scott Stevens, the Devils' defenseman from 1991 to 2004 and long-time team captain, was inducted in 2007 in his first year of eligibility. In December 2014, Stevens returned as head coach for the Devils' defense. Igor Larionov, a forward with a 15-year career in the NHL who spent the 2003\u201304 season with the Devils, was inducted in 2008. Two Devils centers were inducted in 2011: Doug Gilmour, who had played for the team from 1996 to 1998, and Joe Nieuwendyk, a member of the club from 2001 to 2003. In 2013, the Hall of Fame again inducted two former Devils players: left wing Brendan Shanahan, who had played for the team from 1987 to 1991 and again for the 2008\u201309 season, and defenseman Scott Niedermayer, who was a Devil from 1992 to 2004. In the 2015, defenseman Phil Housley, who briefly played 22 games for the organization after being traded to New Jersey at the 1996 trade deadline, was inducted into the Hall of Fame. In 2017, left wing Dave Andreychuk, who played for the Devils for four seasons from 1996 to 1999, was inducted into the Hall of Fame. In 2018, longtime Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur was inducted into the Hall of Fame, who played with the team from 1991 to 2014, breaking multiple league records including most wins and shutouts while a member of the team. In 2025, right wing Alexander Mogilny, who played for the Devils for three non-consecutive seasons from 2000 to 2006, was inducted into the Hall of Fame in 2025.\nIn 2009, Lou Lamoriello, Devils president and general manager from 1987 to 2015, was inducted into the Hall as a Builder. Two Devils head coaches have also been inducted in the category. Herb Brooks, who coached the 1980 U.S. Olympic team to victory in the \"Miracle on Ice\" and served as Devils head coach in the 1992\u201393 season, was inducted in 2006. Pat Burns, head coach from 2002 to 2004, was inducted posthumously in 2014. Longtime Devils broadcaster Mike Emrick was the 2008 recipient of the Foster Hewitt Memorial Award.\nThree Devils head coaches had been inducted as players prior to joining the Devils organization. Jacques Lemaire, a 12-season NHL veteran forward who played primarily for the Canadiens, was inducted in 1984 and served as Devils head coach from 1993 to 1998 and from 2009 to 2011. Larry Robinson, who spent most of his 20-season career with the Canadiens, was inducted in 1995 and subsequently served as Devils head coach from 2000 to 2002 and in 2005. Adam Oates, a center with 19 seasons in the NHL who was inducted in 2012, began serving as the Devils head coach for offense in December 2014.\nDevils Ring of Honor.\nDuring the 2016\u201317 season the Devils created a Devils Ring of Honor to honor players whose numbers were not retired and other team personnel. John McMullen, owner of the Devils from 1982 to 2000, was the inaugural inductee and was inducted on January 6, 2017. Sergei Brylin was inducted on January 20, 2024, becoming the second inductee. Brylin, a defensive forward, played for the Devils from 1995 to 2008, won three Stanley Cup titles with the team and is one of only five Devils who played for all three championship teams. He later became an assistant coach with the Devils. On January 22, 2025, Jacques Lemaire became the third inductee. Lemaire, a Hockey Hall of Famer, was the head coach of the Devils from 1993 to 1998 and again from 2009 to 2011. He coached the Devils to their first Stanley Cup in 1995 and his 11th championship overall.\nTeam captains.\nThis list does not include the former captains of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeneral managers.\nThis list does not include the former general managers of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.\nHead coaches.\nThis list does not include the former coaches of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.\n\"Source\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes:\nFirst-round draft picks.\nThis list does not include draft picks of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise records.\nScoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history (Kansas City, Colorado and New Jersey). Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.\nNote: \"Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndividual and team records.\nCareer records\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRegular season records\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlayoff records\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeam records\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAffiliate teams.\nAmerican Hockey League.\nThe Maine Mariners were the Devils' first American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate, from 1982 to 1987. The team moved in 1987 and became the Utica Devils, serving as New Jersey's affiliate until 1993. The Albany River Rats became their affiliate from 1993 to 2006. In 2006, the Devils bought the Lowell Lock Monsters and renamed them the Lowell Devils, which moved in 2010 to become the Albany Devils. The Albany Devils moved after the 2016\u201317 season and became the Binghamton Devils. In May 2021, it was announced that the Binghamton Devils would be moved to Utica in the 2021\u201322 season to become the Utica Comets.\nECHL.\nIn 2006, the Devils purchased the ECHL franchise Trenton Titans, which was then renamed the Trenton Devils. Following four seasons of on-ice struggles and financial losses, the Devils suspended operations of the Trenton franchise in 2011. On August 8, 2017, the Devils announced a one-year affiliation with the Adirondack Thunder for the 2017\u201318 season, after having an \"informal working arrangement\" for the past two seasons.\nTelevision and radio.\nTelevision: MSGSN\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRadio: Audacy (formerly Radio.com), WFAN (selected games)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "66744", "revid": "873891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66744", "title": "Taiwan Province", "text": "Administrative division of Taiwan\nTaiwan Province (; PFS: \"Th\u00f2i-v\u00e0n-s\u00e9n\" or \"Th\u00f2i-v\u00e2n-s\u00e9n\") is a \"de jure\" administrative division of the Republic of China (Taiwan). Provinces remain a titular division as a part of the Constitution of the Republic of China, but are no longer considered to have any administrative function practically.\nTaiwan Province covers approximately 69% of the island of Taiwan, and comprises around 31% of the total population. The province initially covered the entire island of Taiwan (Formosa), Penghu (the Pescadores), Orchid Island, Green Island, Xiaoliuqiu Island, and their surrounding islands. Between 1967 and 2014, six special municipalities (Kaohsiung, New Taipei, Taichung, Tainan, Taipei and Taoyuan) were split off from the province, all in the most populous regions.\nTaiwan was initially made a prefecture of Fujian Province by the Qing dynasty of China after its conquest of the Kingdom of Tungning in 1683. Following the French offensive in northern Taiwan during the Sino-French War, the island's strategic position in maritime security and defence was re-evaluated and given prominence by the Qing. Under the auspices of Liu Ming-chuan, a plan was commenced to develop Taiwan into a stand-alone division. In 1887, Taiwan was designated as a distinct province (namely \"Fujian-Taiwan Province\"; ), with Liu as the first governor, but the island was then ceded to the Empire of Japan in 1895, following China's defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War. After the surrender of Japan in World War II, the province was re-established on Taiwan by the Kuomintang (KMT) government in September 1945, and it became the last stronghold of the KMT government after their defeat in the Chinese Civil War. The provincial capital of Taipei has correspondingly become the provisional capital of the central government since 1949.\nDuring the constitutional reform initiated in 1996, the Taiwanese government decided to downsize the provincial structure to streamline overlapping personnel and administrative resources between the provincial and central governments, and cut excessive public spending. The provinces ceased to be self-governing bodies in December 1998, with their administrative functions transferred to the Executive Yuan's subsidiary National Development Council, as well as second-tier local governments such as counties. In July 2018, all provincial governmental organs were formally abolished, with their budget and personnel removed.\nHistory.\nQing Empire.\nIn 1683, Zheng Keshuang (third ruler of the Kingdom of Tungning and a grandson of Koxinga), surrendered to the Qing Empire following a naval engagement with Admiral Shi Lang. The Qing then ruled the Taiwanese archipelago (including Penghu) as Taiwan Prefecture of Fujian Province. In 1875, Taipeh Prefecture was separated from Taiwan Prefecture. In 1885, work commenced under the auspices of Liu Ming-chuan to develop Taiwan into a province. In 1887, the island was designated as a province (officially \"Fujian-Taiwan Province\"; Chinese: ), with Liu as the first governor. The province was also reorganized into four prefectures, eleven districts, and three sub-prefectures. The provincial capital, or \"Taiwan-fu\", was intended to be moved from the south (modern-day Tainan) to the more central area of \"Toatun\" (modern-day Taichung) in the revamped Taiwan Prefecture. As the new central Taiwan-fu was still under construction, the capital was temporarily moved north to Taipeh (modern-day Taipei), which eventually was designated the provincial capital.\nEmpire of Japan.\nIn 1895, the entire Taiwan Province, including Penghu, was ceded to Japan following the First Sino-Japanese War through the Treaty of Shimonoseki. Under Japanese rule, the province was abolished in favour of Japanese-style divisions. \nAfter the surrender of Japan in 1945, Taiwan was handed over to the Republic of China (ROC).\nRepublic of China.\nThe ROC government immediately established the Taiwan Provincial Government under first Chief Executive and government-general Chen Yi in September 1945. Chen was extremely unpopular and his rule led to an uprising: the February 28 Incident of 1947. Chen was recalled in May 1947 and the government-general position was abolished.\nIn 1949, Chinese Communist Party forces defeated the Kuomintang (KMT) in the Chinese Civil War, and the Republic of China government moved to Taipei. The provincial administration remained in place under the claim that the ROC was still the government of all of China even though the opposition argued that it overlapped inefficiently with the national government.\nThe seat of the provincial government was moved from Taipei to Zhongxing New Village in 1956. Historically, Taiwan Province covers the entire island of Taiwan and all its associated islands. The city of Taipei was split off to become a province-level special municipality in 1967, and the city of Kaohsiung was split off in 1979 to become another special municipality. In December 2010, Kaohsiung County left the province and merged with the original Kaohsiung City to become an expanded Kaohsiung City, Taipei County became the special municipality named New Taipei City. The cities and counties of Taichung and Tainan were also merged, respectively, and elevated to special municipality. On 25 December 2014, Taoyuan County was upgraded into a special municipality and split off from Taiwan Province.\nUntil 1992, the governor of Taiwan province was appointed by the ROC central government. The office was often a stepping stone to higher office.\nIn 1992, the post of the governor of the province was opened to election. The then-opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) agreed to retain the province with an elected governor in the hopes of creating a \"Yeltsin effect\" in which a popular local leader could overwhelm the national government. These hopes proved unfulfilled as then-Kuomintang member James Soong was elected governor of Taiwan province, defeating the DPP candidate Chen Ding-nan.\nIn 1997, as the result of an agreement between the KMT and the DPP, the powers of the provincial government were curtailed by constitutional amendments. The post of provincial governor was abolished. In addition, the provincial council was also replaced by the Taiwan Provincial Consultative Council. Although the stated purpose was administrative efficiency, Soong and his supporters claim that it was actually intended to impede James Soong's political life, though it did not have this effect.\nThe provincial administration was downscaled in 1998, most of its power handed to the central government. The counties and provincial cities under the province became the primary administrative divisions of the country.\nGovernment.\nThe position of the Chairperson of the Provincial Government, appointed by the central government, is retained to comply with the Constitution.\nThe major operations of the provincial government, such as managing provincial highways and the Bank of Taiwan, have been transferred to the Executive Yuan since 1998. In July 2018, all remaining duties were transferred to the National Development Council and other ministries of the Executive Yuan.\nThe Taiwan Provincial Government was located in Zhongxing New Village, Nantou City, Nantou County between 1957 and 2018. \nDivisions.\nHistory of divisions.\nIn October 1945, The Government of the Republic of China reformed the eight(8) Japanese prefectures under the Government-General of Taiwan into 8 counties and 9 cities.\nCurrent divisions.\nTaiwan Province is nominally divided into 11 counties &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 and 3 cities &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0. All divisions are directly administered by the central government in practice.\nNote that the special municipalities of Kaohsiung, New Taipei, Taichung, Tainan, Taipei, and Taoyuan are both nominally under and directly administered by the central government. They are not parts of any province.\nSister states/provinces.\nTaiwan Province was twinned with 42 U.S. states:\nTerritorial disputes.\nThe People's Republic of China (PRC) regards itself as the \"successor state\" of the Republic of China (ROC), which the PRC claims no longer legitimately exists, following establishment of the PRC on Mainland China. The PRC asserts itself to be the sole legitimate government of China, and claims Taiwan as its 23rd province, even though the PRC itself has never had control of Taiwan or other ROC-held territories. The ROC disputes this position, maintaining that it still legitimately exists and that the PRC has not succeeded it.\nThe PRC claims the entirety of the island of Taiwan and its nearby islands and islets, including the Penghu, as parts of its Taiwan Province, corresponding to the ROC's Taiwan Province before the special municipalities were split off. The PRC claims that Taiwan is a part of China, that the PRC succeeded the ROC as the sole legitimate authority in all of China upon its founding in 1949, and that therefore Taiwan is a part of the PRC.\nThe Senkaku Islands, which are currently administered by Japan, are disputed by both the ROC and the PRC, which claim them as the Tiaoyutai/Diaoyu Islands. The ROC government claims them as part of Toucheng Township, Yilan County.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66745", "revid": "433328", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66745", "title": "Reflux oesophagitis", "text": ""}
{"id": "66746", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66746", "title": "Painters", "text": ""}
{"id": "66748", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66748", "title": "Maria Mutola", "text": "Mozambican middle-distance runner\nMaria de Lurdes Mutola ( ; born 27 October 1972) is a retired Mozambican female track and field who specialised in the 800 metres running event. She is only the fourth female track and field athlete to compete at six Olympic Games. She is a three-time world champion in this event and a one-time Olympic champion.\nAlthough Mutola never broke the world record in her favourite event, she is regarded by many track insiders and fans as one of the greatest 800 metres female runners of all time due to her consistently good results in major championships and her exceptional longevity which saw her compete at the highest level for two decades before retiring from athletics in 2008 at the age of 35. She is also the only athlete ever to have won Olympic, World, World indoor, Commonwealth Games, Continental Games and Continental Championships titles in the same event. She is also the main coach and mentor of Caster Semenya.\nCareer.\nEarly years.\nMutola was born in 1972 in the poor shanty town of Chamanculo on the outskirts of Maputo, then known as Louren\u00e7o Marques, the capital of Portuguese Mozambique. Her father was employed by the railways and her mother was a market vendor. As a young girl she excelled in football. She played with boys, as there were no leagues or teams for girls. At only 14 years of age, she was encouraged to take up athletics by one of Mozambique's foremost literary figures, the poet Jos\u00e9 Craveirinha, who was a keen sports fan. His son Stelio, himself a former national long jump record holder who had competed in the 1980 Summer Olympics, was Mutola's first coach.\nAfter a visit to Portugal, plans were made for her to join the Lisbon-based Benfica athletics club, but at the last minute Mozambican government denied her permission. The next year, after several months' training, she won a silver medal in the 800 metres in the 1988 African Championships in Annaba, Algeria before competing in the 1988 Summer Olympics less than a month later. She ran a personal best time of 2:04.36, but only finished seventh in her first round heat, failing to progress to the semi-finals. Mutola was still only fifteen years old.\nStudying and training in the United States.\nOver the next few years Mutola failed to improve on her best time, but still won gold at the African Championships in Cairo in 1990. She faced little opposition in Mozambique and only trained properly in the run-up to big competitions. Attempts were made to organise scholarships for her to train abroad, but it was not until 1991 that, thanks to an IOC solidarity programme, she was awarded a scholarship to go to the United States to study and train. Springfield High School in Oregon was her host school, due to the fact that there was a Portuguese-speaking staff member (since Mutola spoke no English).\nShe quickly surprised many by finishing fourth in the final of the 1991 World Championships in Tokyo, where her time of 1:57.63 constituted a world junior record. Mutola lost out on a medal because she was severely impeded, elbowed twice by Ella Kovacs as she tried to pass in the final few metres. On the finish line, Kovacs fell across the line ahead of Mutola, reaching out and tripping race winner Lilia Nurutdinova as well. A protest was lodged but it was unsuccessful. At the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona there were great hopes for Mutola to win Mozambique's first Olympic medal. She ran strongly but faded badly in the home straight, eventually finishing fifth behind winner Ellen van Langen. At the same Olympics, Mutola ran one of the few 1500 m races at an international championship, placing ninth in the final. That same year she also won the 800 m event at the 1992 IAAF World Cup in Havana, and was the only woman to beat Ellen van Langen throughout the whole year.\nStatus in 800 m race history.\nMutola is often ranked as one of the greatest female 800\u00a0m runners of all time, and to some even the best. She has not gained a world record in the event, but her consistency, her performances at major championships and her ability to compete at the highest levels of the sport for two decades are unmatched \u2013 the 2008 Olympics were her sixth consecutive Olympics. She does however have a 0\u20134 record against her rival Ana Quirot in World and Olympic competition, and Quirot ran sub-1:55 twice vs. Mutola's career best of 1:55.16. In terms of global championship gold medals however, Mutola bests Quirot in Olympic titles (1\u20130), outdoor World titles (3-2) and indoor World titles (7-0). Mutola and Quirot are good friends to this day and often write one another, and Mutola often wrote Quirot letters of encouragement to return to Track and Field following her near fatal heavy burn explosion.\nMutola won bronze in the 1997 IAAF World Championships in Athletics and silver in 1999. She also won the IAAF World Indoor Championships in Athletics in 1997, only weeks after her father had been killed in a car accident. She raced wearing a black ribbon and dedicated the victory to his memory. In total she has won nine world 800\u00a0m titles, including both indoor and outdoor championships. She won the Commonwealth Games twice, after Mozambique was admitted to the Commonwealth in 1995, and has also won the IAAF World Cup event, representing the Africa team, four times consecutively.\nHer greatest moment, though, came at the Sydney Olympics in 2000, when Mutola finally won Olympic gold. She beat her major rival Stephanie Graf and Kelly Holmes. She returned to Mozambique after her Olympic victory, huge crowds came to cheer her and a road was named after her in Maputo.\nShe continued her successes in the 2001 season, grabbing the world title in Edmonton and again in 2003 in Paris. It was widely felt that Mutola ran tactically during the 2003 race by setting a slow pace in order to aid her training partner Kelly Holmes. As a result of such a strategy Holmes was able to take silver. Mutola was unbeaten throughout 2003 and grabbed the headlines again that year, at the Memorial Van Damme race in Belgium. By winning here, it meant that she became sole winner of the 2003 IAAF Golden League one million dollar jackpot, awarded to athletes who remained undefeated in all six competitions in the season. She put part of her winnings towards the foundation that she had established in her name in Mozambique.\nAiming to become the first woman to successfully defend the Olympic 800\u00a0m title in 2004, her fifth Olympics, Mutola ended up finishing fourth. Despite carrying a hamstring injury, Mutola was in the gold medal position until the final few metres, when three athletes passed her, including the eventual champion, her former training partner Kelly Holmes. In 2005, her injuries were still lingering and she suffered several losses to opponents she would normally easily beat. Mutola finished fourth in the 800 m at the 2005 World Championships in Helsinki; third-place winner Tatyana Andrianova was retroactively suspended for a doping violation in 2015. A later test invalidated Andrianova's results from 9 August 2005 through 8 August 2007. On April 14, 2016, the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) overturned Andrianova's two-year doping suspension because her sample had been re-tested beyond the eight-year statute of limitations. \"As the eight-year statute of limitations had expired prior to January 1, 2015, the 10-year statute of limitations provided under the new 2015 anti-doping rules cannot apply\", CAS said in a statement.\nMutola parted amicably with her coach Margo Jennings, before returning to good form in 2006, when she won the World Indoor Championships title for a record seventh time. At the 2007 IAAF World Championships, Mutola was in contention for a medal entering into the home straight, but pulled out of the race in the dying metres.\nIn 2008, the 800 metres African record held by Mutola, was beaten by the young Pamela Jelimo of Kenya. Mutola had decided that the 2008 Olympic Games would be her last major championships, and she finished fifth in the 800 metres Olympic final. She publicly called an end to her 21-year-long athletics career at the Weltklasse Z\u00fcrich meeting immediately after the Olympics. She finished fourth with a run of 1:58.71 in the 800\u00a0m, again behind Jelimo, who completed a symbolic feat by beating Mutola's meet record which had stood since 1994.\nHer appearance at the 2008 Olympics made her only the fourth female track and field athlete to compete at six Olympics, after Lia Manoliu (discus), Tessa Sanderson (javelin/heptathlon), and seven-time Olympian Merlene Ottey (sprints).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "66749", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66749", "title": "Eritrea/History", "text": ""}
{"id": "66750", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66750", "title": "Eritrea/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "66751", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66751", "title": "Eritrea/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "66752", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66752", "title": "Eritrea/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "66753", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66753", "title": "Eritrea/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "66754", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66754", "title": "Eritrea/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "66755", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66755", "title": "Eritrea/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "66756", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66756", "title": "Eritrea/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "66757", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66757", "title": "Vasco Nunez de Balboa", "text": ""}
{"id": "66758", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66758", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "66759", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66759", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "66760", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66760", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Government", "text": ""}
{"id": "66762", "revid": "2030868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66762", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Science", "text": ""}
{"id": "66763", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66763", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "66764", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66764", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "66765", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66765", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "66766", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66766", "title": "Peoples Republic of China/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "66768", "revid": "49523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66768", "title": "IFF-16SV", "text": ""}
{"id": "66769", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66769", "title": "Bay of Fundy", "text": "Bay on the east coast of North America\nThe Bay of Fundy () is a bay between the Canadian provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, with a small portion touching the U.S. state of Maine. It is an arm of the Gulf of Maine. Its tidal range is the highest in the world. \nThe bay was named \"Bakudabakek\" by the indigenous Mi'kmaq and Passamaquoddy groups, meaning \"open way\". The Wolastoqiyik peoples named it \"Wekwabegituk\", meaning \"waves at the head of the bay\". The name \"Fundy\" has been speculated to have derived from the French word (\"split\") or (\"head of the bay\"). Some individuals have disputed this, including William Francis Ganong, who suggested that the name likely derived from Portuguese origin instead, specifically regarding Jo\u00e3o \u00c1lvares Fagundes, who may have referred to the bay as (\"Great Bay\") and nearby waters as (\"deep river\").\nHydrology.\nTides.\nThe tidal range in the Bay of Fundy is about ; the average tidal range worldwide is only . Some tides are higher than others, depending on the position of the moon, the sun, and atmospheric conditions. Tides are \"semidiurnal\", meaning they have two highs and two lows each day, with about 6\u00a0hours and 13\u00a0minutes between each high and low tide.\nBecause of tidal resonance in the funnel-shaped bay, the tides that flow through the channel are very powerful. In one half-day tidal cycle, about 100\u00a0billion tonnes (110\u00a0billion short tons) of water flow in and out of the bay, which is twice as much as the combined total flow of all the rivers of the world over the same period. The Annapolis Royal Generating Station, a 20\u00a0MW tidal power station on the Annapolis River upstream of Annapolis Royal, was, until its shutdown in 2019, one of the few tidal generating stations in the world, and the only one in North America.\nMost of the rivers that drain into the Bay of Fundy have a tidal bore, a wave front of the incoming tide that \"bores\" its way up a river against its normal flow. Notable tidal bores include those on the Petitcodiac, Maccan, St.\u00a0Croix, and Kennetcook rivers. Before the construction of a causeway in 1968 and subsequent siltation of the river, the Petitcodiac River had one of the world's largest tidal bores, up to high. Since the opening of the causeway gates in 2010, the bore has been coming back, and in 2013 surfers rode it a record-breaking .\nOther tidal phenomena include the Reversing Falls near the mouth of the St.\u00a0John River, a rip tide at Cape Enrage, and the Old Sow whirlpool at Passamaquoddy Bay.\nGeology.\nThe story of the Fundy Basin begins about 220 million years ago in the late Triassic, when all land on earth was part of a supercontinent called Pangaea. At that time what is now the Maritimes was situated near the equator and had a warm tropical climate and lush vegetation. As continental drift reshaped the world between the Late Triassic and Early Jurassic periods, Pangaea broke up. This rifting event created a series of rift basins along eastern North America, including the Fundy Basin. \nDuring the continental breakup, magma erupted as basaltic lavas and left igneous rock formations such as the columnar jointing which can be seen on Brier and Grand Manan islands, among other places around the bay. These flows often are the sites of rarer mineral deposits including agate, amethyst, and stilbite, the latter being the provincial mineral of Nova Scotia.\nThese rifts filled with sediment which became sedimentary rock. Many fossils have been found along the Fundy shoreline. The oldest dinosaur fossil in Canada was found at Burntcoat Head. Very early reptiles have been discovered in Carboniferous tree trunks at Joggins. Wasson Bluff has a rich trove of Jurassic fossils.\nThe bay is a member of the Global Geoparks Network, a UNESCO initiative to promote and conserve the planet's geological heritage.\nFlora and fauna.\nAlthough some land areas are protected, there is no formal marine protection zone in the bay. The Conservation Council of New Brunswick works to protect the ecosystem of the bay. A result of shipping traffic has been the potential for increased collisions between ships and the critically endangered North Atlantic right whale. In 2003, the Canadian Coast Guard adjusted shipping lanes crossing prime whale feeding areas at the entrance to the Bay of Fundy to lessen the risk of collision. Many other marine mammals are found in the bay including fin whales, humpback whales, minke whales, Atlantic white-sided dolphin and the harbour porpoise.\nThe Bay of Fundy mudflats are a rare and unique intertidal habitat. Major mudflats are found on around the Maringouin Peninsula which lies between Shepody Bay and the Cumberland Basin and at the northern end of Chignecto Bay. On the Nova Scotia side, mudflats are found on the southern side of the Minas Basin and in Cobequid Bay. In the Minas Basin, the size of the mudflats from low to high water marks is as much as . Due to tidal turbulence, the water in these area contains very high amounts of fine sediment, source from tidal erosion of Carboniferous and Triassic sedimentary rock. Primary producers include hollow green weed, phytoplankton, algae, and sea lettuce.\nProtected areas include:\nHuman geography and history.\nHistory.\nThe Mi\ua78ckmaq fished in the Bay of Fundy and lived in communities around the bay for centuries before the first Europeans arrived. According to Mi\ua78ckmaq legend, the tide was created when Glooscap wanted to take a bath.\nThe first European to visit the bay may have been Portuguese explorer Jo\u00e3o \u00c1lvares Fagundes in about 1520, although the bay does not appear on Portuguese maps until 1558. The first European settlement was French, founded at Saint Croix Island in Maine, and then Port Royal, founded by Pierre Dugua and Samuel de Champlain in 1605. Champlain named it \"Labaye Francoise\" (The French Bay). Champlain describes finding an old rotted cross in the bay which may have been left by the Portuguese.\nThe village was the first permanent European settlement north of the Spanish St. Augustine, Florida, and predated by two years the first permanent British settlement in Jamestown, Virginia. About 75 years later, Acadians spread out along the bay, founding Grand-Pr\u00e9, Beaubassin, Cobequid, and Pisiguit.\nThere was much military action and many attacks on the settlements around the bay, first as the French and British fought for control of the area, leading to the expulsion of the Acadians, and later by Americans during the American Revolution and the War of 1812.\nIn the 19th century, the bay was the site of much shipping, and shipbuilders flourished, including James Moran of St. Martins, New Brunswick, Joseph Salter, of Moncton, and William D. Lawrence of Maitland, Nova Scotia. Fundy ports produced the fastest ship in the world, ; the largest wooden ship ever built in Canada, ; and the first female sea captain in the western world, Molly Kool. The mystery ship was also built there.\nThe highest water level ever recorded, , occurred in October 1869. It caused extensive destruction to ports and communities, much of which was attributed to a two-metre storm surge created by the Saxby Gale, a tropical cyclone, which coincided with a perigean spring tide. Waves breached dykes protecting low-lying farmland in the Minas Basin and the Tantramar Marshes, sending ocean waters surging far inland.\nSettlements.\nThe largest population centre on the bay is Saint John, New Brunswick, a major port and the first incorporated city in what is now Canada. Other settlements include, in New Brunswick, St. Andrews, Blacks Harbour, Grand Manan, Campobello, Fundy-St. Martins, Alma, Riverside-Albert, Hopewell Cape, and Sackville, and in Nova Scotia, Amherst, Advocate Harbour, Parrsboro, Truro, Maitland, Cheverie, Windsor, Wolfville, Canning, Annapolis Royal, and Digby.\nPorts and shipping.\nThe port of Saint John gives access to the pulp and paper industry and the Irving oil refinery. Hantsport, Nova Scotia, also has a pulp and paper mill and ships gypsum to the United States.\nThe bay is also traversed by ferries:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66770", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66770", "title": "Youth Hostels Association", "text": "Youth Hostels Association may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66771", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66771", "title": "AGM", "text": "AGM or agm may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66772", "revid": "12060030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66772", "title": "Rector (academia)", "text": "Academic official\nA rector (Latin for 'ruler') is a senior official in an educational institution, and can refer to an official in either a university or a secondary school. Outside the English-speaking world, the rector is often the most senior official in a university, while in the United States, the highest-ranking officer within a university's academic administration is often referred to as president. In the United Kingdom and Commonwealth of Nations, a university's chief executive is called vice-chancellor. The term and office of a rector can be referred to as a rectorate. The title is used widely in universities in Europe and is very common in Latin American countries. It is also used in Brunei, Macau, Pakistan, the Philippines, Indonesia, Israel and the Middle East. In the ancient universities of Scotland the rector, elected by students (and staff at Edinburgh), is formally the third most senior officer of the university and was historically responsible for chairing the university court.\nEurope.\nAustria.\nIn a few \"Crown lands\" of the Austrian Empire, one seat in federal state parliaments was reserved for the rector of the capital's university, notably: Graz in Styria, Innsbruck in Tyrol, and Vienna; in Bohemia, two rectors had seats in the equivalent state diet.\nToday, Austrian universities are headed from the vice-chancellor's office, which some universities and the translation of the Austrian Universities Act of 2002 call the \"rectorate\" in English. It consists of a rector (vice-chancellor), who is elected by the university council, and 3-5 additional vice rectors (pro-vice-chancellors). The rector (vice-chancellor) is the CEO of the university.\nBelgium.\nThe head of Belgian universities is called a \"president\", \"recteur\" (French-speaking universities), \"rector\" (Dutch-speaking universities), previously \"rector magnificus\" (men) or \"rectrix magnifica\" (women).\nCzech Republic.\nThe heads of Czech universities are called the \"rektor\". The rector acts in the name of the university and decides the university's affairs unless prohibited by law. The rector is nominated by the University Academic Senate and appointed by the President of the Czech Republic. The nomination must be agreed by a simple majority of all senators, while a dismissal must be agreed by at least three fifths of all senators. The vote to elect or repeal a rector is secret. The term of office is four years and a person may hold it for at most two consecutive terms.\nThe rector appoints vice-rectors (\"pro-rektor\"), who act as deputies to the extent determined by the Rector. Rectors' salaries are determined directly by the Minister of Education.\nAmong the most important rectors of Czech universities were reformer Jan Hus, physician Jan Jesenius, theologian Rodrigo de Arriaga and representative of Enlightenment Josef Vratislav Monse. Ji\u0159ina Popelov\u00e1 (Palack\u00fd University of Olomouc) became the first female Rector in 1950.\nThe rectors are addressed \"Your Magnificence Rector\" (\"Va\u0161e Magnificence pane rektore\").\nDenmark.\nIn Danish, \"rektor\" is the title used in referring to the heads of universities, gymnasiums, schools of commerce and construction, etc. Generally \"rektor\" may be used for the head of any educational institution above the primary school level, where the head is commonly referred to as a 'skoleinspekt\u00f8r' (Headmaster; Inspector of the school). In universities, the second-ranked official of governance is known as \"prorektor\".\nFinland.\nIn Finland, the head of a primary school or secondary schools is called a rector (\"rehtori\") provided the school is of sufficient size in terms of faculty and students, otherwise the title is headmaster (\"koulunjohtaja\"). The head of some Finnish universities is called chancellor (\"kansleri\").\nGermany.\nThe head of a German university is called either \"Rektor\" (rector) or \"Pr\u00e4sident\" (president). The difference is usually that a \"Rektor\" is elected by the Senate from among the professors of the university (which is the traditional method of choosing the head of a German university), while a \"Pr\u00e4sident\" need be neither a professor nor a member of the university (or of any university) prior to appointment. The \"Rektor\" is traditionally addressed as \"Magnifizenz\". The rector forms a collegiate leadership body together with the pro-rectors (\"Prorektor\") and the university's chancellor (\"Kanzler\") - collectively the rectorate (\"Rektorat\"). The rectorate is usually aided by several advisors (\"Referent\") who provide advice on specific topics and take over responsibilities in the preparation of decisions, roughly comparable to an associate Pro-Vice-Chancellor in the British academic system.\n\"Rektor\" is also the official title of the principal/headmaster of an elementary school; the deputies are called \"Konrektor\". In earlier times, the title \"Rektor\" was also used for the head of a Gymnasium. Today, these teachers usually hold the title of \"Oberstudiendirektor\" (\"Senior Director of Studies\").\nIceland.\nThe \"rektor\" is term used for the headmaster or headmistress of Icelandic universities and of some gymnasia.\nItaly.\nIn Italy the rector is the head of the university and \"Rappresentante Legale\" (Legal representative) of the university. The rector is elected by an electoral body composed of all \"Professori ordinari ed associati\" (full and associate professors), the two highest ranks of the Italian university faculty, all the \"Ricercatori\" (lowest rank of departments) and representatives of the staff, students and PhD students.\nThe term of a \"rettore\" is now six years, in accordance with the new national regulation and the \"statuto\" (constitution of the university).\nThe Rettore is styled and formally greeted as \"Magnifico Rettore\" (Magnificent Rector).\nKazakhstan.\nA rector () in Kazakhstan is the chief executive and legal head of a university or other higher\u2011education institution. The rector oversees academic, administrative, and financial management and typically chairs the institution's collegial governing body, such as an Academic Council, though exact governance structures depend on each university's charter.\nRector positions are regulated under national legislation, including Article 44 of the Law on Education of the Republic of Kazakhstan, and institutional statutes. Public university rectors are generally nominated by a university board or academic council and approved by the relevant governmental authority, with procedural details set by each institution's internal rules.\nBecause higher\u2011education institutions enjoy institutional autonomy, the powers, governance role, and tenure of rectors can vary between universities. In 2024, policy reforms by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education limited rectors to a maximum of two consecutive three-year terms (six years total), whereas previously terms and reappointments were set by individual university charters, with some rectors serving 10\u201315 years or more.\nUnder their authority, rectors may appoint vice\u2011rectors to oversee specific areas such as academic programs, research, or administration. Rectors also act as the legal representative of the institution and interact with state authorities, other institutions, and external organizations.\nNetherlands.\nIn the Netherlands, the rector is the principal of a high school. The rector is supported by conrectors (deputy rectors who can take his place).\nIn Dutch universities, the \"Rector Magnificus\" is responsible for the scientific vision and quality of the university. The \"rector magnificus\" is one of the members of the executive board of a university. The \"rector magnificus\" is a full professor. The ceremonial responsibilities of the \"rector magnificus \"are to open the academic year, and to preside over the ceremonial PhD defenses and inaugural lectures of newly appointed (full) professors. During PhD defenses the rector is usually replaced by another full professor who is acting rector during the session.\nNorway.\nA rector (), in the context of academia, is the democratically elected head of a university or university college. The rector is the highest official of the university, and is traditionally elected among the institution's professorship, originally by all the (full) professors and in modern times by all academic employees, the students and the non-academic employees. The rector is traditionally the head of the \"Collegium Academicum\", which has been renamed the university board in the 2000s, and is also the university's chief executive and ceremonial head. The elected deputy of the rector is known as pro-rector (). Some institutions also have vice rectors, who are appointed by the rector and subordinate to the rector and pro-rector.\nTraditionally, Norwegian universities and colleges had democratic elections for the rector and pro-rector positions. Since 2016, the institutions may choose to have an elected or an appointed rector. Universities and colleges usually have a \"university director\" or \"college director\", who is the head of the administration (i.e., the non-academic employees) and subordinate to the rectorate.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, the rector () serves as the elected head of a university or university college. In military and military-type higher education institutions, the equivalent position is referred to as commander (). The rector is the highest official of the university. Rector of the university can be a person with at least a doctoral degree, employed by the university as the main place of work. Rector is referred to as Jego/Jej Magnificencja (en. His/Her Magnificence) (abbreviation: JM). The outfit of rector is red or purple coat (robe) with ermine fur, often with a scepter and a decorative string of symbols of the university. Deputy rectors () at official ceremonies are dressed in the same gown, but with fewer decorations (usually without the fur). Rectors of military universities wear only an officer's uniform and a necklace with symbols of the university.\nAs of 2008, the term of office of the rector of public universities lasts for four years (previously three years), beginning on 1 September in an election year and ending on 31 August of the year in which the term ends. A person may not be elected to serve as rector for more than two consecutive terms. In the case of private universities the rule is regulated by university statute.\nPortugal.\nIn Portugal, the Rector (Portuguese: \"Reitor\" male or \"Reitora\" female), frequently addressed as \"Magnificent Rector\" (\"Magn\u00edfico Reitor\" in Portuguese), is the elected highest official of each university, governing and representing the university.\nThose universities whose foundation has been historically approved by the Pope, as e.g. the rector of the University of Coimbra, the oldest Portuguese university, is referred to as \"Magn\u00edfico Reitor (Rector's name)\" (\"Rector Magnificus (Rector's Name)\"). The others are referred to as \"Excelent\u00edssimo Senhor Reitor\". The rector of a university is helped by vice-rectors and by pro-rectors, with different responsibilities. Until 1974, the director of each lyceum (high school) also had the title of Rector.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, the rector () as a term for a university chancellor introduced in 1961. Before 1961 university chancellor had title \"director\" ().\nSpain.\nIn Spain, all Rectors must be addressed as \"Se\u00f1or Rector Magn\u00edfico\" according to the law (Ley Org\u00e1nica 4/2007), but the Rector of the University of Salamanca, the oldest on the Iberian Peninsula, is usually styled according to academic protocol as \"Excelent\u00edsimo e Ilustr\u00edsimo Se\u00f1or Profesor Doctor Don (Rector's name), Rector Magn\u00edfico de la Universidad de Salamanca\" (\"The Most Excellent and Most Illustrious Lord Professor Doctor Don (Rector's name), \"Rector Magnificus\" of the University of Salamanca\").\nIn Spain, \"Rector\" or \"Rector Magn\u00edfico\" (magnific rector, from Latin \"Rector Magnificus\") is the highest administrative and educational office in a university, equivalent to that of president or chancellor of an English-speaking university but holding all the powers of a vice-chancellor; they are thus the head of the academy at universities. Formally styled as \"Excelent\u00edsimo e Ilustr\u00edsimo Se\u00f1or Profesor Doctor Don N, Rector Magn\u00edfico de la Universidad de X\" (\"Most Excellent and Illustrious Lord Professor Doctor Don N, Rector Magnificus of the University of X\"), it is an office of high dignity within Spanish society, usually being highly respected. It is not strange to see them appear in the media, especially when some academic-related subject is being discussed and their opinion is requested.\nSpanish rectors are chosen from within the body of university full professors (\"Catedr\u00e1ticos\" in Spanish); it is compulsory for anyone aspiring to become a rector to have been a doctor for at least six years before his election, and to have achieved professor status, holding it in the same university for which he is running. Usually, when running for election, the rector will need to have chosen the vice-rectors (\"vicerrectores\" in Spanish), who will occupy several sub-offices in the university. Rectors are elected directly by free and secret universal suffrage of all the members of the university, including students, lecturers, readers, researchers, and civil servants. However, the weight of the vote in each academic sector is different: the total student vote usually represents 20% of the whole, no matter how many students there are; the votes of the entire group made up of professors and readers (members of what used to be known as the \"Claustro\" (\"cloister\")) usually count for about 40-50% of the total; lecturers, researchers (including Ph.D. students and others) and non-doctoral teachers, about 20% of the total; and the remainder (usually some 5-10%) is left for non-scholarly workers (people in administration, etc.) in the university. Spanish law allows those percentages to be changed according to the situation of each university, or even not to have a direct election system. Indeed, in a few universities the Rector is chosen indirectly; the members of the modern \"Claustro\" (a sort of electoral college or parliament in which all the above-mentioned groups are represented) is chosen first, and then the Claustro selects the Rector.\nRectors hold their office for four years before another election is held, and there is no limit to the number of re-election terms. However, only the most charismatic and respected rectors have been able to hold their office for more than two or three terms. Of those, some have been notable Spanish scholars, such as Basque writer Miguel de Unamuno, Rector of the University of Salamanca from 1901 until 1936.\nSweden.\n\"Rektor\" is the title for the highest-ranked administrative and educational leader for an academic institution, such as a primary school, secondary school, private school, high school, college or university. The \"rektors\" of state-run colleges and universities are formally appointed by the government, i.e. the cabinet, but upon the advice of the concerned institution's board, and usually following some sort of democratic process at the concerned institution. The adjunct of a \"rektor\" at a university is called a \"prorektor\" and is appointed by the institution's board. Some institutions also have \"vicerektorer\" (vice rectors), who are appointed by the \"rektor\" to carry out a sub-set of the \"rektor's\" tasks. A \"vicerektor\" is subordinate to the \"rektor\" and \"prorektor\".\nIn the older universities, Uppsala university and Lund university, the \"rektor\" is titled \"rector magnificus\" (men), or \"rectrix magnifica\" (women). Younger universities have in more recent years started using the Latin honorary title in formal situations, such as in honorary speeches or graduation ceremonies.\nThe University Chancellor of Sweden was until 2017 the title of the head of the government accrediting agency, the National Agency for Higher Education. From 2017, this position carries the title Director General which is the usual title of the head of a government agency. The people recruited to the position have in later times always been former \"rektors\" of a Swedish university. The position does not include leadership of a university.\nUniversities and colleges usually have a \"Universitetsdirekt\u00f6r\" or \"F\u00f6rvaltningschef\", who is the head of the administration (i.e., the non-academic employees) and subordinate to the rectorate.\nSwitzerland.\nThe heads of the universities in Switzerland, usually elected by the college of professors, are titled rector (\"Rektor\", \"recteur\").\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland.\nIn England, most universities are led by a chancellor (a ceremonial position) and a vice-chancellor (the academic head). Where the title of 'rector' is used for a substantive position, it has normally been for the leaders of non-university institutions such as university colleges, polytechnics and colleges of higher education, or for heads of college at colleges in federal or collegiate universities.\nAt Liverpool Hope University, the academic head of the university has the title of \"vice-chancellor and rector\". Prior to the institution becoming a university in 2005, the head of Liverpool Hope University College was titled \"rector\". The title is also used at the University of Oxford by the heads of college at Lincoln College and Exeter College. The head of Mater Ecclesiae College, the Pontifical faculty within St Mary's University, Twickenham, also uses the title of rector.\nThe title of rector is also used for the ceremonial head (normally titled chancellor at British universities) of Brunel University London and City St George's, University of London. At Durham University, the titular and religious head of St Chad's College is the rector (a position held \"ex officio\" by the Dean of Durham Cathedral), while the academic head is the principal. \nHistorically, the head of Imperial College London was called the rector, until this was split into a provost and \"president and rector\" in 2012. In 2014, Alice Gast was announced as simply president, replacing Keith O'Nions who had been \"president and rector\". An amendment to the university's statutes in November 2014 formally replaced the title of rector with that of president. Prior to their conversion to universities, some polytechnics had a rector as the head of the establishment; following their transition to universities, the position of rector was retitled as vice-chancellor. Polytechnics using this title included Central London, East London, Huddersfield, Liverpool and Sunderland. Some colleges of higher education, such as Nene College of Higher Education, also used the title of rector prior to becoming universities. King's College, Newcastle, the Newcastle division of the then-federal University of Durham, was led by a rector from its establishment in 1937 until it became Newcastle University in 1963, when the rector of the college became the vice-chancellor of the new university. The position of vice-chancellor of the federal university alternated between the rector of King's College (as vice-chancellor and rector) and the warden of the Durham colleges, the head of the Durham division (as vice-chancellor and warden). At the University of Cambridge, the officers now known as proctors were originally (in the 13th century) called rectors.\nScotland.\nAncient universities.\nIn Scotland, the position of rector exists in the four ancient universities (St Andrews, Glasgow, Aberdeen and Edinburgh) as well as at Dundee, which took its governance systems from its early connections to the University of St Andrews.\nThe current office of rector, sometimes termed \"lord rector\", was instituted by the Universities (Scotland) Act 1858, passed by the Parliament of the United Kingdom. With the Universities (Scotland) Act 1889 requiring an election for the rector every three years in the ancient universities. The rector is the third-ranking official of university governance and is elected every three years by matriculated students at Aberdeen, Dundee, Glasgow and St Andrews, and by both the students and the staff at Edinburgh. Until the Higher Education Governance (Scotland) Act 2016 came into force, the rector chaired meetings of the university court, the governing body of the university; since 2016 the rector only opens and closes court meetings with the senior lay member chairing the business of the meeting.\nThe titular head of an ancient university in Scotland is the chancellor, who appoints a vice-chancellor to deputise in the awarding of degrees. The principal of each university is, by convention, appointed as vice-chancellor, however the position of vice-chancellor does not confer any other powers or responsibility on the principal. The authority to serve as chief executive of each university is vested in the office of principal, who holds both offices referred to as \"principal and bice-chancellor\".\nThe role of the rector is considered by many students to be integral to their ability to shape the universities' agenda, and one of the main functions of the rector is to represent the interests of the student body. To some extent the office of rector has evolved into more of a figurehead role, with a significant number of celebrities and personalities elected as rectors, such as Stephen Fry and Lorraine Kelly at Dundee, Clarissa Dickson Wright at Aberdeen, and John Cleese and Frank Muir at St Andrews, and political figures, such as Mordechai Vanunu at Glasgow. In many cases, particularly with high-profile rectors, attendance at the university court in person is rare; the rector nominates an individual (normally a member of the student body) with the title of \"rector's assessor\", who sits as a voting member of the university court.\nGordon Brown, the former Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, was rector of the University of Edinburgh while a student there but since then most universities have amended their procedures to disqualify currently matriculated students from standing for election.\nAs of April 2025[ [update]], the rector of the University of Aberdeen is Iona Fyfe, a Scottish folk singer; the rector of the University of Dundee is arts consultant Keith Harris; the rector of the University of Edinburgh is Simon Fanshawe; the rector of the University of Glasgow is Ghassan Abu-Sittah; and the rector of the University of St Andrews is Stella Maris.\nHigh schools.\nSome Scottish high schools and secondary schools have a head teacher whose official title is \"rector\", an example being Bell Baxter High School in Cupar, Fife.\nCentral and Eastern Europe and Turkey.\nThe rector is the head of most universities and other higher educational institutions in at least parts of Central and Eastern Europe, such as Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Romania, North Macedonia, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Turkey, Hungary and Ukraine. The rector's deputies are known as \"pro-rectors\". Individual departments of a university (called faculties) are headed by deans.\nNorth America.\nCanada.\nQuebec's francophone universities such as the Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al and Universit\u00e9 Laval use the term (\"recteur\" or \"rectrice\" in French) to designate the head of the institution. \nAs in most Commonwealth and British-influenced countries, the term \"rector\" is not commonly used in English in Canada outside Quebec. At the bilingual University of Ottawa, in Ontario the term president is used in English while \"recteur\" (or \"rectrice\") continues is the French term for the head of the university. In addition, the historically French-Catholic, and now bilingual, Saint Paul University, also in Ottawa, uses the term to denote its head. \nAt the University of Manitoba, affiliates such as the Roman Catholic St. Paul's College and the French language Universit\u00e9 de Saint-Boniface also uses the term 'rector' to designate the head of those institutions.\nQueen's University (Kingston, Ontario) uses the term \"rector\". The term refers to a member of the student body elected to work as an equal with the chancellor and principal. The Badge of Office of the Rector of Queen's University was registered with the Canadian Heraldic Authority on 15 October 2004. See List of Rectors of Queen's University.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, the term \"rector\" refers to the highest authority of most of National and State Universities, it is also usual in private Universities. The Schools and Faculties (\"Facultades\" in Spanish) are in charge of Directors which are below the authority of the rector. The rector is often selected from the full time professors and have periods which vary in the different universities.\nThe rector of the National Autonomous University of Mexico, the most relevant Mexican university, is an important mediatic figure of academic authority for all the country. The political relevance of the university makes the rector office one disputed political position and the ex-rectors are often related with the public service after their appointment, for example, Juan Ram\u00f3n de la Fuente rector from 1999 to 2007 was Permanent Representative of Mexico to the United Nations between 2018 and 2024, and since then is Minister for Foreign Affairs in the government of Claudia Sheinbaum. Similarly, Jos\u00e9 Narro Robles rector from 2007 to 2015 was after head of the Ministry of Health. Since 2015 the office of rector on the UNAM is occupied by Enrique Graue Wiechers, who was appointed for his second and last period (2019-2023).\nUnited States.\nMost US colleges do not use the term \"rector.\" The terms \"president\" and \"chancellor\" are often used for the chief executive of universities and university systems, depending on the institution's statutes or governing documents. Some state university systems have both \"presidents\" of the constituent institutions and a \"chancellor\" of the overall system, or vice versa; for example, in the University of California system, each of the ten campuses is headed by a chancellor, while the leader of the system is given the title \"president.\" Colleges and universities, or state systems, also typically have governing boards (akin to a board of directors), which may be referred to by a variety of names, including \"board of trustees\" and \"board of regents\", and which are usually led by a chairperson.\n\"Rector\" is commonly used in Virginia, however. The University of Virginia, University of Mary Washington, George Mason University, Virginia State University, Virginia Commonwealth University, Longwood University, Washington and Lee University, the College of William and Mary, Old Dominion University, Christopher Newport University, and Virginia Tech all use the term \"Rector\" to designate the presiding officer of the Board of Visitors or \"Board of Trustees\", in the case of Washington and Lee. Thomas Jefferson served as the first rector of the University of Virginia, beginning in 1819, and intended that the school would not have a president; it lacked that position until 1904.\nFrom 1701 to 1745, the head of the school that was to become Yale University was termed the \"rector\". As head of Yale College, Thomas Clap was both the last to be called \"rector\" (1740\u20131745) and the first to be referred to as president (1745\u20131766). Modern custom omits the use of the term \"rector\" and identifies Abraham Pierson as the first Yale president (1701\u20131707), making Clap the fifth of Yale's leaders, regardless of title.\nSeveral Catholic colleges and universities, particularly those run by religious orders of priests (such as the Jesuits) used to employ the term \"rector\" to refer to the school's chief officer. In many cases, the rector was also the head of the community of priests assigned to the school, so the two posts \u2013 head of the university and local superior of the priests \u2013 were merged in the role of rector (\"See \"Ecclesiastical rectors\"\"). This practice is mostly no longer followed, as the details of the governance of most of these schools have changed. Creighton University still appoints a rector. At the University of Notre Dame, the title \"rector\" is used for those in charge of individual residence halls.\nSome American high schools also have a rector; for example, at St. Paul's School in New Hampshire, the rector is equivalent to a headmaster or head of the school.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThe term \"rector\" is uncommon in Australian academic institutions. The executive head of an Australian university has traditionally been given the British title Vice-Chancellor, although in recent times the American term President has also been adopted. The term rector is used by some academic institutions, such as the University of Melbourne residential college, Newman College; the private boys' school, Xavier College; and the University of Sydney residential college, St John's College (Benedictine).\nThe title rector is sometimes used for the head of a subordinate and geographically separate campus of a university. For example, the executive head of the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra, which is a campus of the University of New South Wales in Sydney is a Rector, as is the head of the Cairns campus of James Cook University, based at Townsville.\nNew Zealand.\nThe title is used in New Zealand for the headmaster of some independent schools, such as Lindisfarne College and St. Patrick's College, Silverstream, as well as a number of state schools for boys, including Otago Boys' High School, King's High School, Dunedin, Waitaki Boys' High School, Timaru Boys' High School, Palmerston North Boys' High School and Southland Boys' High School showing the Scots' involvement in the foundation of those schools.\nAfrica.\nBenin.\nIn Benin, the term is commonly used for heads of universities and academic institutions.\nMauritius.\nIn Mauritius the term 'rector' is used to designate the head of a secondary school.\nAsia.\nIndia.\nThe heads of certain Indian boarding schools are called rectors. The head or principal of a Catholic school in India is also called a rector.\nIndonesia.\nRector is the highest executive post in universities in Indonesia. At a public university, university senate members select a pool three candidates for the education minister to decide the rector from. Except for autonomous public university (PTN-BH), rector was elected by university board of trustees. The final decision is not necessarily the one with the majority of the university senate's votes.\nJapan.\nDuring the years of the Tokugawa shogunate (1601\u20131868), the rector of Edo's Confucian Academy, the \"Sh\u014dhei-k\u014d\" (afterwards known at the \"Yushima Seid\u014d\"), was known by the honorific title \"Daigaku-no kami\" which, in the context of the Tokugawa hierarchy, can effectively be translated as \"Head of the State University\". The rector of the \"Yushima Seid\u014d\" stood at the apex of the country-wide educational and training system which was created and maintained with the personal involvement of successive sh\u014dguns. The position as rector of the \"Yushima Seid\u014d\" became hereditary in the Hayashi family. The rectors' scholarly reputation was burnished by the publication in 1657 of the seven volumes of and by the publication in 1670 of the 310 volumes of .\nMacau.\nIn the former Portuguese colony of Macau, a Special Administrative Region of China since late 1999, the highest administrative officials of four universities, namely University of Macau, Macao Polytechnic University, University of Saint Joseph, and City University of Macau, are titled as 'Rector'. However, the equivalent position is 'President' at the Macau University of Science and Technology.\nMalaysia.\nIn this Commonwealth country, the term \"Rektor\" is used to refer to the highest administrative official in several universities and higher education institutions in Malaysia, such as the International Islamic University Malaysia in Gombak. For the Universiti Teknologi MARA, the term \"Rektor\" is used for head of a branch campus and answers to the \"Naib Canselor\". A \"Rektor\" is comparable to the position of \"Naib Canselor\", or vice-chancellor, in other higher education institutions, as the \"Rektor\" answers to the \"Canselor\".\nMyanmar.\nThe term \"rector\" (Burmese:\"\u1015\u102b\u1019\u1031\u102c\u1000\u1039\u1001\u1001\u103b\u102f\u1015\u103a\") is used to refer to the highest official of universities in Myanmar. Each university department is headed by a professor, who is responsible to the rector. Nowadays, given the large dimensions of some universities, the position of pro-rector has emerged, just below that of the rector. Pro-rectors are in charge of managing particular areas of the university, such as research or undergraduate education. For example: Rector of University of Magway, a big role in Myanmar education.\nPakistan.\nThe heads of certain universities and colleges such as COMSATS University Islamabad, National University of Modern Languages, National University of Sciences &amp; Technology, Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Forman Christian College, Virtual University of Pakistan and PIEAS are all titled \"Rector\".\nPhilippines.\nThe term \"rector\" or \"Rector Magnificus\" is used to refer to the highest official in prominent Catholic universities and colleges such as the University of Santo Tomas, the Colegio de San Juan de Letran, and the San Beda University. The rector typically sits as chair of the university board of trustees. He exercises policy-making, general academic, managerial, and religious functions over all university academic and non-academic staff.\nDuring the Spanish colonial period, on 20 May 1865, a royal order from Queen Isabella II gave the Rector Magnificus of the University of Santo Tomas the power to direct and supervise all the educational institutions in the Philippines and thus, the Rector of the university became the \"ex officio\" head of the secondary and higher education in the Philippines. All diplomas issued by other schools were approved by the Rector of the university and examinations leading to the issuance of such diplomas were supervised by the professors of the University of Santo Tomas.\nThailand.\nThe term \"rector\" is not widely used to refer to the highest executive position in Thai universities (Thai:\"\u0e2d\u0e18\u0e34\u0e01\u0e32\u0e23\u0e1a\u0e14\u0e35\"; RTGS:\u00a0 ), compared to the term \"president\". Thammasat University adopts this term for this position to reflect its tradition associated with the French education system where Pridi Banomyong, Thammasat's founding father was educated.\nExcept Assumption University, the only International Catholic University in Thailand, the position of the head of the executives and administrators of the institute is \"rector\". A decade after the present rector assume his duty, the title of Rector Magnificus was bestowed on Rev. Bro. Bancha Saenghiran, f.s.g., Ph.D. at a solemn Academic ceremony on 1 November 2011 at the Assumption University Suvarnabhumi campus in the ornate Chapel of St. Louis Marie de Montfort (founder of the Montfortian Brothers of St. Gabriel.)\nSouth America.\nArgentina.\nThe term \"rector\" is used to refer to the highest official of universities, and university-owned high schools (e.g., Escuela Superior de Comercio Carlos Pellegrini) in Argentina. Each faculty (Spanish:\"Facultad\") has its own dean.\nBrazil.\nThe term \"rector\" (Portuguese: \"Reitor\") is used to refer to the highest official of universities in Brazil. Each faculty is headed by a director, who is under the authority of the rector. Nowadays, given the large size of some universities, the position of pro-rector has emerged below that of the rector. The pro-rector is in charge of managing a particular area of the university, such as research or undergraduate education.\nCompound titles.\nA rector who has resigned is often given the title \"rector emeritus\". One who temporarily performs the functions usually fulfilled by a rector is styled a \"pro-rector\" (in parishes, administrator).\nDeputies of rectors in institutions are known as \"vice-rector\"s (in parishes, as curates, assistant - or associate rectors, etc.). In some universities the title vice-rector has, like vice-chancellor in many Anglo-Saxon cases, been used for the de facto head when the essentially honorary title of rector is reserved for a high externa dignitary; until 1920, there was such a \"vice-recteur\" at the Parisian Sorbonne as the French Minister of Education was its nominal \"recteur\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66773", "revid": "125972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66773", "title": "Shrines to Mary, mother of Jesus", "text": "Marian shrines\nA shrine to the Virgin Mary, or Marian shrine, is a shrine marking an apparition or other miracle ascribed to the Blessed Virgin Mary, or a site centered on historically strong Marian devotions. Such locales are often the destinations of Christian pilgrimages.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66774", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66774", "title": "Regional planning", "text": "Land use planning above city or town level\nRegional planning deals with the efficient placement of land-use activities, infrastructure, and settlement growth across a larger area of land than an individual city or town. Regional planning is related to urban planning as it relates land use practices on a broader scale. It also includes formulating laws that will guide the efficient planning and management of such said regions. Regional planning can be comprehensive by covering various subjects, but it more often specifies a particular subject, which requires region-wide consideration. \nRegions require various land uses; protection of farmland, cities, industrial space, transportation hubs and infrastructure, military bases, and wilderness. Regional planning is the science of efficient placement of infrastructure and zoning for the sustainable growth of a region. Advocates for regional planning such as new urbanist Peter Calthorpe, promote the approach because it can address region-wide environmental, social, and economic issues which may necessarily require a regional focus.\nA 'region' in planning terms can be administrative or at least partially functional, and is likely to include a network of settlements and character areas. In most European countries, regional and national plans are 'spatial' directing certain levels of development to specific cities and towns in order to support and manage the region depending on specific needs, for example supporting or resisting polycentrism.\nNomenclature.\nAlthough the term \"regional planning\" is nearly universal in English-speaking countries the areas covered and specific administrative set ups vary widely. In North America, regional planning may encompass more than one state, such as the Regional Plan Association, or a larger conurbation or network of settlements. North American regional planning is likely to cover a much larger area than the Regional Assemblies of the UK; both, however, are equally \"regional\" in nature.\nPrinciples.\nSpecific interventions and solutions will depend entirely on the needs of each region in each country, but generally speaking, regional planning at the macro level will seek to:"}
{"id": "66775", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66775", "title": "Dean", "text": "Dean may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "66781", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66781", "title": "Oberon (moon)", "text": "Moon of Uranus\nOberon () is the outermost and second-largest major moon of the planet Uranus. It is the second-most massive of the Uranian moons, and the tenth-largest moon in the Solar System. Discovered by William Herschel in 1787, Oberon is named after the mythical king of the fairies who appears as a character in Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". Its orbit lies partially outside Uranus's magnetosphere.\nOberon likely formed from the accretion disk that surrounded Uranus just after the planet's formation. The moon consists of approximately equal amounts of ice and rock, and is probably differentiated into a rocky core and an icy mantle. A layer of liquid water may be present at the boundary between the mantle and the core. The surface of Oberon, which is dark and slightly red in color, appears to have been primarily shaped by asteroid and comet impacts. It is covered by numerous impact craters reaching 210\u00a0km in diameter. Oberon possesses a system of \"chasmata\" (graben or scarps) formed during crustal extension as a result of the expansion of its interior during its early evolution.\nThe Uranian system has been studied up close only once; the spacecraft \"Voyager 2\" took several images of Oberon in January 1986, which allowed 40% of the moon's surface to be mapped.\nDiscovery and naming.\nOberon was discovered by William Herschel on January 11, 1787; on the same day, he discovered Uranus's largest moon, Titania. He later reported the discoveries of four more satellites, although they were subsequently revealed as spurious. For nearly fifty years following their discovery, Titania and Oberon would not be observed by any instrument other than William Herschel's, although the moon can be seen from Earth with a present-day high-end amateur telescope.\nAll of the moons of Uranus are named after characters created by William Shakespeare or Alexander Pope. The name Oberon was derived from Oberon, the King of the Fairies in \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". The names of all four satellites of Uranus then known were suggested by Herschel's son John in 1852, at the request of William Lassell, who had discovered the other two moons, Ariel and Umbriel, the year before. It is uncertain if Herschel devised the names, or if Lassell did so and then sought Herschel's permission. The adjectival form of the name is \"Oberonian,\" .\nOberon was initially referred to as \"the second satellite of Uranus\" and in 1848 was given the designation \"Uranus II\" by Lassell, although he sometimes used Herschel's numbering (where Titania and Oberon are II and IV). In 1851, Lassell eventually numbered all four known satellites in order of their distance from the planet by Roman numerals, and since then Oberon has been designated \"Uranus IV\".\nPlanetary moons other than Earth's were never given symbols in the astronomical literature. Denis Moskowitz, a software engineer who designed most of the dwarf planet symbols, proposed an O (the initial of Oberon) combined with the low globe of J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande's Uranus symbol as the symbol of Oberon (). This symbol is not widely used.\nOrbit.\nOberon orbits Uranus at a distance of about 584,000\u00a0km, being the farthest from the planet among its five major moons. Oberon's orbit has a small orbital eccentricity and inclination relative to the equator of Uranus. Its orbital period is around 13.5\u00a0days, coincident with its rotational period. In other words, Oberon is tidally locked, with one face always pointing toward the planet. Oberon spends a significant part of its orbit outside the Uranian magnetosphere. As a result, its surface is directly struck by the solar wind. This is important, because the trailing hemispheres of satellites orbiting inside a magnetosphere are struck by the magnetospheric plasma, which co-rotates with the planet. This bombardment may lead to the darkening of the trailing hemispheres, which is actually observed for all Uranian moons except Oberon (see below).\nBecause Uranus orbits the Sun almost on its side, and its moons orbit in the planet's equatorial plane, they (including Oberon) are subject to an extreme seasonal cycle. Both northern and southern poles spend 42 years in a complete darkness, and another 42 years in continuous sunlight, with the sun rising close to the zenith over one of the poles at each solstice. The \"Voyager 2\" flyby coincided with the southern hemisphere's 1986 summer solstice, when nearly the entire northern hemisphere was in darkness. Once every 42 years, when Uranus has an equinox and its equatorial plane intersects the Earth, mutual occultations of Uranus's moons become possible. One such event, which lasted for about six minutes, was observed on May 4, 2007, when Oberon occulted Umbriel.\nComposition and internal structure.\nOberon is the second-largest and second-most massive of the Uranian moons after Titania, and the ninth-most massive moon in the Solar System. It is the tenth-largest moon by size however, since Rhea, the second-largest moon of Saturn and the ninth-largest moon, is nearly the same size as Oberon although it is about 0.4% larger, despite Oberon having more mass than Rhea. Oberon's density of 1.68\u00a0g/cm3, which is higher than the typical density of Saturn's satellites, indicates that it consists of roughly equal proportions of water ice and a dense non-ice component. The latter could be made of rock and carbonaceous material including heavy organic compounds. The presence of water ice is supported by spectroscopic observations, which have revealed crystalline water ice on the surface of the moon. Water ice absorption bands are stronger on Oberon's trailing hemisphere than on the leading hemisphere. This is the opposite of what is observed on other Uranian moons, where the leading hemisphere exhibits stronger water ice signatures. The cause of this asymmetry is not known, but it may be related to impact gardening (the creation of soil via impacts) of the surface, which is stronger on the leading hemisphere. Meteorite impacts tend to sputter (knock out) ice from the surface, leaving dark non-ice material behind. The dark material itself may have formed as a result of radiation processing of methane clathrates or radiation darkening of other organic compounds.\nOberon may be differentiated into a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle. If this is the case, the radius of the core (480\u00a0km) is about 63% of the radius of the moon, and its mass is around 54% of the moon's mass\u2014the proportions are dictated by the moon's composition. The pressure in the center of Oberon is about 0.5\u00a0GPa (5\u00a0kbar). The current state of the icy mantle is unclear. If the ice contains enough ammonia or other antifreeze, Oberon may possess a liquid ocean layer at the core\u2013mantle boundary. The thickness of this ocean, if it exists, is up to 40\u00a0km and its temperature is around 180\u00a0K (close to the water\u2013ammonia eutectic temperature of 176\u00a0K). However, the internal structure of Oberon depends heavily on its thermal history, which is poorly known at present. Albeit more recent publications seem to be in favour of active subterranean oceans throughout the larger moons of Uranus.\nSurface features and geology.\nOberon is the second-darkest large moon of Uranus after Umbriel. Its surface shows a strong opposition surge: its reflectivity decreases from 31% at a phase angle of 0\u00b0 (geometrical albedo) to 22% at an angle of about 1\u00b0. Oberon has a low Bond albedo of about 14%. Its surface is generally red in color, except for fresh impact deposits, which are neutral or slightly blue. Oberon is, in fact, the reddest among the major Uranian moons. Its trailing and leading hemispheres are asymmetrical: the latter is much redder than the former, because it contains more dark red material. The reddening of the surfaces is often a result of space weathering caused by bombardment of the surface by charged particles and micrometeorites over the age of the Solar System. However, the color asymmetry of Oberon is more likely caused by accretion of a reddish material spiraling in from outer parts of the Uranian system, possibly from irregular satellites, which would occur predominately on the leading hemisphere, similar to Saturn's moon Iapetus.\nTwo primary classes of geological features dominate Oberon's surface: impact craters and chasmata ('canyons'\u2014deep, elongated, steep-sided depressions which would probably be described as rift valleys or escarpments if on Earth). Oberon's surface is the most heavily cratered of all the Uranian moons, with a crater density approaching saturation\u2014when the formation of new craters is balanced by destruction of old ones. This high number of craters indicates that Oberon has the most ancient surface among Uranus's moons. The crater diameters range up to 206 kilometers for the largest known crater, Hamlet. Many large craters are surrounded by bright impact ejecta (rays) consisting of relatively fresh ice. The largest craters, Hamlet, Othello and Macbeth, have floors made of a very dark material deposited after their formation. A peak with a height of about 11\u00a0km was observed in some \"Voyager\" images near the south-eastern limb of Oberon, which may be the central peak of a large impact basin with a diameter of about 375\u00a0km. Oberon's surface is intersected by a system of canyons, which, however, are less widespread than those found on Titania. The canyons' sides are probably scarps produced by normal faults which can be either old or fresh: the latter transect the bright deposits of some large craters, indicating that they formed later. The most prominent Oberonian canyon is Mommur Chasma.\nThe geology of Oberon was influenced by two competing forces: impact crater formation and endogenic resurfacing. The former acted over the moon's entire history and is primarily responsible for its present-day appearance. The latter processes were active for a period following the moon's formation. The endogenic processes were mainly tectonic in nature and led to the formation of the canyons, which are actually giant cracks in the ice crust. The canyons obliterated parts of the older surface. The cracking of the crust was caused by the expansion of Oberon by about 0.5%, which occurred in two phases corresponding to the old and young canyons.\nThe nature of the dark patches, which mainly occur on the leading hemisphere and inside craters, is not known. Some scientists hypothesized that they are of cryovolcanic origin (analogs of lunar maria), while others think that the impacts excavated dark material buried beneath the pure ice (crust). In the latter case Oberon should be at least partially differentiated, with the ice crust lying atop the non-differentiated interior.\nOrigin and evolution.\nOberon is thought to have formed from an accretion disc or subnebula: a disc of gas and dust that either existed around Uranus for some time after its formation or was created by the giant impact that most likely gave Uranus its large obliquity. The precise composition of the subnebula is not known; however, the relatively high density of Oberon and other Uranian moons compared to the moons of Saturn indicates that it may have been relatively water-poor. Significant amounts of carbon and nitrogen may have been present in the form of carbon monoxide and N2 instead of methane and ammonia. The moons that formed in such a subnebula would contain less water ice (with CO and N2 trapped as clathrate) and more rock, explaining the higher density.\nOberon's accretion probably lasted for several thousand years. The impacts that accompanied accretion caused heating of the moon's outer layer. The maximum temperature of around 230\u00a0K was reached at the depth of about 60\u00a0km. After the end of formation, the subsurface layer cooled, while the interior of Oberon heated due to decay of radioactive elements present in its rocks. The cooling near-surface layer contracted, while the interior expanded. This caused strong extensional stresses in the moon's crust leading to cracking. The present-day system of canyons may be a result of this process, which lasted for about 200\u00a0million years, implying that any endogenous activity from this cause ceased billions of years ago.\nThe initial accretional heating together with continued decay of radioactive elements were probably strong enough to melt the ice if some antifreeze like ammonia (in the form of ammonia hydrate) or some salt was present. Further melting may have led to the separation of ice from rocks and formation of a rocky core surrounded by an icy mantle. A layer of liquid water ('ocean') rich in dissolved ammonia may have formed at the core\u2013mantle boundary. The eutectic temperature of this mixture is 176\u00a0K. If the temperature dropped below this value the ocean would have frozen by now. Freezing of the water would have led to expansion of the interior, which may have also contributed to the formation of canyon-like graben. Still, present knowledge of the evolution of Oberon is very limited. Although recent analysis concluded that its more likely that the larger moons of Uranus having active subsurface oceans.\nExploration.\nSo far the only close-up images of Oberon have been from the \"Voyager 2\" probe, which photographed the moon during its flyby of Uranus in January 1986. Since the closest approach of \"Voyager 2\" to Oberon was 470,600\u00a0km, the best images of this moon have spatial resolution of about 6\u00a0km. The images cover about 40% of the surface, but only 25% of the surface was imaged with a resolution that allows geological mapping. At the time of the flyby the southern hemisphere of Oberon was pointed towards the Sun, so the dark northern hemisphere could not be studied. No other spacecraft has ever visited the Uranian system.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66782", "revid": "159979", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66782", "title": "The Psychedelic Furs", "text": "British post punk band\nThe Psychedelic Furs are an English rock band founded in London in February 1977. Led by lead vocalist Richard Butler and his brother Tim Butler on bass guitar, the Psychedelic Furs are one of the many acts spawned from the British post-punk scene.\nThe band had several hits in their early career. In 1986, filmmaker John Hughes used their song \"Pretty in Pink\" for his film \"Pretty in Pink\". They went on hiatus after they finished touring in 1992, but resumed in 2000 and continue to perform live. The band released \"Made of Rain\", their first studio album in nearly three decades, on 31 July 2020.\nCareer.\nEarly days (1977\u20131980).\nRichard Butler stated that the Psychedelic Furs began rehearsing in his family's front room but were soon banished because of the noise. The band was initially called RKO, then Radio. They later vacillated between calling themselves the Europeans and the Psychedelic Furs, playing gigs under both names before permanently settling on the latter. The word psychedelic was chosen to separate the band from punk rockers who ostentatiously scorned the legacy of 1960s rock music.\nThe band initially consisted of Richard Butler (vocals), Tim Butler (bass guitar), Duncan Kilburn (saxophone), Paul Wilson (drums), and Roger Morris (guitars). By 1979, this line-up had expanded to a sextet with Vince Ely replacing Wilson on drums and John Ashton joining as a second guitarist. The Psychedelic Furs' debut, a self-titled album released in March 1980, was produced by Steve Lillywhite. The album quickly established the band on radio in Europe and was a No. 18 hit in the UK Albums Chart. The album also found success in Germany, Italy, France, Spain and Australia.\nSuccess (1981\u20131991).\nThe Furs found success in the US with their next release, 1981's \"Talk Talk Talk,\" which saw the band making its debut on the US \"Billboard\" 200 chart. In the UK, the album yielded two charting singles, \"Dumb Waiters\" and the original version of \"Pretty in Pink\". The latter song served as inspiration for the 1986 John Hughes film \"Pretty in Pink\" and was re-recorded for the platinum-selling \"Pretty in Pink\" soundtrack \u2013 though Richard Butler was later adamant that the cinematic interpretation had very little to do with the song's original intent.\nIn 1982, the band was reduced to a quartet with the departures of Morris and Kilburn and moved to the U.S. in search of a producer. The band recorded their next album, \"Forever Now\", with record producer Todd Rundgren in Woodstock, New York. Released in September 1982, this album contained \"Love My Way\", which became another UK chart entry, and also their first US \"Billboard\" Hot 100 single.\nEly left the band after \"Forever Now\" (though he would later return in 1988). The next album, \"Mirror Moves\" was produced by Keith Forsey (who also programmed the drums and became the band's drummer) and featured the songs \"The Ghost in You\" and \"Heaven\". Both charted in the UK and \"Heaven\" became the band's highest charting UK hit at the time, peaking at No. 29. Columbia Records opted for \"Here Come Cowboys\" for the corresponding US release which failed to chart but \"The Ghost In You\" was a hit on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100. In Canada, \"The Ghost In You\" also charted. \"Mirror Moves\" became a Top 20 album on the Canadian Albums Chart and was named the No. 1 album of 1984 by Toronto new wave radio station CFNY.\nBy the mid-1980s, the band had become a staple on both US college radio and modern rock radio stations. Simultaneously, they were experiencing consistent mainstream success placing several singles in the charts on both sides of the Atlantic. Still, according to biographer Dave Thompson, they would \"have more impact on future musicians than they ever did in the marketplace.\"\nIn 1986, the band recorded a new version of \"Pretty in Pink\" for the film soundtrack. Released as a single, it became their biggest hit to date in the US and their biggest UK hit. Butler later claimed that the success of \"Pretty in Pink\" caused the band to be pressured into entering the recording studio with producer Chris Kimsey to record a follow-up release before they were ready. The result was \"Midnight to Midnight\", their biggest Top 40 success to date, but an album that Richard Butler later characterised as \"hollow, vapid and weak\". A more overtly commercial effort than their prior recordings, the album also featured the single \"Heartbreak Beat\", the Furs' biggest Top 40 hit in the US. The album also featured drummer Paul Garisto and saxophonist Mars Williams, both of whom toured with the band.\nIn the wake of \"Midnight to Midnight\", Ely returned, and the Furs issued the single \"All That Money Wants\", a track recorded for the 1988 best-of compilation album \"All of This and Nothing\". 1989's \"Book of Days\", produced by the band and David M. Allen, featured the singles \"Should God Forget\" and \"House\". Produced by the band and Stephen Street, 1991's \"World Outside\" included the single \"Until She Comes\" and was the Furs' final studio album for nearly three decades. From 1988 on, the Furs' singles had steady chart success with three No. 1 hits on the newly established US Modern Rock Tracks chart between 1988 and 1991. \"All That Money Wants\" was a No. 1 hit in 1988, while \"House\" topped the chart in 1990 and \"Until She Comes\" was No. 1 in 1991.\nHiatus and reunion (2000\u2013present).\nThe band took a long break in the early 1990s, with Richard and Tim Butler going on to found Love Spit Love with Richard Fortus and Frank Ferrer (both of whom would later join Guns N' Roses). In 2000, Richard Butler, Tim Butler, and Ashton reformed the Psychedelic Furs. The touring lineup also included Fortus and, later, Ferrer. They released a live album, \"\" , which included a new studio recording, \"Alive (For Once in My Lifetime)\".\nIn 2006, Richard Butler released a solo album, \"Richard Butler\". Since re-forming in 2001, the band continued to tour worldwide. The current Psychedelic Furs touring line-up includes Richard Butler, Tim Butler, Zack Alford, Amanda Kramer, and Rich Good.\nIn 2017, the band's 1984 single \"The Ghost in You\" was featured in the second season of Netflix hit series \"Stranger Things\" and was included on the Sony Music soundtrack companion to the season, \"\", released in October 2017. That same year, the band's 1982 single \"Love My Way\" was played several times in the Oscar-nominated film \"Call Me by Your Name\".\nThe Psychedelic Furs released their eighth studio album \"Made of Rain\" on 31 July 2020 to positive reviews. This release marked the first full-length studio album by the band since 1991's \"World Outside\". It became the band's second-highest charting UK Album ever and featured at the end-of-year Best Albums roundup in \"Mojo\", \"Uncut\", \"Classic Pop\", ABC's \"Good Morning America\", and \"Vive Le Rock\" among others. \"Don't Believe\", the first single from the album was released on 20 January 2020. It was followed by \"You'll Be Mine\", \"No-One\" and \"Come All Ye Faithful\", each with an official video.\nOn 1 March 2021, the band released the official video for \"Made of Rain\"'s fifth single \"Wrong Train\". It premiered exclusively on NME.com and was inspired by Richard Butler's paintings. He starred in the video himself.\nThe Strokes' Grammy Award-winning album \"The New Abnormal\" (2020) featured the song \"Eternal Summer\" which quotes the Furs' \"The Ghost in You\", for which songwriters Richard and Tim Butler received songwriting credits.\nOn 1 September 2021, two weeks before the Made of Rain Tour kicked-off, the band released a new single \"Evergreen\", from the \"Made of Rain\" sessions. According to Richard Butler it is about \"memory and the passing of time.\"\nRichard Butler co-wrote songs with Martin Gore for Depeche Mode's fifteenth studio album \"Memento Mori\" (2023), including the lead single \"Ghosts Again\".\nSaxophonist Mars Williams died on 20 November 2023.\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTimeline\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66783", "revid": "37771323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66783", "title": "Interchange File Format", "text": "Container file format introduced by Electronic Arts and Commodore\nInterchange File Format (IFF) is a generic digital container file format originally introduced by Electronic Arts (in cooperation with Commodore) in 1985 to facilitate transfer of data between software produced by different companies.\nIFF files do not have any standard filename extension. On many systems that generate IFF files, file extensions are not important because the operating system stores file format metadata separately from the file name. The codice_1 filename extension is commonly used for the ILBM image file format, which uses the IFF container format.\nResource Interchange File Format is a format developed by Microsoft and IBM in 1991 that is based on IFF, except the byte order has been changed to little-endian to match the x86 microprocessor architecture. Apple's Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) is a big-endian audio file format developed from IFF. The TIFF image file format is not related to IFF.\nStructure.\nAn IFF file is built up from chunks. Each chunk begins with what the specification calls a \"Type ID\" (what the Macintosh called an OSType, and Windows developers might call a FourCC). This is followed by a 32-bit signed integer (all integers in IFF file structure are big-endian) specifying the size of the following data (the chunk content) in bytes. Because the specification includes explicit lengths for each chunk, it is possible for a parser to skip over chunks that it either can't or doesn't care to process.\nThis structure is closely related to the type\u2013length\u2013value (TLV) representation.\nThere are predefined \"group\" chunks, with type IDs codice_2, codice_3 and codice_4. A codice_2 chunk is like a record structure, containing a type ID (indicating the record type) followed by nested chunks specifying the record fields. A codice_3 is a factoring structure containing a series of codice_7 (property) chunks plus nested group chunks to which those properties apply. A codice_4 is just a collection of nested chunks with no special semantics. Group chunks can contain other group chunks, depending on the needs of the application. Group chunks, like their simpler counterparts, contain a length element. Skipping over a group can thus be done with a simple relative seek operation.\nChunks must begin on even file offsets, as befits the origins of IFF on the Motorola 68000 processor, which couldn't address quantities larger than a byte on odd addresses. Thus chunks with odd lengths will be \"padded\" to an even byte boundary by adding a so-called \"pad byte\" after their regular end.\nThe top-level structure of an IFF file consists of exactly one of the group chunks: codice_2, codice_3 or codice_4, where codice_2 is by far the most common one.\nEach type of chunk typically has a different internal structure, which could be numerical data, text, or raw data. It is also possible to include other IFF files as if they are chunks (note that they have the same structure: four letters followed with length), and some formats use this. There are standard chunks that could be present in any IFF file, such as codice_13 (containing text with information about author of the file), codice_14 (containing text with annotation, usually name of the program that created the file), codice_15 (containing text with name of the work in the file), codice_16 (containing file version), codice_17 (containing text with copyright information). There are also chunks that are common among a number of formats, such as codice_18, which holds color palette in ILBM, ANIM and https:// files (pictures, animations and vector pictures). There are chunks that have a common name but hold different data such as codice_19, which could store an image in an ILBM file and sound in an 8SVX file. And finally, there are chunks unique to their file type. Some programs that create IFF files add chunks to them with their internal data; these same files can later be read by other programs without any disruption (because their parsers could skip uninteresting chunks), which is a great advantage of IFF and similar formats.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66784", "revid": "49523", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66784", "title": "IFF-8SVX", "text": ""}
{"id": "66785", "revid": "417659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66785", "title": "Audio Interchange File Format", "text": "File format family\nAudio Interchange File Format (AIFF) is an audio file format standard used for storing sound data for personal computers and other electronic audio devices. The format was developed by Apple Inc. in 1988 based on Electronic Arts' Interchange File Format (IFF, widely used on Amiga systems) and is most commonly used on Apple Macintosh computer systems.\nThe audio data in most AIFF files is uncompressed pulse-code modulation (PCM). This type of AIFF file uses much more disk space than lossy formats like MP3\u2014about 10 MB for one minute of stereo audio at a sample rate of 44.1\u00a0kHz and a bit depth of 16 bits. There is also a compressed variant of AIFF known as AIFF-C or AIFC, with various defined compression codecs.\nIn addition to audio data, AIFF can include loop point data and the musical note of a sample, for use by hardware samplers and musical applications.\nThe file extension for the standard AIFF format is codice_1 or codice_2. For the compressed format the preferred suffix is codice_3, but audio applications supporting the format also allow codice_1 or codice_2.\nAIFF on macOS.\nWith the development of the OS X operating system now known as macOS, Apple created a new type of AIFF which is, in effect, an alternative little-endian byte order format.\nBecause the AIFF architecture has no provision for alternative byte order, Apple used the existing AIFF-C compression architecture, and created a \"pseudo-compressed\" codec called sowt (twos spelled backwards). The only difference between a standard AIFF file and an AIFF-C/sowt file is the byte order; there is no compression involved at all.\nApple uses this new little-endian AIFF type as its standard on macOS. When a file is imported to or exported from iTunes in \"AIFF\" format, it is actually AIFF-C/sowt that is being used. When audio from an audio CD is imported by dragging to the macOS Desktop, the resulting file is also an AIFF-C/sowt. In all cases, Apple refers to the files simply as \"AIFF\", and uses the codice_1 extension.\nFor the vast majority of users this technical situation is completely unnoticeable and irrelevant. The sound quality of standard AIFF and AIFF-C/sowt are identical, and the data can be converted back and forth without loss. Users of older audio applications, however, may find that an AIFF-C/sowt file will not play, or will prompt the user to convert the format on opening, or will play as static.\nAll traditional AIFF and AIFF-C files continue to work normally on macOS, and many third-party audio applications as well as hardware continue to use the standard AIFF big-endian byte order.\nAIFF Apple Loops.\nApple has also created another recent extension to the AIFF format in the form of Apple Loops used by GarageBand and Logic Pro, which allows the inclusion of data for pitch and tempo shifting by an application in the more common variety, and MIDI-sequence data and references to GarageBand playback instruments in another variety.\nApple Loops use either the codice_1 (or codice_2) or codice_9 extension regardless of type.\nData format.\nAn AIFF file is divided into a number of chunks. Each chunk is identified by a \"chunk ID\" more broadly referred to as FourCC.\nTypes of chunks found in AIFF files:\nMetadata.\nAIFF files can store metadata in Name, Author, Comment, Annotation, and Copyright chunks. An ID3v2 tag chunk can also be embedded in AIFF files, as well as an Application Chunk with Extensible Metadata Platform (XMP) data in it.\nCommon compression types.\nAIFF supports only uncompressed PCM data. AIFF-C also supports compressed audio formats, which can be specified in the \"COMM\" chunk. The compression type is \"NONE\" for PCM audio data. The compression type is accompanied by a printable name. Common compression types and names include, but are not limited to:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66786", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66786", "title": "Hanging Gardens of Babylon", "text": "One of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World\nThe Hanging Gardens of Babylon were one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World listed by Hellenic culture. They were described as a remarkable feat of engineering with an ascending series of tiered gardens containing a wide variety of trees, shrubs, and vines, resembling a large green mountain constructed of mud bricks. It was said to have been built in the ancient city of Babylon, near present-day Hillah, Babil province, in Iraq. The Hanging Gardens' name is derived from the Greek word (, lit.\u2009'overhanging'), which has a broader meaning than the modern English word \"hanging\" and refers to trees being planted on a raised structure such as a terrace.\nAccording to one legend, the Hanging Gardens were built alongside a grand palace known as \"The Marvel of Mankind\", by the Neo-Babylonian King Nebuchadnezzar II (who ruled between 605 and 562 BC), for his Median wife, Queen Amytis, because she missed the green hills and valleys of her homeland. This was attested to by the Babylonian priest Berossus, writing in about 290\u00a0BC, a description that was later quoted by Josephus. The construction of the Hanging Gardens has also been attributed to the legendary queen Semiramis and they have been called the \"Hanging Gardens of Semiramis\" as an alternative name.\nThe Hanging Gardens are the only one of the Seven Wonders whose location has not been definitively established. No extant Babylonian texts mention the gardens and no definitive archaeological evidence has been found in Babylon. Three theories have been suggested to account for this: first, that the gardens were purely mythical, and the descriptions found in ancient Greek and Roman writings (including those of Strabo, Diodorus Siculus and Quintus Curtius Rufus) represented a romantic ideal of an eastern garden; second, that they existed in Babylon but were destroyed sometime around the first century AD; and third, that the legend refers to a well-documented garden that the Assyrian King Sennacherib (704\u2013681 BC) built in his capital city of Nineveh on the River Tigris, near the modern city of Mosul.\nDescriptions in classical literature.\nThere are five principal writers whose descriptions of Babylon exist in some form today. These writers concern themselves with the size of the Hanging Gardens, their overall design and means of irrigation, and why they were built.\nJosephus (c.\u200937\u2013100 AD) quotes a description of the gardens by Berossus, a Babylonian priest of Marduk, whose writing c.\u2009290 BC is the earliest known mention of the gardens. Berossus described the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II and is the only source to credit that king with the construction of the Hanging Gardens.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this palace he erected very high walls, supported by stone pillars; and by planting what was called a pensile paradise, and replenishing it with all sorts of trees, he rendered the prospect an exact resemblance of a mountainous country. This he did to gratify his queen, because she had been brought up in Media, and was fond of a mountainous situation.\nDiodorus Siculus (active c.\u200960\u201330 BC) seems to have consulted the 4th century BC texts of both Cleitarchus (a historian of Alexander the Great) and Ctesias of Cnidus. Diodorus ascribes the construction to a \"Syrian king\". He states that the garden was in the shape of a square, with each side approximately four plethra long. The garden was tiered, with the uppermost gallery being 50 cubits high. The walls, 22 feet thick, were made of brick. The bases of the tiered sections were sufficiently deep to provide root growth for the largest trees, and the gardens were irrigated from the nearby Euphrates.\nQuintus Curtius Rufus (fl. 1st century AD) probably drew on the same sources as Diodorus. He states that the gardens were located on top of a citadel, which was 20 stadia in circumference. He attributes the building of the gardens to a \"Syrian king\", again for the reason that his queen missed her homeland.\nThe account of Strabo (c.\u200964 BC\u00a0\u2013 21 AD) possibly based his description on the lost account of Onesicritus from the 4th century BC. He states that the gardens were watered by means of an Archimedes' screw leading to the gardens from the Euphrates river.\nThe last of the classical sources thought to be independent of the others is \"A Handbook to the Seven Wonders of the World\" by the paradoxographer Philo of Byzantium, writing in the 4th to 5th century AD (not to be confused with the earlier engineer of the same name). The method of raising water by screw matches that described by Strabo. Philo praises the engineering and ingenuity of building vast areas of deep soil, which had a tremendous mass, so far above the natural grade of the surrounding land, as well as the irrigation techniques.\nHistorical existence.\nIt is unclear whether the Hanging Gardens were an actual construction or a poetic creation, owing to the lack of documentation in contemporaneous Babylonian sources. There is also no mention of Nebuchadnezzar's wife Amytis (or any other wives), although a political marriage to a Median or Persian would not have been unusual. Many records exist of Nebuchadnezzar's works, yet his long and complete inscriptions do not mention any garden. However, the gardens were said to still exist at the time that later writers described them, and some of these accounts are regarded as deriving from people who had visited Babylon. Herodotus, who describes Babylon in his \"Histories\", does not mention the Hanging Gardens, although it could be that the gardens were not yet well known to the Greeks at the time of his visit.\nTo date, no archaeological evidence has been found at Babylon for the Hanging Gardens. It is possible that evidence exists beneath the Euphrates, which cannot be excavated safely at present. The river flowed east of its current position during the time of Nebuchadnezzar II, and little is known about the western portion of Babylon. Rollinger has suggested that Berossus attributed the Gardens to Nebuchadnezzar for political reasons, and that he had adopted the legend from elsewhere.\nIdentification with Sennacherib's gardens at Nineveh.\nOxford scholar Stephanie Dalley has proposed that the Hanging Gardens of Babylon were actually the well-documented gardens constructed by the Assyrian king Sennacherib (reigned 704\u2013681 BC) for his palace at Nineveh; Dalley posits that during the intervening centuries the two sites became confused, and the extensive gardens at Sennacherib's palace were attributed to Nebuchadnezzar II's Babylon. Archaeological excavations have found traces of a vast system of aqueducts attributed to Sennacherib by an inscription on its remains, which Dalley proposes were part of an series of canals, dams, and aqueducts used to carry water to Nineveh with water-raising screws used to raise it to the upper levels of the gardens.\nDalley bases her arguments on recent developments in the analysis of contemporary Akkadian inscriptions. Her main points are:\nKing Sennacherib's garden was well-known not just for its beauty\u00a0\u2013 a year-round oasis of lush green in a dusty summer landscape\u00a0\u2013 but also for the marvelous feats of water engineering that maintained the garden. There was a tradition of Assyrian royal garden building. King Ashurnasirpal II (883\u2013859 BC) had created a canal, which cut through the mountains. Fruit tree orchards were planted. Also mentioned were pines, cypresses and junipers, almond trees, date trees, ebony, rosewood, olive, oak, tamarisk, walnut, terebinth, ash, fir, pomegranate, pear, quince, fig, and grapes. A sculptured wall panel of Assurbanipal shows the garden in its maturity. One original panel and the drawing of another are held by the British Museum, although neither is on public display. Several features mentioned by the classical authors are discernible on these contemporary images.\nOf Sennacherib's palace, he mentions the massive limestone blocks that reinforce the flood defences. Parts of the palace were excavated by Austin Henry Layard in the mid-19th century. His citadel plan shows contours which would be consistent with Sennacherib's garden, but its position has not been confirmed. The area has been used as a military base in recent times, making it difficult to investigate further.\nThe irrigation of such a garden demanded an upgraded water supply to the city of Nineveh. The canals stretched over into the mountains. Sennacherib was proud of the technologies he had employed and describes them in some detail on his inscriptions. At the headwater of Bavian (Khinnis) his inscription mentions automatic sluice gates. An enormous aqueduct crossing the valley at Jerwan was constructed of over two million dressed stones. It used stone arches and waterproof cement. On it is written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sennacherib king of the world king of Assyria. Over a great distance I had a watercourse directed to the environs of Nineveh, joining together the waters... Over steep-sided valleys I spanned an aqueduct of white limestone blocks, I made those waters flow over it.\nSennacherib claimed that he had built a \"Wonder for all Peoples\", and said he was the first to deploy a new casting technique in place of the \"lost-wax\" process for his monumental (30 tonne) bronze castings. He was able to bring the water into his garden at a high level because it was sourced from further up in the mountains, and he then raised the water even higher by deploying his new water screws. This meant he could build a garden that towered above the landscape with large trees on the top of the terraces\u00a0\u2013 a stunning artistic effect that surpassed those of his predecessors.\nPlants.\nThe gardens, as depicted in artworks, featured blossoming flowers, ripe fruit, burbling waterfalls and terraces exuberant with rich foliage. Based on Babylonian literature, tradition, and the environmental characteristics of the area, some of the following plants may have been found in the gardens:\nImported plant varieties that may have been present in the gardens include cedar, cypress, ebony, pomegranate, plum, rosewood, terebinth, juniper, oak, ash tree, fir, myrrh, walnut, and willow. Some of these plants were suspended over the terraces and draped over its walls with arches underneath.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66788", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66788", "title": "Squeeze (band)", "text": "English rock band\nSqueeze are an English rock band that came to prominence in the United Kingdom during the new wave period of the late 1970s, and continued recording in the 1980s, 1990s and 2010s. In the UK, their singles \"Cool for Cats\", \"Up the Junction\", and \"Labelled with Love\" were top-ten chart hits. Though not as commercially successful in the United States, Squeeze had American hits with \"Tempted\", \"Black Coffee in Bed\", and \"Hourglass\", and were considered a part of the Second British Invasion.\nIn the vast majority of their material, lyrics are written by Chris Difford and music by Glenn Tilbrook, who are guitarists and vocalists in the band. The duo were hailed as \"the heirs to Lennon and McCartney's throne\" during the band's initial popularity in the late 1970s. The group formed in Deptford, London, in 1974, and first broke up in 1982. Squeeze then reformed in 1985, and disbanded again in 1999. The band were also noted as a launchpad for the successful careers of their keyboard players, Jools Holland and Paul Carrack.\nThe band reunited for tours through the United States and United Kingdom in 2007. In 2010, they issued \"Spot the Difference\", an album of newly recorded versions of older material. The band's first album of all-new material since 1998, \"Cradle to the Grave\", was released in October 2015, followed by another album, \"The Knowledge\", in October 2017.\nCareer.\nFirst incarnation: 1974\u20131982.\nThe band's founding members in March 1974 were Chris Difford (guitar, vocals, lyrics), and Glenn Tilbrook (vocals, guitar, music). Difford claims that in 1973, he stole 50p from his mother's purse to put a card in a local sweetshop window to advertise for a guitarist to join his band, although he was not actually in a band at the time. Tilbrook was the only person who responded to the advertisement. Difford and Tilbrook began writing songs together, and soon added Jools Holland (keyboards) and Paul Gunn (drums) to form an actual band. The group performed under several names, most frequently \"Captain Trundlow's Sky Company\" or \"Skyco\", before selecting the band name \"Squeeze\" as a facetious tribute to the Velvet Underground's oft-derided 1973 album \"Squeeze\".\nGilson Lavis replaced Gunn on drums, and Harri Kakoulli joined on bass in 1975.\nSqueeze's early career was spent around Deptford in south-east London, where they were part of a lively local music scene which included Alternative TV and Dire Straits. Though the group was initially signed to Miles Copeland III's BTM Records, the label went under in late 1976, and so their early singles and debut EP, 1977's \"Packet of Three\", were released on the Deptford Fun City label.\nSqueeze's first EP and most of their self-titled debut album (1978) were produced by John Cale for A&amp;M Records. Cale had been a member of Velvet Underground from whose album Squeeze took their name. However, the debut album's two hit singles (\"Take Me I'm Yours\" and \"Bang Bang\") were produced by the band themselves, as the label found Cale's recordings uncommercial.\nIn the United States and Canada, the band and album were dubbed \"UK Squeeze\" owing to legal conflicts arising from a contemporary American band called \"Tight Squeeze\". The \"UK\" was dropped for all subsequent releases. In Australia, the same name change was used due to legal conflicts arising from an existing Sydney-based band also called \"Squeeze\". Albums in Australia were credited to \"UK Squeeze\" up to and including 1985's \"Cosi Fan Tutti Frutti\".\nThe band's second album, \"Cool for Cats\" (1979), contained the band's two highest charting UK singles in \"Cool For Cats\" and \"Up The Junction\", both of which peaked at No.\u00a02. John Bentley replaced Harry Kakoulli on bass in 1979 following the release of the LP.\n\"Argybargy\" (1980), the band's third album, was also a UK hit. It was additionally a mild breakthrough in North America, as the single \"Another Nail in My Heart\" was a No.\u00a056 hit in Canada, and second single \"Pulling Mussels (from the Shell)\" received airplay on US rock radio stations. The video for the former was frequently shown on independent video music shows in the US.\nHolland left for a solo career in 1980. He was replaced by Paul Carrack, formerly of the rock band Ace and the art rock band Roxy Music.\nIn 1981, the band released \"East Side Story\". It was produced by Elvis Costello and Roger Bechirian, and featured Carrack's lead vocals on the radio hit \"Tempted\". Carrack himself left after the release of \"East Side Story\", and was replaced by Don Snow. It also spawned another top 5 hit, the country influenced \"Labelled with Love\", which reached No.4 in the UK, and No.2 in Ireland. This line-up recorded the \"Sweets from a Stranger\" LP in 1982. Negative reviews, the stresses of touring, and conflict between band members led Difford and Tilbrook to break up the band later that year, after releasing a final single, \"Annie Get Your Gun\".\nDifford and Tilbrook years: 1983\u20131984.\nDifford and Tilbrook continued to work together, and released one self-titled album as the duo Difford &amp; Tilbrook in 1984. Although it is not officially a Squeeze album, to many fans \"Difford &amp; Tilbrook\" is considered a \"lost\" Squeeze LP because Difford and Tilbrook were themselves the only constant members of Squeeze. Several Difford &amp; Tilbrook tracks have been featured on officially sanctioned Squeeze compilations, and Tilbrook's official site lists \"Difford &amp; Tilbrook\" as a Squeeze album.\nThe duo also contributed to a musical written and staged in Deptford during this period, entitled \"Labelled with Love\" and based in large part on the music of Squeeze.\nSecond incarnation: 1985\u20131999.\nSqueeze re-formed to play a one night charity gig in 1985, with all five members from the 1980 \"Argybargy\" period\u2014Difford, Tilbrook, Holland, Lavis, and Bentley. The performance was such a success that the band unanimously agreed to resume recording and touring as Squeeze. Searching for a different sound, the band replaced Bentley with bassist Keith Wilkinson from the \"Difford &amp; Tilbrook\" sessions. This line-up released the 1985 LP \"Cosi Fan Tutti Frutti\".\nThe new LP featured complex double-tracked keyboard parts which could not be duplicated by a single keyboard player in a live setting; hence, Jools' brother Christopher Holland, then aged 17, played and toured as a second keyboardist in 1985. Christopher had also played Hammond organ on the album's fourth single \"Heartbreaking World\", which was sung by Jools Holland. However, Christopher Holland's tenure was short-lived, for he had signed to I.R.S. Records and was pursuing a solo career, so he was replaced by an official new member: Andy Metcalfe of The Soft Boys and The Egyptians. A bassist in those groups, Metcalfe played keyboards with Squeeze. His tenure as the band's sixth member lasted until 1988.\nIn 1987, the sextet recorded the album \"Babylon and On\". A successful release on both sides of the Atlantic, this album contained the band's only US top 40 hits in \"Hourglass\" and \"853-5937\".\nMetcalfe left the band in 1988, leaving the Difford / Tilbrook / Holland / Wilkinson / Lavis line-up to record 1989's \"Frank\". The LP was a commercial disappointment, from which no charting singles were taken in the UK, and the band was dropped from their long-time label A&amp;M.\nAdding a new second keyboard player in the person of Matt Irving, the band issued the live album \"A Round and a Bout\" on I.R.S. Records in March 1990. Jools Holland left Squeeze again in early 1990, and was not immediately replaced. In his stead, the band used session musicians such as Irving (who was no longer an official band member), Steve Nieve, and Bruce Hornsby for the 1991 release \"Play\", which came out on the Reprise label. This release again spawned no UK hits, although in the US the singles \"Satisfied\" and \"Crying in My Sleep\" received significant airplay on modern rock stations, and in Canada \"Satisfied\" was a top 50 hit. However, Reprise dropped the band after this album. Following this, drummer Gilson Lavis was let go in 1992, and replaced by Nieve's Attractions bandmate Pete Thomas. Paul Carrack also returned to the band in 1993.\nSqueeze re-signed to A&amp;M in time for 1993's \"Some Fantastic Place\". After a period of commercial decline in the UK, lead single \"Third Rail\" hit No.\u00a039, becoming Squeeze's first UK Top 40 hit in six years.\nSqueeze's line-up during the mid-1990s changed constantly. The American songwriter Aimee Mann toured as part of the band in 1994, playing both Mann and Squeeze songs. Thomas exited the band that year, and Carrack doubled on snare and keyboards for a few gigs before session drummer Andy Newmark was brought in. Then\u2014still in 1994\u2014Carrack left, which allowed keyboardist Andy Metcalfe to return to the band for a short spell, playing on some live dates. Drummer Kevin Wilkinson (no relation to bassist Keith), formerly of The Waterboys and China Crisis, was also added around this time, replacing Newmark. He lasted through the 1995 album \"Ridiculous\", which was recorded by the quartet of Difford, Tilbrook, Wilkinson and Wilkinson. The album spun off three minor hits in the UK: \"This Summer\", \"Electric Trains\" and \"Heaven Knows\". (\"Heaven Knows\" was used as the closing song in the 1995 film \"Hackers\" starring Angelina Jolie.) In addition, a minimally remixed version of \"This Summer\" became a No.\u00a032 UK hit in 1996, a year after the original version peaked at No.\u00a036. Despite this, A&amp;M once again dropped Squeeze from their roster in late 1996.\nFollowing the release of \"Ridiculous\", Don Snow (now known as Jonn Savannah) returned to Squeeze yet again as their touring keyboard player, but by 1997, the Squeeze line-up had officially dwindled down to just Difford and Tilbrook. That year the duo, billed as Squeeze, released the non-album single \"Down in the Valley\" as a fundraising single for Charlton Athletic F.C. Tilbrook formed the Quixotic label for this and future Squeeze-related releases, as well as releases by other artists.\nFor the 1998 album \"Domino\", the band was again a quintet consisting of Difford, Tilbrook, bassist Hilaire Penda, ex-Del Amitri drummer Ashley Soan, and yet another returning keyboardist in the person of Christopher Holland. Nick Harper often performed with this version of Squeeze as a guest touring musician, providing additional guitar and vocals. In January 1999, just days before a planned tour, Chris Difford suddenly announced that he was taking a \"hiatus\" from Squeeze. The last venue at which Squeeze played with Difford was at The Charlotte, Leicester, England. The band subsequently continued as a quartet led by Tilbrook, with Jim Kimberley replacing Soan on some tour dates, and Christopher Holland exiting in the autumn to be replaced by Tilbrook's other frequent writing partner Chris Braide.\nOn 27 November 1999, in Aberdeen, Scotland, Squeeze played their final gig before breaking up again. Difford and Tilbrook embarked on separate solo careers shortly thereafter.\nSolo years: 2000\u20132006.\nIn 2003 Difford and Tilbrook collaborated on a song for the first time since \"Domino\". The track \"Where I Can Be Your Friend\" appeared on Tilbrook's well-reviewed second solo album, \"Transatlantic Ping Pong\". In 2004, the pair worked with music journalist Jim Drury on the retrospective \"Squeeze: Song By Song\". In this book they declared they had become better friends since breaking up the band than they ever were while Squeeze was together.\nHowever, a 2004 attempt by the VH1 show \"Bands Reunited\" to reassemble the mid-1980s line-up of Squeeze (Difford, Tilbrook, Holland, Wilkinson and Lavis) ended in failure. While Difford and bassist Keith Wilkinson were both favourable to the idea and drummer Gilson Lavis expressed interest, Jools Holland felt he was too busy with current projects to participate. Even more crucially, Glenn Tilbrook eventually decided against a band reunion at that point in time.\nStill, Difford and Tilbrook's friendship continued, and Difford sat in for a few songs at a Tilbrook solo gig in Glasgow in December 2005.\nThird incarnation: 2007\u2013present.\nIn early 2007 it was announced that Difford and Tilbrook would re-form Squeeze for a series of shows throughout the latter half of the year, in support of Universal and Warner's re-issuing of the band's back catalogue and the release of a new 'best of' album, \"Essential Squeeze\", on 30 April. Jools Holland and Gilson Lavis were unable to take part in the series of shows, as they were touring under the \"Jools Holland &amp; His Rhythm &amp; Blues Orchestra\" name for most of the year. However, John Bentley re-joined on bass for the first time since Squeeze's last reunion show in 1985. The rest of the line-up was fleshed out by members of Tilbrook's touring band, the Fluffers: Stephen Large (keyboards) and Simon Hanson (drums).\nOn 7 July 2007, at the \"Return to the Summer of Love Party\" at Hawkhurst, Kent, Difford and Tilbrook, each singing and playing acoustic guitars, played a seven-song set. They played, in order, \"Take Me I'm Yours\", \"Pulling Mussels (From the Shell)\", \"Is that Love?\", \"Tempted\", \"Labelled with Love\", \"Cool for Cats\" and \"Up the Junction\". The first actual full-band Squeeze show since 1999 took place less than a week later, at their old haunt The Albany (in Deptford) on Thursday 12 July; this was actually billed as a \"warm up\" gig prior to the upcoming US tour, and was followed by GuilFest 2007. They toured the US in August 2007, supported on various dates by Fountains of Wayne, Will Hoge, Big Head Todd and the Monsters, Aimee Mann, and Cheap Trick.\nIn November 2007, the band released \"Five Live: On Tour in America\", a live CD consisting of recordings from the American tour. Television appearances and live shows in the US and UK followed in 2008, 2009 and 2010.\nThe band were honoured with a Heritage Award by PRS for Music in March 2010. A plaque was erected at Greenwich Dance's The Borough Hall on Royal Hill in Greenwich, London where they had performed their first gig.\nSqueeze embarked on their 'Spot The Difference' tour of the US in July 2010, which continued in the UK in November and December. The CD \"Spot The Difference\", a re-recording of Squeeze's classic hits, was released in August 2010 to accompany the tour.\nOn the US tour, during a performance of \"Pulling Mussels (From the Shell)\" live on the \"Late Night with Jimmy Fallon\" show, Stephen Large played the keyboard solo on an Apple iPad.\nIn September 2010, Stephen Large left the band and was replaced by Steve Nieve, who had played as a session musician with Squeeze and Difford in the past, but had not\u2014until this line-up change\u2014ever been an official member of the group. However, within a matter of months, Large returned to the Squeeze line-up as Nieve left the band.\nThis line-up of Difford/Tilbrook/Bentley/Large/Hanson continued to tour throughout 2011 and 2012. A 20-track live recording, \"Live at the Fillmore\", was issued on iTunes and as a limited-edition white vinyl double LP in April 2012.\nPrior to their 2012 UK tour, Squeeze announced on the \"Radcliffe &amp; Maconie\" show on BBC Radio 6 Music that they would be selling live recordings of every night's show on the tour at each venue via a 'Pop up Shop'. When the tour commenced, each live recording the band sold also came with a 4-song bonus disc entitled \"Packet of Four\"; these were studio recordings of new Squeeze songs, their first studio recordings of new material in 14 years.\nOn 11 February 2013, Tilbrook and Difford performed a live cover of the Beatles' song \"Please Please Me\" on BBC Radio 2. They were joined by Paul Jones on harmonica. Alongside other contemporary artists, the performance was part of a 50th anniversary celebration of the original recording of the first Beatles album of the same name in the same period of time. A documentary of the recordings was shown by BBC Four on 15 February 2013.\nBeginning in the autumn of 2014, Difford and Tilbrook began touring as a duo, playing Squeeze hits in smaller venues in the UK. Squeeze, still operating as a full band, also continued to play occasional festival shows through 2014 and 2015. In early 2015, Squeeze announced that bassist John Bentley would play his final gig with the band on 24 July. In an interview, Bentley announced his replacement will be Lucy Shaw (also the bassist for Tilbrook's backing band The Fluffers), which was officially confirmed by Squeeze in August.\nIn 2016\u20132018 the band continued to tour, in the US, Australia and extensively in the UK.\n\"Cradle to the Grave\".\nFrom 2008 forward, Difford and Tilbrook repeatedly stated in interviews that they planned to produce an album of new Squeeze material; they alluded to this in on-camera interviews at V Festival in both 2008 and 2011. In January 2010, it was announced that they would be spending part of the coming summer in Italy together writing songs for a new Squeeze album, and in an interview on BBC Radio Wales on 10 November 2013, Tilbrook stated that Squeeze would be recording between January and March 2014. However these sessions never took place and Tilbrook ended up recording and releasing the solo album \"Happy Endings\".\nAround the same time, it was announced that Squeeze would be providing the music for a BBC drama called \"Cradle to Grave\", based on the autobiography \"Going To Sea in a Sieve\" by Danny Baker. Squeeze debuted the song \"Cradle to the Grave\" on their 2013 tour, whilst Difford and Tilbrook were photographed with Danny Baker on the set of \"Cradle to the Grave\".\nRecording for the album finally got underway sometime in 2014/2015, and in April 2015, Difford announced on his Twitter feed that he had listened to a \"first mix\" of the new album. In July, Squeeze announced on their Facebook page that the album was entering the mastering stage. \"Cradle to the Grave\", the band's first album of original material since 1998 received its official release on 2 October 2015. A limited edition of 1000 copies were released through the band's own Love Records at the end of August.\nIn December 2015, Difford and Tilbrook appeared on BBC Radio 4's \"Mastertapes\" series, where guests talk about the album that made them or changed them. The album in question was \"East Side Story\", and was recorded in front of a live audience at the BBC's iconic \"Maida Vale Studios\".\nPresent activity.\nSqueeze performed in front of David Cameron on BBC's \"The Andrew Marr Show\" in January 2016 and used the performance to protest against the then-Prime Minister by changing the lyrics to their song \"Cradle to the Grave\".\nIn July 2017, the band announced a North American tour, along with two line-up changes: the replacement of Lucy Shaw as bassist with Yolanda Charles and the addition of Dirty Vegas frontman Steve Smith as percussionist and backing vocalist. The band also announced an Australian tour for 2018, and revealed that they were in the midst of recording a new album.\nIn August 2017, Squeeze revealed the title of their fifteenth studio album as \"The Knowledge\". A new single, \"Innocence in Paradise\", was released ahead of the album. \"The Knowledge\" was released on 13 October 2017.\nThe band has continued touring through the UK, Ireland and North America. A tour was announced on the official Squeeze website for 2020 in Australia and New Zealand, but was indefinitely postponed due to scheduling problems.\nOn 13 August 2019, the band officially announced the addition of a seventh member, guitarist Melvin Duffy. Duffy had played as a session musician on Squeeze's previous two albums, and at occasional live shows.\nIn September 2019, Squeeze were joined at the Louisville, Kentucky Bourbon &amp; Beyond Festival by ex-Nirvana drummer and Foo Fighters front-man Dave Grohl on drums, for a performance of the 1982 hit \"Black Coffee in Bed\".\nIn February 2020, it was announced that Yolanda Charles had departed the band, and new bassist Sean Hurley (who had filled in for Charles on bass on a few 2019 dates, including the date Dave Grohl guested) would be replacing her. In April of that year, Tilbrook, while discussing an upcoming scheduled gig, mentioned that it would be the \"very first gig with our new bass player! A chap called Owen Biddle, who used to play in a band called The Roots.\" However, the show in question was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe new line-up of Squeeze, with Biddle permanently replacing Hurley, began touring in 2021.\nIn November 2022, in response to the United Kingdom cost of living crisis, the band announced that proceeds from their \"Food for Thought\" EP would be donated to food banks and asked fans attending their UK tour to bring donations for the Trussell Trust.\nIn September 2023 Tilbrook said that Squeeze intended to record their next two albums in Los Angeles, including one collection of new material and another consisting of previously unrecorded songs written in the band's very earliest days.\nOn 8 June 2024 the band were special guests for Richard Thompson, on the final night of his UK tour, at the Royal Albert Hall.\nStyle and influences.\nStyle.\nStylistically, Squeeze have been characterised as new wave, post-punk, pub rock and power pop. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of \"AllMusic\" proclaimed the band to provide \"one of the links between classic British guitar pop and post-punk\". Squeeze have also been labelled as punk and pop punk. In a January 1988 interview by \"Music Connection\", when addressing Squeeze being thought of as a punk band, Glenn Tilbrook commented \"I never thought that we were [a punk band] \u2013 although I thought we were influenced by it to a certain extent\".\nInfluences.\nSqueeze were inspired by 1960s rock bands The Kinks and The Beatles, and the songwriting partnership of Difford and Tilbrook has attracted comparisons to that of John Lennon and Paul McCartney, a likening the band have expressed \"mixed feelings\" about. In addition, members of Squeeze have cited artists including David Bowie, Elvis Costello, Donovan, The Blockheads' Ian Dury, Bob Dylan, Jimi Hendrix, King Crimson and Greg Lake, Nick Lowe, Glenn Miller, Ramones, The Rolling Stones, the Velvet Underground and Lou Reed, and The Who as sources of influence or inspiration.\nLegacy and influence.\nSqueeze have been cited as an influence by several bands and artists. American new wave singer Marshall Crenshaw cited Squeeze as one of the primary influences for his 1982 self-titled debut album. College rock band the Replacements, particularly bassist Tommy Stinson, also professed an admiration for the band. Many artists in the Britpop genre also took influence from the band, particularly Blur, whose guitarist Graham Coxon called Squeeze an \"amazing band\" and named Tilbrook's voice as \"one of my favourite ever English singing voices.\" Later artists who named Squeeze as an influence include American Hi-Fi, The Caulfields, Kasabian, the Killers, Nightmare of You, Razorlight, and Space.\nMany bands and artists who would later achieve phenomenal success would begin their careers opening for Squeeze, including Dire Straits, The Jam, R.E.M., The Specials, U2 and XTC.\nMembers.\nCurrent members\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66789", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66789", "title": "Alfonso X of Castile", "text": "King of Castile and Le\u00f3n from 1252 to 1284\nAlfonso X (also known as the Wise, ; 23 November 1221 \u2013 4 April 1284) was King of Castile, Le\u00f3n and Galicia from 1 June 1252 until his death in 1284. During the election of 1257, a dissident faction chose him to be king of Germany on 1 April. He renounced his claim to Germany in 1275, and in creating an alliance with the Kingdom of England in 1254, his claim on the Duchy of Gascony as well.\nAlfonso's scientific interests\u2014he is sometimes nicknamed the Astrologer (\"el Astr\u00f3logo\")\u2014led him to sponsor the creation of the Alfonsine tables, and the Alphonsus crater on the Moon is named after him. He also sponsored the work of historians who, for the first time since Isidore of Seville in c.\u2009600, placed Spain in the context of world history. As a lawmaker he introduced the first vernacular law code in Castile, the \"Siete Partidas\". He created the Mesta, an association of sheep farmers in the central plain, but debased the coinage to finance his claim to the German crown. He fought a successful war with Portugal, but a less successful one with Granada. The end of his reign was marred by a civil war with his eldest surviving son, the future Sancho\u00a0IV, which continued after his death.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nAlfonso was born on 23 November 1221 in Toledo, Kingdom of Castile. He was the eldest son of Ferdinand\u00a0III and Elizabeth (Beatrice) of Swabia. His mother was the paternal cousin of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick\u00a0II, to whom Alfonso is often compared. His maternal grandparents were Philip of Swabia and Irene Angelina. Little is known about his upbringing, but he was most likely raised in Toledo. For the first nine years of his life Alfonso was only heir to Castile until his paternal grandfather king Alfonso\u00a0IX of Le\u00f3n died and his father united the kingdoms of Castile and Le\u00f3n. He began his career as a soldier, under the command of his father, when he was sixteen years old.\nAfter the accession of King Theobald I of Navarre, Ferdinand tried to arrange a marriage for Alfonso with Theobald's daughter, Blanche, but the move was unsuccessful. At the same time, he had a romantic relationship with Mayor Guill\u00e9n de Guzm\u00e1n, who bore him a daughter, Beatrice. In 1240, he married Mayor Guill\u00e9n de Guzm\u00e1n, but the marriage was later annulled and their issue declared illegitimate. During the 1240s, alongside his father, he conquered several Muslim strongholds in Al-Andalus, including Murcia, Alicante and C\u00e1diz.\nIn 1249, Alfonso married Violant, the daughter of King James I of Aragon and Violant of Hungary, although betrothed already in 1246.\nReign.\nAlfonso succeeded his father as King of Castile and Le\u00f3n in 1252. The following year he invaded Portugal, capturing the region of the Algarve. King Afonso III of Portugal had to surrender. Despite this Afonso III reached an agreement with Alfonso X that in consenting to marry Alfonso X's daughter, Beatrice of Castile, the captured land would be returned to their heirs. In 1261 Alfonso X captured Jerez. In 1263 he returned Algarve to the King of Portugal and signed the Treaty of Badajoz (1267).\nIn 1254 Alfonso X signed a treaty of alliance with King Henry III of England, supporting him in the war against King Louis IX of France. In the same year Alfonso's half-sister, Eleanor, married Henry's son Edward: with this act Alfonso renounced forever all claim to the Duchy of Gascony, to which Castile had been a pretender since the marriage of Alfonso VIII of Castile to Eleanor of England.\nImperial election.\nIn 1256, on the death of William II of Holland, Alfonso's descent from the Hohenstaufen through his mother, a daughter of Philip of Swabia, gave him a claim to the German crown through the Hohenstaufen line. Alfonso's election as German king by the prince-electors encouraged him to enter into complicated schemes that involved excessive expenses but never to success. Alfonso never travelled to Germany, and his alliance with the Italian Ghibelline Lord Ezzelino IV da Romano deprived him of the support of Pope Alexander IV. His rival, Richard of Cornwall, went to Germany and was crowned in 1257 at Aachen.\nTo obtain money, Alfonso debased the coinage and then endeavoured to prevent a rise in prices by an arbitrary tariff. The little trade that took place in his dominions was ruined, and the burghers and peasants were deeply offended. His nobles, whom he tried to cow by sporadic acts of violence, rebelled against him in 1272. Reconciliation with the nobles was brought about by Alfonso's son Ferdinand in 1273.\nAfter Richard of Cornwell's death, the German princes elected Rudolph of Habsburg (1273), Alfonso being declared deposed by Pope Gregory X. In 1275 Alfonso tried to meet with his imperial vicar in Italy, William VII of Montferrat (who had succeeded Ezzelino), and his Ghibelline allies in Piedmont and Lombardy to celebrate the victory against the Guelph Charles I of Anjou and be crowned in Lombardy. However, he was halted in his imperial ambitions in Provence by the Pope who, after a long negotiation, obtained Alfonso's oral renunciation of any claims to the Holy Roman Empire.\nCivil war.\nThroughout his reign, Alfonso contended with his nobles, particularly the families of Nu\u00f1o Gonz\u00e1lez de Lara, Diego L\u00f3pez de Haro and Esteban Fern\u00e1ndez de Castro, all of whom were formidable soldiers and instrumental in maintaining Castile's military strength in its frontier territories. According to some scholars Alfonso lacked the singleness of purpose required by a ruler who would devote himself to organization and also the combination of firmness with temper needed for dealing with his nobles although this is not a view taken by all. Others have argued that his efforts were too singularly focused on the diplomatic and financial arrangements surrounding his bid to become Holy Roman Emperor.\nAlfonso's eldest son, Ferdinand, died in 1275 at the Battle of \u00c9cija against the Moroccan and Granadan invasion armies, leaving two infant sons. Alfonso's second son, Sancho, claimed to be the new heir, in preference to the children of Ferdinand de la Cerda, basing his claim on an old Castilian custom, that of proximity of blood and agnatic seniority. Alfonso preferred to leave the throne to his grandsons, but Sancho had the support of the nobility. A bitter civil war broke out resulting in Alfonso's being forced in 1282 to accept Sancho as his heir instead of his young grandsons; only the cities of Seville, Murcia and Badajoz remained faithful to him. Son and nobles alike supported the Moors when he tried to unite the nation in a crusade; and when he allied himself with Abu Yusuf Yakub, the ruling Marinid sultan of Morocco, they denounced him as an enemy of the faith. A reaction in his favour was beginning in his latter days, but he died defeated and deserted at Seville in 1284, leaving a will, by which he endeavoured to exclude Sancho, and a heritage of civil war.\nEconomic policy.\nIn 1273, he created the Mesta, an association of some 3,000 petty and great sheep holders in Castile, in reaction to less wool being exported from the traditional sites in England. This organization later became exceedingly powerful in the country (as wool became Castile's first major exportable commodity and reported a trade surplus, called \"white gold\", as the wool amount was critical to the health of the population during the winter), and eventually its privileges were to prove a deadly wound in the Castilian economy. One side effect of the quickly expanding sheep herds was the decimation to the Castilian farmland through which the sheep grazed.\nThe original function of the Mesta was to separate the fields from the sheep-ways linking grazing areas.\nLegislative activity.\nAs a ruler, Alfonso showed legislative capacity, and a wish to provide the kingdoms expanded under his father with a code of laws and a consistent judicial system. The \"Fuero Real\" was undoubtedly his work. He began medieval Europe's most comprehensive code of law, the \"Siete Partidas\", which, however, thwarted by the nobility of Castile, was only promulgated by his great-grandson. Because of this, and because the \"Partidas\" remain fundamental law in the American Southwest, he is one of the 23 lawmakers depicted in the House of Representatives chamber of the United States Capitol.\nMilitary training.\nFrom a young age Alfonso X showed an interest in military life and chivalry. In 1231 Alfonso traveled with P\u00e9rez de Castron on a military campaign in lower Andalusia. Writing in \"Estoria de Espa\u00f1a\", Alfonso describes having seen St. James on a white horse with a white banner and a legion of knights fighting a war above the soldiers of Spain. This vision of a heavenly army fighting in Jerez and participation in military campaigns likely left Alfonso X with a high degree of knowledge and respect for military operations and chivalric knights. Alfonso's respect for chivalry can also be seen in his writing of Spanish law. Spanish Chivalric conduct was codified in the (2,21) where he wrote that knights should be, \"of good linage and distinguished by gentility, wisdom, understanding, loyalty, courage, moderation, justice, prowess, and the practical knowledge necessary to assess the quality of horse and arms (, 21,1\u201310).\" These efforts to make a codified standard of chivalric conduct were likely meant to both encourage strength of arms (prowess) and to restrain the use of violence for only just (state-sponsored) usage.\nCourt culture.\nKing Alfonso X developed a court culture that encouraged cosmopolitan learning. Alfonso had many works previously written in Arabic and Latin translated into vernacular Castilian in his court. Alfonso \"turned to the vernacular for the kind of intellectual commitments that formerly were inconceivable outside Latin.\" He is credited with encouraging the extensive written use of the Castilian language instead of Latin as the language used in courts, churches, and in books and official documents (although his father, Ferdinand III, had begun to use it for some documents). This translation of Arabic and Classic documents into vernacular encouraged the development of Spanish sciences, literature, and philosophy.\nTranslations.\nFrom the beginning of his reign, Alfonso employed Jewish, Christian and Muslim scholars at his court, primarily for the purpose of translating books from Arabic and Hebrew into Latin and Castilian, although he always insisted on personally supervising the translations. This group of scholars formed his royal scriptorium, continuing the tradition of the twelfth-century Escuela de Traductores de Toledo (Toledo School of Translators). Their final output promoted Castilian as a learning language both in science and literature, and established the foundations of the new Spanish language. This evolved version of the Castilian language also acquired significant relevance in the royal chancery, where it came to replace Latin, which until then had been the language commonly used for royal diplomacy in Castile and Le\u00f3n.\nThe very first translation, commissioned by his brother, Fernando de la Cerda\u2014who had extensive experience, both diplomatic and military, among the Muslims of southern Iberia and north Africa\u2014was a Castilian version of the animal fable \"Kalila wa-Dimna\", a book that belongs to the genre of wisdom literature labeled Mirrors for Princes: stories and sayings meant to instruct the monarch in proper and effective governance.\nThe primary intellectual work of these scholars centered on astronomy and astrology. The early period of Alfonso's reign saw the translation of selected works of magic (\"Lapidario\", \"Picatrix\", \"Libro de las formas et las ymagenes\") all translated by a Jewish scholar named Yehuda ben Moshe (Yhuda Mosca, in the Old Spanish source texts). These were all highly ornate manuscripts (only the \"Lapidario\" survives in its entirety) containing what was believed to be secret knowledge on the magical properties of stones and talismans. In addition to these books of astral magic, Alfonso ordered the translation of well-known Arabic astrological compendia, including the \"Libro de las cruzes\" and \"Libro conplido en los iudizios de las estrellas\". The first of these was, ironically, translated from Latin (it was used among the Visigoths), into Arabic, and then back into Castilian and Latin. Most of the texts first translated at this time survive in only one manuscript each.\nAstronomy.\nAs an intellectual he gained considerable scientific fame based on his encouragement of astronomy, which included astrology at the time and the Ptolemaic cosmology as known to him through the Arabs. He surrounded himself with mostly Jewish translators who rendered Arabic scientific texts into Castilian at Toledo. His fame extends to the preparation of the Alfonsine tables, based on calculations of al-Zarqali, \"Arzachel\". Alexander Bogdanov maintained that these tables formed the basis for Copernicus's development of a heliocentric understanding in astronomy.\nBecause of this work, the lunar crater Alphonsus is named after him. One famous, but apocryphal, quote attributed to him upon his hearing an explanation of the extremely complicated mathematics required to demonstrate Ptolemy's theory of astronomy was \"If the Lord Almighty had consulted me before embarking on creation thus, I should have recommended something simpler.\" Gingerich (1990) says that a form of this alleged quotation was mentioned (but rejected) as early as the 16th century by the historian Jer\u00f3nimo de Zurita, and that Soriano Viguera (1926) states that \"nothing of the sort can be found in Alfonso's writings.\" Nevertheless, Dean Acheson (U.S. Secretary of State, 1949\u20131953) used it as the basis for the title and epigraph of his memoir \"Present at the Creation.\"\nChronicles.\nAlfonso also commissioned a compilation of chronicles, the \"Cr\u00f3nica general\", completed in 1264. This chronicle sought to establish a general history and drew from older chronicles, folklore and Arabic sources. This work enjoyed renewed popularity starting in the sixteenth century, when there was a revival of interest in history; Flori\u00e1n de Ocampo published a new edition and Lorenzo de Sep\u00falveda used it as the chief source of his popular romances. Sep\u00falveda wrote a number of romances having Alfonso X as their hero.\nHistorical works.\nAlfonso's court compiled in Castilian a work titled \"General Estoria\". This work was an attempt at a world history that drew from many sources and included translations from the Vulgate Old Testament mixed with myths and histories from the classical world, mostly Egypt, Greece, and Rome. This world history was left incomplete, however, and so it stops at the birth of Christ. The main significance of this work lies in the translations from Latin into Castilian. Much like his chronicles, the ability of Alfonso's court to compile writings from a variety of cultures and translate them into Castilian left a historic impact on Spain.\nAlfonso X is credited with the first depiction of an \"h\u00f3rreo\", a typical granary from the northwest of the Iberian Peninsula. The oldest document containing an image of an \"h\u00f3rreo\" is Alfonso's \"Cantigas de Santa Maria\" (song CLXXXVII) from XII A.C. In this depiction, three rectangular \"h\u00f3rreos\" of Gothic style are illustrated.\nGames.\nAlfonso also had the \"Libro de ajedrez, dados, y tablas\" (\"\"Libro de los Juegos\" (The Book of Games)\") translated into Castilian from Arabic and added illustrations with the goal of perfecting the work. It was completed in 1283. The Libro de juegos contains an extensive collection of writings on chess, with over 100 chess problems and chess variants.\nMusic.\nAlfonso X commissioned or co-authored numerous works of music during his reign. These works included \"Cantigas d'escarnio e maldicer\" and the vast compilation \"Cantigas de Santa Maria\" (\"Songs to the Virgin Mary\"), which was written in Galician\u2013Portuguese and figures among the most important of his works. The \"Cantigas de Santa Maria\" form one of the largest collections of vernacular monophonic songs to survive from the Middle Ages. They consist of 420 poems with musical notation. The poems are for the most part on miracles attributed to the Virgin Mary. One of the miracles Alfonso relates is his own healing in Puerto de Santa Mar\u00eda.\nFamily.\nViolante was twelve or thirteen years old at the time of her marriage to Alfonso; she produced no children for several years and it was feared that she was barren. Alfonso almost had their marriage annulled, but they went on to have eleven children:\nAlfonso X also had several illegitimate children. With Mayor Guill\u00e9n de Guzm\u00e1n, daughter of Guill\u00e9n P\u00e9rez de Guzm\u00e1n and of Mar\u00eda Gonz\u00e1lez Gir\u00f3n, he fathered:\nWith Elvira Rodr\u00edguez de Villada, daughter of Rodrigo Fern\u00e1ndez de Villada, he fathered:\nWith Mar\u00eda Alfonso de Le\u00f3n, his aunt, the illegitimate daughter of the King Alfonso IX of Le\u00f3n and Teresa Gil de Soverosa he had:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66790", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66790", "title": "Specific phobia", "text": "Specific, irrational fears\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSpecific phobia is an anxiety disorder, characterized by an extreme, unreasonable, and irrational fear associated with a specific object, situation, or concept which poses little or no actual danger. Specific phobia can lead to avoidance of the object or situation, persistence of the fear, and significant distress or problems functioning associated with the fear. A phobia can be a fear of anything.\nAlthough fears are common and normal, a phobia is an extreme type of fear where great lengths are taken to avoid being exposed to the particular danger. Phobias are considered the most common psychiatric disorder, affecting about 10% of the population in the US, according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), (among children, 5%; among teens, 16%). About 75% of patients have more than one specific phobia.\nIt can be described as when patients are anxious about a particular situation. It causes a great load of difficulty in life. Patients have a lot of distress or interference when functioning in their daily life. Unreasonable or irrational fears get in the way of daily routines, work, and relationships due to the effort that a patient makes to avoid the terrifying feelings associated with the fear.\nFemales are twice as likely to be diagnosed than males with a specific phobia.\nChildren and adolescents who are diagnosed with a specific phobia are at an increased risk for additional psychopathology later in life.\nSigns and symptoms.\nFear, discomfort or anxiety may be triggered both by the presence and the anticipation of the specific object or situation. The main behavioral sign of a specific phobia is avoidance. The fear or anxiety associated with specific phobia can also manifest in physical symptoms such as an increased heart rate, shortness of breath, muscle tension, sweating, or a desire to escape the situation.\nCauses.\nThe exact cause of specific phobias is not known. The mechanisms for development of specific phobias can be distinguished between innate (genetic and neurobiological) factors, and learned factors. \nIn neurobiology, one explanation proposed for specific phobia is that the typical activation of the amygdala in response to stimuli may be exaggerated due to pathological changes. According to this theory, a deficiency in amygdala habituation may also contribute to the persistence of non-experiential phobia. Certain phobias that are less lethal (e.g. dogs) seem to be more frequently observed and easily acquired in comparison to potentially lethal fears which are more relevant to developed human society (e.g. cars and guns). This was theorised to be due to biological adaptation being passed through evolution which makes recent threats less prone to easy acquisition. However, a 2014 study found evidence against this evolutionary theory, which stated: \"Our findings are inconsistent with the hypothesis that fears/phobias of individual stimuli result from genetic and environmental factors unique to that stimulus. Instead, we observed substantial sharing of risk factors across individual fears.\" There is also evidence for the validity of a genetic component contributing to blood-injection-injury phobias and animal phobias, although this evidence did not support the idea that other specific phobias had genetic influence. Blood-injection-injury phobias are also believed to be the most heritable among specific phobias.\nThe classical conditioning model of learning has also been used to suggest that a phobia will be learned when an event that causes a fear or anxiety reaction is paired with a neutral event. An example of this model is when being near a dog (neutral event) is paired with the emotional experience of being bitten by a dog, resulting in a chronic fear which is described as a specific phobia to dogs. An alternative proposed mechanism of association is through observational learning. According to this theory, a person may internalize another person's fears about a specific object or situation through observation of their reactions.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis in the ICD or the DSM requires a marked fear, anxiety or avoidance that is long-lasting (greater than six months) and consistently occurs in the presence of the feared object or situation. The DSM-5 states that the fears should be out of proportion to the danger posed, compared to the ICD-10 which specifies that the symptoms must be excessive or unreasonable. Minor differences have persisted between the ICD-11 and DSM-5.\nIn the DSM-5, there are several types which specific phobia can be classified under:\nAlthough the avoidance resulting from specific phobia is comparable to other anxiety disorders, differential diagnosis is done through examining underlying causes for the behavior. Agoraphobia is also considered distinct from specific phobia, along with substance use disorders, and avoidant personality disorder. The occurrence of panic attacks is not itself a symptom of specific phobias and falls under the criteria of panic disorder.\nTreatment.\nThere are a variety of treatment options available for specific phobias, most of which focus on psychosocial interventions. Different psychological treatments have varying levels of effects depending on the specific phobia being addressed.\nCognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).\nCognitive behavioral therapy is a short term, skills-focused therapy that aims to help people diffuse unhelpful emotional responses by helping people consider them differently or change their behavior. CBT represents the gold standard and first line of therapy in specific phobias. CBT is effective in treating specific phobias primarily through exposure and cognitive strategies to overcome a person's anxiety. Computer-assisted treatment programs, self-help manuals, and delivery by a trained practitioner are all methods of accessing CBT. A single session of CBT in one of these modalities can be effective for individuals who have a specific phobia.\nExposure therapy.\n is a particularly effective form of CBT for many specific phobias, however, treatment acceptance and high drop-out rates have been noted as concerns. In addition, a third of people who complete exposure therapy as a treatment for specific phobia may not respond, regardless of the type of exposure therapy. Other interventions have been successful for particular types of specific phobia, such as virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET) for spider, dental, and height phobias, applied muscle tension (AMT) for needle phobia, and psychoeducation with relaxation exercises for fear of childbirth. With exposure therapy, a type of cognitive-behavioural therapy, clinically significant improvement was experienced by up to 90% of patients. While very long-term outcomes remain unknown, many of the benefits of exposure therapy persisted after one year. Treatment may be more successful at reducing symptoms in people with low trait anxiety, high motivation, and high self-efficacy entering exposure therapy. In addition, high cortisol levels, high heart rate variation, evoking disgust, avoiding relaxation, focusing on cognitive changes, context variation, sleep, and memory-enhancing drugs can also reduce symptoms following exposure therapy.\nExposure can be \"live\"(in real life) or imaginal (in ones imagination) and can involve:\nExposures that are imaginal are less effective.\nSpecifically for acrophobia, in-vivo exposure (exposure to real-world height-scenarios while maintaining anxiety at controlled levels) has been shown to significantly improve measures of anxiety in the short-term, but this effect decreased over a longer term. Likewise, virtual reality exposure was statistically significant in some measures of anxiety reduction, but not others.\nPharmacotherapeutics.\nAs of late 2020, there is limited evidence for the use of pharmacotherapy in the treatment of specific phobia. Pharmacological treatments are typically used in combination with behaviorally-focused psychotherapy, as introducing pharmacological interventions independently may result in relapsing of symptoms.\nThe selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), paroxetine and escitalopram, have shown preliminary efficacy in small randomized controlled clinical trials. However, these trials were too small to show any definitive benefits of anxiolytic medication alone in treating phobia. Benzodiazepines are occasionally used for acute symptom relief, but have not been shown to be effective for long-term treatment. There are some findings suggesting that adjuvant use of the NMDA receptor partial agonist, d-cycloserine, with virtual reality exposure therapy may improve specific phobia symptoms more than virtual reality exposure therapy alone. As of 2020, studies on the use of adjunct d-cycloserine are inconclusive.\nPrognosis.\nThe majority of those that develop a specific phobia first experience symptoms in childhood. Often individuals will experience symptoms periodically with periods of remission before complete remission occurs. However, specific phobias that continue into adulthood are likely to experience a more chronic course. Specific phobias in older adults has been linked with a decrease in quality of life. Those with specific phobias are at an increased risk of suicide. Greater impairment is found in those that have multiple phobias. Response to treatment is relatively high but many do not seek treatment due to lack of access, ability to avoid phobia, or unwilling to face feared object for repeated CBT sessions.\nEpidemiology.\nSpecific phobia is estimated to affect 6\u201312% of people at some point in their life. There may be a large amount of underreporting of specific phobias as many people do not seek treatment, with some surveys conducted in the US finding that 70% of the population reports having one or more unreasonable fears.\nSpecific phobias have a lifetime prevalence rate of 7.4% and a one-year prevalence of 5.5% according to data collected from 22 different countries. The usual age of onset is childhood to adolescence. During childhood and adolescence, the incidence of new specific phobias is much higher in females than males. The peak incidence for specific phobias amongst females occurs during reproduction and childrearing, possibly reflecting an evolutionary advantage. There is an additional peak in incidence, reaching nearly 1% per year, during old age in both men and women, possibly reflective of newly occurring physical conditions or adverse life events. The development of phobias varies with subtypes, with animal and blood injection phobias typically beginning in childhood (ages 5\u201312), whereas development of situational specific phobias (i.e., fear of flying) usually occurs in late adolescence and early adulthood.\nIn the US, the lifetime prevalence rate is 12.5% and a one-year prevalence rate of 9.1%. An estimated 12.5% of U.S. adults experience specific phobia at some time in their lives and the prevalence is approximately double in females compared to males. An estimated 19.3% of adolescents experience specific phobia, but the difference between males and females is not as pronounced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66791", "revid": "1300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66791", "title": "Cyclothymic Disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "66792", "revid": "1300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66792", "title": "Dysthymic Disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "66793", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66793", "title": "Tetrahymena", "text": "Genus of single-celled organisms\nTetrahymena is a genus of free-living ciliates, examples of unicellular eukaryotes. The genus Tetrahymena is the most widely studied member of its phylum.59 It can produce, store and react with different types of hormones. \"Tetrahymena\" cells can recognize both related and hostile cells.\nThey can also switch from commensalistic to pathogenic modes of survival. They are common in freshwater lakes, ponds, and streams.277\n\"Tetrahymena\" species used as model organisms in biomedical research are \"T. thermophila\" and \"T. pyriformis\". Their main claim to fame is their role in the discovery of telomeres and telomerase which is based on the fact that ciliates are one of the richest sources for these molecules.\n\"T. thermophila\": a model organism in experimental biology.\nAs a ciliated protozoan, \"Tetrahymena thermophila\" exhibits nuclear dimorphism: two types of cell nuclei. They have a bigger, non-germline macronucleus and a small, germline micronucleus in each cell at the same time and these two carry out different functions with distinct cytological and biological properties. This unique versatility allows scientists to use \"Tetrahymena\" to identify several key factors regarding gene expression and genome integrity. In addition, \"Tetrahymena\" possess hundreds of cilia and has complicated microtubule structures, making it an optimal model to illustrate the diversity and functions of microtubule arrays.\nBecause \"Tetrahymena\" can be grown in a large quantity in the laboratory with ease, it has been a great source for biochemical analysis for years, specifically for enzymatic activities and purification of sub-cellular components. In addition, with the advancement of genetic techniques it has become an excellent model to study the gene function \"in vivo\". The recent sequencing of the macronucleus genome should ensure that \"Tetrahymena\" will be continuously used as a model system.\n\"Tetrahymena thermophila\" exists in seven different sexes (mating types) that can reproduce in 21 different combinations, and a single tetrahymena cannot reproduce sexually with itself. Each organism \"decides\" which sex it will become during mating, through a stochastic process.\nStudies on \"Tetrahymena\" have contributed to several scientific milestones including:\nLife cycle.\nThe life cycle of \"T. thermophila\" consists of an alternation between asexual and sexual stages. In nutrient rich media during vegetative growth cells reproduce asexually by binary fission. This type of cell division occurs by a sequence of morphogenetic events that results in the development of duplicate sets of cell structures, one for each daughter cell. Only during starvation conditions will cells commit to sexual conjugation, pairing and fusing with a cell of opposite mating type. Tetrahymena has seven mating types; each of which can mate with any of the other six without preference, but not its own.\nTypical of ciliates, \"T. thermophila\" differentiates its genome into two functionally distinct types of nuclei, each specifically used during the two different stages of the life cycle. The diploid germline micronucleus is transcriptionally silent and only plays a role during sexual life stages. The germline nucleus contains 5 pairs of chromosomes which encode the heritable information passed down from one sexual generation to the next. During sexual conjugation, haploid micronuclear meiotic products from both parental cells fuse, leading to the creation of a new micro- and macronucleus in progeny cells. Sexual conjugation occurs when cells starved for at least 2hrs in a nutrient-depleted media encounter a cell of complementary mating type. After a brief period of co-stimulation (~1hr), starved cells begin to pair at their anterior ends to form a specialized region of membrane called the conjugation junction.\nIt is at this junctional zone that several hundred fusion pores form, allowing for the mutual exchange of protein, RNA and eventually a meiotic product of their micronucleus. This whole process takes about 12 hours at 30\u00a0\u00b0C, but even longer than this at cooler temperatures. The sequence of events during conjugation is outlined in the accompanying figure.\nThe larger polyploid macronucleus is transcriptionally active, meaning its genes are actively expressed, and so it controls somatic cell functions during vegetative growth. The polyploid nature of the macronucleus refers to the fact that it contains approximately 200\u2013300 autonomously replicating linear DNA mini-chromosomes. These minichromosomes have their own telomeres and are derived via site-specific fragmentation of the five original micronuclear chromosomes during sexual development. In T. thermophila each of these minichromosomes encodes multiple genes and exists at a copy number of approximately 45-50 within the macronucleus. The exception to this is the minichromosome encoding the rDNA, which is massively upregulated, existing at a copy number of approximately 10,000 within the macronucleus. Because the macronucleus divides amitotically during binary fission, these minichromosomes are un-equally divided between the clonal daughter cells. Through natural or artificial selection, this method of DNA partitioning in the somatic genome can lead to clonal cell lines with different macronuclear phenotypes fixed for a particular trait, in a process called phenotypic assortment. In this way, the polyploid genome can fine-tune its adaptation to environmental conditions through gain of beneficial mutations on any given mini-chromosome whose replication is then selected for, or conversely, loss of a minichromosome which accrues a negative mutation. However, the macronucleus is only propagated from one cell to the next during the asexual, vegetative stage of the life cycle, and so it is never directly inherited by sexual progeny. Only beneficial mutations that occur in the germline micronucleus of \"T. thermophila\" are passed down between generations, but these mutations would never be selected for environmentally in the parental cells because they are not expressed.\nBehavior.\nFree swimming cells of \"Tetrahymena\" are attracted to certain chemicals by chemokinesis. The major chemo-attractants are peptides and/or proteins.\nA 2016 study found that cultured \"Tetrahymena\" have the capacity to 'learn' the shape and size of their swimming space. Cells confined in a droplet of a water for a short time were, upon release, found to repeat the circular swimming trajectories 'learned' in the droplet. The diameter and duration of these swimming paths reflected the size of the droplet and time allowed to adapt.\nDNA repair.\nIt is common among protists that the sexual cycle is inducible by stressful conditions such as starvation. Such conditions often cause DNA damage. A central feature of meiosis is homologous recombination between non-sister chromosomes. In \"T. thermophila\" this process of meiotic recombination may be beneficial for repairing DNA damages caused by starvation.\nExposure of \"T. thermophila\" to UV light resulted in a greater than 100-fold increase in \"Rad51\" gene expression. Treatment with the DNA alkylating agent methyl methanesulfonate also resulted in substantially elevated Rad 51 protein levels. These findings suggest that ciliates such as \"T. thermophila\" utilize a Rad51-dependent recombinational pathway to repair damaged DNA.\nThe Rad51 recombinase of \"T. thermophila\" is a homolog of the \"Escherichia coli\" RecA recombinase. In \"T. thermophila\", Rad51 participates in homologous recombination during mitosis, meiosis and in the repair of double-strand breaks. During conjugation, Rad51 is necessary for completion of meiosis. Meiosis in \"T. thermophila\" appears to employ a Mus81-dependent pathway that does not use a synaptonemal complex and is considered secondary in most other model eukaryotes. This pathway includes the Mus81 resolvase and the Sgs1 helicase. The Sgs1 helicase appears to promote the non-crossover outcome of meiotic recombinational repair of DNA, a pathway that generates little genetic variation.\nPhenotypic and genotypic plasticity.\nMany species of \"Tetrahymena\" are known to display unique response mechanisms to stress and various environmental pressures. The unique genomic architecture of the ciliates (presence of a MIC, high ploidy, large number of chromosomes, etc.) allows for differential gene expression, as well as increased genomic flexibility. The following is a non-exhaustive list of examples of phenotypic and genotypic plasticity in the Tetrahymena genus.\nInducible trophic polymorphisms.\n\"T. vorax\" is known for its inducible trophic polymorphisms, an ecologically offensive tactic that allows it to change its feeding strategy and diet by altering its morphology. Normally, \"T. vorax\" is a bacterivorous microstome around 60 \u03bcm in length. However, it has the ability to switch into a carnivorous macrostome around 200 \u03bcm in length that can feed on larger competitors. If \"T. vorax\" cells are too nutrient starved to undertake transformation, they have also been recorded as transforming into a third \"tailed\"-microstome morph, thought to be a defense mechanism in response to cannibalistic pressure. While \"T. vorax\" is the most well studied \"Tetrahymena\" that exhibits inducible trophic polymorphisms, many lesser known species are able to undertake transformation as well, including \"T. paulina\" and \"T. paravorax\". However, only \"T. vorax\" has been recorded as having both a macrostome and tailed-microstome form.\nThese morphological switches are triggered by an abundance of stomatin in the environment, a mixture of metabolic compounds released by competitor species, such as \"Paramecium\", \"Colpidium\", and other \"Tetrahymena\". Specifically, chromatographic analysis has revealed that ferrous iron, hypoxanthine, and uracil are the chemicals in stomatin responsible for triggering the morphological change. Many researchers cite \"starvation conditions\" as inducing the transformation, as in nature, the compound inducers are in highest concentration after microstomal ciliates have grazed down bacterial populations, and ciliate populations are high. When the chemical inducers are in high concentration, \"T. vorax\" cells will transform at higher rates, allowing them to prey on their former trophic competitors.\nThe exact genetic, and structural mechanisms that underlie \"T. vorax\" transformation are unknown. However, some progress has been made in identifying candidate genes. Researchers from the University of Alabama have used cDNA subtraction to remove actively transcribed DNA from microstome and macrostome \"T. vorax\" cells, leaving only differentially transcribed cDNA molecules. While nine differentiation-specific genes were found, the most frequently expressed candidate gene was identified as a novel sequence, \"SUBII-TG\".\nThe sequenced region of \"SUBII-TG\" was 912 bp long and consists of three largely identical 105 bp open-reading frames. A northern blot analysis revealed that low levels of transcription are detected in microstome cells, while high levels of transcription occur in macrostome cells. Furthermore, when the researchers limited \"SUBII-TG\" expression in the presence of stomatin (using antisense oligonucleotide methods), a 55% reduction in \"SUBII-TG\" mRNA correlated with a 51% decrease in transformation, supporting the notion that the gene is at least partially responsible for controlling the transformation in \"T. vorax\". However, very little is known about the \"SUBII-TG\" gene. Researchers were only able to sequence a portion of the entire open-reading frame, and other candidate genes have not been investigated thoroughly. mRNA and amino acid sequencing indicate that ubiquitin may play a crucial role in allowing transformation to take place as well. However, no known genes in the ubiquitin family have been identified in \"T. vorax\". Finally, the genetic mechanisms of the \"tailed\" microstome morph are completely unknown.\nMetal resistance, gene and genome amplification.\nOther related species exhibit their own unique responses to various stressors. In \"T. thermophila\", chromosome amplification and gene expansion are inducible responses to common organometallic pollutants such as cadmium, copper, and lead. Strains of \"T. thermophila\" that were exposed to large quantities of Cd2+ over time were found to have a 5-fold increase of \"MTT1\", and \"MTT3\" (metallothionein genes that code for Cadmium and Lead binding proteins) as well as \"CNBDP\", an unrelated gene that lies just upstream of \"MTT1\" on the same chromosome. The fact that a non-metallothionein gene on the same locus as \"MTT1\" and \"MTT3\" increased copy number indicates that the entire chromosome had been amplified, as opposed to just specific genes. \"Tetrahymena\" species are 45-ploid for their macronucleus, meaning that the wild type of \"T. thermophila\" normally contains 45 copies of each chromosome. While the actual number of unique chromosomes are unknown, the number is thought to be around 187 in the MAC, and 5 in the MIC. Thus, the Ca2+ adapted strain contained 225 copies of the specific chromosome in question. This resulted in a nearly 28-fold increase in detected expression levels of \"MTT1\", and slightly less in \"MTT3\".\nWhen researchers grew a sample of the \"T. thermophila\" population in normal growth medium (lacking Cd2+) for one month, the number of \"MTT1\", \"MTT3\", and \"CNBDP\" genes decreased to an average of three copies (135C). By seven months in normal growth medium, the \"T. thermophila\" cells were found reduced to just the wild type copy number (45C). When researchers returned cells from the same colony to Cd2+ medium, within a week \"MTT1\", \"MTT3\", and \"CNBDP\" genes increased to three copies once again (135C). Thus, the authors argue that chromosome amplification is an inducible and reversible mechanism in the \"Tetrahymena\" genetic response to metal stress. \u00a0\nResearchers also used gene-knockdown experiments, where the copy number of another metallothionein gene on a different chromosome, \"MTT5\", was dramatically reduced. Within a week, the new strain was found to have developed four novel genes from at least one duplication of \"MTT1\". However, chromosome duplication had not taken place, as indicated by the wild-type ploidy and the normal quantity of other genes on the same chromosomes. Rather, researchers believe that the duplication resulted from homologous recombination events, producing transcriptionally active, upregulated genes that carry repeated \"MTT1\".\nEnhanced motility and dispersal.\n\"T. thermophila\" also undergoes phenotypic changes when faced with limited resource availability. Cells are capable of changing their shape and size, along with behavioral swimming strategies in response to starvation. The more motile cells that change in response to starvation are known as dispersers, or disperser cells. While rates and levels of phenotypic change differ between strains, disperser cells form in nearly all strains of \"T. thermophila\" when faced with starvation. Dispersers, and non-dispersing cells both become dramatically thinner and smaller, increasing the basal body and cilia density, allowing them to swim between two and three times faster than normal cells. Some strains of \"T. thermophila\" have also been found to develop a single, non-beating, enlarged cilia that assists the cell in steering or directing movement. While the behavior has been shown to correlate with faster dispersal and form as a reversible trait in \"Tetrahymena\" cells, little is known about the genetic or cellular mechanisms that allow for its development. Furthermore, other studies show that when genetically variable populations of \"T. thermophila\" were starved, dispersal cells actually increased in cell length, despite still becoming thinner. More research is needed to determine the genetic mechanisms that underlie disperser formation.\nSpecies in genus.\nSpecies in this genus include.\nIn education.\nCornell University offers a National Institutes of Health (NIH) funded program through the Science Education Partnership Award (SEPA) Program called Advancing Secondary Science Education thru Tetrahymena (ASSET). The group develops stand-alone labs or lessons using Tetrahymena as training modules that teachers can use in classes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66794", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66794", "title": "Chinese history", "text": ""}
{"id": "66795", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66795", "title": "Jean-Bertrand Aristide", "text": "Former president of Haiti, priest (b. 1953)\nJean-Bertrand Aristide (; born 15 July 1953) is a Haitian former Salesian priest and politician who became Haiti's first democratically elected president in 1991 before being deposed in a coup d'\u00e9tat. As a priest, he taught liberation theology and, as president, he attempted to normalize Afro-Creole culture, including Vodou religion, in Haiti. \nAristide was appointed to a parish in Port-au-Prince in 1982 after completing his studies to become a priest. He became a focal point for the pro-democracy movement, first under Jean-Claude \"Baby Doc\" Duvalier and then under the military transition regime which followed. He won the 1990\u201391 Haitian presidential election with 67% of the vote but was ousted just months later in the September 1991 military coup. The coup regime collapsed in 1994 under U.S. pressure and threat of force (Operation Uphold Democracy), and Aristide was president again from 1994 to 1996 and from 2001 to 2004. \nAristide was ousted again in a 2004 coup d'\u00e9tat after right-wing ex-army paramilitary units invaded the country from across the Dominican border. Aristide and many others have alleged that the United States had a role in orchestrating the second coup against him. In 2022, numerous Haitian and French officials told\u00a0\"The New York Times\"\u00a0that France and the United States had effectively overthrown Aristide by pressuring him to step down, though this was denied by James Foley, U.S. Ambassador to Haiti at the time of the coup.\nAfter the second coup against him, Aristide went into exile in the Central African Republic and South Africa. He returned to Haiti in 2011 after seven years in exile.\nBackground and church vocation.\nJean-Bertrand Aristide was born into poverty in Port-Salut, Sud on 15 July 1953. His father died three months after Aristide was born, and he later moved to Port-au-Prince with his mother. At age five, Aristide started school with priests of the Salesian order. He was educated at the Coll\u00e8ge Notre-Dame in Cap-Ha\u00eftien, graduating with honors in 1974. He then took a course of novitiate studies in La Vega, Dominican Republic, before returning to Haiti to study philosophy at the Grand S\u00e9minaire Notre Dame and psychology at the State University of Haiti.\nAfter completing his post-graduate studies in 1979, Aristide travelled in Europe, studying in Italy, Greece, and at the Cremisan Monastery in the town of Beit Jala. He returned to Haiti in 1982 for his ordination as a Salesian priest, and was appointed curate of a small parish in Port-au-Prince.\nBetween 1957 and 1986, Haiti was ruled by the family dictatorships of Fran\u00e7ois \"Papa Doc\" and Jean-Claude \"Baby Doc\" Duvalier. The misery endured by Haiti's poor made a deep impression on Aristide himself, and he became an outspoken critic of Duvalierism. Nor did he spare the hierarchy of the country's church, since a 1966 Vatican Concordat granted Duvalier one-time power to appoint Haiti's bishops. An exponent of liberation theology, Aristide denounced Duvalier's regime in one of his earliest sermons. This did not go unnoticed by the regime's top echelons. Under pressure, the provincial delegate of the Salesian Order sent Aristide into three years of exile in Montreal. By 1985, as popular opposition to Duvalier's regime grew, Aristide was back preaching in Haiti. His Easter Week sermon, \"A call to holiness\", delivered at the cathedral of Port-au-Prince and later broadcast throughout Haiti, proclaimed: \"The path of those Haitians who reject the regime is the path of righteousness and love.\"\nAristide became a leading figure in the Ti Legliz movement, whose name means \"little church\" in Krey\u00f2l. In September 1985, he was appointed to St. Jean Bosco church, in a poor neighborhood in Port-au-Prince. Struck by the absence of young people in the church, Aristide began to organize youth, sponsoring weekly youth Masses. He founded an orphanage for urban street children in 1986 called \"Lafanmi Selavi\" [Family is Life]. The program sought to be a model of participatory democracy for the children it served. As Aristide became a leading voice for the aspirations of Haiti's dispossessed, he inevitably became a target for attack. He survived at least four assassination attempts. The most widely publicized attempt, the St. Jean Bosco massacre, occurred on 11 September 1988, During the attempt over one hundred armed Tontons Macoute wearing red armbands forced their way into St. Jean Bosco as Aristide began Sunday Mass. As army troops and police stood by, the men fired machine guns at the congregation and attacked fleeing parishioners with machetes. Aristide's church was burned to the ground. Thirteen people are reported to have been killed, and 77 wounded. Aristide survived and went into hiding.\nSubsequently, Salesian officials ordered Aristide to leave Haiti, but tens of thousands of Haitians protested, blocking his access to the airport. In December 1988, Aristide was expelled from his Salesian order. A statement prepared by the Salesians called the priest's political activities an \"incitement to hatred and violence\", out of line with his role as a clergyman. Aristide appealed the decision, saying: \"The crime of which I stand accused is the crime of preaching food for all men and women.\" In a January 1988 interview, he said \"The solution is revolution, first in the spirit of the Gospel; Jesus could not accept people going hungry. It is a conflict between classes, rich and poor. My role is to preach and organize...\" In 1994, Aristide left priesthood, ending years of tension with the church over his criticism of its hierarchy and his espousal of liberation theology. Aristide married Mildred Trouillot, on 20 January 1996, with whom he had two daughters.\nFirst presidency (1991\u201396).\nFollowing the violence at the aborted national election of 1987, the 1990 election was approached with caution. Aristide announced his candidacy for the presidency. Following a six-week campaign, during which he dubbed his followers the \"\" (National Front for Change and Democracy, or FNCD), Aristide was elected president in 1990 with 67% of the vote in what is generally recognized as the first honest election in Haitian history. However, just eight months into his presidency he was overthrown by a bloody military coup. He broke from FNCD and created the Struggling People's Organization (OPL, Organisation Politique \"Lavalas\") \u2013 \"the flood\" or \"torrent\" in Kr\u00e9y\u00f2l. The coup d'\u00e9tat overthrowing Aristide occurred six weeks after the 200-year anniversary of Bois Ca\u00efman, a Vodou ceremony during which Haitians planned the Haitian Revolution of 1791, which the Aristide government had commemorated at the National Palace.\nA coup attempt against Aristide had taken place on 6 January, even before his inauguration, when Roger Lafontant, a Tonton Macoute leader under Duvalier, seized the provisional president Ertha Pascal-Trouillot the first and only woman president. After large numbers of Aristide supporters filled the streets in protest and Lafontant attempted to declare martial law, the army crushed the incipient coup.\nDuring Aristide's short-lived first period in office, he attempted to carry out substantial reforms, which brought passionate opposition from Haiti's business and military elite. He sought to bring the military under civilian control, retiring the commander in chief of the army H\u00e9rard Abraham, initiated investigations of human rights violations, and brought to trial several Tontons Macoute who had not fled the country. He also banned the emigration of many well known Haitians until their bank accounts had been examined. His relationship with the National Assembly soon deteriorated, and he attempted repeatedly to bypass it on judicial, Cabinet and ambassadorial appointments. His nomination of his close friend and political ally, Ren\u00e9 Pr\u00e9val, as prime minister, provoked severe criticism from political opponents overlooked, and the National Assembly threatened a no-confidence vote against Pr\u00e9val in August 1991. This led to a crowd of at least 2000 at the National Palace, which threatened violence; together with Aristide's failure to explicitly reject mob violence, this permitted the junta, which would topple him, to accuse him of human rights violations. The nomination of Marie-Denise Fabien Jean-Louis, a Duvalier-linked physician with no diplomatic experience, as minister of foreign affairs, also received significant opposition from many within the Lavalas movement.\n1991 coup d'\u00e9tat.\nIn September 1991 the army performed a coup against him (1991 Haitian coup d'\u00e9tat), led by army general Raoul C\u00e9dras, who had been promoted by Aristide in June to commander in chief of the army. Aristide was deposed on 29 September 1991, and after several days sent into exile, his life only saved by the intervention of U.S., French and Venezuelan diplomats. In accordance with the requirements of article 149 of the Haitian Constitution, Superior Court justice Joseph N\u00e9rette was installed as pr\u00e9sident provisoire to serve until elections were held within 90 days of Aristide's resignation. However, real power was held by army commander Raoul C\u00e9dras. High-ranking members of the Haitian National Intelligence Service (SIN), which had been set up and financed in the 1980s by the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) as part of the war on drugs, were involved in the coup, and were reportedly still receiving funding and training from the CIA for intelligence-gathering activities at the time of the coup, but this funding reportedly ended after the coup. The \"New York Times\" stated, \"No evidence suggests that the C.I.A. backed the coup or intentionally undermined President Aristide.\" However, press reports about possible CIA involvement in Haitian politics before the coup sparked congressional hearings in the United States.\nA campaign of terror against Aristide supporters was started by Emmanuel Constant after Aristide was forced out of power. In 1993, Constant, who had been on the CIA's payroll as an informant since 1992, organized the Front for the Advancement and Progress of Ha\u00efti (FRAPH), which targeted and killed Aristide supporters.\nAristide spent his exile first in Venezuela and then in the United States, working to develop international support. A United Nations trade embargo during Aristide's exile, intended to force the coup leaders to step down, was a strong blow to Haiti's already weak economy. President George H. W. Bush granted an exemption from the embargo to many U.S. companies doing business in Haiti, and president Bill Clinton extended this exemption.\nIn addition to this trade with the United States, the coup regime was supported by massive profits from the drug trade thanks to the Haitian military's affiliation with the Cali Cartel; Aristide publicly stated that his own pursuit of arresting drug dealers was one event that prompted the coup by drug-affiliated military officials Raul Cedras and Michel Francois (a claim echoed by his former secretary of State Patrick Elie). Representative John Conyers (D-Michigan) expressed concern that the only U.S. government agency to publicly recognize the Haitian junta's role in drug trafficking was the Drug Enforcement Administration, and that, despite a wealth of evidence provided by the DEA proving the junta's drug connections, the Clinton administration downplayed this factor rather than use it as a hedge against the junta (as the U.S. government had done against Manuel Noriega). Nairn in particular alleged that the CIA's connections to these drug traffickers in the junta not only dated to the creation of SIN, but were ongoing during and after the coup. Nairn's claims are confirmed in part by revelations of Emmanuel Constant regarding the ties of his FRAPH organization to the CIA before and during the coup government.\n1994 return.\nFollowing large pro-Aristide demonstrations by Haitian expats (estimated over 60,000 demonstrators in New York City) urging Bill Clinton to deliver on his election promise to return Aristide to Haiti, U.S. and international pressure (including United Nations Security Council Resolution 940 on 31 July 1994), persuaded the military regime to back down and U.S. troops were deployed in the country by President Bill Clinton. On 15 October 1994, the Clinton administration returned Aristide to Haiti to complete his term in office.\nAristide received the 1996 UNESCO Prize for human rights education.\nOpposition (1996\u20132001).\nIn late 1996, Aristide broke from the OPL over what he called its \"distance from the people\" and created a new political party, the Fanmi Lavalas. The OPL, holding the majority in the S\u00e9nat and the Chambre des D\u00e9put\u00e9s, renamed itself the Organisation du Peuple en Lutte, maintaining the OPL acronym.\nFanmi Lavalas won the 2000 legislative election in May, but a handful of Senate seats were allocated to Lavalas candidates that critics claimed should have had second-round runoffs (as the votes of some smaller parties were eliminated in final vote counts, which had also been done in earlier elections). Critics argue that FL had not achieved a first-round majority for this handful of senate seats. Critics also charge that Fanmi Lavalas controlled the Provisional Election Commission which made the decision, but their criticism is of a vote count technique used prior in Haiti history. Aristide then was elected later that year in the 2000 presidential election, an election boycotted by most opposition political parties, now organised into the Convergence D\u00e9mocratique. Although the U.S. government claimed that the election turnout was hardly over 10%, international observers saw turnout of around 50%, and at the time, CNN reported a turnout of 60% with over 92% voting for Aristide. The Bush administration in the U.S. and Haitian expatriate opposition leaders in Florida would use the criticism over the election to argue for an embargo on international aid to the Haitian government.\nSecond presidency (2001\u20132004).\nIn 2003, Aristide called for France, the former colonizer of the country, to pay $21\u00a0billion in restitution to Haiti for the 90\u00a0million gold francs supplied to France by Haiti in restitution for French property, including enslaved people, that was appropriated in the Haitian rebellion, over the period from 1825 to 1947.\n2004 overthrow.\nIt has been alleged that after his return to power in 2001, Aristide increasingly relied on street gangs to enforce his will and to terrorize his political opponents. After the murder of Amiot M\u00e9tayer, the leader of the pro-Aristide Lame Kanibal (Cannibal Army) gang in the Raboteau slum in the northern city of Gona\u00efves in September 2003, M\u00e9tayer's partisans, believing that Aristide had ordered his killing, rose up against the president. On 5 December 2003, organized pro-Aristide forces committed and encouraged violent attacks and threats against University of Port-au-Prince students protesting against Aristide.\nIn early 2004, the Cannibal Army was joined in its fight against the government by former military and police, many of whom had been in exile in the Dominican Republic and who had been launching cross-border raids since 2001. The paramilitary campaign was headed by ex-police chief Guy Philippe and former FRAPH death squad founder Louis Jodel Chamblain. In February 2004, pro-Aristide forces were accused of committing a massacre in the city of Saint-Marc.\nThe rebels soon took control of the North, and eventually laid siege to, and then invaded, the capital. Under disputed circumstances, Aristide was flown out of the country by the U.S. with assistance from Canada and France on 28 February 2004. Aristide and his bodyguard, Franz Gabriel, stated that he was the victim of a \"new coup d'\u00e9tat or modern kidnapping\" by U.S. forces. Mrs. Aristide stated that the personnel who escorted him wore U.S. Special Forces uniforms, but changed into civilian clothes upon boarding the aircraft that was used to remove them from Haiti. Jamaican prime minister P. J. Patterson released a statement saying \"we are bound to question whether his resignation was truly voluntary, as it comes after the capture of regions of Haiti by armed insurgents and the failure of the international community to provide the requisite support. The removal of President Aristide in these circumstances sets a dangerous precedent for democratically elected governments anywhere and everywhere, as it promotes the removal of duly elected persons from office by the power of rebel forces.\" Meanwhile, National Palace security agent Casimir Chariot said that Aristide left of his own free will. Aristide's prime minister, Yvon Neptune, also said that Aristide's resignation was genuine.\nAfter Aristide was flown out of Haiti, looters raided his villa. Most barricades were lifted the day after Aristide left as the shooting had stopped; order was maintained by Haitian police, along with armed rebels and local vigilantes. Almost immediately after the Aristide family was transported from Haiti, the Prime Minister of Jamaica, P.J. Patterson, dispatched a member of parliament, Sharon Hay-Webster, to the Central African Republic. The leadership of that country agreed that Aristide and his family could go to Jamaica. The Aristide family remained on the island for several months until the Jamaican government gained acceptance by South Africa for the family to relocate there.\nAristide later claimed that France and the U.S. had a role in what he termed \"a kidnapping\" that took him from Haiti to South Africa via the Central African Republic. However, authorities said his temporary asylum there had been negotiated by the United States, France and Gabon. On 1 March 2004, U.S. congresswoman Maxine Waters, along with Aristide family friend Randall Robinson, reported Aristide had told them that he had been forced to resign and had been abducted from the country by the United States and that he had been held hostage by an armed military guard. According to Waters, Mildred Aristide called her at her home at 6:30\u00a0am, informing her that \"the coup d'etat has been completed\". She also stated how Jean-Bertrand Aristide claimed the U.S. embassy in Haiti's chief of staff came to his house and threatened that he, alongside many other Haitians would be killed if he did not resign. Aristide's letter, which is described as his resignation, does not actually contain Aristide clearly and officially resigning. Representative Charles Rangel, D-New York, expressed similar words, saying Aristide had told him he was \"disappointed that the international community had let him down\" and \"that he resigned under pressure\" \u2013 \"As a matter of fact, he was very apprehensive for his life. They made it clear that he had to go now or he would be killed.\" When asked for his response to these statements Colin Powell said that \"it might have been better for members of Congress who have heard these stories to ask us about the stories before going public with them so we don't make a difficult situation that much more difficult\" and he alleged that Aristide \"did not democratically govern or govern well\". CARICOM, an organization of Caribbean countries that included Haiti, called for a United Nations investigation into Aristide's removal, but were reportedly pressured by the U.S. and France to drop their request. Some observers suggest the rebellion and removal of Aristide were covertly orchestrated by these two countries and Canada.\nIn 2022, Thierry Burkard, the French ambassador to Haiti at the time, told the \"New York Times\" that France and the United States had effectively orchestrated a coup against Aristide by forcing him into exile. In response to this, James Brendan Foley, U.S. Ambassador to Haiti at the time of the coup, called these claims untrue, stating that it was never U.S. policy to remove Aristide. He said that Aristide had requested a U.S. rescue and that the decision to dispatch a plane to carry him to safety had been agreed upon following night-time discussions at the behest of Aristide.\nIn a 2006 interview, Aristide claimed the United States reneged on compromises he made with it over the privatization of enterprises to ensure that part of the profits from those enterprises would be distributed to the Haitian population and then relied on a disinformation campaign to discredit him.\nExile (2004\u20132011).\nAfter being cast into exile, in mid-2004 Aristide, his family, and bodyguards were welcomed to South Africa by several cabinet ministers, 20 senior diplomats, and a guard of honor. Receiving a salary from and provided staff by the South African government, Aristide lived with his family in a government villa in Pretoria. In South Africa, Aristide became an honorary research fellow at the University of South Africa, learned Zulu, and, on 25 April 2007, received a doctorate in African languages.\nOn 21 December 2007, a speech by Aristide marking the new year and Haiti's Independence Day was broadcast, the fourth such speech since his exile; in the speech he criticized the 2006 presidential election in which Pr\u00e9val was elected, describing it as a \"selection\", in which \"the knife of treason was planted\" in the back of the Haitian people.\nSince the election, some high-ranking members of Lavalas have been targets for violence. Lovinsky Pierre-Antoine, a leading human rights organizer in Haiti and a member of Lavalas, disappeared in August 2007. His whereabouts remain unknown and a news article states: \"Like many protesters, he [Wilson Mesilien, coordinator of the pro-Aristide 30 September Foundation] wore a T-shirt demanding the return of foundation leader Lovinsky Pierre-Antoine, a human rights activist and critic of both U.N. and U.S. involvement in Haiti who disappeared in August.\"\nReturn to Haiti.\nIn a confidential 2008 United States embassy cable, former U.S. ambassador to Haiti Janet Sanderson emphasized that: \"A premature departure of MINUSTAH would leave the [Haitian] government...vulnerable to...resurgent populist and anti-market economy political forces\u00a0\u2013 reversing gains of the last two years. MINUSTAH is an indispensable tool in realizing core USG [U.S. government] policy interests in Haiti.\"\nAt a meeting with U.S. State Department officials on 2 August 2006, former Guatemalan diplomat Edmond Mulet, then chief of MINUSTAH, urged U.S. legal action against Aristide to prevent the former president from gaining more traction with the Haitian population and returning to Haiti.\nAt Mulet's request, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan urged South Africa\u2019s president Thabo Mbeki to ensure that Aristide remained in the country.\nU.S. ambassador James Foley wrote in a confidential 22 March 2005 cable that an August 2004 poll \"showed that Aristide was still the only figure in Haiti with a favorability rating above 50%\".\nAfter Ren\u00e9 Pr\u00e9val, a former ally of Aristide, was elected president of Haiti in 2006, he said it would be possible for Aristide to return to Haiti.\nOn 16 December 2009, several thousand protesters marched through Port-au-Prince calling for Aristide's return to Haiti, and protesting the exclusion of Aristide's Fanmi Lavalas party from upcoming elections.\nOn 12 January 2010, Aristide sent his condolences to victims of the earthquake in Haiti just a few hours after it occurred, and stated that he wished to return to help rebuild the country.\nOn 7 November 2010, in an exclusive interview (the last given before his return to Haiti) with independent reporter Nicolas Rossier in \"Eurasia Review\" and the \"Huffington Post\", Aristide declared that the 2010 elections were not inclusive of his party, Fanmi Lavalas, and therefore not fair and free. He also confirmed his wishes to go back to Haiti but stated that he was not allowed to travel out of South Africa.\nIn February 2011, Aristide announced that he would return to Haiti within days of the ruling Haitian government removing impediments to him receiving his Haitian passport. On 17 March 2011, Aristide departed for Haiti from his exile in South Africa. U.S. president Barack Obama had asked South African president Jacob Zuma to delay Aristide's departure to prevent him from returning to Haiti before a presidential run-off election scheduled for 20 March. Aristide's party was barred from participating in the election, and the U.S. feared his return could be destabilizing. On Friday, 18 March 2011, he and his spouse arrived at Port-au-Prince Airport, and were greeted by thousands of supporters. He told the crowd waiting at the airport: \"The exclusion of Fanmi Lavalas is the exclusion of the Haitian people. In 1804, the Haitian revolution marked the end of slavery. Today, may the Haitian people end exiles and coups d\u2019\u00e9tat, while peacefully moving from social exclusion to inclusion.\"\nPost-exile (2011\u2013present).\nAfter Aristide returned to Haiti in 2011, he abstained from political involvement. On 12 September 2014, Aristide was ordered under house arrest by Judge Lamarre Belzaire while under a corruption investigation. Aristide's lawyers and supporters of Fanmi Lavalas questioned the legality of the judge's order under Haitian law as well as the judge's impartiality.\nIn late 2016, Aristide, for the first time in many years, returned to electioneering, touring the country to promote Fanmi Lavalas candidates; the election results (decried by his party as illegitimate) returned to power right-wing forces in the country, with only a 20% voter turnout.\nAccomplishments.\nUnder president Aristide's leadership, the Haitian government implemented many major reforms. These included greatly increasing access to health care and education for the general population, increasing adult literacy and protections for those accused of crimes, improving training for judges, prohibiting human trafficking, disbanding the Haitian military, establishing an improved climate for human rights and civil liberties, doubling the minimum wage, instituting land reform and assistance to small farmers, providing boat construction training to fishermen, establishing a food distribution network to provide low cost food to the poor at below market prices, building low-cost housing, and reducing government corruption.\nAchievements in education.\nDuring successive Lavalas administrations, Jean-Bertrand Aristide and Ren\u00e9 Pr\u00e9val built 195 new primary schools and 104 secondary schools. Prior to Aristide's election in 1990, there were just 34 secondary schools nationwide. Lavalas also provided thousands of scholarships so that children could afford to attend church/private schools. Between 2001 and 2004, the percentage of children enrolled in primary school education rose to 72%, and an estimated 300,000 adults took part in Lavalas sponsored adult literacy campaigns. This helped the adult literacy rate rise from 35% to 55%.\nAchievements in health care.\nIn addition to numerous educational advances, Aristide and Lavalas embarked on an ambitious plan to develop the public primary health care system with Cuban assistance. Since the devastation unleashed by Hurricane Georges in 1998, Cuba entered a humanitarian agreement with Haiti whereby Haitian doctors would be trained in Cuba, and Cuban doctors would work in rural areas. At the time of 2010 Haiti earthquake, 573 doctors had been trained in Cuba.\nDespite operating under an aid embargo, the Lavalas administration succeeded in reducing the infant mortality rate as well as reducing the percentage of underweight newborns. A successful AIDS prevention and treatment program was also established, leading the Catholic Institute for International Relations to state: the \"incredible feat of slowing the rate of new infections in Haiti has been achieved despite the lack of international aid to the Haitian government, and despite the notable lack of resources faced by those working in the health field\".\nDisbanding the army and paramilitary units \u2013 the Fad'H, Tonton Macoutes, and Attaches.\nThe Lavalas political project has long been dedicated to promoting a civilian police force and disbanding the long-time tools of elite repression in Haiti which have been the country's brutal military and paramilitary forces. The government under Aristide launched the first trial of paramilitary death squads and successfully jailed many after aired on Haitian public television trials of FAdH and FRAPH members involved in massacres of civilians.\nTrials were held bringing to justice a handful of wealthy individuals from among Haiti's upper class that had financed paramilitary death squads, including individuals such as Judy C. Roy (who has acknowledged her financing of the FLRN death squads) of whom held close ties with the former dictators Raoul Cedras and Jean-Claude Duvalier. Reforming the country's security services though posed a constant problem for Lavalas, as the U.S. sought to undermine these reform efforts by seeking to re-insert its right-wing allies into the police force. The Lavalas government also faced a lack of resources, due to cuts in aid to Haiti with US policies under the first presidency of George W. Bush. Meanwhile, there was continued prevalence of corruption in connection with the drug trade.\nCriticism.\nAccusations of human rights abuses.\nHuman Rights Watch accused the Haitian police force under Aristide and his political supporters of attacks on opposition rallies. They also said that the emergence of armed rebels seeking to overthrow Aristide reflected \"the failure of the country's democratic institutions and procedures\". According to a study by researcher Jeb Sprague, the armed rebel paramilitary units received vital support from a handful of Haitian elites, Dominican governmental sectors, and foreign intelligence. The undermanned Haitian police faced difficulties in repelling cross-border attacks led by the ex-army paramilitary rebels.\nVideos surfaced showing a portion of a speech by Aristide on 27 August 1991, occurring just after military personnel and death squad members attempted to assassinate him, in which he says \"Don't hesitate to give him what he deserves. What a beautiful tool! What a beautiful instrument! What a beautiful piece of equipment! It's beautiful, yes it's beautiful, it's cute, it's pretty, it has a good smell, wherever you go you want to inhale it.\" Critics allege that he was endorsing the practice of \"necklacing\" opposition activists, placing a gasoline-soaked tire around a person's neck and setting the tire ablaze; others argue he was actually speaking about people using the constitution to empower themselves and to defend their country against right-wing death squads. Earlier in the speech he is quoted as saying \"Your tool in hand, your instrument in hand, your constitution in hand! Don't hesitate to give him what he deserves. Your equipment in hand, your trowel in hand, your pencil in hand, your Constitution in hand, don't hesitate to give him what he deserves.\"\nAlthough there were accusations of human rights abuses, the OAS/UN International Civilian Mission in Haiti, known by the French acronym MICIVIH, found that the human rights situation in Haiti improved dramatically following Aristide's return to power in 1994. Amnesty International reported that, after Aristide's departure in 2004, Haiti was \"descending into a severe humanitarian and human rights crisis\". BBC correspondents say that Aristide is seen as a champion of the poor, and remains popular with many in Haiti. Aristide continues to be among the most important political figures in the country, and is considered by many to be the only really popular, democratically elected leader Haiti has ever had. Yet his second administration was targeted for destabilization and is remembered as a time of great difficulty of many.\nAccusations of corruption.\nSome officials have been indicted by a U.S. court.\nCompanies that allegedly made deals with Aristide's government included IDT, Fusion Telecommunications, and Skytel; critics claim the first two companies had political links to Aristide. AT&amp;T reportedly declined to wire money to \"Mont Salem\". Aristide's supporters say corruption charges against the former president are a deliberate attempt to keep a popular leader from running in elections.\nViews.\nIn 2000, Aristide published \",\" which accused the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund of working on behalf of the world's wealthiest nations rather than in the interest of genuine international development. Aristide called for \"a culture of global solidarity\" to eliminate poverty as an alternative to the globalization represented by neocolonialism and neoliberalism.\nAristide is known for organizing popular resistance to the Duvalier dynasty as a priest, and saw it a Christian duty to oppose the privilege of the rich oligarchy and social injustice of capitalism. He commented on his actions: \"I acted as a theologian in order to guide a political struggle: the irruption of the poor on the social scene.\" While sometimes described as communist, Aristide himself argues that his view are of Catholic rather than Marxist inspiration, but also clarified that Marxist writings are valuable and were used by him among other political philosophies. Aristide followed the principle of class struggle, which he saw as undeniable reality: \"I did not invent class struggle. Neither did Karl Marx. I would have preferred never to meet it. This may be possible if one never leaves the Vatican or the heights of Petionville [a chic Haitian suburb]. In the streets of Port-au-Prince, who has not met class struggle? It is not a topic for controversy, but a fact, based on empirical evidence.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66796", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66796", "title": "Alfonso V of Le\u00f3n", "text": "King of Le\u00f3n from 999 to 1028\nAlfonso V (c. 994\u00a0\u2013 7 August 1028), called the Noble, was King of Le\u00f3n from 999 to 1028. Like other kings of Le\u00f3n, he used the title emperor () to assert his standing among the Christian rulers of Spain. He succeeded his father, Bermudo II, in 999. His mother Elvira Garc\u00eda and count Menendo Gonz\u00e1lez, who raised him in Galicia, acted as his co-regents. Upon the count's death in 1008, Alfonso ruled on his own.\nReign.\nAlfonso began the work of reorganizing the Christian kingdom of the northwest of the Iberian Peninsula after a most disastrous period of civil war and Arab inroads. Enough is known of him to justify the belief that he had some of the qualities of a soldier and a statesman.\nHis name and that of his wife are associated with the grant of the first franchises of Le\u00f3n (1017). On Wednesday, 7 August 1028, Alfonso V was killed by an arrow while besieging the Muslim-occupied town of Viseu. King Alfonso was buried next to his first wife Elvira, according to his wishes, at the Church of Saint John the Baptist and San Pelayo which later changed its name to the Basilica of San Isidoro when the latter saint's remains were transferred from Seville. The following epitaph was carved on his tomb:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"H. IACET ADEFONSUS QUI POPVLATIT LEGIONEM...ET DEDIT BONOS FOROS ET FECIT / ECCLESIAM HANC LVTO ET LATERE. HABVIT PRAELIA CUM / SARRACENIS, ET INTERFECTUS, EST SAGITTA APUD VISEUM / PORTUGAL FUIT FILIUS VEREMUNDI ORDONII / OBIIT ERA M SEXAGESIMA QUINTA III NAS M.\"\nFamily.\nAlfonso first married Elvira Men\u00e9ndez in 1013, daughter of his tutor Menendo Gonz\u00e1lez at whose house he was raised as a child. They had two children:\nAfter Elvira's death on 2 December 1022, Alfonso married Urraca Garc\u00e9s, sister of King Sancho III of Pamplona. Before this marriage took place, the king of Pamplona had sent Ponce, abbot at the Monastery of San Pedro de Tav\u00e8rnoles, later bishop of Oviedo, and a nobleman named Garcia, to intercede before Abbot Oliba, bishop of Vic, in favor of the marriage of his sister Urraca to the king of Le\u00f3n, despite the impediments of consanguinity. Although Bishop Oliba did not authorize the marriage, describing it as \"incesti connubii\" in a letter dated 11 May 1023, the royal wedding was celebrated between the date of the bishop's letter and 13 November 1023 when Alfonso V and his new wife, who confirms as \"Urraka regina\", appear together for the first time in a charter in the Cathedral of Le\u00f3n.\nUrraca and her mother Jimena Fern\u00e1ndez made a donation on 26 September 1028 to the Cathedral of Santiago de Compostela confirming as \"Scemena regina simulque et filia mea Urraca Regina (...) genitoris nostri Fredenandus Ueremudiz et domna Geloria\", and a few years later, King Bermudo III on 6 August 1031 referred to his step-mother as \"Urraca regina Garseani regis filia\".\nAlfonso and Urraca had one daughter, who was named Jimena as attested in a charter dated 22 December 1036 in a donation made by Muniadona and her son Fernando Gundem\u00e1riz, son of Gundemaro Pini\u00f3liz, whom she confirms as Jimena, daughter of King Alfonso.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66797", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66797", "title": "Fibroblast", "text": "Animal connective tissue cell\nA fibroblast is a type of biological cell typically with a spindle shape that synthesizes the extracellular matrix and collagen, produces the structural framework (stroma) for animal tissues, and plays a critical role in wound healing. Fibroblasts are the most common cells of connective tissue in animals.\nStructure.\nFibroblasts have a branched cytoplasm surrounding an elliptical, speckled nucleus having two or more nucleoli. Active fibroblasts can be recognized by their abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). Inactive fibroblasts, called 'fibrocytes', are smaller, spindle-shaped, and have less RER. Although disjointed and scattered when covering large spaces, fibroblasts often locally align in parallel clusters when crowded together.\nUnlike the epithelial cells lining the body structures, fibroblasts do not form flat monolayers and are not restricted by a polarizing attachment to a basal lamina on one side, although they may contribute to basal lamina components in some situations (e.g. subepithelial myofibroblasts in intestine may secrete the \u03b1-2 chain-carrying component of the laminin, which is absent only in regions of follicle-associated epithelia which lack the myofibroblast lining). Fibroblasts can also migrate slowly over substratum as individual cells, again in contrast to epithelial cells. While epithelial cells form the lining of body structures, fibroblasts and related connective tissues sculpt the \"bulk\" of an organism.\nThe life span of a fibroblast, as measured in chick embryos, is 57 \u00b1 3 days.\nRelationship with fibrocytes.\nFibroblasts and fibrocytes are two states of the same cells, the former being the activated state, the latter the less active state, concerned with maintenance and tissue metabolism. Currently, there is a tendency to call both forms fibroblasts. The suffix \"-blast\" is used in cellular biology to denote a stem cell or a cell in an activated state of metabolism.\nFibroblasts are morphologically heterogeneous with diverse appearances depending on their location and activity. Though morphologically inconspicuous, ectopically transplanted fibroblasts can often retain positional memory of the location and tissue context where they had previously resided, at least over a few generations. This remarkable behavior may lead to discomfort in the rare event that they stagnate there excessively.\nDevelopment.\nThe main function of fibroblasts is to maintain the structural integrity of connective tissues by continuously secreting precursors of the extracellular matrix (ECM), providing all such components, primarily the ground substance and a variety of fibers. The composition of the ECM determines the physical properties of connective tissues.\nLike other cells of connective tissue, fibroblasts are derived from primitive mesenchyme. Hence, they express the intermediate filament protein vimentin, a feature used as a marker to distinguish their mesodermal origin. However, this test is not specific as epithelial cells cultured in vitro on adherent substratum may also express vimentin after some time.\nIn certain situations, epithelial cells can give rise to fibroblasts, a process called epithelial-mesenchymal transition.\nConversely, fibroblasts in some situations may give rise to epithelia by undergoing a mesenchymal to epithelial transition and organizing into a condensed, polarized, laterally connected true epithelial sheet. This process is seen in many developmental situations (e.g. nephron and notocord development), as well as in wound healing and tumorigenesis.\nFunction.\nFibroblasts make collagen fibers, glycosaminoglycans, reticular and elastic fibers. The fibroblasts of growing individuals divide and synthesize ground substance. Tissue damage stimulates fibrocytes and induces the production of fibroblasts.\nInflammation.\nBesides their commonly known role as structural components, fibroblasts play a critical role in an immune response to a tissue injury. They are early players in initiating inflammation in the presence of invading microorganisms. They induce chemokine synthesis through the presentation of receptors on their surface. Immune cells then respond and initiate a cascade of events to clear the invasive microorganisms. Receptors on the surface of fibroblasts also allow regulation of hematopoietic cells and provide a pathway for immune cells to regulate fibroblasts.\nTumour mediation.\nFibroblasts, like tumor-associated host fibroblasts (TAF), play a crucial role in immune regulation through TAF-derived ECM components and modulators. TAF are known to be significant in the inflammatory response as well as immune suppression in tumors. TAF-derived ECM components cause alterations in ECM composition and initiate the ECM remodeling. ECM remodeling is described as changes in the ECM as a result of enzyme activity which can lead to degradation of the ECM. Immune regulation of tumors is largely determined by ECM remodeling because the ECM is responsible for regulating a variety of functions, such as proliferation, differentiation, and morphogenesis of vital organs. In many tumor types, especially those related to the epithelial cells, ECM remodeling is common. Examples of TAF-derived ECM components include Tenascin and Thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), which can be found in sites of chronic inflammation and carcinomas, respectively.\nImmune regulation of tumors can also occur through the TAF-derived modulators. Although these modulators may sound similar to the TAF-derived ECM components, they differ in the sense that they are responsible for the variation and turnover of the ECM. Cleaved ECM molecules can play a critical role in immune regulation. Proteases like matrix metalloproteineases and the uPA system are known to cleave the ECM. These proteases are derived from fibroblasts.\nUse of fibroblasts as feeder cells.\nMouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) are often used as supportive \"feeder cells\" in research using human embryonic stem cells, induced pluripotent stem cells and primary epithelial cell culture. However, many researchers are trying to phase out MEFs in favor of culture media with precisely defined ingredients in order to facilitate the development of clinical-grade products.\nIn view of the potential clinical applications of stem cell-derived tissues or primary epithelial cells, the use of human fibroblasts as an alternative to MEF feeders has been studied. Whereas the fibroblasts are usually used to maintain pluripotency of the stem cells, they can also be used to facilitate development of the stem cells into specific type of cells such as cardiomyocytes.\nHost immune response.\nFibroblasts from different anatomical sites in the body express many genes that code for immune mediators and proteins. These mediators of immune response enable the cellular communication with hematopoietic immune cells. The immune activity of non-hematopoietic cells, such as fibroblasts, is referred to as \u201cstructural immunity\u201d. In order to facilitate a fast response to immunological challenges, fibroblasts encode crucial aspects of the structural cell immune response in the epigenome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66798", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66798", "title": "Maurice Greene (sprinter)", "text": "American sprinter (born 1974)\nMaurice Greene (born July 23, 1974) is an American former track and field sprinter who competed in the 60 meters, 100 meters, and 200 meters. He is a former 100 m world record holder with a time of 9.79 seconds. During the height of his career (1997\u20132004) he won four Olympic medals and was a five-time World Champion. This included three golds at the 1999 World Championships, a feat which had previously only been achieved by Carl Lewis and Michael Johnson and has since been equaled by three others.\nHis career was affected by several injuries from 2001 onwards, although he won the 100\u00a0meters bronze and silver in the sprint relay at the 2004 Summer Olympics. Greene was also successful indoors: he was the 1999 Indoor World Champion, was the world record holder in the 60-meter dash for nearly 20 years and remains the joint-fastest man over 50 meters. He raced sparingly after an injury in 2005 and officially retired in 2008. Over his career, he made the third most sub-10-second runs (52) in the 100 m, tied with Usain Bolt and only surpassed by Asafa Powell and Justin Gatlin.\nFollowing his track career he has become an ambassador for the IAAF and a television personality, appearing on \"Identity\", \"Blind Date\", and \"Dancing with the Stars\". Most recently he volunteered as a track coach at University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) for the 2012\u20132013 season.\nSince then he has become a physical education teacher at American Leadership Academy in Arizona. \nEarly life.\nGreene was born in Kansas City, Kansas and attended F.L. Schlagle High School. In his youth and high school, he participated in both American football and track and field. After high school, Greene received a Track scholarship to the University of Kansas. Greene also attended Park University and Kansas City Kansas Community College.\nSports career.\nEarly career and breakthrough.\nIn 1995 he took part in his first major international tournament at the World Championships in Gothenburg, but was eliminated in the 100 m quarter-finals. His next season was disappointing, as he failed to make the American team for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. After watching the Olympic final from the stands, Greene made his way to Los Angeles to seek the coaching of John Smith. He joined the start-up HSI group. He went on to become the group's most visible member.\nThe following season would be his breakthrough. At the World Championships in Athens, Greene won the 100 m title. This marked the beginning of Greene's dominance in the 100 m. He successfully defended his title in 1999 and 2001 and captured the Olympic gold medal in the 2000 Olympics. He was also successful at the 200 m. At the 1999 World Championships, he also won the 200 m title, the first to win both sprint events at a World Championships. However, he did not run the 200 m at the 2000 Olympics after an injury at the US trials.\nWorld record holder and athletic prime.\nIn 1999 he set the 100 m world record at 9.79 s (+0.1\u00a0m/s wind), beating Donovan Bailey's standing world record of 9.84 s (+0.7\u00a0m/s wind), and lowering the world record by the largest margin since the advent of electronic timing. Greene also matched Bailey's 50 m indoor world record time, but the run was never ratified. He also set the 60 m indoor world record twice. His 60 m indoor record is currently at 6.39 seconds. In addition, Maurice Greene was the only sprinter to hold the 60 m and 100 m world records at the same time. The previous IAAF logo was created in Greene's image.\nIn 2002, Greene lost his 100 m world record to fellow American Tim Montgomery, who beat his time by 0.01 (9.78 s +2.0\u00a0m/s), while Greene himself was injured and watched the race from the stands; Montgomery has since been found guilty of using performance-enhancing drugs, and his record has been retroactively rescinded. The record was broken legitimately by Asafa Powell in 2005 with a time of 9.77 s (+1.6\u00a0m/s wind).\nAt the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greene added to his medal tally with the bronze after finishing third in his attempt to defend his 100 m title to Justin Gatlin, and a silver as the anchor leg runner on the United States 4 \u00d7 100 m relay team, narrowly denied another Olympic Gold by the British team, who won by 0.01 seconds.\nGreene ran 52 sub-10-second 100 m races during his career, which at the time was more than any other sprinter in history. This record has now been surpassed by Asafa Powell who has 97 100 m sub-10-second runs to his name and Justin Gatlin who has 64 100 m sub-10-second runs to his name and equalled by Usain Bolt who has the same amount of sub-10-second runs with 52. Previously Greene had held the record for the most wind-legal sub-10-second clockings for 100 m in one season when he ran 9 sub-10s in 1999. This record was also broken by Asafa Powell in 2006 (12), and it was improved by Powell in 2008 to 15.\nOn December 21, 2006, he appeared as one of the \"strangers\" on the NBC game show \"Identity\". The contestant, a self-professed track and field fan, incorrectly identified him by name as Marion Jones, although she identified him as the \"world's fastest man.\"\nPost-running.\nOn February 4, 2008, Greene announced his retirement from track and field in Beijing, citing nagging injuries and a wish to see new individuals succeed in the sport. Greene said he hopes to pursue coaching and business interests.\nIn April 2008, the New York Times reported that Greene had paid Mexican discus thrower Angel Guillermo Heredia $10,000, which Heredia claimed was in payment for performance-enhancing drugs. Greene admitted meeting Heredia and making the payment but claimed it was common for him to pay for \"stuff\" for other members of his training group, and reiterated that he had never used banned drugs.\nGreene was a contestant on Season 7 of \"Dancing with the Stars\", and was paired with two-time champion Cheryl Burke. He was eliminated in Week 8 of the competition, taking 5th place. He hyperextended his leg during the competition. He later helped out in their pro-dancer competition and danced a Tango with future winner Anna Demidova. Greene also appeared on the American television series \"Blind Date\" where he was paired with a woman named Christie. Greene and Christie agreed that they would see each other again.\nHe has a tattoo that reads GOAT referring to his claim to be the \"Greatest of All Time\".\nMedia.\nIn an event set up by ESPN's Todd Gallagher, Greene appeared in the book \"Andy Roddick Beat Me With a Frying Pan\" racing in a 100-meter race against the book's editor, who had a 31-meter head start and the help of a moving sidewalk. Greene lost by a nose.\nMaurice Greene hosted the monthly show \"Greene Light\" on Eurosport where he met stars of athletics, such as Blanka Vla\u0161i\u0107, Allyson Felix and Churandy Martina.\nGreene was also the cover athlete for the multi-platform video game International Track &amp; Field 2000, which was developed by Konami.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66799", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66799", "title": "Antonio Gaudi/Casa Batllo", "text": ""}
{"id": "66800", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66800", "title": "Antonio Gaudi/Park Guell", "text": ""}
{"id": "66801", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66801", "title": "Antonio Gaudi/Casa Mila", "text": ""}
{"id": "66802", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66802", "title": "Haiti/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "66803", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66803", "title": "Haiti/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "66804", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66804", "title": "Haiti/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "66805", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66805", "title": "Haiti/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "66806", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66806", "title": "Haiti/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "66807", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66807", "title": "Haiti/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "66808", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66808", "title": "Haiti/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "66809", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66809", "title": "Kokichi Mikimoto", "text": "Japanese entrepreneur (1858\u20131954)\n was a Japanese entrepreneur who is credited with creating the first cultured pearl and subsequently starting the cultured pearl industry with the establishment of his luxury pearl company Mikimoto.\nHe was inducted into the House of Peers by imperial decree and posthumously awarded the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Sacred Treasure. On 18 April 1985, the Japan Patent Office selected him as one of Ten Japanese Great Inventors.\nThe company was ranked as one of the world's most luxurious brands by \"Women's Wear Daily\" Magazine and Mikimoto was considered one of the best Japanese financial leaders of the 20th century by Nihon Keizai Shimbun. He is also known as the founder of Mikimoto Pharmaceuticals, a company specialising in beauty products containing pearl calcium. Mikimoto Pearl Island is named after him. In addition, the \"Phoenix Mikimoto Crown\" used by Miss Universe winners as well as the pageant crown used by Miss International is credited to his patented work.\nEarly life.\nMikimoto was born 25 January 1858 in Toba, Shima Province (now Mie Prefecture). Mikimoto's father was an \"udon\" shop owner. Mikimoto was the eldest son. At age 11, Mikimoto's father fell ill. He left school at the age of 13 and sold vegetables to support his family. Seeing the pearl divers of Ise unloading their treasures at the shore in his childhood started his fascination with pearls. At the age of 20, Mikimoto noticed the many flaws of pearls as he judged a pearl exhibition in 1878. This began Mikimoto's search for the development of the perfect pearl.\nPioneering cultured pearls.\nMikimoto began his search of an alternative method to produce pearls as the chairman of the Shima Marine Products Improvement Association. At this point the demand for pearls had severely outweighed the supply, prompting the consideration of an effort to protect the oysters.\nIn 1888, Mikimoto obtained a loan to start his first pearl oyster farm at the Shinmei inlet on Ago Bay in Mie prefecture with his wife and partner Ume. On 11 July 1893, after many failures and near bankruptcy, he was able to create the hemispherical cultured pearls. The pearls were made by seeding the oyster with a small amount of mother of pearl. Despite this major discovery there were initially difficulties in selling his cultured pearls due to public confusion. To encourage sales, Mikimoto opened a jewelry boutique in Ginza where he was able to have workers educate the consumer on the nature of the cultured pearls. He introduced these pearls at a marine products exposition in Norway in 1897 and began an export business. However, it took him another 12 years to create completely spherical pearls that were indistinguishable from the highest quality natural ones, and commercially viable harvests were not obtained until the 1920s. In 1927, Mikimoto met with inventor Thomas Edison, who was in awe of Mikimoto's cultured pearls as it was \"supposed to be biologically impossible\".\nMikimoto did not know that government biologist Tokichi Nishikawa and a carpenter, Tatsuhei Mise, had each spent time in Australia and learned the secret to spherical pearl production from expatriate British marine biologist William Saville-Kent \u2013 inserting a piece of oyster epithelial membrane (the lip of mantle tissue) with a nucleus of shell or metal into an oyster's body or mantle causes the tissue to form a pearl sack. The sack produces nacre, which coats the nucleus, thus creating a pearl. Mise received a 1907 patent for this grafting needle. When Nishikawa applied in the same year, he realized that Mise had already secured a patent. In a compromise, the pair agreed to cooperate, calling their discovery the \"Mise-Nishikawa method\".\nMikimoto had received a patent in 1896 for producing hemispherical pearls, or mabes, and a 1908 patent for culturing in mantle tissue, but he could not use the Mise-Nishikawa method without invalidating his own patents. Mikimoto then altered his patent application to cover a technique to make round pearls in mantle tissue, which was granted in 1916. However, this method was not commercially viable. Mikimoto finally made arrangements to use Nishikawa's methods after 1916, and Mikimoto's business began to expand rapidly.\nIndustry success.\nThe new technology enabled Japan's cultured pearl industry to quickly expand after 1916; by 1935 there were 350 pearl farms in Japan producing 10 million cultured pearls annually.\nMikimoto Pearl Company.\nIn 1899, the first Mikimoto pearl shop opened in the fashionable Ginza district of Tokyo selling natural seed pearls and half round pearls. The Mikimoto business expanded internationally, opening stores in London (1913).\nBy 1935, the Japanese pearl industry was facing oversupply issues and plummeting prices for Japanese cultured pearls. Mikimoto promoted Japanese pearls in Europe and the US to counteract falling prices. He publicly burnt tons of low-quality pearls as a publicity stunt to establish a reputation that the Mikimoto company only sold high-quality cultured pearls.\nAfter World War II, Mikimoto opened stores in Paris, New York City, Chicago, Boston, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Shanghai, and Bombay, and was thus one of the first Japanese brands to attain an international presence and recognition.\nMikimoto had to constantly fight allegations that his pearls were only \"imitations\" of real pearls, despite scientific reports to the contrary. Mikimoto took advantage of every opportunity to personally promote his pearls, and took part in the 1926 Philadelphia World Exposition in which he displayed a replica of the \"Liberty Bell\" covered with pearls.\nMikimoto was the official jeweler of the Miss USA (2003\u20132008), Miss Universe (2002\u20132007 and 2017\u20132019) and Miss Teen USA (2002\u20132008) pageants, under the Miss Universe Organization.\nIn 2010\u201311, the company's estimated total sales were \u20ac300 million.\nIn June 2013, the company was chosen to design a five-piece parure consisting of a brooch, necklace, earrings, bracelet and the state diadem for Princess Kako of Akishino's 20th birthday anniversary, valued at \u00a530 Million JPY (US$279,000). The illustrious tiara features both floral motif and national symbols of Japan.\nPersonal life.\nMikimoto's wife was Ume, who was also his partner in creating the cultured pearl. Mikimoto and his wife have five children: Rui (eldest daughter), Mine (second daughter), Yo (third daughter), Ai (youngest daughter), and Ryuzo (son).\nOn 21 September 1954, Mikimoto died at the age of 96. Mikimoto's personal memorabilia are displayed at Mikimoto Pearl Island Memorial Hall, a museum in Toba, Japan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66811", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66811", "title": "Seasonal affective disorder", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSeasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a mood disorder subset in which people who typically have normal mental health throughout most of the year exhibit depressive symptoms at the same time each year. It is commonly, but not always, associated with the reductions or increases in total daily sunlight hours that occur during the winter or summer.\nCommon symptoms include sleeping too much, having little to no energy, and overeating. The condition in the summer can include heightened anxiety. However, there are significant differences in the duration, severity, and symptoms of each individual's experience of SAD. For instance, in a fifth of patients, the disorder completely resolves in five to eleven years, whereas for 33\u201344% of patients, it progresses into non-seasonal major depression.\nIn the DSM-IV and DSM-5, its status as a standalone condition was changed: It is no longer classified as a unique mood disorder but is now a specifier (called \"with seasonal pattern\") for recurrent major depressive disorder that occurs at a specific time of the year and fully remits otherwise. Although experts were initially skeptical, the condition eventually became recognized as a common disorder. However, the validity of SAD was called into question by a 2016 analysis from the Centers for Disease Control, when it found no links between depression, seasonality or sunlight exposure.\nIn the United States, the percentage of the population affected by SAD ranges from 1.4% of the population in Florida to 9.9% in Alaska. \nSigns and symptoms.\nSAD is a type of major depressive disorder, and those with the condition may exhibit any of the associated symptoms, such as feelings of hopelessness and worthlessness, thoughts of suicide, loss of interest in activities, withdrawal from social interaction, sleep and appetite problems, difficulty with concentrating and making decisions, decreased libido, a lack of energy, or agitation. Symptoms of winter SAD often include falling asleep earlier or in less than 5 minutes in the evening, oversleeping or difficulty waking up in the morning, nausea, and a tendency to overeat, often with a craving for carbohydrates, which leads to weight gain. SAD is typically associated with winter depression, but springtime lethargy or other seasonal mood patterns are not uncommon. Although each individual case is different, in contrast to winter SAD, people who experience spring and summer depression may be more likely to show symptoms such as insomnia, decreased appetite and weight loss, and agitation or anxiety.\nBipolar disorder.\n\"With seasonal pattern\" is a specifier for \"bipolar and related disorders\", including bipolar I disorder and bipolar II disorder.\nMost people with SAD experience major depressive disorder, but as many as 20% may have a bipolar disorder. Bipolar disorder is characterized by alternating episodes of depression and mania or hypomania. Depressive episodes include symptoms such as low energy, difficulty concentrating, changes in sleep and appetite, feelings of hopelessness, and suicidal thoughts. Manic episodes, which are more common in bipolar I disorder, may include elevated mood, decreased need for sleep, impulsivity, and increased activity or risky behaviors. In contrast, hypomania (seen in bipolar II disorder) presents as a milder form of mania without significant impairment in daily life. It is important to distinguish between diagnoses because there are important treatment differences. In these cases, people who have the \"With seasonal pattern\" specifier may experience a depressive episode either due to major depressive disorder or as part of bipolar disorder during the winter and remit in the summer. Around 25% of patients with bipolar disorder may present with a depressive seasonal pattern, which is associated with bipolar II disorder, rapid cycling, eating disorders, and more depressive episodes. Differences in biological sex display distinct clinical characteristics associated to seasonal pattern: males present with more Bipolar II disorder and a higher number of depressive episodes, and females with rapid cycling and eating disorders.\nADHD.\nA study by the National Institute of Health published findings in 2016 that concluded, \"seasonal and circadian rhythm disturbances are significantly associated with ADHD symptoms.\" Participants in the study who had ADHD were three times more likely to have SAD symptoms (9.9% vs 3.3%), and about 2.7 times more likely to have s-SAD symptoms (12.5% vs 4.6%). Those with ADHD and SAD are likely to experience sluggishness, irritability, and withdrawal. A study published in the \"Journal of Affective Disorders\" found that approximately 27% of adults with ADHD also experience SAD, with women being more susceptible than men. \nCause.\nIn many species, activity is diminished during the winter months, in response to the reduction in available food, the reduction of sunlight (especially for diurnal animals), and the difficulties of surviving in cold weather. Hibernation is an extreme example, but even species that do not hibernate often exhibit changes in behavior during the winter.\nVarious proximate causes have been proposed. One possibility is that SAD is related to a lack of serotonin, and serotonin polymorphisms could play a role in SAD, although this has been disputed. Mice incapable of turning serotonin into N-acetylserotonin (by serotonin N-acetyltransferase) appear to express \"depression-like\" behavior, and antidepressants such as fluoxetine increase the amount of the enzyme serotonin N-acetyltransferase, resulting in an antidepressant-like effect. Another theory is that the cause may be related to melatonin, which is produced in dim light and darkness by the pineal gland, since there are direct connections, via the retinohypothalamic tract and the suprachiasmatic nucleus, between the retina and the pineal gland. Melatonin secretion is controlled by the endogenous circadian clock, but can also be suppressed by bright light.\nOne study looked at whether some people could be predisposed to SAD based on personality traits. Correlations between certain personality traits such as higher levels of neuroticism, agreeableness, openness, and an avoidance-oriented coping style, appeared to be common in those with SAD.\nPer Pfizer, risk factors for SAD include being a female, younger age, previously being diagnosed with extreme depression or bipolar disorder, having a family history of the same disease, or living a considerable distance from the equator. \nPathophysiology.\nSeasonal mood variations are believed to be related to light. An argument for this view is the effectiveness of bright-light therapy. SAD is measurably present at latitudes in the Arctic region, such as northern Finland (around 64 degrees north latitude), where the rate of SAD is 9.5%. Cloud cover may contribute to the negative effects of SAD. There is evidence that many patients with SAD have a delay in their circadian rhythm, and that bright light treatment corrects these delays which may be responsible for the improvement in patients.\nThe symptoms of it mimic those of dysthymia or even major depressive disorder. There is also potential risk of suicide in some patients experiencing SAD. One study reports 6\u201335% of people with the condition required hospitalization during one period of illness. At times, patients may not feel depressed, but rather lack energy to perform everyday activities.\nSubsyndromal Seasonal Affective Disorder (s-SAD or SSAD) is a milder form of SAD experienced by an estimated 14.3% (vs. 6.1% SAD) of the U.S. population. The blue feeling experienced by both those with SAD and with SSAD can usually be dampened or extinguished by exercise and increased outdoor activity, particularly on sunny days, resulting in increased solar exposure. Connections between human mood, as well as energy levels, and the seasons are well documented, even in healthy individuals.\nDiagnosis.\nAccording to the American Psychiatric Association DSM-IV criteria, Seasonal Affective Disorder is not regarded as a separate disorder. It is called a \"course specifier\" and may be applied as an added description to the pattern of major depressive episodes in patients with major depressive disorder or patients with bipolar disorder.\nThe \"Seasonal Pattern Specifier\" must meet four criteria: depressive episodes at a particular time of the year; remissions or mania/hypomania at a characteristic time of year; these patterns must have lasted two years with no nonseasonal major depressive episodes during that same period; and these seasonal depressive episodes outnumber other depressive episodes throughout the patient's lifetime. The Mayo Clinic describes three types of SAD, each with its own set of symptoms.\nManagement.\nTreatments for classic (winter-based) seasonal affective disorder include light therapy, medication, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and carefully timed supplementation of the hormone melatonin.\nLight therapy.\nPhotoperiod-related alterations of the duration of melatonin secretion may affect the seasonal mood cycles of SAD. This suggests that light therapy may be an effective treatment for SAD. Light therapy uses a lightbox, which emits far more lumens than a customary incandescent lamp. Bright white \"full spectrum\" light at 10,000 lux, blue light at a wavelength of 480nm at 2,500 lux or green (actually cyan or blue-green) light at a wavelength of 500nm at 350 lux are used, with the first-mentioned historically preferred.\nBright light therapy is effective with the patient sitting a prescribed distance, commonly 30\u201360\u00a0cm, in front of the box with their eyes open, but not staring at the light source, for 30\u201360 minutes. A study published in May 2010 suggests that the blue light often used for SAD treatment should perhaps be replaced by green or white illumination. Discovering the best schedule is essential. One study has shown that up to 69% of patients find lightbox treatment inconvenient, and as many as 19% stop use because of this.\nDawn simulation has also proven to be effective; in some studies, there is an 83% better response when compared to other bright light therapy. When compared in a study to negative air ionization, bright light was shown to be 57% effective vs. dawn simulation 50%. Patients using light therapy can experience improvement during the first week, but increased results are evident when continued throughout several weeks. Certain symptoms like hypersomnia, early insomnia, social withdrawal, and anxiety resolve more rapidly with light therapy than with cognitive behavioral therapy. Most studies have found it effective without use year round, but rather as a seasonal treatment lasting for several weeks, until frequent light exposure is naturally obtained.\nLight therapy can also consist of exposure to sunlight, either by spending more time outside or using a computer-controlled heliostat to reflect sunlight into the windows of a home or office. Although light therapy is the leading treatment for seasonal affective disorder, prolonged direct sunlight or artificial lights that don't block the ultraviolet range should be avoided, due to the threat of skin cancer.\nThe evidence base for light therapy as a preventive treatment for seasonal affective disorder is limited. The decision to use light therapy to treat people with a history of winter depression before depressive symptoms begin should be based on a person's preference of treatment.\nMedication.\nSSRI (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) antidepressants have proven effective in treating SAD. Effective antidepressants are fluoxetine, sertraline, or paroxetine. Both fluoxetine and light therapy are 67% effective in treating SAD, according to direct head-to-head trials conducted during the 2006 Can-SAD study. Subjects using the light therapy protocol showed earlier clinical improvement, generally within one week of beginning the clinical treatment. Bupropion extended-release has been shown to prevent SAD for one in four people, but has not been compared directly to other preventive options in trials. In a 2021 updated Cochrane review of second-generation antidepressant medications for the treatment of SAD, a definitive conclusion could not be drawn, due to lack of evidence, and the need for larger randomized controlled trials.\nModafinil may be an effective and well-tolerated treatment in patients with seasonal affective disorder/winter depression.\nAnother explanation is that vitamin D levels are too low when people do not get enough Ultraviolet-B on their skin. An alternative to using bright lights is to take vitamin D supplements. However, studies did not show a link between vitamin D levels and depressive symptoms in elderly Chinese, nor among elderly British women given only 800IU when 6,000IU is needed. 5-HTP (an amino acid that helps to produce serotonin, and is often used to help those with depression) has also been suggested as a supplement that may help treat the symptoms of SAD, by lifting mood, and regulating sleep schedule for those with the condition. However, those who take antidepressants are not advised to take 5-HTP, as antidepressant medications may combine with the supplement to create dangerously high levels of serotonin \u2013 potentially resulting in serotonin syndrome.\nOther treatments.\nDepending upon the patient, one treatment (e.g., lightbox) may be used in conjunction with another (e.g., medication).\nPhysical exercise has shown to be an effective form of depression therapy, particularly when in addition to another form of treatment for SAD. One particular study noted marked effectiveness for treatment of depressive symptoms, when combining regular exercise with bright light therapy. Patients exposed to exercise which had been added to their treatments in 20 minutes intervals on the aerobic bike during the day, along with the same amount of time underneath the UV light were seen to make a quick recovery.\nOf all the psychological therapies aimed at the prevention of SAD, cognitive-behavior therapy, typically involving thought records, activity schedules and a positive data log, has been the subject of the most empirical work. However, evidence for cognitive behavioral therapy or any of the psychological therapies aimed at preventing SAD remains inconclusive.\nEpidemiology.\nNordic countries.\nWinter depression is a common slump in the mood of some inhabitants of most of the Nordic countries. Iceland, however, seems to be an exception. A study of more than 2000 people there found the prevalence of seasonal affective disorder and seasonal changes in anxiety and depression to be unexpectedly \"low\" in both sexes. The study's authors suggested that propensity for SAD may differ due to some genetic factor within the Icelandic population. A study of Canadians of wholly Icelandic descent also showed low levels of SAD. It has more recently been suggested that this may be attributed to the large amount of fish traditionally eaten by Icelandic people. In 2007, about 90 kilograms of fish per person was consumed per year in Iceland, as opposed to about 24 kilograms in the US and Canada, rather than to genetic predisposition; a similar anomaly is noted in Japan, where annual fish consumption in recent years averages about 60 kilograms per capita. Fish are high in vitamin D. Fish also contain docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), which helps with a variety of neurological dysfunctions.\nOther countries.\nIn the United States, a diagnosis of seasonal affective disorder was first proposed by Norman E. Rosenthal, M.D. in 1984. Rosenthal wondered why he became sluggish during the winter after moving from sunny South Africa to (cloudy in winter) New York. He started experimenting with increasing exposure to artificial light, and found this made a difference. In Alaska it has been established that there is a SAD rate of 8.9%, and an even greater rate of 24.9% for subsyndromal SAD.\nAround 20% of Irish people are affected by SAD, according to a survey conducted in 2007. The survey also shows women are more likely to be affected by SAD than men. An estimated 3% of the population in the Netherlands experience winter SAD.\nHistory.\nResearch on SAD in the United States began in 1979 when Herb Kern, a research engineer, noticed he felt depressed during the winter months. Kern suspected that scarcer natural light in winter was the cause and discussed the idea with NIMH scientists working on bodily rhythms. They were intrigued and responded by inventing a lightbox to treat Kern's depression, which improved.\nSAD was formally described and named in 1984 by Norman E. Rosenthal and his colleagues at the National Institute of Mental Health. The initial investigation was motivated by observations of depression occurring during the dark winter months in northern regions of the United States, known as polar night. Rosenthal proposed that the reduction in available natural light during winter could contribute to this phenomenon. Subsequently, he and his colleagues conducted a placebo-controlled study that utilized light therapy to document the effects of the condition. Although Rosenthal's ideas were initially greeted with skepticism, SAD has become well recognized. His 1993 book \"Winter Blues\" has become the standard introduction to the subject.\nSAD is usually more common in the fall/winter (Winter SAD), though it may occur during the spring/summer (Spring SAD). Winter-onset SAD is more common and is often characterized by atypical depressive symptoms including hypersomnia, increased appetite, and craving for carbohydrates. Spring/summer SAD is also seen and is more frequently associated with typical depressive symptoms including insomnia and loss of appetite.\nCriticism of disorder and diagnosis.\nThe validity of SAD has been called into question multiple times. A 2008 study indicated that some people stay without sun for months, yet they are not affected by SAD. A 2016 analysis from the Centers for Disease Control found no links between depression, seasonality or sunlight exposure and suggested discontinuation of the diagnosis. Further, a 2018 study focusing on instability of SAD diagnosis criteria over prolonged periods of time, suggested that SAD is a temporary expression of a mood disorder rather than a specific disorder.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66812", "revid": "24812038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66812", "title": "Depressive disorder", "text": ""}
{"id": "66815", "revid": "45826321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66815", "title": "Seratonin", "text": ""}
{"id": "66816", "revid": "1300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66816", "title": "Selective seratonin re-uptake inhibitor", "text": ""}
{"id": "66818", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66818", "title": "Comarques of Catalonia", "text": "Groups of municipalities in Catalonia, Spain\nComarques of Catalonia\nAnoia \n Bages \n Segarra \n Solson\u00e8s \n Conca de Barber\u00e0 \n Llu\u00e7an\u00e8s \n Moian\u00e8s \n Osona \n Bergued\u00e0 \n Cerdanya \n Alt Urgell \n PallarsSobir\u00e0 \n Vald'Aran \n AltaRibagor\u00e7a \n PallarsJuss\u00e0 \n Noguera \n Urgell \n Plad'Urgell \n Segri\u00e0 \n Garrigues \nAltPened\u00e8s \nBaixLlobregat \nBarcelon\u00e8s \n Vall\u00e8sOccidental \n Maresme \n Vall\u00e8s Oriental \n Ripoll\u00e8s \n Garrotxa \n Alt Empord\u00e0 \n Pla del'Estany \n Giron\u00e8s \n Selva \n BaixEmpord\u00e0 \nGarraf \nBaixPened\u00e8s \nTarragon\u00e8s \nAltCamp \nBaixCamp \n Priorat \n Riberad'Ebre \n TerraAlta \n Baix Ebre \n Montsi\u00e0 Northern Catalonia/Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Orientales (France) \nFrance \nAndorra \nAragon \nValencia Mediterranean Sea \nThe comarques of Catalonia (singular \"comarca\", , ), often referred to in English as counties, are an administrative division of Catalonia. Each comarca comprises a number of municipalities, roughly equivalent to a county in the United States. Currently, Catalonia is divided into 42 comarques and Aran, considered a \"unique territorial entity\" and not a comarca.\nEach comarca has a representative county council (), except for Barcelon\u00e8s, which abolished it in 2019, and Aran, which instead has the Conselh Generau d'Aran.\nComarques form the second-level administrative division within Catalonia, being a subdivision of vegueries (or provinces at state level).\nOverview.\nAlthough today the comarques are officially defined under a Catalan parliamentary act, for centuries they had existed unofficially, with citizens identifying with a particular comarca in the same way that people in other parts of the world might identify with a particular region.\nIn some cases, comarques consist of rural areas and many small villages centring on an important town, where the people of the region traditionally go to shop or to sell their goods. This is the case of comarques such as the Pla de l'Estany, centred on the town of Banyoles, or the Ripoll\u00e8s, centred on the town of Ripoll. In other cases, comarques are larger areas with many important population centres that have traditionally been considered part of the same region, as in the case of the Empord\u00e0 or Vall\u00e8s.\nThe current official division of Catalonia into comarques originates in an order of the autonomous Catalan government under the Spanish Republic in 1936. It was superseded after the 1939 victory of Francisco Franco's forces in the Spanish Civil War, but restored in 1987 by the re-established Generalitat of Catalonia. Since the definition of comarques is sometimes ambiguous, many new proposals have been made since the comarques were first officially designated as attempts to modify the official distribution with what some regions consider to be a traditional comarca. As a result, some revisions to the official division have been made, such as the additions of Moian\u00e8s and Llu\u00e7an\u00e8s to the map, in 2015 and 2023 respectively.\nComarques exist as a local government area, and have a representative county council. They are often known as \"counties\" in the English language, but this can be confused with the counties that were ruled by counts.\nBorders of comarques generally do not cross those of the four state-level provinces (Barcelona, Girona, Lleida, Tarragona). However, since the provinces are defined by the Spanish government, while comarques are defined by the Catalan government, exceptions do exist\u00a0\u2013 most notably in the case of Cerdanya, which is roughly evenly split between the provinces of Lleida and Girona (other exceptions generally involve only a handful of municipalities).\nAran, which is included here, is officially not a comarca but a \"unique territorial entity\" with additional powers. Its current status was formalised in February 2015.\nComarca revisions.\nRevisions to the comarques took place in 1988 (creation of Pla d'Estany, Pla d'Urgell, and Alta Ribagor\u00e7a), 1990 (various adjustments), and May 2015 (creation of Moian\u00e8s). The Catalan government's \"Report on the revision of Catalonia's territorial organisation model\" (the Roca Report), published in 2000, recommends many more changes to comarques, which have not yet been adopted except for the 2015 creation of Moian\u00e8s. The other proposed new comarques are: Vall de Camprodon (capital at Camprodon), Selva Mar\u00edtima (capital at Blanes), Alta Segarra (capital at Calaf), Segre Mitj\u00e0 (capital at Ponts), and Baix Llobregat Nord (capital at Martorell).\nIn a non-binding referendum in July 2015, a majority of municipalities of the Llu\u00e7an\u00e8s region of Osona voted to join a proposed new comarca of that name. It was finally added to the list of Comarques on the 3rd of May 2023.\nNorthern Catalan comarques.\nThere are six comarques which are often referred to as the \"historical comarques of Catalonia\", because their present-day territory was a part of the former Principality of Catalonia, but nowadays they lie in Northern Catalonia, administered by France.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "66819", "revid": "51006759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66819", "title": "Root mean square", "text": "Square root of the mean square\nIn mathematics, the root mean square (abbrev. RMS, RMS or rms) of a set of values is the square root of the set's mean square.\nGiven a set formula_1, its RMS is denoted as either formula_2 or formula_3. The RMS is also known as the quadratic mean (denoted formula_4), a special case of the generalized mean. The RMS of a continuous function is denoted formula_5 and can be defined in terms of an integral of the square of the function.\nIn estimation theory, the root-mean-square deviation of an estimator measures how far the estimator strays from the data.\nDefinition.\nThe RMS value of a set of values (or a continuous-time waveform) is the square root of the arithmetic mean of the squares of the values, or the square of the function that defines the continuous waveform. \nIn the case of a set of \"n\" values formula_6, the RMS is\nformula_7\nThe corresponding formula for a continuous function (or waveform) \"f\"(\"t\") defined over the interval formula_8 is\nformula_9\nand the RMS for a function over all time is\nformula_10\nThe RMS over all time of a periodic function is equal to the RMS of one period of the function. The RMS value of a continuous function or signal can be approximated by taking the RMS of a sample consisting of equally spaced observations. Additionally, the RMS value of various waveforms can also be determined without calculus, as shown by Cartwright.\nIn the case of the RMS statistic of a random process, the expected value is used instead of the mean.\nIn common waveforms.\nIf the waveform is a pure sine wave, the relationships between amplitudes (peak-to-peak, peak) and RMS are fixed and known, as they are for any continuous periodic wave. However, this is not true for an arbitrary waveform, which may not be periodic or continuous. For a zero-mean sine wave, the relationship between RMS and peak-to-peak amplitude is:\n\"Peak-to-peak\" formula_11\nFor other waveforms, the relationships are not the same as they are for sine waves. For example, for either a triangular or sawtooth wave:\n\"Peak-to-peak\" formula_12\nIn waveform combinations.\nWaveforms made by summing known simple waveforms have an RMS value that is the root of the sum of squares of the component RMS values, if the component waveforms are orthogonal (that is, if the average of the product of one simple waveform with another is zero for all pairs other than a waveform times itself).\nformula_13\nAlternatively, for waveforms that are perfectly positively correlated, or \"in phase\" with each other, their RMS values sum directly.\nUses.\nIn electrical engineering.\nCurrent.\nThe RMS of an alternating electric current equals the value of constant direct current that would dissipate the same power in a resistive load.\nVoltage.\nA special case of RMS of waveform combinations is:\nformula_14\nwhere formula_15 refers to the direct current (or average) component of the signal, and formula_16 is the alternating current component of the signal.\nAverage electrical power.\nElectrical engineers often need to know the power, \"P\", dissipated by an electrical resistance, \"R\". It is easy to do the calculation when there is a constant current, \"I\", through the resistance. For a load of \"R\" ohms, power is given by:\nformula_17\nHowever, if the current is a time-varying function, \"I\"(\"t\"), this formula must be extended to reflect the fact that the current (and thus the instantaneous power) is varying over time. If the function is periodic (such as household AC power), it is still meaningful to discuss the \"average\" power dissipated over time, which is calculated by taking the average power dissipation:\nformula_18\nSo, the RMS value, \"I\"RMS, of the function \"I\"(\"t\") is the constant current that yields the same power dissipation as the time-averaged power dissipation of the current \"I\"(\"t\").\nAverage power can also be found using the same method that in the case of a time-varying voltage, \"V\"(\"t\"), with RMS value \"V\"RMS,\nformula_19\nThis equation can be used for any periodic waveform, such as a sinusoidal or sawtooth waveform, allowing us to calculate the mean power delivered into a specified load.\nBy taking the square root of both these equations and multiplying them together, the power is found to be:\nformula_20\nBoth derivations depend on voltage and current being proportional (that is, the load, \"R\", is purely resistive). Reactive loads (that is, loads capable of not just dissipating energy but also storing it) are discussed under the topic of AC power.\nIn the common case of alternating current when \"I\"(\"t\") is a sinusoidal current, as is approximately true for mains power, the RMS value is easy to calculate from the continuous case equation above. If \"I\"p is defined to be the peak current, then:\nformula_21\nwhere \"t\" is time and \"\u03c9\" is the angular frequency (\"\u03c9\"\u00a0=\u00a02\u03c0/\"T\", where \"T\" is the period of the wave).\nSince \"I\"p is a positive constant and was to be squared within the integral:\nformula_22\nUsing a trigonometric identity to eliminate squaring of trig function:\nformula_23\nbut since the interval is a whole number of complete cycles (per definition of RMS), the sine terms will cancel out, leaving:\nformula_24\nA similar analysis leads to the analogous equation for sinusoidal voltage:\nformula_25\nwhere \"I\"P represents the peak current and \"V\"P represents the peak voltage.\nBecause of their usefulness in carrying out power calculations, listed voltages for power outlets (for example, 120V in the US, or 230V in Europe) are almost always quoted in RMS values, and not peak values. Peak values can be calculated from RMS values from the above formula, which implies \"V\"P\u00a0=\u00a0\"V\"RMS\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\u221a2, assuming the source is a pure sine wave. Thus the peak value of the mains voltage in the USA is about 120\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0\u221a2, or about 170 volts. The peak-to-peak voltage, being double this, is about 340 volts. A similar calculation indicates that the peak mains voltage in Europe is about 325 volts, and the peak-to-peak mains voltage, about 650 volts.\nRMS quantities such as electric current are usually calculated over one cycle. However, for some purposes the RMS current over a longer period is required when calculating transmission power losses. The same principle applies, and (for example) a current of 10 amps used for 12 hours each 24-hour day represents an average current of 5 amps, but an RMS current of 7.07 amps, in the long term.\nThe term \"RMS power\" is sometimes erroneously used (e.g., in the audio industry) as a synonym for \"mean power\" or \"average power\" (it is proportional to the square of the RMS voltage or RMS current in a resistive load). For a discussion of audio power measurements and their shortcomings, see Audio power.\nSpeed.\nIn the physics of gas molecules, the root-mean-square speed is defined as the square root of the average squared-speed. The RMS speed of an ideal gas is calculated using the following equation:\nformula_26\nwhere \"R\" represents the gas constant, 8.314\u00a0J/(mol\u00b7K), \"T\" is the temperature of the gas in kelvins, and \"M\" is the molar mass of the gas in kilograms per mole. In physics, speed is defined as the scalar magnitude of velocity. For a stationary gas, the average speed of its molecules can be in the order of thousands of km/h, even though the average velocity of its molecules is zero.\nError.\nWhen two data sets \u2014 one set from theoretical prediction and the other from actual measurement of some physical variable, for instance \u2014 are compared, the RMS of the pairwise differences of the two data sets can serve as a measure of how far on average the error is from 0. The mean of the absolute values of the pairwise differences could be a useful measure of the variability of the differences. However, the RMS of the differences is usually the preferred measure, probably due to mathematical convention and compatibility with other formulae.\nAudio engineering.\nRMS is used in audio engineering to measure signal volume, particularly in the case of audio processing. The alternative volume measurement is peak volume, in analog as the signal Vpp, or in digital as the -dB peak below clipping given the encoding format. Signal RMS in this context is often used as the comparator signal for compression, which produces a \"smoothing\" effect in compression by responding more slowly to sharp transients like those on drums. RMS is also used as a mastering metric to compare against other time average units such as LUFs.\nIn frequency domain.\nThe RMS can be computed in the frequency domain, using Parseval's theorem. For a sampled signal formula_27, where formula_28 is the sampling period,\nformula_29\nwhere formula_30 and \"N\" is the sample size, that is, the number of observations in the sample and DFT coefficients.\nIn this case, the RMS computed in the time domain is the same as in the frequency domain:\nformula_31\nRelationship to other statistics.\nThe standard deviation formula_32 of a population or a waveform formula_33 is the RMS deviation of formula_33 from its arithmetic mean formula_35. They are related to the RMS value of formula_33 by \nformula_37. \nFrom this it is clear that the RMS value is always greater than or equal to the average, in that the RMS includes the squared deviation (error) as well.\nPhysical scientists often use the term \"root mean square\" as a synonym for standard deviation when it can be assumed the input signal has zero mean, that is, referring to the square root of the mean squared deviation of a signal from a given baseline or fit. This is useful for electrical engineers in calculating the \"AC only\" RMS of a signal. Standard deviation being the RMS of a signal's variation about the mean, rather than about 0, the DC component is removed (that is, RMS(signal) = stdev(signal) if the mean signal is 0).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
