{"id": "65577", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65577", "title": "Hu Yaobang", "text": "Chinese politician (1915\u20131989)\nHu Yaobang (20 November 1915 \u2013 15 April 1989) was a Chinese politician who was a high-ranking official of the People's Republic of China. He held the top office of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) from 1981 to 1987, first as Chairman from 1981 to 1982, then as General Secretary from 1982 to 1987. After the Cultural Revolution (1966\u20131976), Hu rose to prominence as a close ally of Deng Xiaoping, the paramount leader of China at the time.\nHu joined the CCP in the 1930s. During the Cultural Revolution, he was purged, recalled, and purged again by Mao Zedong. After Deng rose to power, following Mao's death, Hu played an important role in the \"Boluan Fanzheng\" program. Throughout the 1980s, he pursued a series of economic and political reforms under the supervision of Deng. Meanwhile, Hu's political and economic reforms also made him the enemy of several powerful Party elders, who opposed free-market and government reforms. When widespread student protests occurred across China in December 1986 and January 1987, Hu's political opponents blamed him for the disruptions and convinced Deng that Hu's tolerance of \"bourgeois liberalization\" had instigated the protests. Hu was forced to resign as General Secretary in early 1987, but allowed to retain his membership in the Politburo.\nHu's position as General Secretary was succeeded by his close ally Zhao Ziyang, who carried on many of Hu's economic and political reforms. A day after Hu's death in April 1989, a small-scale unofficial commemoration took place in Beijing, during which people demanded that the Chinese government reassess and recognize Hu's legacy; a week later, the day before Hu's funeral, some 100,000 students marched on Tiananmen Square, eventually leading to the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre in June. The Chinese government subsequently censored details of Hu's life, but in 2005 it commemorated him and lifted its censorships, on the occasion of his 90th birth anniversary. Hu was buried in Gongqingcheng in Jiangxi.\nEarly years.\nYoung revolutionary.\nHu Yaobang's ancestors were Hakkas from Jiangxi. During the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644) they migrated into Hunan, where Hu was born. Hu Yaobang was born into a poor peasant family.138 He did not receive a formal education and taught himself to read.138\nHu participated in his first rebellion when he was twelve and left his family to join the Chinese Communist Party when he was only fourteen, becoming a full member of the Party in 1933. During the factional struggles that polarized the CCP during the 1930s, Hu supported Mao Zedong and opposed the 28 Bolsheviks.\nHu was one of the youngest veterans of the Long March. Once Mao was removed from power, shortly before the beginning of the Fourth Encirclement Campaign, Mao's supporters were persecuted, and Hu Yaobang was sentenced to death. Just before the beginning of the Long March, he and others were on their way to be beheaded. However, a powerful local communist commander named Tan Yubao intervened at the last minute, saving Hu's life. Because of Hu's support of Mao, he was deemed unreliable and ordered to join the Long March so that he could be placed under surveillance.\nHu Yaobang was seriously wounded in the battle of Mount Lu, near Zunyi, close to the area where Mao Zedong rose back to power via the Zunyi Conference. After Hu was wounded, the communist field medic teams chose not to help Hu, and left him in the battlefield to die on the side of the road. Hu was rescued by a childhood friend of his, a Chinese Red Army commander, who happened to pass by. Hu called out his friend's nickname to ask for help, and the friend helped him catch up with the retreating main force of the Chinese Red Army and get treatment for his wounds.\nHu was taken prisoner by the KMT during the Long March.138 In 1936, Hu had joined an expeditionary force led by Zhang Guotao. The objective of Zhang's 21,800+ strong force, was to cross the Yellow River, to expand the communist base west of Shaanxi, and to link up with forces from the Soviet Union or with the Xinjiang warlord Sheng Shicai, who was an ally of the communists and the Soviet Union. Zhang Guotao's forces were soundly defeated by the local Nationalist warlords, the Ma clique. Hu Yaobang, along with Qin Jiwei, became two of the thousands of prisoners-of-war captured by Ma clique's forces. Hu was one of only 1,500 prisoners-of-war whom Ma Bufang decided to use as forced labor rather than execute.\nMa Bufang sent several Muslim cavalry divisions under General Ma Biao to fight against the Japanese. However Chiang Kai-shek pressured Ma Bufang to contribute even more of his troops to fight Japanese invaders, Ma Bufang decided that, instead of using more of his own troops, he would instead send the 1,500 Chinese Red Army prisoners-of-war as conscripts. Since the marching route had to pass the border of the communist base in Shaanxi, Hu Yaobang and Qin Jiwei decided to return to the Communists, and secretly organized an escape. The escape took place as planned and was a success: out of the total 1,500 POWs, more than 1,300 successfully returned to Yan'an. Mao personally welcomed these returning communists, and Hu Yaobang returned to communist forces, where he would remain for rest of his life.\nAfter Hu arrived in Yan'an, he attended the Anti-Japanese Military School. While studying in Yan'an, Hu met and married his wife, Li Zhao, who was also a student in Yan'an. After his training, Hu worked in the political department, and was assigned to work as a member of Peng Dehuai's Third Front Army.\nHu befriended and worked closely with Deng Xiaoping in the 1930s. In the 1940s, Hu worked under Deng as a political commissar in the Second Field Army. In the final stages of the Chinese Civil War, Hu accompanied Deng to Sichuan, and communist forces successfully took control of the province from Nationalist forces in 1949.\nLand reform movement.\nDuring the final round of China's land reform movement, Hu took part in the Party's efforts to restrain peasant violence against landlords, explaining that calls to \"annihilate\" landlords meant to take landlord property, not lives. Hu instructed Party work teams never to \"use beheadings to solve problems[.]\" In Hu's view, execution of \"evil tyrants\" (meaning the most exploitive or criminal landlords) and counterrevolutionary landlords was appropriate: \"It is entirely they who force us to kill them.\"\nEarly PRC politician.\nIn 1949, the CCP successfully defeated Nationalist forces on mainland China, and the communists founded the People's Republic. In 1952, Hu accompanied Deng to Beijing, and Hu became the leader of the Communist Youth League from 1952 to 1966. Hu rose rapidly up the Communist Party hierarchy, until Mao sent Hu to work as First Party Secretary of Shaanxi in 1964, saying: \"He needs some practical training\". Hu may have been assigned to work outside of Beijing because he was judged as being not sufficiently enthusiastic about Maoism. Unlike many of his colleagues, Hu was able to keep his membership within the Party Central Committee until the 9th Party Congress in April 1969.\nDuring the Cultural Revolution, Hu was purged twice and rehabilitated twice, mirroring the political career of Hu's mentor, Deng Xiaoping. In 1969, Hu was recalled to Beijing to be persecuted. Hu became \"number one\" among the \"Three Hus\", whose names were vilified and who were paraded through Beijing wearing heavy wooden collars around their necks. The other two \"Hus\" were Hu Keshi, who was the second most senior member of the Communist Youth League, and Hu Qili, who was third most senior in the Communist Youth League and who had also become a close associate of Deng Xiaoping. After being publicly humiliated, Hu was sent to an isolated work camp to participate in \"reformation through labour\" under strict security. While in political exile Hu was forced to work hauling large boulders by hand.\nWhen Deng was temporarily recalled to Beijing, from 1973 to 1976, Hu was also recalled; but, when Deng was purged again, in 1976, Hu was also purged. After his second purge, Hu was sent to herd cattle. Hu was recalled and rehabilitated a second time in 1977, shortly after Mao's death. After Hu was recalled, he was promoted to directing the Party's organizational department, and later directed Party propaganda through a department of the Politburo. Hu was one of the main leaders responsible for re-assessing the fates of people who had been persecuted during the Cultural Revolution. According to the Chinese government, Hu was personally responsible for exonerating over three million people. Hu tacitly supported the 1978 Democracy Wall protesters, and invited two of the activists to his home in Beijing. Hu opposed Hua Guofeng's \"Two Whatevers\" policy, and was an important supporter of Deng Xiaoping's ascent to power.\nReformer.\nPublic policies.\nHu Yaobang's rise to power was engineered by Deng Xiaoping, and Hu rose to the highest levels of the Party after Deng displaced Hua Guofeng as China's \"paramount leader\". In 1980 Hu became General Secretary of the Central Committee's Secretariat, and was elected to the powerful Politburo Standing Committee. In 1981, Hu became CCP Chairman, but helped abolish the position of Party chairman in 1982, as part of a broader effort to distance China from Maoist politics. Most of the chairman's functions were transferred to the post of General Secretary, a post taken by Hu. Deng's displacement of Hua Guofeng marked the Party leadership's consensus that China should abandon strict Maoist economics in favor of more pragmatic policies, and Hu directed many of Deng's attempts to reform the Chinese economy. By 1982, Hu was the second most powerful person in China, after Deng. Throughout the last decade of Hu's career, he promoted the role of intellectuals as being fundamental to China's achievement of the Four Modernizations.\nDuring the early 1980s, Deng referred to Hu and Zhao Ziyang as his \"left and right hands\". After advancing to the position of general secretary, Hu promoted a number of political reforms, often collaborating with Zhao. The ultimate goals of Hu's reforms were sometimes vaguely defined. Hu attempted to reform China's political system by: requiring candidates to be directly elected in order to enter the Politburo; holding more elections with more than one candidate; increasing government transparency; increasing public consultation before determining Party policy; and, increasing the degree to which government officials could be held directly responsible for their mistakes.\nDuring his time in office, Hu tried to rehabilitate the people who were persecuted during the Cultural Revolution. Many Chinese people think that this was his most important achievement. He was also in favor of a pragmatic policy in the Tibet Autonomous Region after realising the mistakes of previous policies. He ordered the withdrawal of thousands of Han Chinese cadres from the Tibet Autonomous Region following a May 1980 visit to the region, believing that Tibetans and Uyghurs should be empowered to administer their own affairs. Hu reduced the number of Han party cadre, and relaxed social controls.240 Han Chinese who remained were required to learn Tibetan and Uyghur. He set out six requirements to improve 'existing conditions', including the increase of state funds to the Tibet Autonomous Region, improvements in education, and efforts to revive Tibetan and Uyghur culture. At the same time, Hu stated that \"anything that is not suited to Tibet's conditions should be rejected or modified\". Hu made a point of explicitly apologizing to Tibetans for China's misrule of the region during this trip. He also declared to cancel Bingtuan (soldier farmers) in Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, but he failed to do so due to Wang Zhen's against. Later his ethnic policy has been criticized by some high-level officials such as Deng Liqun, as well as some Han nationalists who think Hu Yaobang have given too many Social privilege to ethnic minorities.\nHu traveled widely throughout his time as general secretary, visiting 1500 individual districts and villages in order to inspect the work of local officials and to keep in touch with the common people. In 1971, Hu retraced the route of the Long March, and took the opportunity to visit and inspect remote military bases located in Tibet, Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, Yunnan, Qinghai, and Inner Mongolia.\nPolitical opinions.\nHu was notable for his liberalism and the frank expression of his opinions, which sometimes agitated other senior Chinese leaders. On a trip to Inner Mongolia in 1984, Hu publicly suggested that Chinese people might start eating in a Western way (with forks and knives, on individual plates) in order to prevent communicable diseases. He was one of the first Chinese officials to abandon wearing a Mao suit in favor of Western business suits. When asked which of Mao Zedong's theories were desirable for modern China, he reportedly replied \"I think, none\".\nHu was not prepared to abandon Marxism completely, but frankly expressed the opinion that Communism could not solve \"all of mankind's problems\". Hu encouraged intellectuals to raise controversial subjects in the media, including democracy, human rights, and the possibility of introducing legal limits to the Communist Party's influence within the Chinese government. Many party elders mistrusted Hu from the start and eventually grew to fear his influence. The ire of some of the Eight Elders ultimately contributed to his forced resignation from the post of general secretary.\nHu made sincere efforts to repair Sino-Japanese relations, but was criticized for the scope of his efforts. In 1984, when Beijing recognized the twelfth anniversary of Japan's diplomatic recognition of the People's Republic, Hu invited 3,000 Japanese youth to Beijing, and arranged for them to tour Shanghai, Hangzhou, Nanjing, Wuhan, and Xi'an. Many senior officials considered Hu's efforts extravagant, since Japan had only invited 500 Chinese youths to Japan the previous year. Hu was criticized internally for the lavish gifts that he gave to visiting Japanese officials, and for allowing his daughter to privately accompany Japanese prime minister Nakasone's son when they visited Beijing. Hu defended his actions by citing the importance of strong Sino-Japanese relations, and his belief that the atrocities committed by Japan in China during World War II were the actions of military warlords, and not ordinary citizens.\nHu alienated potential allies within the People's Liberation Army when he suggested for two consecutive years that the Chinese defense budget should be reduced, and senior military leaders began to criticize him. Military officials accused Hu of making poor choices when purchasing military hardware from Australia in 1985. When Hu visited Britain, military officials criticized him for drinking soup too loudly during a banquet hosted by Queen Elizabeth II.\nZhao and Hu began a large-scale anti-corruption programme, and permitted the investigations of the children of high-ranking Party elders, who had grown up protected by their parents' influence. Hu's investigation of Party officials belonging to this \"Crown Prince Party\" made Hu unpopular with many powerful Party officials. After Deng refused to support some of Hu's reforms, Hu made private comments critical of Deng Xiaoping for his indecisiveness and \"old-fashioned\" way of thinking, opinions of which Deng eventually became aware.\nResignation.\nIn December 1986, a group of students organized public protests across over a dozen cities in support of political and economic liberalization. The protests began in the University of Science and Technology in Hefei, Anhui, where they were led by the activist and astrophysicist, Fang Lizhi, who was then vice president of the university. Fang talked openly about introducing political reforms which would end the influence of the Communist Party within the Chinese government. The protests were also led by two other \"radical intellectuals\", Wang Ruowang and Liu Binyan.\nDeng Xiaoping disliked all three leaders, and ordered Hu to dismiss them from the Party in order to silence them, but Hu Yaobang refused. In January 1987, after two weeks of student protests demanding greater Western-style freedoms, a clique of Party elders, senior military officials and Deng Xiaoping forced Hu to resign on the grounds that he had been too lenient with student protesters and for moving too quickly towards free market-style economic reforms.\nAfter Hu's forced dismissal, Deng Xiaoping promoted Zhao Ziyang to replace the liberal Hu as Party general secretary, putting Zhao in a position to succeed Deng as \"paramount leader\". Hu officially resigned as Party general secretary on 16 January, but retained his seat in the Politburo Standing Committee. When Hu \"resigned\", the Party forced him to issue a humiliating \"self-criticism of his mistakes on major issues of political principles in violation of the party's principle of collective leadership\". During the event, which consisted of all of the Elders, Politburo, Secretariat, and the Central Advisory Commission, all of his allies abandoned him with the exception of his close friend, Xi Zhongxun, who stood up and defended him and lashed out at everybody for Hu's treatment. Hu had to keep Xi from losing his temper, telling him \"Don't worry about it, Zhongxun, I've got this.\" After that, Hu became more reclusive and less active in Chinese politics, studying revolutionary history and practicing his calligraphy in his spare time, and taking long walks for exercise. Hu was generally viewed as having no real power after his resignation, and he was relegated to largely ceremonial roles.\nHu's \"resignation\" harmed the credibility of the CCP while improving Hu's own. Among Chinese intellectuals Hu became an example of a man who refused to compromise his convictions in the face of political resistance, and who had paid the price as a result. The promotion of a conservative, Li Peng, to the position of premier after Hu's departure from executive-level positions made the government less enthusiastic to pursue reform, and upset plans of an orderly succession of power from Deng Xiaoping to any politician similar to Hu.\nDeath, protests, and burial.\nDeath and public reactions.\nIn October 1987, Hu retained his membership in the CCP's Central Committee at the 13th Party Congress, and was subsequently elected a member of the new Politburo by the first plenary session of the Central Committee. On 8 April 1989, Hu suffered a heart attack while attending a Politburo meeting in Zhongnanhai to discuss education reform. Hu was rushed to the hospital, accompanied by his wife. Hu died several days later, on 15 April. He was 73 years old. Hu's last words were that he should be buried simply, without extravagance, in his hometown.\nIn his official obituary, Hu was described as \"a long-tested and staunch communist warrior, a great proletarian revolutionist and statesman, an outstanding political leader for the Chinese army\". Western reporters observed that Hu's obituary was intentionally \"glowing\" in order to divert suspicion that the Party had mistreated him. At the memorial service, Hu's widow Li Zhao blamed Hu's death on how harshly the party treated him, telling Deng Xiaoping \"It's all because of \"you\" people!\"\nAlthough he had become a semi-retired official by the time of his death, and had been removed from positions of real power for his \"mistakes\", public pressure forced the Chinese government to give him a state funeral, attended by Party leaders. The eulogy at Hu's funeral praised his work in restoring political normality and promoting economic development after the Cultural Revolution. Public mourners at Hu's funeral lined up long, a reaction which surprised China's leaders. Shortly after Hu's funeral, students in Beijing began petitioning the government to officially reverse the verdict that had led to Hu's \"resignation\", and to provide a more elaborate public funeral. The government then held a public memorial service for Hu in the Great Hall of the People.\nOn 22 April 1989, 50,000 students marched to Tiananmen Square to participate in Hu's memorial service, and to deliver a letter of petition to Premier Li Peng. Many people were dissatisfied with the party's slow response and relatively subdued funerary arrangements. Public mourning began on the streets of Beijing and elsewhere. In Beijing, this was centred on the Monument to the People's Heroes in Tiananmen Square. The mourning became a public conduit for anger against perceived nepotism in the government, the unfair dismissal and early death of Hu, and the behind-the-scenes role of the \"old men\", officially retired leaders who nevertheless maintained quasi-legal power, such as Deng Xiaoping. The protests eventually escalated into the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, resulted in the dismissal of more liberal Zhao Ziyang and the rise of Jiang Zemin, who becomes the new paramount leader. Hu's promotion of the ideas on freedom of speech and freedom of press greatly influenced the students participating in the protests.\nTomb.\nAfter Hu's funeral, his body was cremated, and his ashes were buried in Babaoshan. Hu's wife, Li Zhao, was unhappy with the location of Hu's grave, and successfully petitioned the government to move Hu's remains to a more suitable site. Eventually Hu's remains were moved to a large mausoleum in Gongqingcheng (a county-level city under the jurisdiction of Jiujiang), a city that Hu had helped found in 1955. Hu's mausoleum is arguably the most impressive tomb of any senior CCP leader.\nLi Zhao collected money for the construction of Hu's tomb from both private and public sources; and, with the help of her son, they selected an appropriate location in Gongqingcheng. The tomb was constructed in the shape of a pyramid, on the top of a hill. On 5 December 1990, Hu's ashes were flown to Gongqingcheng, carried by his son, Hu Deping. The ceremony was attended by Wen Jiabao, numerous Jiangxi public officials, and 2,000 members of the Communist Youth League. Gongqingcheng's factories and schools were closed for the day, allowing 7,000 local citizens to attend. At the ceremony, Li Zhao made a speech expressing her gratitude towards the government and for the people who attended.\nLegacy.\nThe Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 eventually ended in the violent suppression of protesters on 4 June 1989, in which numerous civilians were killed. Because the protests had been sparked by the death of Hu Yaobang, the government determined that any public discussion of Hu and his legacy could destabilize China by renewing debate about the political reforms that Hu supported. Because of the public association with Hu and the Tiananmen Square protests, Hu Yaobang's name became taboo on the mainland, and the Chinese government was careful to mention him in the media. In one example of government censorship, printed media which commemorated the anniversary of his death in 1994 were withdrawn from publication.\n2005 commemoration.\nHu Jintao announced plans to commemorate Hu Yaobang in August 2005, with events organised for 20 November, the 90th anniversary of Hu's birth. Ceremonies were planned in Beijing, where Hu died, in Hunan, where Hu was born, and in Jiujiang, where Hu was buried. Western observers noted that the move to commemorate Hu Yaobang may have been part of a broader political effort by Hu Jintao to gain support from reform-minded colleagues, who had always respected Hu Yaobang.\nSome political analysts have argued that Hu Jintao's administration wished to be associated with Hu Yaobang. Both Hu's (no relation) rose to power through the Communist Youth League, and have been described as part of the same \"Youth League Clique\". Hu Yaobang's support was partially responsible for Hu Jintao's rapid promotion during the 1980s.\nSome observers noted that Hu Yaobang's commemoration made it more likely that the Party would be willing to re-evaluate the 1989 Tiananmen protests, but other observers expressed skepticism. Memorials with the purpose of recognizing the date of someone's birth or death are often signs of political trends within China, with some pointing to the prospect of further reform. Skeptics noted that Hu Jintao made a statement praising the governments of Cuba and North Korea (in spite of their economic \"flaws\") shortly after announcing Hu Yaobang's public commemoration, implying that it would be unlikely that the party would pursue a dramatic programme of political reform in the near future.\nOn 18 November 2005, the Communist Party officially celebrated the 90th anniversary of Hu Yaobang's birth with activities at the People's Hall (the date was changed to two days before it was officially scheduled). Around 350 people attended, including premier Wen Jiabao, vice president Zeng Qinghong, and numerous other Party officials, celebrities, and members of Hu Yaobang's family. It was rumored that Hu Jintao wanted to attend, but was prevented from doing so by other senior members of the Party who still disliked Hu Yaobang. Wen was not given the opportunity to talk, and Zeng Qinghong was the most senior Party member to speak. In his speech, Zeng said that members should learn from Hu's merits, especially his frankness and genuine concern for the Chinese people. Zeng stated that Hu had \"contributed all his life and built immortal merits for the liberation and happiness of the Chinese people\u00a0... His historic achievements and moral character will always be remembered by the Party and our people.\"\nSubsequent commemorations.\nThe official three-volume biography and a collection of Hu's writings were slated for release in China. The project was originally begun by a group of Hu's former aides, led by Zhang Liqun (who died in 2003). After the government learned of the project, it insisted on taking control of it. One of the main issues that government censors identified was the concern that details of Hu's relationship with Deng Xiaoping (especially details of Hu's removal from power after resisting orders to crack down on student demonstrators in 1987) would reflect poorly on Deng's legacy. The authors of Hu's biography subsequently rejected offers from the government to release a censored version. Only one volume (dealing with events up to the end of the Cultural Revolution) of the biography written by Hu's former aides was eventually published, with the other two volumes held by the government and remaining unpublished.\nAlthough magazines publishing commemorative articles were initially stopped from being released, the ban was lifted in 2005 and these magazines were publicly issued. \"Yanhuang Chunqiu\", a reform-minded magazine, was allowed to publish a series of articles in 2005 commemorating the birthday of Hu Yaobang, but the government acted to limit the availability of the magazine. The issue commemorating Hu sold 50,000 copies, but the remaining 5,000 copies were destroyed by propaganda officials. This was the first time since his death that Hu's name appeared publicly.\nIn April 2010 (the 21st anniversary of Hu's death), Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao wrote an article in the \"People's Daily\" titled \"Recalling Hu Yaobang when I return to Xingyi\". Presented as an essay, it recollected an investigation of ordinary people's lives by Hu Yaobang and Wen Jiabao in Xingyi County, Guizhou, in 1986. Wen, who worked with Hu from 1985 to 1987, praised Hu's \"superior working style of being totally devoted to the suffering of the masses\", and his \"lofty morality and openness [of character]\". Wen's essay elicited an enthusiastic reaction in Chinese-language websites, generating over 20,000 responses on Sina.com on the day the article appeared. The article was interpreted by observers familiar with the Chinese political system as a confirmation by Wen that he was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Hu, rather than Zhao Ziyang.\nOn 20 November 2015, the 100th Anniversary of the birth of Hu Yaobang, Communist Party General Secretary Xi Jinping held a high-profile commemoration ceremony for Hu Yaobang in Beijing. In contrast to the event held by the previous leadership ten years earlier, the 100th anniversary event was deliberately high-profile and attended by all members of the Politburo Standing Committee. Xi lavished Hu with praise for his accomplishments, and said that Hu \"dedicated his life to the party and to the people. His led a glorious life, a life of struggle\u00a0... his contributions will shine in history.\" Hu appeared as a character in the 2015 historical drama \"Deng Xiaoping at History's Crossroads\".\nOn 20 November 2025, the 110th Anniversary of the birth of Hu Yaobang, General Secretary Xi Jinping once again held a high-profile commemoration ceremony for Hu Yaobang in Beijing, attended by Politburo Standing Committee members Cai Qi and Li Xi. At the ceremony, Xi said that \"Comrade Hu Yaobang actively advocated and promoted reform and opening up, and devoted a great deal of effort to promoting socialist modernization. We should learn from him, [dare to] stand at the forefront of the times and vigorously pursue reform and innovation\" and called Hu \"a time-tested loyal communist fighter and a great proletarian revolutionist and statesman\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65580", "revid": "10773111", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65580", "title": "Sukhoi Su-27", "text": "Soviet 4th generation fighter aircraft\nThe Sukhoi Su-27 (; NATO reporting name: Flanker) is a Soviet-origin twin-engine supersonic supermaneuverable fighter aircraft designed by Sukhoi. It was intended as a direct competitor for the large US fourth-generation jet fighters such as the Grumman F-14 Tomcat and McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle, with range, heavy aircraft ordnance, sophisticated avionics and high maneuverability. The Su-27 was designed for air superiority missions, and subsequent variants are able to perform almost all aerial warfare operations. It was designed with the Mikoyan MiG-29 as its complement.\nThe Su-27 entered service with the Soviet Air Forces in 1985. The primary role was long range air defence against American SAC Rockwell B-1B Lancer and Boeing B-52G and H Stratofortress bombers, protecting the Soviet coast from aircraft carriers and flying long range fighter escort for Soviet heavy bombers such as the Tupolev Tu-95, Tupolev Tu-22M and Tupolev Tu-160.\nThe Su-27 was developed into a family of aircraft; these include the Su-30, a two-seat, dual-role fighter for all-weather, air-to-air and air-to-surface deep interdiction missions, and the Su-33, a naval fleet defense interceptor for use from aircraft carriers. Further versions include the side-by-side two-seat Su-34 strike/fighter-bomber variant, and the Su-35 improved air superiority and multirole fighter. A thrust-vectoring version was created, called the Su-37. The Shenyang J-11 is a Chinese license-built version of the Su-27.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1969, the Soviet Union learned of the U.S. Air Force's \"F-X\" program, which resulted in the F-15 Eagle. The Soviet leadership soon realized that the new American fighter would represent a serious technological advantage over existing Soviet fighters. \"What was needed was a better-balanced fighter with both good agility and sophisticated systems.\" In response, the Soviet General Staff issued a requirement for a \"Perspektivnyy Frontovoy Istrebitel\" (\"PFI\", literally \"Prospective Frontline Fighter\", roughly \"Advanced Frontline Fighter\"). Specifications were extremely ambitious, calling for long-range, good short-field performance (including the ability to use austere runways), excellent agility, Mach 2+ speed, and heavy armament. The aerodynamic design for the new aircraft was largely carried out by TsAGI in collaboration with the Sukhoi design bureau.\nWhen the specification proved too challenging and costly for a single aircraft in the number needed, the PFI specification was split into two: the \"LPFI\" (\"Lyogkyi PFI\", Lightweight PFI) and the \"TPFI\" (\"Tyazholyi PFI\", Heavy PFI). The LPFI program resulted in the Mikoyan MiG-29, a relatively short-range tactical fighter, while the TPFI program was assigned to Sukhoi OKB, which eventually produced the Su-27 and its various derivatives.\nThe Sukhoi design, which was altered progressively to reflect Soviet awareness of the F-15's specifications, emerged as the \"T-10\" (Sukhoi's 10th design), which first flew on 20 May 1977. The aircraft had a large wing, clipped, with two separate podded engines and a twin tail. The 'tunnel' between the two engines, as on the F-14 Tomcat, acts both as an additional lifting surface and hides armament from radar.\nThe T-10 was influenced by the Sukhoi Aircraft Design Bureau (Su-ADB), Central Aero-Hydrodynamic Institute (TsAGI) and the Siberian Aviation Research Institute (SibNIA) in their development of a new aerodynamic scheme labelled the 'integral scheme', where the aircraft would have optimal performance under a longitudinal instability of 3-5% mean aerodynamic chord while flying in subsonic regimes as well as fly by wire (FBW) for future heavy fighters. Stability problems present in the development of airframes under similar performance demands such as the YF-22 and JAS-39 Gripen were rectified during the FBW development process through limitation of normal load factor and angle of attack. Controlled high angle of attack maneuverability, known as supermaneuverability, was emphasized after a 1980s study by research teams from Su-ADB and TsAGI showing its effectiveness in close combat.\nAir Force.\nThe first batch of flying prototypes were \"T-10-1\" and \"T-10-2\". They were powered by Lyulka AL-21 turbojets and had ogival wings. The aerodynamic layout was found to be unsatisfactory during construction; this was verified starting with T-10-1's maiden flight on 20 May 1977. The aircraft completed trials in November 1983 and donated to the Soviet Air Force Museum in late-1985. T-10-2 first flew on 16 May 1978. On 7 July 1978, it crashed and killed the pilot; the aircraft exceeded its G limit and broke-up in flight after behaving unpredictably when the control stick was pulled back. The prototypes were initially called \"Ram-K\" by Western intelligence; they were first spotted by Western satellite imagery at the Flight Research Institute's (LII) \"Ramenskoye\" airfield at Zhukovsky; they were later assigned the NATO reporting name \"Flanker-A\". Komsomolsk-on-Amur Aircraft Plant (KnAAPO) built second batch - \"T-10-3\" and \"T-10-4\" - starting in 1978. These were the first to be fitted with the intended powerplant, the Lyulka AL-31 turbofan, and their engine nacelles were redesigned accordingly. T-10-3 was initially used for powerplant testing; it first flew on 23 August 1979 after being delayed by engine trouble. In 1982 and 1983, it performed land-based STOBAR tests for naval aviation. T-10-4 was used for avionics and armament testing with the Mech radar. Tests with the T-10-4 and the later \"T-10-10\" revealed serious deficiencies with the Mech radar. KnAAPO built a third batch of \"type T-10-5\" AL-21-powered aircraft - \"T-10-5\", \"T-10-6\", \"T-10-9\", \"T-10-10\", \"T-10-11\" - for avionics tests. \"T-10-6\" was destroyed in October 1980 in a ground fire caused by a leaking fuel line. T-10-10 and T-10-11 performed radar, weapons control and targeting tests. These prototypes found that avionics weight, AL-31 fuel consumption, and aerodynamics failed to meet requirements.\nThe aircraft underwent a major redesign. Sukhoi accepted greater cooperation from SibNIA, which conducted extensive wind tunnel testing. Contemporary Western aircraft were examined for ideas. The new design - \"T-10S\" - bore only a superficial resemblance to the T-10; the design was completed in 1980 and was the precursor to the production Su-27. The first batch of flying T-10S prototypes were \"T-10-7\" (or \"T-10S-1\") and \"T-10-12\" (or \"T-10S-2\"). T-10-7 was used for handling, manoeuvring, and AL-31 tests; it had no radar or mission avionics. It first flew on 20 April 1981, and crashed on 3 September 1981 after a critical in-flight failure; the pilot ejected and survived, but the project's chief was replaced and the flight engineer was dismissed. T-10-12 was completed by KnAAPO in March 1981 for fire control testing. On 23 December 1981, it broke-up in flight and killed the pilot. Sukhoi's general designer was dismissed after the crash. KnAAPO produced additional batches in 1982 - \"T-10-15\", \"T-10-17\" to \"T-10-22\" - and 1983 - \"T-10-23\" to \"T-10-27\". T-10-17 was the first aircraft built to full production standard and first flew on 26 May 1982. In 1983, it landed after losing part of a wing and a tail fin from structural failure. T-10-21 crashed on 25 May 1984 after a structural failure of a leading edge flap; the pilot ejected and survived.\nThe \"T-10S-3\" was modified and officially designated the \"P-42\", setting a number of world records for time-to-height, beating those set in 1975 by a similarly modified F-15 called \"The Streak Eagle\". The \"P-42\" \"Streak Flanker\" was stripped of all armament, radar and operational equipment. The fin tips, tail-boom and the wingtip launch rails were also removed. The composite radome was replaced by a lighter metal version. The aircraft was stripped of paint, polished and all drag-producing gaps and joints were sealed. The engines were modified to deliver an increase in thrust of , resulting in a thrust-to-weight ratio of almost 2:1 (for comparison with standard example see Specifications).\nThe production \"Su-27\" (sometimes \"Su-27S\", NATO designation 'Flanker-B') began to enter VVS operational service in 1985, although manufacturing difficulties kept it from appearing in strength until 1990. The Su-27 served with both the V-PVO and Frontal Aviation. Operational conversion of units to the type occurred using the \"Su-27UB\" (Russian for \"Uchebno Boevoy\" - \"combat trainer\", NATO designation 'Flanker-C') twin-seat trainer, with the pilots seated in tandem.\nWhen the naval Flanker trainer was being conceived the Soviet Air Force was evaluating a replacement for the Su-24 \"Fencer\" strike aircraft, and it became evident to Soviet planners at the time that a replacement for the Su-24 would need to be capable of surviving engagements with the new American F-15 and F-16. The Sukhoi bureau concentrated on adaptations of the standard \"Su-27UB\" tandem-seat trainer. However, the Soviet Air Force favoured the crew station (side-by-side seating) approach used in the Su-24 as it worked better for the high workload and potentially long endurance strike roles. Therefore, the conceptual naval side-by-side seated trainer was used as the basis for development of the \"Su-27IB\" (Russian for \"Istrebityel Bombardirovshchik\" - \"fighter bomber\") as an Su-24 replacement in 1983. The first production airframe was flown in early 1994 and renamed the \"Su-34\" (NATO reporting name 'Fullback').\nNavy.\nDevelopment of a version for the Soviet Navy designated \"Su-27K\" (from \"Korabyelny\" - \"shipborne\", NATO designation 'Flanker-D') commenced not long after the development of the main land-based type. Some of the T-10 demonstrators were modified to test features of navalized variants for carrier operations. These modified demonstrators led to specific prototypes for the Soviet Navy, designated \"T-10K\". The T-10Ks had canards, an arresting hook and carrier landing avionics as well as a retractable inflight refueling probe. They did not have the landing gear required for carrier landings or folding wings. The first T-10K flew in August 1987 flown by the famous Soviet test pilot Viktor Pugachev (who first demonstrated the Cobra maneuver using an Su-27 in 1989), performing test takeoffs from a land-based ski-jump carrier deck on the Black Sea coast at Saky in the Ukrainian SSR. The aircraft was lost in an accident in 1988.\nAt the time the naval Flanker was being developed the Soviets were building their first generation of aircraft carriers and had no experience with steam catapults and did not want to delay the introduction of the carriers. Thus it was decided to use a takeoff method that did not require catapults by building up full thrust against a blast deflector until the aircraft sheared restraints holding it down to the deck. The fighter would then accelerate up the deck onto a ski jump and become airborne.\nThe production \"Su-27K\" featured the required strengthened landing gear with a two-wheel nose gear assembly, folding stabilators and wings, outer ailerons that extended further with inner double slotted flaps and enlarged leading-edge slats for low-speed carrier approaches, modified leading edge root extension (LERX) with canards, a modified ejection seat angle, upgraded fly-by-wire, upgraded hydraulics, an arresting hook and retractable inflight refuelling probe with a pair of deployable floodlights in the nose to illuminate the tanker at night. The Su-27K began carrier trials in November 1989, again with Pugachev at the controls, on board the first Soviet aircraft carrier, called \"Tbilisi\" at the time and formal carrier operations commenced in September 1991.\nDevelopment of the naval trainer, called the \"Su-27KUB\" (from \"Korabyelny Uchebno-Boyevoy\" - \"shipborne trainer-combat\"), began in 1989. The aim was to produce an airframe with dual roles for the Navy and Air Force suitable for a range of other missions such as reconnaissance, aerial refuelling, maritime strike, and jamming. This concept then evolved into the \"Su-27IB\" (Su-34 \"Fullback\") for the Soviet Air Force. The naval trainer had a revised forward fuselage to accommodate a side-by-side cockpit seating arrangement with crew access via a ladder in the nose-wheel undercarriage and enlarged canards, stabilisers, fins and rudders. The wings had extra ordnance hardpoints and the fold position was also moved further outboard. The inlets were fixed and did not feature foreign object damage suppression hardware. The central fuselage was strengthened to accommodate maximum gross weight and internal volume was increased by 30%. This first prototype, the T-10V-1, flew in April 1990 conducting aerial refuelling trials and simulated carrier landing approaches on the Tbilisi. The second prototype, the T-10V-2 was built in 1993 and had enlarged internal fuel tanks, enlarged spine, lengthened tail and tandem dual wheel main undercarriage.\nExport and post-Soviet development.\nIn 1991, the production facilities at KnAAPO and Irkutsk developed export variants of the Su-27: the \"Su-27SK\" single seat fighter and \"Su-27UBK\" twin-seat trainer, (the \"K\" in both variants is Russian for \"Kommercheskiy\" - literally \"Commercial\") which have been exported to China, Vietnam, Ethiopia and Indonesia.\nAfter the collapse of the USSR in 1991, Russia, the successor state, started development of advanced variants of the Su-27 including the Su-30, Su-33, Su-34, Su-35, and Su-37.\nSince 1998, the export \"Su-27SK\" has been produced as the Shenyang J-11 in China under licence. The first licensed-production plane, assembled in Shenyang from Russian supplied kits, was flight tested on 16 December 1998. These licence-built versions, which numbered 100, were designated J-11A. The next model, the J-11B made extensive use of Chinese developed systems within the \"Su-27SK\" airframe.\nStarting in 2004, the Russian Air Force began a major update of the original Soviet Su-27 ('Flanker-B') fleet. The upgraded variants were designated \"Su-27SM\" (Russian for \"Seriyniy Modernizovanniy\" - literally \"Serial Modernized\"). This included upgrades in air-to-air capability with the R-77 missile with an active radar homing head. The modernized Su-27SM fighters belong to the 4+ generation. The strike capability was enhanced with the addition of the Kh-29T/TE/L and Kh-31P/Kh-31A ASM and KAB-500KR/KAB-1500KR smart bombs. The avionics were also upgraded. The Russian Air Force is currently receiving aircraft modernized to the SM3 standard. The aircraft's efficiency to hit air and ground targets has increased 2 and 3 times than in the basic Su-27 variant. Su-27SM3 has two additional stations under the wing and a much stronger airframe. The aircraft is equipped with new onboard radio-electronic systems and a wider range of applicable air weapons. The aircraft's cockpit has multifunctional displays.\nThe Su-30 is a two-seat multi-role version developed from the \"Su-27UBK\" and was designed for export and evolved into two main variants. The export variant for China, the \"SU-30MKK\" ('Flanker-G') which first flew in 1999. The other variant developed as the export version for India, the \"Su-30MKI\" ('Flanker-H') was delivered in 2002 and has at least five other configurations.\nThe Su-33 is the Russian Navy version of the Soviet \"Su-27K\" which was redesignated by the Sukhoi Design Bureau after 1991. Both have the NATO designation 'Flanker-D'.\nThe Su-34 is the Russian derivative of the Soviet-era \"Su-27IB\", which evolved from the Soviet Navy \"Su-27KUB\" operational conversion trainer. It was previously referred to as the \"Su-32MF\".\nThe newest and most advanced version of the Su-27 is the Su-35S (\"Serial\"). The Su-35 was previously referred to as the \"Su-27M\", \"Su-27SM2\", and \"Su-35BM\".\nThe Su-37 is an advanced technology demonstrator derived from Su-35 prototypes, featuring thrust vectoring nozzles made of titanium rather than steel and an updated airframe containing a high proportion of carbon-fibre and Al-Li alloy. Only two examples were built and in 2002 one crashed, effectively ending the program. The Su-37 improvements did however make it into new Flanker variants such as the \"Su-35S\" and the \"Su-30MKI\".\nDesign.\nThe Su-27's basic design is aerodynamically similar to the MiG-29, but it is substantially larger. The wings are attached to the center of the fuselage at the leading edge extensions, featuring a semi-delta design, with the tips cropped for missile rails or ECM pods. The fighter is also an example of a tailed delta wing configuration, retaining conventional horizontal tailplanes.\nThe Su-27 had the Soviet Union's first operational fly-by-wire control system, based on the Sukhoi OKB's experience with the T-4 bomber project. Combined with relatively low wing loading and powerful basic flight controls, it makes for an exceptionally agile aircraft, controllable even at very low speeds and high angle of attack. In airshows the aircraft has demonstrated its maneuverability with a Cobra maneuver \u2013 or dynamic deceleration\u00a0\u2013 briefly sustained level flight at a 120\u00b0 angle of attack.\nThe naval version of the 'Flanker', the \"Su-27K\" (or Su-33), incorporates canards for additional lift, reducing takeoff distances. These canards have also been incorporated in some Su-30s, the Su-35, and the Su-37.\nThe Su-27 is equipped with a Phazotron N001 Myech coherent Pulse-Doppler radar with track while scan and look-down/shoot-down capability. The fighter also has an OLS-27 infrared search and track (IRST) system in the nose just forward of the cockpit with an range.\nThe Su-27 is armed with a single Gryazev-Shipunov GSh-30-1 cannon in the starboard wingroot, and has up to 10 hardpoints for missiles and other weapons. Its standard missile armament for air-to-air combat is a mixture of R-73 (AA-11 Archer) and R-27 (AA-10 'Alamo') missiles, the latter including extended range and infrared homing models.\nOperational history.\nSoviet Union and Russia.\nThe Soviet Air Force began receiving Su-27s in June 1985. The first frontline unit to receive the Su-27 was the 831st Fighter Aviation Regiment at Myrhorod Air Base, Ukrainian SSR, in November 1985. It officially entered service in August 1990.\nOn 13 September 1987, a fully armed Soviet Su-27, Red 36, intercepted a Norwegian Lockheed P-3 Orion maritime patrol aircraft flying over the Barents Sea. The Soviet fighter performed different close passes, colliding with the P-3 on the third pass. The Su-27 disengaged and both aircraft landed safely at their bases.\nThese aircraft were used by the Russian Air Force during the 1992\u20131993 war in Abkhazia against Georgian forces. One fighter, piloted by Major Vatslav Aleksandrovich Shipko (\u0412\u0430\u0446\u043b\u0430\u0432 \u0410\u043b\u0435\u043a\u0441\u0430\u043d\u0434\u0440\u043e\u0432\u0438\u0447 \u0428\u0438\u043f\u043a\u043e) was reported shot down in friendly fire by an S-75M Dvina on 19 March 1993 while intercepting Georgian Su-25s performing close air support. The pilot was killed.\nIn the 2008 South Ossetia War, Russia used Su-27s to gain airspace control over Tskhinvali, the capital city of South Ossetia.\nOn 7 February 2013, two Su-27s briefly entered Japanese airspace off Rishiri Island near Hokkaido, flying south over the Sea of Japan before turning back to the north. Four Mitsubishi F-2 fighters were scrambled to visually confirm the Russian planes, warning them by radio to leave their airspace. A photo taken by a JASDF pilot of one of the two Su-27s was released by the Japan Ministry of Defense. Russia denied the incursion, saying the jets were making routine flights near the disputed Kuril Islands.\nRussia plans to replace the Su-27 and the Mikoyan MiG-29 eventually with the Sukhoi Su-57 fifth-generation multi-role twin-engine fighter. \nA squadron of Su-27SM3s was deployed to Syria in November 2015 as part of the Russian military intervention in the Syrian Civil War.\nA Russian Su-27 crashed over the Black Sea on 25 March 2020, in mysterious circumstances. The pilot was not found, after a large-scale rescue effort hampered by inclement weather involving four helicopters, 11 civilian and military vessels, and several drones. The plane's last location was some 50 kilometers from the city of Feodosia.\nChina.\nChina was the Su-27's first export customer; it received 76 Soviet/Russian-built aircraft - 36 Su-27SKs and 40 Su-27UBKs.\nNegotiations with the Soviet Union started in June 1990 for the MiG-29 and Su-24; by October, China was interested in the more-capable Su-27. China called the purchase \"906 Project\". In February 1991, a Su-27 performed a flight demonstration at Beijing's Nanyuan Airport.\nChina ordered 24 Su-27s, weapons and a flight simulator in May 1991. 70% of the payment was in barter with \"poor quality\" light industrial goods and food; the poor state of the Soviet economy strengthened China's negotiating position. A 1995 estimate of the cost was $1.3-1.5 billion. The first 12 aircraft - eight Su-27SKs and four Su-27UBKs - were delivered in late-1991. 12 were delivered in 1992. The first batch was stationed at the Wuhu Air Base in the early 1990s. These were equipped with N001E radar and could engage one target at a time; later batches used the N001P and could engage two targets at a time.\nTwo more - possibly Su-27UB trainers - were ordered or received by end of 1992.\nIn 1995, the terms of payment were and scope of the agreement changed. China agreed to pay only with US dollars, and Russia agreed to allow China to license-produce the Su-27 as the J-11; the Russian negotiators were not authorized by the Russian government to agree to the latter. China received 18 Su-27SKs and 6 Su\u201327UBKs in 1995\u20131996.\nIn December 1999, China ordered 28 Su\u201327UBKs as trainers. The first 12 were delivered in December 2000. The remainder were delivered by September 2009.\nThrough 2012, China's Su-27s could not fire the R-77 air-to-air missile due to limitations to their fire control systems.\nEthiopia.\nEthiopian Su-27s shot down two Eritrean MiG-29s and damaged another one during the Eritrean-Ethiopian War in February 1999 and destroyed another two in May 2000. The Su-27s were also used in combat air patrol (CAP) missions, suppression of air defense, and providing escort for fighters on bombing and reconnaissance missions. The Su-27 has replaced the aging Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21, which was the main air superiority fighter of the ETAF between 1977 and 1999.\nEthiopian government used its Su-27s for bombing targets during the Tigray War. Ethiopian Su-27s were depicted armed with OFAB-250 unguided bombs and over the skies of Mekelle.\nOn 25 August 2022, Ethiopian authorities claimed an An-26 was intercepted and then shot down by an ETAF Su-27, scrambled to investigate the airspace violation incoming from Sudan.\nAngola.\nThe Su-27 entered Angolan service in mid-2000 during the Angolan Civil War. It is reported that one Su-27 in the process of landing, was shot down by 9K34 Strela-3 MANPADs fired by UNITA forces on 19 November 2000.\nIndonesia.\nFour Indonesian Flanker-type fighters including Su-27s participated for the first time in the biennial Exercise Pitch Black exercise in Australia on 27 July 2012. Arriving at Darwin, Australia, the two Su-27s and two Sukhoi Su-30s were escorted by two Australian F/A-18 Hornets of No. 77 Squadron, Royal Australian Air Force. Exercise Pitch Black 12 was conducted from 27 July through 17 August 2012, and involved 2,200 personnel and up to 94 aircraft from Australia, Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand, New Zealand and the United States.\nPotential operators.\nNorth Korea.\nAccording to Admiral Samuel Paparo, commander of the United States Indo-Pacific Command, North Korea is set to receive an unknown number of Su-27 and MiG-29 aircraft from Russia in exchange for Pyongyang sending troops for the war in Ukraine. \"The War Zone\" states that Russia is unlikely to transfer them in the short term at least.\nUkraine.\nThe Ukrainian Air Force inherited about 66-70 Su-27 aircraft after the collapse of the Soviet Union. Lack of funds in addition to the Su-27's high maintenance requirements led to a shortage of spare parts and inadequate servicing with approximately 34 in service as of 2019. Years of underfunding meant that the air force has not received a new Su-27 since 1991. Between 2007 and 2017, as many as 65 combat jets were sold abroad, including nine Su-27s. In 2009, amid declining relations with Russia, the Ukrainian Air Force began to have difficulty obtaining spare parts from Sukhoi. Only 19 Su-27s were serviceable at the time of the Russian annexation of Crimea and subsequent War in Donbas in 2014. Following the Russian invasion, Ukraine increased its military budget, allowing stored Su-27s to be returned to service.\nThe Zaporizhzhya Aircraft Repair Plant \"MiGremont\" in Zaporizhzhia began modernizing the Su-27 to NATO standards in 2012, which involved a minor overhaul of the radar, navigation and communication equipment. Aircraft with this modification are designated Su-27P1M and Su-27UB1M. The Ministry of Defence accepted the project on 5 August 2014, and the first two aircraft were officially handed over to the 831st Tactical Aviation Brigade in October 2015. Despite the modernization, the avionics and missiles of the Ukrainian Su-27s were still \"two generations behind\" those of the Russians.\nIn 2014, during the Annexation of Crimea, a Ukrainian Air Force Su-27 was scrambled to intercept Russian fighter jets over Ukraine's airspace over the Black Sea on 3 March. With no aerial opposition and other aircraft available for ground attack duties, Ukrainian Su-27s played only a small role in the war in Donbas until 24 February 2022. Ukrainian Su-27s were recorded performing low fly passes and were reported flying top cover, combat air patrols and eventual escort or intercept of civil aviation traffic over Eastern Ukraine. Videos taken of low-flying Su-27s involved in the operation revealed they were armed with R-27 and R-73 air-to-air missiles.\nThere were two fatal crashes involving Ukrainian Su-27s in 2018. On 16 October, a Ukrainian Su-27UB1M flown by Colonel Ivan Petrenko crashed during the Ukraine-USAF exercise \"Clear Sky 2018\" based at Starokostiantyniv Air Base. The second seat was occupied by Lieutenant Colonel Seth Nehring, a pilot of the 144th Fighter Wing of the California Air National Guard. Both pilots died in the crash, that happened about 5:00\u00a0p.m. local time in the Khmelnytskyi province of western Ukraine. On 15 December, an Su-27 crashed on final approach about from Ozerne Air Base in Zhytomyr Oblast, after performing a training flight. Major Fomenko Alexander Vasilyevich was killed.\nOn 29 May 2020, Ukrainian Su-27s took part in the Bomber Task Force in Europe with B-1B bombers for the first time in the Black Sea region. On 4 September 2020, three B-52 bombers from the 5th Bomb Wing, Minot Air Force Base, North Dakota, conducted vital integration training with Ukrainian MiG-29s and Su-27s inside Ukraine's airspace.\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nThe Su-27 was used by both sides in the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On 24 February 2022, a Ukrainian Su-27 and a refueling vehicle were burned out by fire after a Russian attack on Ozerne Air Base in Zhytomyr District during the first day of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The next day, another Su-27 was shot down in Kyiv by a Russian S-400 system and was recorded by residents on their cell phones and published on Twitter; its pilot, Colonel Oleksandr Oksanchenko, was killed. A third Su-27 was reported lost by Ukrainian officials over Kropyvnytskyi, in central Ukraine; its pilot was killed.\nOn 7 May 2022, a pair of Ukrainian Su-27s conducted a high-speed, low-level bombing run on Russian-occupied Snake Island; the attack was captured on film by a Bayraktar TB2 drone.\nOn 7 June 2022, a Ukrainian Su-27, bort number \"38 blue\", was shot down while flying at low altitude near Orikhiv in Zaporizhzhia Oblast. The aircraft was reportedly destroyed either by an enemy air-to-air missile or due to friendly fire.\nOn 21 August 2022, a Ukrainian Su-27 was reported lost in combat. The pilot died.\nIn September 2022, a Ukrainian Su-27 was spotted with American-made AGM-88 HARM anti-radiation missiles.\nOn 13 October 2022, one Ukrainian Su-27 from the 39th Tactical Aviation Brigade was lost during a combat mission in Poltava Oblast, the pilot died.\nOn 10 March 2023, a Russian Su-27 was damaged in a partisan attack on Uglovoye airfield in Primorsky Krai, Russia. The video of a burning airplane was posted by the Freedom of Russia Legion.\nOn 14 March 2023, a Russian Su-27 intercepted an American MQ-9 Reaper drone and performed several passes, dumping fuel onto it before colliding with it, causing the drone to crash into the Black Sea.\nIn August 2023, it was revealed that Ukrainian Su-27s had started carrying JDAM-ER guided bombs.\nOn 17 May 2024, a Ukrainian Su-27 was shot down in the vicinity of Metalivka, Chuhuiv Raion, during the Kharkiv offensive. The pilot, Lt Col Denys Vasyliuk, was killed. The aircraft was an upgraded Su-27UP2M, which was still undergoing tests prior to the Russian invasion.\nAs of 24 October 2025, Ukraine has lost 17 Su-27 and Russia lost 3 Su-27.\nOn 28 April 2025, a Ukrainian Su-27 was lost in an accident \"while repelling a drone attack\"; the pilot ejected safely. A commission has been established to investigate the cause of the incident.\n People's Air and Air Defence Force of Angola \u2013 Seven Su-27s in service as of January 2013. Three were bought from Belarus in 1998. Received a total of eight. One was reportedly shot down on 19 November 2000 by a 9K34 Strela-3 MANPADS during the Angolan Civil War.\n People's Liberation Army Air Force (PLAAF) \u2013 78 Su-27 delivered between 1990 and 2010. 32 Su-27UBK are in service as of 2022.\nEritrean Air Force ordered 2 during the Ethiopian-Eritrean War.\nEthiopian Air Force \u2013 up to 17 Su-27S, Su-27P, Su-27UB sourced second\u2013hand from Russia in two different batches: 9 starting from 1998 and 8 starting from 2002. Some crashed over the years.\n Indonesian Air Force \u2013 5 Su-27SKM in service. Two Su-27SK and three Su-27SKM fighters were delivered in 2003 and 2010 respectively. In 2017 Indonesia upgraded its two Su-27SK to SKM standard.\n Kazakh Air Defense Forces \u2013 20 Su-27/Su-27BM2, 3 Su-27UB/UBM2\n Russian Aerospace Forces \u2013 101 Su-27s in service as of 2021. 359 Su-27 aircraft, including 225 Su-27s, 70 Su-27SMs, 12 Su-27SM3s, and 52 Su-27UBs were in service as of January 2014. Less than 422 Su-27s are in service as of 2025 according to World Air Forces. A modernization program began in 2004. Half of the Su-27 fleet had reportedly been modernized in 2012. The Russian Aerospace Forces were receiving aircraft modernized to the SM3 standard as of 2018.\n* 3rd Guards Fighter Aviation Regiment, 4th Air and Air Defence Forces Army\n* 159th Guards Fighter Aviation Regiment, 6th Air and Air Defence Forces Army\n As of 4 March 2025, Russia lost 2 Su-27 and one damaged on ground during Russia - Ukraine war.\n Russian Navy \u2013 53 Su-27s in use as of January 2014\n Ukrainian Air Force \u2013 70 Su-27s in inventory. It had 34 Su-27s in service as of March 2019.\n As of 4 March 2025, Ukraine lost 16 Su-27 during Russian invasion of Ukraine.\n United States Air Force \u2013 Two Su-27Ps were delivered to the U.S. in 1995 from Belarus. Two Su-27UBs were bought from Ukraine in 2009 by a private company, Pride Aircraft for sale to civilians. The aircraft was bought by USAF in 2011 and one of them was retired in 2023. They have been spotted operating over Area 51 for evaluation and training purposes.\n Uzbekistan Air and Air Defence Forces \u2013 34 Su-27s in use as of January 2013\n Vietnam People's Air Force \u2013 9 Su-27SKs and 3 Su-27UBKs in use as of January 2013\n Belarusian Air Force \u2212 Inherited 23-28 Su-27s from the former 61st Fighter Aviation Regiment of the Soviet Union. They had 22 in service as of December 2010. Nine Su-27s were sold to Angola in 1998. Belarus had operated 17 Su-27P and 4 Su-27UBM1 aircraft before their retirement in December 2012.\n Soviet Air Force \u2212 Passed to different successor nations in 1991.\n Soviet Air Defence Forces \u2212 Over 100 Su-27s in 1988, according to US intelligence.\nOperators.\nPrivate ownership.\nAccording to the U.S. FAA there are two privately owned Su-27s in the U.S., as of 2015. Two Su-27UB from the Ukrainian Air Force were demilitarised and sold to Pride Aircraft of Rockford, Illinois. Pride Aircraft modified some of the aircraft to their own desires by remarking all cockpit controls in English and replacing much of the Russian avionics suite with Garmin, Bendix/King, and Collins avionics. The aircraft were both sold to private owners for approximately $5\u00a0million each. The United States Air Force bought the aircraft in 2011 and in 2023 one of them was preserved at the National Museum of the United States Air Force.\nOn 30 August 2010, the \"Financial Times\" claimed that a Western private training support company ECA Program placed a US$1.5 billion order with Belarusian state arms dealer BelTechExport for 15 unarmed Su-27s (with an option on 18 more) to organize a dissimilar air combat training school in the former NATO airbase in Keflavik, Iceland, with deliveries due by the end of 2012. A September 2010 media report by RIA Novosti, the state-owned news agency, questioned the existence of the agreement. No further developments on such a plan have been reported by 2014, while a plan for upgrading and putting the retired Belarusian Air Force Su-27 fleet back to service was reported in February 2014.\nSpecifications (Su-27SK).\n\"Data from\" Sukhoi, KnAAPO, Deagel.com, Airforce-Technology.comGeneral characteristics* Crew: 1* Aspect ratio: * Fuel capacity: internal\nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach 2.35\nArmament\nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65581", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65581", "title": "Sukhoi SU-27", "text": ""}
{"id": "65585", "revid": "44318890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65585", "title": "United States of America", "text": ""}
{"id": "65587", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65587", "title": "History of the United States of America", "text": ""}
{"id": "65590", "revid": "41021449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65590", "title": "Common salt", "text": ""}
{"id": "65591", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65591", "title": "United States of America/People", "text": ""}
{"id": "65592", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65592", "title": "United States of America/Geography", "text": ""}
{"id": "65593", "revid": "80960", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65593", "title": "Ruler", "text": "Instrument used to measure distances\nA ruler, sometimes called a rule, scale, line gauge, or metre/meter stick, is an instrument used to make length measurements, whereby a length is read from a series of markings called \"rules\" along an edge of the device. Usually, the instrument is rigid and the edge itself is a straightedge (\"ruled straightedge\"), which additionally allows one to draw straighter lines. Rulers are an important tool in geometry, geography and mathematics. They have been used since at least 2650 BC.\nVariants.\nRulers have long been made from different materials and in multiple sizes. Historically, they were mainly wood but plastics have also been used. They can be created with length markings instead of being scribed. Metal is also used for more durable rulers for use in the workshop; sometimes a raised metal edge is embedded into a wooden desk ruler to preserve the edge when used for straight-line cutting and to prevent ink from feathering under the ruler when used to draw a straight line with a pen. Typically in length, though some can go up to 100 cm, it is useful for a ruler to be on a desk or workstation to help in drawing. Shorter rulers are convenient for keeping in a pocket. Longer rulers (e.g. ) are necessary in some cases, some examples being the yardsticks and meter sticks. Historically, long measuring rods were used for larger projects, now superseded by the tape measure, the surveyor's wheel or laser rangefinders.\nUse in geometry.\nIn geometry, straight lines between points may be drawn using a straightedge (ruler without any rules on it). Furthermore, it is also used to draw accurate graphs and tables.\nA ruler and compass construction is a construction that uses a ruler and a compass. It is possible to bisect an angle into two equal parts with a ruler and compass. It can be proven, though, that it is impossible to divide an angle into three equal parts using only a compass and straightedge\u00a0\u2014 the problem of angle trisection. However, if two marks be allowed on the ruler, the problem becomes solvable via a neusis construction.\nHistory.\nIn the history of measurement many distance units have been used which were based on the human body such as the cubit, hand and foot, and these units varied in length by era and location. In the late 18th century, the metric system came into use and has since been adopted to varying degrees in almost all countries around the world. \nThe oldest preserved measuring rod is a copper-alloy bar that dates from c. 2650\u00a0BC and was found by the German Assyriologist Eckhard Unger while excavating at the Sumerian city of Nippur (present-day Iraq).\nRulers made of ivory were in use by the Indus Valley civilization period prior to 1500\u00a0BC. Excavations at Lothal (2400\u00a0BC) have yielded one such ruler calibrated to about . Ian Whitelaw holds that the Mohenjo-Daro ruler is divided into units corresponding to and these are marked out in decimal subdivisions with amazing accuracy, to within . Ancient bricks found throughout the region have dimensions that correspond to these units.\nAnton Ullrich invented the folding ruler in 1851. Frank Hunt later made the flexible ruler in 1902.\nCurved and flexible rulers.\nThe equivalent of a ruler for drawing or reproducing a smooth curve, where it takes the form of a rigid template, is known as a French curve. A flexible device that can be bent to the desired shape is known as a flat spline, or (in its more modern incarnation) a \"flexible curve\". Historically, a flexible lead rule used by masons that could be bent to the curves of a molding was known as a lesbian rule.\nPhilosophy.\nLudwig Wittgenstein famously used rulers as an example in his discussion of language games in the \"Philosophical Investigations\" (1953). He pointed out that the standard meter bar in Paris was the criterion against which all other rulers were determined to be one meter long. However, there was no analytical way to demonstrate that the standard meter bar itself was one meter long. It could only be asserted as one meter as part of a language game.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65594", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65594", "title": "United States of America/Economy", "text": ""}
{"id": "65595", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65595", "title": "United States of America/Communications", "text": ""}
{"id": "65596", "revid": "40107148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65596", "title": "United States of America/Transportation", "text": ""}
{"id": "65597", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65597", "title": "United States of America/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "65599", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65599", "title": "United States of America/Transnational Issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "65608", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65608", "title": "Xavier University \u2013 Ateneo de Cagayan", "text": "Roman Catholic university in Cagayan de Oro, Philippines\nThe Xavier University \u2013 Ateneo de Cagayan (; ), also known simply as the Ateneo de Cagayan, Xavier or XU is a private, Catholic, coeducational, basic and higher education institution. It is operated by the Philippine Province of the Society of Jesus in Cagayan de Oro, Misamis Oriental, Philippines. Founded in 1933 as the Ateneo de Cagayan, it became the first higher education institution in Mindanao to receive a university status a year before its sister school Ateneo de Manila. It was given its present name in honor of the Jesuit missionary St. Francis Xavier.\nThe university offers primary and secondary education as well as undergraduate and post-graduate education in humanities, social sciences, engineering, management and business. It offers professional degrees through graduate schools such as Xavier Ateneo College of Law and Jose P. Rizal School of Medicine.\nHistory.\nUniversity status.\nRector Fr. Francisco Z. Araneta, S.J., had vowed to St. Francis Xavier that if Ateneo de Cagayan was granted university status before its commencement exercises on March 22, 1958, he would rename it after the saint. An hour before the commencement exercises, then-Secretary of Education Manuel Lim sent a telegram stating that Ateneo de Cagayan now had university status.\nOn August 27, 1958, it was inaugurated as a university and officially became \"Xavier University \u2013 Ateneo de Cagayan\". It became the first higher education institution in Mindanao to receive university status, a year before its sister school, the Ateneo de Manila. At the inauguration banquet, President Carlos P. Garcia received the first honorary degree conferred by the university.\nCampuses.\nXavier University \u2013 Ateneo de Cagayan operates on four campuses: \n\"Campus of the Future\" project.\nIn 2017, the institution proposed the \u20b12.1 billion peso plan of the 21-hectare expansion project the \"Campus of the Future\" which would sell at least 4 hectares of its 6-hectare downtown campus and another 14-hectares of a 63-hectare agricultural property in Cagayan de Oro. \u201c\"First-class education needs first-class building and campus design\".\u201d Xavier Ateneo President Fr. Mars P. Tan stated.\nCagayan de Oro Mayor Oscar Moreno also hailed the plan, saying the plan would \u201credefine\u201d and change the landscape of Northern Mindanao's capital city. However, there has been some opposition from alumni and retired faculty and staff, citing long-term traffic issues in the uptown area, as well as the heritage status of the main campus.\nIn line with this, the Provincial Superior of the Jesuits in the Philippines, Fr. Primitivo E. Viray, S.J., endorsed the plan to the Superior General of the Society of Jesus in Rome, the Very Rev. Arturo A. Sosa, S.J., whom gave the green-light to endorsed the plan to the Vatican for its approval.\nIn 2021, the Vatican has finally given its seal of approval for the \"Campus of the Future\" project of Xavier University \u2013 Ateneo de Cagayan. \"The long wait for the final decision only showed the amount of time devoted by the Church authorities to review and study the project.\" in a statement said.\nGovernance.\nThe university is governed by a Board of Trustees, led by Francisco F. Guerra III as the chairman. Fr. Mars P. Tan, S.J., University President since July 31, 2020, is a member of the Board.\nAs one of six Jesuit colleges and universities in the Philippines, Xavier Ateneo also forms a consortium with the other two Jesuit universities in Mindanao, namely: Ateneo de Davao University and Ateneo de Zamboanga University.\nAcademics.\nProfessional schools.\nGraduate school.\nThe Graduate School offers the university's post-baccalaureate programs, through doctoral studies. Its council is the Graduate School Student Council.\nSchool of Law.\nThe School of Law offers a Juris Doctor program. Its student council is the Association of Law Students. Its team is called \"Legis\" and its mascot is the goddess Dike (Lady Justice).\nStudies are both history and research-oriented, and offer legal aid for the marginalized members of society through the Xavier University Center for Legal Assistance. \nThe School of Law aspires to attain superior performance and service. Its students have won in national and international moot court competitions and law debates. It has produced graduates who are nationally distinguished law practitioners, corporate counsels, policy makers, local chief executives, and judiciary officials.\nOn November 11, 2011, the School was named an \"Outstanding Law School\" by the Legal Education Board of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, and it was recognized as being one of the ten best-performing law schools in the Philippines from 2001 to 2011. A plaque was presented to its dean, Atty. Raul R. Villanueva, as outstanding law dean. On the 2015 bar exam the school ranked seventh among law-schools-with-20-examinees-or-more, and one examinee came in eighth.\nDr. Jose P. Rizal School of Medicine.\nThe Dr Jose P Rizal School of Medicine is housed in a five-storey building located at the east side of Xavier Ateneo campus. The Medical Library with 5,000 volumes and 256 journals is the Mindanao repository for World Health Organization publications.\nFounded in 1983, the medical school has Level 3 Accredited Status from the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges and Universities.\nUndergraduate schools.\nCollege of Agriculture.\nThe College of Agriculture was founded in 1954. Its student council is the Agriculture or Aggies Student Council. They are known by the monikers 'Aggies' and 'Bullriders', and its mascot is the bull. Program offerings include Agribusiness, Agricultural Engineering, Food Technology, Development Communication, and Agriculture with majors in agricultural economics, animal science, and crop science.\nThe college pursues an integrated program of instruction, research, extension, and production to educate students in sustainable agriculture and other relevant technologies and in equitable access to resources in the context of \"global liberalization\" and \"grassroots people participation.\" Manresa Farm offers research, outreach, and production opportunities, which are supplemented by team-building and ongoing faculty development. Opportunities include immersion in communities and internships with companies and organizations.\nOn February 27, 2009, Commission on Higher Education (CHED) declared Xavier Ateneo Center of Development in Agriculture for three years, the first private institution given this designation. In December 2015, it was declared as a Center of Excellence in Agriculture. In November 2009, CHED declared Xavier a National Center of Excellence, specifically a Provincial Institute for Agriculture (PIA) under the National Agriculture and Fisheries Education System. As a PIA, Xavier is among the priority partners of CHED in implementing development projects in agriculture.\nXavier Ateneo qualifies for a \u20b1500,000 grant to fund scholarships, continuing agriculture education programs, instructional materials development, and upgrading of facilities including research laboratories, among other priority projects supported by CHED. The college has Level III PAASCU accreditation valid until May 2020. The college has produced five topnotchers and over 50 top-10 finishers on the agriculture licensure examination.\nCollege of Arts and Sciences.\nThe College of Arts and Sciences, with more than 160 on the faculty, offers most of the university's core subjects, e.g., Filipino, English, humanities, natural and social sciences. Its student council is the United Arts and Sciences Student Council. Its mascot is the Tiger.\nIts linkages with Local Government Units sustain its Coastal Research Management and strengthen its research and extension network. The Office of International Cooperation and Networking negotiates with foreign universities for international linkages. The Arts and Sciences programs of the university are PAASCU Level IV accredited with its Literature and Biology programs declared as a CHED Center of Development. \nCollege of Computer Studies.\nThe College of Computer Studies (CCS), founded in 2011, offers programs in Computer Science, in Information Systems, in Information Technology and in Entertainment and Multimedia Computing. \nThe CCS maintains partnerships and linkages with other academic, industry, and government institutions to augment its instruction, research, and social outreach capabilities and to enhance the delivery of its curricular offerings. For instance, it has been a long-time partner and training provider of the SMART Schools/Microsoft Partners in Learning Program \u2013 a collaborative project of SMART, Microsoft, PBSP, DepEd that provides service to the community through IT training programs for public schools.\nCollege of Engineering.\nThe College of Engineering was founded in 1979 with 374 students and specialties in chemical, civil, electrical, and mechanical engineering. Of this first class only 51 graduated in 1984, 30 of these in civil engineering. Programs in electronics and industrial engineering were added in 1993, and the Masters in Engineering after 1995. In 2015 the pass rate ranged from 73% in electrical to 100% in mechanical engineering. All the programs are PAASCU Level II accredited and all but industrial engineering are CHED Centers of Development.\nCollege of Nursing.\nThe College of Nursing was founded in 1989 and was recognized by the Commission on Higher Education in 1992. The first batch in 1993 had a 100% passing rate in the Integrated Nurses Licensure Examination. The four-year Bachelor of Science in Nursing Program is community and prevention oriented. Students engage in basic sanitation activities in the community such as the regular free circumcisions in barangays and community fora on health issues.\nFrom 2013 through 2016 Xavier Ateneo, with about 150 nurses per year, had a 100% passing rate on the licensure exam, and has been ranked second among large nursing schools in the Philippines.\nSchool of Business and Management.\nThe School of Business and Management (formerly 'College of Commerce') is a recognized Center of Excellence with programs in accountancy, real estate management, and business administration (majors in business economics, financial management, marketing management). The Student Entrepreneurship Program is focused on entrepreneurial values, business ethics, environmental stewardship, and corporate social responsibility.\nIn the 2016 CPA exams, XU ranked sixth nationwide, and from its first class in Real Estate Management 17 of 19 received a passing grade. Its Accountancy and Business &amp; Administration programs are PAASCU Level IV re-accredited, valid until May 2019.\nSchool of Education.\nThe School of Education was founded in 1938 and reopened in 1947; it trains science, math, and English teachers. The Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm is used in teaching. Student internships in educational institutions in the region begin as early as sophomore year. Its student council is the Teachers' Guild. Its mascot is the Phoenix.\nThe school holds a Level III Re-accredited Status granted by PAASCU. CHED has the School of Education as a Center of Excellence. The elementary and secondary education programs are both PAASCU Level IV re-accredited and as a Center of Training Institution for the Department of Education's Certificate and In-Service Education and Training (INSET) Programs.\nAndrew L Gotianun Sr. Center for Integrated Technologies.\nUnlike the other colleges, the Andrew L. Gotianun Sr. Center for Integrated Technologies (ALGCIT \u2013 formerly \"Center for Industrial Technology\") is a technical-vocational school. Its student council is the Center for Integrated Technologies Student Council. Its mascot is the Knight.\nStudents are involved in entrepreneurial and industrial work. ALGCIT is recognized by the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and in 1999 recognized by TESDA as a Center for Excellence in Industrial Technician Education. The center offers four three-year programs based on TESDA training regulations. Students who complete the programs are eligible to take the TESDA National Certificate examinations for the qualifications embedded in each program.\nALGCIT was housed at the main campus at Corrales Avenue until 2012 when it moved to the Jose Ch. Alvarez Technology Complex in the Manresa campus.\nNotable people.\nProminent figures such as the late President Carlos P. Garcia and late President Corazon Aquino were among the people who were conferred an honorary degree by the university. PDP-Laban President Jose Alvarez is a notable alumnus of the university. Former senator Miriam Defensor Santiago was among the distinguished politician who was conferred by the institution as well. The former Vice President Teofisto Guingona Jr. is among the notable alumnus of the university. Influential figures such as Governor Peter M. Unabia, Former Senator Aquilino Q. Pimentel, Jr., Congressman Zia Alonto Adiong, Congressman Rufus B. Rodriguez, and Congressman Yevgeny Vincente \"Bambi\" B. Emano are among the most prominent alumni of the university. Filipino song artist Arthur Nery, TJ Monterde and distinguished author Jonahmae P. Pacala, also known by her pseudonym Jonaxx, are also alumni of the institution.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65609", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65609", "title": "Polruan", "text": "Village in Cornwall, England\nPolruan () is a coastal village in the parish of Lanteglos-by-Fowey in Cornwall, England, United Kingdom. It is bounded on three sides by water: to the north by Pont Creek, to the west by the River Fowey and to the south by the English Channel and neighbouring village Bodinnick to the north, connected by a 4-mile walk along the hill tops. Polruan is very steep and well protected from the prevailing winds and Polruan Pool is a haven for small boats.\nThe population of Polruan was 534 in the 2021 census.\nHistory.\nPolruan has never been a centre for fishing, although it is often mistakenly called a fishing village. In the 1851 census there were just four men giving their occupations as fishermen, the majority were linked to shipbuilding or were mariners. In the medieval period Polruan produced some very large ships, employed in the wine trade with Bordeaux. In 1343 five Polruan ships were in the King's service. A century later the \"Edward of Polruan\" was accused of piracy and its size can be shown by the number of men it carried, 200 men 'armed and arrayed for war.'\n St Ruan was the first to occupy the top of Polruan Hill the point where St Saviour's ruin still stands today. The ruin of St Saviour's church on the hill above Polruan dates to the 8th century. It was a landmark for shipping, and also, in times of war, a vantage point for observing the approach of enemy shipping to the strategically important Fowey harbour. The name Polruan derives from the Cornish for \"harbour of a man called Ruveun\".\nPolruan also has a blockhouse fortification built in the 14th century that guards the entrance to the river Fowey, one of a pair\u2014its partner being situated on the Fowey side of the river. The Polruan blockhouse is well preserved due to the efforts of various enthusiastic councillors and conservationists on the Polruan side of the river, in contrast to the blockhouse in Fowey. Between the two blockhouses was strung a defensive chain to prevent enemy ships entering the harbour, the chain being lowered for friendly vessels. This was primarily used during the wars with the Dutch.\nThe Harbour Commissioners Yard at Brazen Island was a shipbuilding yard in the 19th century, one of several in Polruan building schooners, barquentines and ketches. Polruan was the major shipbuilding site in the harbour and the owners and the families of the mariners lived in the village. As wooden shipbuilding declined in late 19th century, Brazen Island became a sardine processing factory which also supplied electricity for the village. The gun battery at Peak Point held an anti-shipping gun of which the mounting pin can still be seen. The battery gave the name of Battery Park. The wall at Peak Field was used for rifle practice. Motor torpedo boats were repaired at Pont Creek during World War II. The overhanging trees hid the boats from surveillance aircraft. The remains of cradles for boat repair and some hull parts can still be seen preserved in the mud on the foreshore.\nA cross known as Polruan or St Saviour's Cross stands at the top of Fore Street. The latter name comes from the former chapel of St Saviour nearby.\nEducation.\nThe main school serving the village is Polruan Primary Academy which is a mixed school of non-denominational religion. The primary school (which only has 25 pupils at most) was formerly the village girls' school, the boys' school being destroyed in the Second World War after a German bomber shed its unused payload. The site of the boys' school is now where the car park is at the top of St Saviours Hill.\nThe nearest secondary school, Fowey River Academy, is in Fowey.\nTransport.\nPolruan can be accessed in a number of ways. By car using the linking one road in and one road out, which is the usual way. There is a taxi service operating in the village which transports residents in and out of the village. The local bus service operates on different times during season, the service is run via Looe, Polperro, Lansallos and Greenbank.\nOther transport includes the Polruan ferry, which crosses the river to and from Fowey every 15 minutes and operates every day of the year. There is also a passenger ferry to Mevagissey. Cars can be ferried to Fowey from Bodinnick which is 4 miles away. When the car ferry from Bodinnick is not running, Fowey and points westwards are reached by car via a car journey via Lostwithiel.\nSport.\nThe history of the Troy class of boat has been set down by Marcus Lewis. Lewis also builds boats and has a small history of the Fowey River class of boat.\nMaritime links.\n The long legacy of shipbuilding continues today with Toms yard. Until recently the Fowey Harbour Pilots traditionally came from Polruan. Pilotage for commercial shipping was carried out from open boats with the Pilots boarding the ships via a pilot ladder. The Fowey Pilots Association describes the work of the pilots.\nPolruan is one of a now increasing number of Cornish places to use lookouts to help marine craft in distress. Many lookout towers were demolished in the 1980s to save costs. Now, through the National Coastwatch Institution (NCI), a voluntary charity, many of the surviving old coastguard lookouts and towers are being re-staffed by qualified volunteers. The Old Coastguard Lookout at Polruan was among the first to be re-commissioned in this way. (The current His Majesty's Coastguard headquarters for cliff rescue, including the equipment store, is on St Saviour's Hill adjacent to the NCI Station, above the main village carpark. Exercises of the HM Coastguard continue.) The current Polruan NCI Station overlooks the Fowey estuary and also St Austell Bay beyond the village. It was constructed in the nineteenth century.\nPeople.\nCalvin Dean, the actor from the film \"Tormented\", grew up in Polruan. Daphne du Maurier once stayed in the village and based her first novel, \"The Loving Spirit\", on the Slade family of shipbuilders and mariners. Peter Skellern, the singer was resident in the village. Actor Patrick Malahide, who amongst other roles, played Inspector Chisholm in the popular television series \"Minder\" is also another Polruan resident.\nThe illustrator Mabel Lucie Attwell lived in the village, as did the absurdist English playwright Norman F. Simpson. Raynor Winn, the author of \"The Salt Path\", used to live in Polruan, which is the mid- and end-point of the 630-mile walk described in the book.\nFilm and television.\nThe film \"Stolen Hours\" featuring Susan Hayward was filmed around Polruan. The latter part of the film follows an actress who comes to Polruan to live out the remainder of her life, following a brain tumour, with her surgeon husband. The 1963 film displays older shots of the village including use of the village shop, \"Headland House\", and the clip of the children's sports day which is filmed where Greenbank is now built. A local, Mrs Baker, was included in the filming of the egg and spoon race and calls... \"Let's get shoes off!\"\nAn episode of \"The Inspector Lynley Mysteries\" was also partly filmed in Polruan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65610", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65610", "title": "Tintagel", "text": "Village in Cornwall, England\nTintagel () or Trevena (, meaning \"Village on a Mountain\") is a civil parish and village situated on the Atlantic coast of Cornwall, England, United Kingdom. The village and nearby Tintagel Castle are associated with the legends surrounding King Arthur and in recent times have become a tourist attraction. It was claimed by Geoffrey of Monmouth that the castle was the place of Arthur's conception.\nToponymy.\nToponymists have had difficulty explaining the origin of 'Tintagel': the probability is that it is Norman French, as the Cornish of the 13th century would have lacked the soft 'g' ('i/j' in the earliest forms: see also Tintagel Castle). If it is Cornish then 'Dun' would mean \"Fort\". Oliver Padel proposes 'Dun' '-tagell' meaning \"narrow place\" in his book on place names. There is a possible cognate in the Channel Islands named \"Tente d'Agel\", but that still leaves the question subject to doubt.\nThe name first occurs in Geoffrey of Monmouth's \"Historia Regum Britanniae\" (c. 1136, in Latin) as \"Tintagol\", implying pronunciation with a hard [g] sound as in modern English \"girl\". But in Layamon's \"Brut\" (MS Cotton Otho C.xi, f. 482), in early Middle English, the name is rendered as \"Tintaieol\". The letter \"i\" in this spelling implies a soft consonant like modern English \"j\"; the second part of the name would be pronounced approximately as \"-ageul\" would be in modern French.\nAn oft-quoted Celtic etymology in the \"Oxford Dictionary of English Place-Names\", accepts the view of Padel (1985) that the name is from Cornish *\"din\" meaning \"fort\" and *\"tagell\" meaning \"neck, throat, constriction, narrow\" (Celtic *\"d\u016bn\", \"fort\" = Irish \"d\u00fan\", \"fort\", \"cf\". Welsh \"dinas\", \"city\"; *\"tagell\" = Welsh \"tagell\", \"gill, wattle\").\nThe modern-day village of Tintagel was always known as Trevena () until the Post Office started using 'Tintagel' as the name in the mid-19th century. Until then, 'Tintagel' had been restricted to the name of the headland and of the parish.\nArea and population.\nTreknow is the largest of the other settlements in the Tintagel parish, which also include Bossiney, Truas, Trebarwith, Tregatta, Trenale, Trethevy, Treven, Trevillet, and Trewarmett. The population of the entire parish was 1,725 at the 2021 census, and 1,727 at the 2011 census, down from 1,820 people at the 2001 census, and the area of the parish is . (The population recorded in the 2011 census was 1,782 but this includes Knightsmill in the parish of St Teath.)\nAn electoral ward also exists extending inland to Otterham. The population of this ward at the same census was 3,990.\nHistory and government.\nA small cliff castle was established at Bossiney in Norman times, probably before the Domesday Survey of 1086. In \"Domesday Book\", there are certainly two manors in this parish (for a probable third see Trethevy).\nBossiney and Trevena were established as a borough in 1253 by Richard, 1st Earl of Cornwall. Bossiney (which included Trevena) was held from the monks of Bodmin by the Earl of Cornwall: there was land for six ploughs and of pasture (before the Conquest it had been held from the monks by Alfwy). The monks of Bodmin held Treknow themselves: there was land for eight ploughs and of pasture. Tintagel was one of the 17 Antiqua maneria of the Duchy of Cornwall. The parish feast traditionally celebrated at Tintagel was 19 October, the feast day of St Denys, patron of the chapel at Trevena (the proper date is 9 October but the feast has moved forward due to the calendar reform of 1752). The market hall and the site of the fair were near the chapel. \"Tintagel (Trevena) declined towards the end of the medieval period for it was ill-equipped to take up fishing as an alternative occupation. Paradoxically it now enjoys a temporary prosperity as a result of tourist interest in the castle which was converted so romantically by Geoffrey of Monmouth into an ancient residence of King Arthur.\" (W. G. V. Balchin 1954)\nThe Tithe Commissioners' survey was carried out in 1840\u201341 and recorded the area of the parish as , of which arable and pasture land was . The land owned by the largest landowner, Lord Wharncliffe, amounted to , and there was of glebe land. Precise details of the size and tenure of every piece of land are given. Sidney Madge did research into the history of the parish and compiled a manuscript \"Records of Tintagel\" in 1945. The villages of Trevena and Bossiney were until the early 20th century separated by fields along Bossiney Road.\nTrebarwith was the scene of the shipwreck of the \"Sarah Anderson\" in 1886 (all on board perished), but the most famous of the wrecks happened on 20 December 1893, at Lye Rock when the barque \"Iota\" was driven against the cliff. The crew were able to get onto the rock and apart from a youth of 14 were saved by four men (three of these from Tintagel: one of them, Charles Hambly, received a Vellum testimonial and three medals for bravery afterwards). The story is told in verse in \"Musings on Tintagel and its Heroes\" by Joseph Brown, 1897; the youth was buried in Tintagel Churchyard and the grave is marked by a wooden cross (his name is given in the bureaucratic Italian usage, surname first: Catanese Domenico). On 6 July 1979, Tintagel was briefly subject to national attention when an RAF Hawker Hunter fighter aircraft crashed into the village following an engine malfunction; the unusual incident caused significant damage and consternation, but no deaths.\nThe borough of Bossiney was given the right to send two MPs to Parliament c. 1552 and continued to do so until 1832 when its status as a borough was abolished. For the purposes of local government, Tintagel is currently a civil parish and councillors are elected every four years. The principal local authority in this area is Cornwall Council, but until March 2009 the parish was in the area of North Cornwall District Council. Parish council minutes can be found on Tintagel Web. From 1894 to 1974, the parish was in the Camelford Rural District.\nArthurian legend.\nAs described in Geoffrey's popular \"Historia\", Gorlois, Duke of Cornwall, put his wife Igraine in \"Tintagol\" while he was at war (\"posuit eam in oppido Tintagol in littore maris\": \"he put her in the \"oppidum\" Tintagol on the shore of the sea\"). Merlin disguised Uther Pendragon as Gorlois so that Uther could enter Tintagel and impregnate Igraine while pretending to be Gorlois; Uther and Igraine's child was King Arthur. This motif became the standard origin story of Arthur in subsequent medieval chronicles and chivalric romances. In modern era, the association of Tintagel with Arthur's birthplace was popularised by Alfred, Lord Tennyson in \"Idylls of the King.\"\nSome events of the Tristan and Iseult legend are also set at Tintagel. Modern works such as Algernon Charles Swinburne's \"Tristram of Lyonesse\" and Thomas Hardy's \"The Famous Tragedy of the Queen of Cornwall at Tintagel in Lyonnesse\" perpetuated that association.\nTourists can visit King Arthur's Great Halls at Trevena which is a substantial building of the early 1930s. The Artognou stone, which was discovered in 1998, has added to the legend, although historians do not believe the inscription refers to King Arthur.\nArchaeology and architecture.\nThe Ravenna Cosmography, of around 700, makes reference to Purocoronavis (almost certainly a corruption of Durocornovium), 'a fort or walled settlement of the Cornovii': the location is unidentified, but Tintagel and Carn Brea have both been suggested. If this is correct then it would have been on the site of Tintagel Castle. Excavations around Tintagel Castle have supported the notion of trade goods there, with ships from along the Atlantic Coast and the Mediterranean Sea bringing pots carrying wine or oil, in the Early medieval period. The site appeared to be one of the places where a local king or warlord, perhaps of Dumnonia, and his entourage settled for a time, and traded with ships arriving from those far ports.\nExcavations.\nMajor excavations beginning with C. A. Ralegh Radford's work in the 1930s on and around the site of the 12th-century castle have revealed that Tintagel headland was the site of either a high status Celtic monastery (according to Ralegh Radford) or a princely fortress as well as trading settlement dating to the 5th and 6th centuries (according to later excavators), in the period immediately following the withdrawal of the Romans from Britain. Finds of Mediterranean oil and wine jars show that Sub-Roman Britain was not the isolated outpost it was previously considered to be, for an extensive trade in high-value goods was taking place at the time with the Mediterranean region.\nFinds from the excavations are preserved at the Royal Cornwall Museum in Truro. In 1998, excavations discovered the Artognou stone, which has added to Tintagel's Arthurian lore, although historians do not believe the inscription refers to King Arthur. Two seasons of excavation work were undertaken in Tintagel churchyard in the early 1990s.\nAntiquities.\nThe largest of the Bronze Age barrows is at the highest point in the parish, Condolden, another is at Menadue, and there are a number of others along the cliffs. In the Iron Age there were probably fortifications at Willapark and Barras Head, and inland at Trenale Bury. Two of the Roman milestones found in Cornwall are at Tintagel (the earlier of the two is described under Trethevy: the later one was found in the walls of the churchyard in 1889 and is preserved in the church. The inscription can be read as '[I]mp C G Val Lic Licin' which would refer to the Emperor Licinius (d. 324).\nThere are many other relics of antiquity to be found here such as the so-called King Arthur's Footprint on the Island and a carved rock from Starapark which has been placed outside the Sir James Smith's School at Dark Lane, Camelford. Rodney Castleden has written about these as Bronze Age ritual objects. \"King Arthur's Footprint\" is a hollow in the rock at the highest point of Tintagel Island's southern side. It is not entirely natural, having been shaped by human hands at some stage. It may have been used for the inauguration of kings or chieftains as the site is known to have a long history stretching back to the Dark Ages. The name is probably a 19th-century invention by the castle guide.\nStone crosses, of which there are two, have both been moved from their original positions: the plainer of the two is Hendra cross (see Bossiney). Aelnat's cross which was found at Trevillet and then moved to the Wharncliffe Arms Hotel at Trevena, is finely carved. The inscription can be read as 'Aelnat fecit hanc crucem pro anima sua' (\u00c6lnat made this cross for [the good of] his soul) \u2013 the back of the stone has the names of the four evangelists. The name of this man is Saxon, and together with Alfwy mentioned in 1086 he is the only Anglo-Saxon recorded in connection with the area. One of Thomas Hardy's poems, \"By the runic stone\" (1917) was interpreted by Evelyn Hardy as referring to Aelnat's cross.\nNotable secular buildings.\nThe village has the Tintagel Old Post Office, which dates from the 14th century. It became a post office during the 19th century, and is now listed Grade I and owned by the National Trust.\nTintagel Primary School was built at Treven in 1914 to replace the old church school (founded 1874) and has been extended since. Those who go on to a comprehensive school attend Sir James Smith's School, Camelford. The Gift House was purchased by the Trustees of Tintagel Women's Institute from Catherine Johns and not donated as previously thought. It adjoins the Old Post Office.\nThe former Vicarage was built in the early 17th century and substantial additions were made in the late 18th and mid-19th centuries. In the grounds is Fontevrault Chapel and a columbarium which is one of the best preserved in Cornwall. The site and glebe lands were the home of the vicars as early as the mid-13th century when the benefice came into the hands of the Abbey of Fontevraud in Anjou, France. In 2008, the Diocese of Truro decided to acquire new accommodation for future vicars and to sell the vicarage.\nKing Arthur's Great Halls at Trevena is a substantial building of the early 1930s. It was built for custard powder manufacturer F. T. Glasscock as the headquarters of the \"Fellowship of the Knights of the Round Table\", behind Trevena House. A variety of Cornish stones are used in the construction and the 73 stained glass windows illustrating the Arthurian tales are by Veronica Whall; there are several paintings of scenes from the life of King Arthur by William Hatherell. In 1927, the Order of the Fellowship of the Knights of the Round Table was formed in Britain by Frederick Thomas Glasscock (a retired London businessman, d. 1934) to promote Christian ideals and Arthurian notions of medieval chivalry. Glasscock was resident at Tintagel (in the house \"Eirenicon\" which he had built) and responsible for the building of King Arthur's Hall (an extension of Trevena House which had been John Douglas Cook's residence and had been built on the site of the former Town Hall and Market Hall). The hall is now used as a Masonic Hall, and is home to four Masonic bodies.\nHotels.\nThe King Arthur's Castle Hotel (now called Camelot Castle Hotel) was built in 1896 and opened in 1899 as an enterprise of Sir Robert Harvey and the architect was Silvanus Trevail. It was originally intended as the terminus hotel for a planned branch railway line from Camelford that was never built. The hotel stands alone on land previously known as Firebeacon. Its front has battered walls, a central entrance tower rising to five storeys and projecting four-storey corner towers; the towers have machicolations and rise above the three storeys of the rest of the building. The Great Hall on the first floor is designed around a replica of the Winchester Round Table and has Romanesque arcades with Italian marble piers. In 2010, an expos\u00e9 of the hotel's business practices was broadcast by the BBC television programme \"Inside Out South West\".\nThere were two hotels on Fore Street, Trevena: the Wharncliffe Hotel and the Tintagel Hotel. The Wharncliffe has now been converted into flats (next to the King Arthur's Hall): the Aelnat Cross (Hiberno-Saxon) stands in the grounds. It is named after the Earl of Wharncliffe who was the largest landowner in the parish until his holdings were sold at the beginning of the 20th century. Opposite the Wharncliffe is the former Tintagel Hotel, once commonly known as Fry's Hotel: this was the terminus for coaches in the days before the railway to Camelford Station and stands on the site of the medieval chapel of St Denys. Near Dunderhole Point on Glebe Cliff stands a building from the former slate quarry that has been used as Tintagel Youth Hostel (managed by YHA) for many years.\nChurches and chapels.\nThe Church of St Materiana (Tintagel Parish Church) has been Anglican since the English Reformation. It was originally built in Norman times. Writing in 1951, Nikolaus Pevsner was uncertain about the dating and suggests that the Norman work has some Saxon features while the tower may be 13th or 15th century in date. It stands on the cliffs between Trevena and Tintagel Castle and is listed Grade I. The first church on the site was probably in the 6th century, founded as a daughter church of Minster: these are the only churches dedicated to St Materiana though she is usually identified with Madryn, Princess of Gwent. The existing church may be late 11th or early 12th century: the tower is some three centuries later and the most significant change since then was the restoration in 1870 by James Piers St Aubyn. An area of the churchyard was excavated in 1990\u201391 by the Cornwall Archaeological Unit. There are modern stained glass windows, three modern copies of Old Master paintings, and a Roman milestone (described above under \"Antiquities\"). The parish war memorial stands at the western end of the churchyard and a modern churchyard cross (c. 1910) near the south entrance.\nThere was a Norman chapel of St Julitta at the castle, now in ruins, which was excavated in Ralegh Radford's excavations. It is a simple rectangular building and the chancel is of a later date than the nave.\nIn the Middle Ages, there was also a chapel of St Denys at Trevena: the annual fair was therefore celebrated in the week of his feast day (19 October). From 1925 until 2008 part of the Vicarage outbuildings were also in use as a chapel (the Fontevrault Chapel). The name commemorates the abbey in France which held the patronage of Tintagel during the Middle Ages (the commune is now known as Fontevraud-l'Abbaye), founded by Robert of Arbrissel.\nThe Methodist Church has chapels at Trevena and Bossiney. Formerly there were more chapels of various Methodist sects (Wesleyans, Bible Christians), including at Trenale and Trewarmett: the Methodist Cemetery is at Trewarmett. Wesleyan Methodism in Tintagel began in 1807 at Trenale and over the next sixty years gained many adherents though divided among a number of sects (Wesleyan Methodist, Methodist Association, Bible Christian): chapels were built at Trevena in 1838 and Bossiney in 1860. In the 1830s and 1840s, the Camelford Wesleyan Methodist circuit, which included Tintagel, underwent a secession by more than half the members to the Wesleyan Methodist Association. The various Methodist churches were united again by the agreements of 1907 and 1932. Mary Toms, a Bible Christian from Tintagel, evangelised parts of the Isle of Wight.\nSt Paul's Church, Tintagel has a thirty-thousand piece mosaic of the saint within its walls. Since January 2008, when the church celebrated its 40th anniversary, a modern-day version of Leonardo da Vinci's \"The Last Supper\" by local artist Nicholas St John Rosse has hung above the main altar in the church. It has made international headlines due to its use of modern clothing and local people as the apostles. People from many other countries also come to Tintagel to view the names of their babies who have been lost due to miscarriage, stillbirth or other cause. The names are recorded in the Miscarriage &amp; Infant Loss Memorial Book which is kept at the church.\nAt Trethevy is the Anglican St Piran's Chapel. Another Anglican chapel (the church of the Holy Family) is at Treknow.\nQuarrying.\nThe extensive Tintagel Slate Quarries are largely responsible for the jagged coastline south of Tintagel and stretch all the way to Trebarwith Strand. The quarries were worked from the fifteenth until the early twentieth centuries. The slate was mainly used for roofing and the remains of quarry buildings and machinery strong points can be seen from both sea level and the South West Coast Path. Tintagel's youth hostel building formerly housed the office, powerhouse and smithy for Lambshouse quarry. A 19th century engine house still stands above the Prince of Wales quarry and Bowithick quarry is now a waste disposal facility. The only slate quarries in Tintagel that remain operational are Trevillet and Trebarwith Road Rustic Quarry.\nGeography and nature.\nCoastline.\nThe coastline around Tintagel is significant because it is composed of old Devonian slate; about a mile southwards from Tintagel towards Treknow the coastline was quarried extensively for this hard-wearing roofing surface. Quarries inland at Trebarwith and Trevillet continued to be worked until the mid-20th century. Apart from the island headlands on the coast include Willapark and Start Point.\nThe turquoise green water around this coast is caused by the slate/sand around Tintagel which contains elements of copper: strong sunlight turns the water a light turquoise green colour in warm weather. The rocks contain various metal ores in small amounts: a few of these were mined in the Victorian period.\nThough very near the coast the hill of Condolden (or Kingsdown) is among the very few areas in Cornwall outside Bodmin Moor which exceeds 1000 feet. At Trethevy is the waterfall known as St Nectan's Kieve in a wooded valley. The beach at Bossiney Haven is close by and Trebarwith Strand, just half an hour's walk south of Tintagel, is one of Cornwall's finer beaches, boasting clear seas, golden sands, and superb surf. There is also a small beach at Tintagel Haven immediately north of the castle, as well as a cave known as Merlin's Cave under the castle. A stream called the Trerammett River flows from Treven to Tintagel Haven.\nThe cliffs from Backways Cove, south of Trebarwith Strand to Willapark just to the south of Boscastle are part of the Tintagel Cliffs SSSI (a Site of Special Scientific Interest), designated for both its maritime heaths and geological features. There are also four Geological Conservation Review sites.\nTintagel lies within the Cornwall Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). National Trust properties include, besides the Old Post Office in Trevena (see above), fine stretches of the cliffs along the coast including Glebe Cliff, Barras Nose and Penhallick Point. The coastal footpaths include part of the South West Coast Path.\nBirds.\nThe birds of the coast are well worth observing: in 1935 an anonymous writer mentions Willapark as the scene of spectacular flocks of seabirds (eight species); inland he describes the crows (including the Cornish chough and the raven) and falcons which frequent the district. B. H. Ryves mentions the razorbill as numerous at Tintagel (perhaps the largest colony in the county) and summarises reports from earlier in the century. In 1991, a local bird keeper, Jon Hadwick, published \"Owl Light\" about his experiences keeping ten owls and a buzzard. In the early days of the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds Charles Hambly (also known for saving shipwrecked sailors) was a correspondent for the Society. A hundred years later Harry Sandercock observed that even modern agricultural changes had not reduced the bird populations.\nPlants of the environs of Tintagel.\n\"Within easy reach of Tintagel at least 385 varieties of flowers, 30 kinds of grasses, and 16 of ferns can be found ... a 'happy hunting ground' for botanists\" and a list of thirty-nine of the rarest is given. (Contribution by E.M.S. to W. J. C. Armstrong's \"Rambler's Guide\", 1935.)\nSocial and cultural life.\nTintagel was the venue for the Gorsedh Kernow in 1964.\nSocial and sporting activities and associations.\nThe Social Hall established by Mrs Ruth Homan and the Old School in Fore Street have been the chief meeting places during most of the 20th century. Both the Women's Institute and the football and cricket teams are well-supported. Tintagel A.F.C. were champions of Cornwall in 1955\u201356 and have been in existence over a hundred years; goalkeeper Harry Cann also played for Plymouth Argyle F.C. Until the 1930s there were two golf courses and a few tennis courts: neither golf course reopened in the postwar period. Camelford Rugby Football Club was formed in 2008 and plays its home matches at Parc Tremain, Tintagel. Cornish wrestling tournaments, for prizes, have been held in Tintagel.\nThe Tintagel Orpheus Male Voice Choir was founded in 1926 by Jack Thomas, a Welshman who worked at Trevillet Quarry. The choir has rehearsed weekly, and performed frequently, ever since.\nLiterary associations.\nTintagel is used as a locus for the Arthurian mythos by the poet Alfred, Lord Tennyson in the poem \"Idylls of the King\" and Algernon Charles Swinburne's \"Tristram of Lyonesse\", a literary version of the Tristan and Iseult legend. Thomas Hardy's \"The Famous Tragedy of the Queen of Cornwall at Tintagel in Lyonnesse\", a one-act play which was published in 1923, is another version of the same legend with events set at Tintagel (the book includes an imaginary drawing of Tintagel Castle at the period). Hardy and his first wife visited Tintagel on various occasions: she drew a sketch of the inside of the church as it was about 1867. It is very prominent in the books in Fay Sampson's \"Daughter of Tintagel\" series of Arthurian novels (later retitled \"Morgan le Fay\").\nThe novelist Dinah Craik visited Tintagel in 1883 and published an informative account of her journey through Cornwall the following year. William Howitt's visit was quite different: his account is called \"A day-dream at Tintagel\" (in \"Visits to Remarkable Places\"). Relatively few works of fiction have Tintagel as a setting: these include Anthony Trollope's short story \"Malachi's Cove\" and the Charles and Alice Muriel Williamson's epistolary novel \"Set in Silver\" published in 1909. Ernest George Henham was a novelist resident in Devon who used the pseudonym John Trevena for many of his books; it is probable that the surname he chose was derived from the original name for Tintagel, though his writings are concerned mainly with Devon. Tintagel features prominently in Edith Wharton's final, unfinished novel, \"The Buccaneers\", the protagonist of which, Nan St. George, meets her future husband, the Duke of Tintagel, while exploring the ruins of Tintagel Castle. Wharton styled the characters as Duke and Duchess of Tintagel, while Tintagel actually lies within the Duchy of Cornwall; in the novel, the Duke and Duchess live in a newer, fictional Tintagel Castle, built in approximately the late 18th century.\nMusical and film associations.\nArnold Bax was inspired to compose his symphonic poem \"Tintagel\" after a visit to the village. Edward Elgar also composed while on a visit to Tintagel.\nThe film \"Knights of the Round Table\" had some sequences filmed near Tintagel Castle with local people as extras: this was in 1953 though it was not released until 1954. Some other filming has been carried out in Tintagel, e.g. \"Malachi's Cove\" at Trebarwith. The exterior of the Camelot Castle Hotel was used to portray Dr. Seward's asylum in the 1979 film \"Dracula\". The Youth Hostel doubled for the coastguard station in the 1981 BBC serial \"The Nightmare Man\".\nNotable people.\nThe Earls and Dukes of Cornwall (to whom the castle belonged) were never resident at Tintagel though a few of them are known to have visited. From 1552 to 1832, Tintagel was a parliamentary borough (generally known as the Borough of Bossiney) sending two members to the House of Commons; these included Sir Francis Drake, Sir Simon Harcourt and James Stuart-Wortley, 1st Baron Wharncliffe. During the same period, there were also mayors of the borough of whom the best known is William Wade (fl. 1756\u20131786). Contemporaries of Mayor Wade were the Rev. Arthur Wade (vicar 1770\u20131810) and Charles Chilcott (d. 1815) (known for his gigantic stature). The Rev. R. B. Kinsman (vicar 1851\u20131894) was also honorary constable of the castle.\nDuring the 19th century, Tintagel was visited by many writers, including Robert Stephen Hawker, Charles Dickens, Alfred Tennyson, Thomas Hardy, and the mystic philosopher Rudolf Steiner. It was also the occasional residence of John Douglas Cook, founder editor of the \"Saturday Review\" (d. 1868) who is buried at Tintagel. He bought Trevena House as an occasional residence: it later became the front part of King Arthur's Hall (see ).\nHenry George White, the village schoolmaster for many years, was also a prolific amateur painter. The Very Rev. Cliff Piper, Dean of Moray, Ross and Caithness was born at Tintagel.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65612", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65612", "title": "Lucius Cornelius Sulla Felix", "text": ""}
{"id": "65613", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65613", "title": "Anglo-Dutch wars", "text": "Series of wars during the 17th and 18th centuries\nThe Anglo\u2013Dutch wars () were a series of four conflicts fought between the Dutch Republic and the states of England and Great Britain between 1652 and 1784. The first three wars occurred in the second half of the 17th century due to Anglo-Dutch tensions over trade and colonial expansion, while the fourth conflict was fought a century later. Almost all the battles were naval engagements.\nEngland was successful in the first war, while the Dutch were successful in the second and third wars. However, in the century between the third and fourth war, the Royal Navy had become the most powerful maritime force in the world, while the Dutch States Navy had fallen to fourth position, behind the French and Spanish navies, and the fourth war was a profound humiliation for the Dutch. During the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, British and Dutch forces continued to engage in intermittent conflict, which resulted in Britain capturing most of the Dutch colonial empire and annihilating much of the Dutch navy.\nBackground.\nThe English and the Dutch were both participants in the 16th century European religious conflicts during the Reformation period between the Roman Catholic House of Habsburg and the opposing Protestant states. At the same time, as the Age of Exploration dawned in the West, the Dutch and English both sought profits overseas in the New World of the recently discovered continents of the Americas.\nDutch Republic.\nIn the early 1600s, the Dutch, while continuing to fight the Eighty Years' War (1566/68-1648), with the Habsburgs, also began to carry out long-distance exploration by sea. The Dutch innovation in the trading of shares in a joint-stock company allowed them to finance expeditions with stock subscriptions sold in the United Provinces of the Netherlands and in London. They founded colonies in North America, India, and the East Indies. They also enjoyed continued success in privateering \u2013 in 1628 Admiral Piet Heyn became the only commander to successfully capture a large Spanish treasure fleet. With the many long voyages by Dutch East Indiamen cargo vessels, their society built an officer class and institutional knowledge that would later be replicated in England, principally by the British East India Company.\nBy the middle of the 17th century, the Dutch joined the Portuguese and their Portuguese Empire as the main European traders in Asia. This coincided with the enormous growth of the Dutch merchant fleet, made possible by the cheap mass production of the fluyt sailing ship types. Soon the Dutch had one of Europe's largest mercantile fleets, with more merchant ships than all other nations combined, and possessed a dominant position in the Baltic maritime trade of 1400-1800 in the Baltic Sea to the northeast.\nIn 1648 the Dutch concluded the Peace of M\u00fcnster with the Kingdom of Spain. Due to the division of powers in the Dutch Republic, the army and navy were the main base of power of the Stadtholder, although the budget allocated to them was set by the States General. With the arrival of peace, the States General decided to decommission most of the Dutch military. This led to conflict between the major Dutch cities and the new Stadtholder, William II of Orange, bringing the internal controversies in the Republic to the brink of civil war. The Stadtholder's unexpected death in 1650 only added to the political tensions.\nEngland.\nTudor dynasty.\nIn the 16th century, Queen Elizabeth I (a.k.a. Elizabeth the Great, 1533-1603, reigned 1558-1603), commissioned several privateers to carry out long-range attacks against the Spanish Empire's global interests, exemplified by the attacks by Sir Francis Drake (c.1540-1596), William Parker, and other Elizabethan sea dogs on Spanish merchant shipping and colonial possessions. Partly to provide a pretext for ongoing hostilities against Spain, Queen Elizabeth assisted the Dutch Revolt (1581) against the Kingdom of Spain by signing the Treaty of Nonsuch in 1585 with the newly-established Dutch state / republic of the United Provinces.\nStuart.\nAfter the death of Elizabeth I, Anglo-Spanish relations began to improve under the new monarch of James the First, and the peace of the Treaty of London in 1604 ended most privateering actions, (until the outbreak of the next Anglo-Spanish War (1625-1630) during the larger continental Thirty Years' War of 1618-1648). Underfunding then led to neglect of the Royal Navy.\nLater, Roman Catholic sympathiser King Charles I of England made a number of secret agreements with Spain, directed against Dutch sea power. He also embarked on a major programme of naval reconstruction, enforcing ship money to rebuild and expand the Royal Navy with financing the building of such prestige battle vessels as the . But fearful of endangering his relations with the powerful Dutch stadtholder Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange, his assistance to Spain was limited in practice to allowing Spanish troops on their way to Dunkirk to make use of English shipping. However, in 1639, when a large Spanish transport fleet sought refuge in The Downs anchorage off the town of Deal, Kent, King Charles chose not to protect it against a Dutch attack; the resulting Battle of the Downs undermined both Spanish sea power and Charles's reputation in Spain.\nMeanwhile, in the New World of the Americas, forces from the Dutch New Netherlands colony and the English Massachusetts Bay Colony contested over much of North America's north-eastern seaboard.\nCromwell.\nThe outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 (to 1651), began a period in which the Kingdom of England's naval position was severely weakened. Its navy was internally divided, though its officers tended to favour the parliamentary side; after the execution by public beheading of King Charles I in 1649, however, Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658, served 1653-1658), was able to unite Great Britain into the republican Commonwealth of England. He then revamped the English navy by expanding the number of ships, promoting officers on merit rather than family connections, and cracking down on embezzlement by suppliers and dockyard staff, thereby positioning England to mount a global challenge to Dutch mercantile dominance.\nThe mood in England grew increasingly belligerent towards the Dutch. This partly stemmed from old perceived slights: the Dutch were considered to have shown themselves ungrateful for the aid they had received against the Spanish by growing stronger than their former English protectors; Dutch fishermen caught most of the herring off the English east coast in the North Sea; the Dutch East India Company had driven English traders out of the East Indies; and Dutch merchants vociferously appealed to the principle of free trade to circumvent taxation in English colonies. There were also new points of conflict: with the decline of Spanish power at the end of the Thirty Years' War in 1648, the colonial possessions of the Portuguese Empire (already in the midst of the Portuguese Restoration War, 1640-1668) and perhaps even those of the greater Spanish Empire itself were up for grabs.\nCromwell feared the influence of both the Orangist faction at home and English royalists exiled to the Republic; the Stadtholders had supported the Stuart monarchs \u2014 William II of Orange had married the daughter of Charles I of England in 1641\u2014and they abhorred the trial and execution of Charles I.\nEarly in 1651 Cromwell tried to ease tensions by sending a delegation to The Hague proposing that the Dutch Republic join the Commonwealth and assist the English in conquering most of Spanish America for its extremely valuable resources. This attempt to draw the Dutch into a lopsided alliance with England in fact led to war: the ruling faction in the States of Holland was unable to formulate an answer to this unexpected offer and the pro-Stuart Orangists incited mobs to harass Cromwell's envoys. When the delegation returned home, the Parliament of England decided to pursue a policy of confrontation.\nWars.\nFirst war: 1652\u20131654.\nAs a result of Cromwell's ambitious programme of naval expansion, at a time when the Dutch admiralties were selling off many of their own warships, the English came to possess a greater number of larger and more powerful purpose-built warships than their rivals across the North Sea did. However, the Dutch had many more merchant ships, together with lower freight rates, better financing and a wider range of manufactured goods to sell \u2013 although Dutch ships were blocked by the Spanish from operations in most of southern Europe, along the coasts of the \nMediterranean Sea, giving the English an advantage there.\nTo protect English commercial interests in North America, in October 1651 the English Parliament passed the first of the Navigation Acts, which mandated that all goods imported into England must be carried by English ships or vessels from the exporting countries, thus excluding (mostly Dutch) middlemen. Agitation among the Dutch merchants as a result of the Navigation Acts was further increased by Admiral Sir George Ayscue's (1616-1652) capture in early 1652 of 27 Dutch merchant ships illegally trading with the English still royalist colony of Barbados in the West Indies islands chain of the Americas, in contravention of an embargo imposed by the Parliamentarians. The Dutch responded to the growing tensions by enlisting large numbers of armed merchantmen into their navy. In 1652, Lord Protector Cromwell required all foreign warships in the North Sea or the English Channel to lower their colours when encountering English warships. On 29 May 1652, Lieutenant-Admiral Maarten Tromp (1598\u20131653), refused to lower the colours of his ships after encountering an English fleet led by General at Sea Robert Blake (1598\u20131657). This resulted in a skirmish, the Battle of Dover, off the coast of Dover, England in the English Channel in 1652, after which the Commonwealth of England then declared war on the Dutch Republic on 10 July.\nAfter some inconclusive minor fights the English were successful in the first major battle, with Blake defeating the Dutch Vice-Admiral Witte de With (1599\u20131658), in the Battle of the Kentish Knock in October 1652. Believing that the war was all but over, the English divided their forces and in December were routed by the fleet of Lieutenant-Admiral Maarten Tromp at the Battle of Dungeness in the English Channel. The Dutch were also victorious in March 1653, at the Battle of Leghorn near Italy and had gained effective control of both the Mediterranean and the English Channel. Blake, recovering from an injury, rethought, together with Duke of Albemarle George Monck (1608\u20131670), the whole system of naval tactics, and after the winter of 1653 used the line of battle, first to drive the Dutch navy out of the English Channel in the Battle of Portland and then out of the North Sea in the Battle of the Gabbard. The Dutch were unable to effectively resist as the States General of the Netherlands had not in time heeded the warnings of their admirals that much larger warships were needed.\nIn the final Battle of Scheveningen on 10 August 1653, Tromp was killed, a blow to Dutch morale, but the English had to end their blockade of the Dutch coast. As both nations were by now exhausted and Cromwell had dissolved the aggressive warlike Rump Parliament, ongoing peace negotiations could be brought to fruition, albeit after many months of slow diplomatic exchanges. The war ended on 5 April 1654, with the signing of the Treaty of Westminster of 1654 (ratified by the States General on 8 May), but the commercial rivalry was not resolved, the English having failed to replace the Dutch as the world's dominant trade nation. The treaty contained a secret annex, the Act of Seclusion, forbidding the infant Prince William III of Orange (future King William III of England) from becoming also the Dutch stadtholder of the province of Holland, which would prove to be a future cause of discontent. In 1653 the Dutch had started a major naval expansion programme of their own, building sixty larger vessels, partly closing the qualitative gap with the English naval fleet. Cromwell, having already started the Anglo-Spanish War against Spain in 1654 without Dutch help, during his rule then avoided a new conflict with the fellow Republic on the continent, even though the Dutch in the same time period defeated his Portuguese and Swedish allies.\nSecond war: 1665\u20131667.\nAfter the English Restoration in 1660, newly-crowned King Charles II tried through diplomatic means to make his nephew, Prince William III of Orange, stadtholder of the Dutch Republic. At the same time, Charles promoted a series of mercantilist policies aimed at encountering Dutch mercantile dominance, which again led to a renewed deterioration in Anglo-Dutch relations. This subsequently led to a surge of anti-Dutch sentiment in England, the country being, as Samuel Pepys put it, \"mad for war\". English merchants and chartered overseas mercantile trade companies\u2014such as the East India Company, the Royal Adventurers Trading into Africa, and the Levant Company\u2014calculated that global economic primacy could now be wrestled away from the Dutch. They reckoned that a combination of naval battles and irregular privateering missions would cripple the Dutch Republic and force the States General to agree to a more favourable peace. The plan was for English ships to be replenished, and sailors paid, with looted booty seized from captured Dutch merchant vessels returning from overseas.\nIn 1665 many Dutch merchantman ships were captured, and Dutch trade and industry were hurt. The English achieved several victories over the Dutch, such as taking the Dutch colony of New Netherland and seaport town of New Amsterdam (of later renamed present day New York) by an English fleet of King Charles' younger brother, the future King James II; but there were also several Dutch victories, such as the capture of the renewed Royal Navy flagship \"Prince Royal\" during the Four Days Battle at sea of 11 to 14 June 1666 \u2013 the subject of a famous painting by Willem van de Velde (1633\u20131707). Dutch maritime trade recovered from 1666, while the English war effort and economy suffered a downturn when London was ravaged by disease in the Great Plague during 1665\u20131666, and much of the capital of the City of London along the River Thames was burnt to the ground by the massive devastating infamous Great Fire of London of September 1666, (which was generally interpreted across the English Channel in the Dutch Republic as divine retribution for the earlier Holmes's Bonfire raid in August 1666).\nA surprise attack in June 1667, the raid on the Medway, on the English fleet in its home port arguably won the war for the Dutch; British historian C. R. Boxer described it as one of the \"most humiliating defeat suffered by British arms\". By 1667, Louis XIV's armies began their march into the Spanish Netherlands, the buffer zone between the Republic and France, the Dutch created a Triple Alliance with Sweden and Britain to push back against Louis. A flotilla of ships led by Michiel de Ruyter (1607\u20131676), sailed westward up the Thames River and Thames Estuary, on a daring raid, broke through the defences guarding Chatham Harbour, set fire to several English warships moored there, and even towed away and , flagship and second largest warship of the Royal Navy. Also in June 1667, the Dutch sailed vessels on a raiding expedition from the Caribbean north into the Hampton Roads harbour at the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay in the Battle of the James River, near the modern-day Hampton and Norfolk seaports of the English Colony of Virginia, destroying an English ship in the harbour and bombarding its coastal protecting fort. The raid on the Medway led to widespread anger in England towards the government. This, together with the mounting costs of the war and the extravagant spending of the returned King Charles's court, produced a rebellious atmosphere in London. Charles ordered the English envoys at Breda to sign a peace quickly with the Dutch, as he feared an open revolt at home against him.\nThird war: 1672\u20131674.\nDuring the start of the war in 1672, Charles II proclaimed a declaration called the Declaration of Indulgence that suspended penalties against public Nonconformist and private Catholic worship. Soon the Royal Navy was rebuilt. After the events of the previous war, English public opinion was unenthusiastic about starting a new one. However, as he was bound by the secret Treaty of Dover, Charles II was obliged to assist Louis XIV in his attack on the Dutch Republic in the Franco-Dutch War. The Test Act was passed in 1673 as an extension of the Cavalier Code. When the Royal French Army was halted by the Hollandic Water Line (a defence system involving strategic flooding), an attempt was made to invade the Dutch Republic by sea. De Ruyter won a series of strategic victories against the Anglo-French fleet and prevented an invasion of the Dutch Republic. After these failures, the English parliament forced Charles to make peace.\nFourth war: 1780\u20131784.\nIn 1688, the Dutch feared that England might align with France in the upcoming Nine Years' War, potentially repeating the crisis of 1672. To prevent this, William of Orange, making use of an invitation from seven influential and discontented Englishmen, led a Dutch invasion force that landed at Torbay in Devon. From there, he marched on London and successfully deposed James II of England. While occupying London with his troops William was placed on the English throne, on the basis of the Bill of Rights, alongside his English wife Mary. His reign ended further Anglo-Dutch conflicts and both states joined forces to fight the expansionist policies of Louis XIV of France. Though remaining allies, England (and after 1707, Great Britain) quickly surpassed the Dutch in military and economic power. From roughly 1720 onwards, Dutch economic growth experienced a significant decline, and in 1780, the \"per capita\" gross national income of Britain surpassed their Dutch counterparts, leading to rising levels of resentment from the latter.\nThe Diplomatic Revolution brought this to light and during the following Seven Years' War the Dutch remained neutral. When Britain's North American colonies revolted against British rule in 1776, the Dutch provided indirect support to the rebels, angering the British, who eventually declared war on the Dutch in 1780. By this point, the Dutch navy had severely weakened, possessing only 20 ships of the line. The conflict consisted mostly of a series of successful British operations against Dutch colonial interests, though one fleet action took place at the battle of Dogger Bank on 5 August 1781, which was indecisive. The war ended in a conclusive British victory and exposed the weakness of the political and economic foundations of the Dutch Republic, leading to instability and revolution.\nLater wars.\nDuring the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, France reduced the Netherlands to a satellite state and finally annexed the country in 1810. In 1797 the Dutch fleet was defeated by the British in the Battle of Camperdown, but an Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland in 1799 was less successful. France still considered both the extant Dutch fleet and the large Dutch shipbuilding capacity very important assets. The Dutch navy was supposed to take part in the planned invasion of the United Kingdom. To this end a large flotilla of flat-bottomed boats was built in the Batavian Republic, that had to be transported over sea to Boulogne. This was successful, but after the Battle of Trafalgar France gave up its attempt to match the British fleet, despite a strong Dutch lobby to this effect.\nBritain also invaded several Dutch colonies, firstly in the Americas - Essequibo was captured in 1803 and Suriname was taken the following year. Following their victory at Trafalgar, Britain was now able to strike Dutch colonies elsewhere at will. The Cape Colony was captured in Southern Africa in January 1806. The Dutch territories in the Caribbean were all taken by 1807 including the largest island, Cura\u00e7ao. The Dutch East Indies was the only area left to be taken. Starting with the first Java campaign of 1806\u20131807 which saw the Royal Navy defeating the Dutch fleets to ensure British dominance in the region.\nAfter the incorporation of the Netherlands in the French Empire in 1810, the British that year captured the Spice Islands during a six-month campaign. A year later saw the final conquest of the Dutch East Indies with the seizure of the whole of Java during a month-long campaign. With the signing of the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814, Britain returned all those colonies to the new Kingdom of the Netherlands, with the exception of the Cape, Ceylon, and part of Dutch Guyana. Some historians count the wars between Britain and the Batavian Republic and the Kingdom of Holland during the Napoleonic era as the Fifth and Sixth Anglo\u2013Dutch wars.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65614", "revid": "50975484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65614", "title": "Second Anglo-Dutch War", "text": "Naval conflict from 1665 to 1667\nThe Second Anglo-Dutch War began on 4 March 1665 and concluded with the signing of the Treaty of Breda on 31 July 1667. It was one in a series of naval wars between England and the Dutch Republic, driven largely by commercial disputes.\nDespite several major battles, neither side was able to score a decisive victory, and by the end of 1666 the war had reached stalemate. Peace talks made little progress until the Dutch Raid on the Medway in June 1667 forced Charles II to agree to the Treaty of Breda.\nBy eliminating a number of long-standing issues, the terms eventually made it possible for England and the Dutch Republic to unite against the expansionist policies pursued by Louis XIV of France. In the short-term however, Charles's desire to avenge this setback led to the Third Anglo-Dutch War in 1672.\nBackground.\nDespite similar ideologies, commercial disputes and political differences between the Dutch Republic and Commonwealth of England led to the 1652 to 1654 First Anglo-Dutch War. The treaty that ended the war failed to address these issues, which included Dutch opposition to the 1651 Navigation Acts, and English objections to Dutch trading monopolies. Even when the two countries were at peace, competition for markets in the East Indies and elsewhere often resulted in conflict outside Europe. For various reasons, factions in both countries hampered efforts to reach resolution through diplomatic means.\nFrom 1650 to 1672, Dutch politics was dominated by the States Party and their leader, Grand pensionary Johan de Witt. Despite suspicions about Charles II's links to their Orangist opponents, De Witt viewed the 1660 Stuart Restoration as an opportunity to rebuild relationships. He hoped to negotiate overlapping defensive agreements with England and France to ensure peace, and continued Dutch economic dominance.\nHowever, the English saw little benefit in preserving this system, and wanted concessions the Dutch were not prepared to grant. When merchants in the City of London demanded increased Protectionism, Charles II renewed the Navigation Acts in August 1660, then strengthened them further in 1663. Parliament claimed they were simply responding to measures taken by the Dutch East India Company, or VOC, to enforce its monopolies in Asia, and by the Dutch West India Company, or WIC, in West Africa.\nFor Charles, expanding the economy was another way to reduce his financial dependence on Parliament, preferably using royal monopolies or charters to do so. In 1660, he and his brother James founded the Royal African Company, or RAC, whose purpose was to challenge Dutch dominance of the Atlantic slave trade. Investors included senior politicians such as George Carteret, Shaftesbury and Arlington, creating a strong link between the RAC and government policy.\nThe Atlantic trade was a three way process, whereby slaves from West Africa were transported to Sugar plantations in the Caribbean, which in turn were supplied by colonies in North America. These links meant conflict in one region often led to fighting in all three. In August 1664, the English first occupied New Netherland, renamed New York City, then took WIC slaving posts in modern Guinea. When these were recaptured by a Dutch fleet under Michiel de Ruyter in early 1665, the RAC was forced into bankruptcy, and its influential investors saw war as the best way to recoup their losses.\nIn taking these actions, the Dutch were reassured by their 1662 defensive treaty with France, under which Louis XIV agreed to provide military support if they were attacked by England. In return, the Dutch undertook not to interfere with French actions in the Spanish Netherlands, but by 1664, many were concerned by the prospect of having an expansionist France as a neighbour, rather than a weakened Spain. Although it provided another reason to agree terms with England, negotiations made little progress. This was partially due to the complexity of the Dutch political system, which made it difficult to reach consensus between the different provinces and powerful trade groups like the VOC. It also reflected De Witt's belief Parliament would not approve funds for an expensive naval war, a view shared by many English politicians, including Charles's chief minister Lord Clarendon.\nFor his part, Louis XIV feared an Anglo-Dutch conflict might draw in Spain or the Holy Roman Empire, and impede his efforts to acquire the Spanish Netherlands. He therefore tried to mediate between the two, or at least limit conflict to Africa and the Americas, which would not require France to become involved. Aware of his reluctance, Charles II saw no reason to make concessions, while Sir George Downing, his Ambassador in The Hague, claimed recent financial losses meant the Dutch could not afford a war. Other advisors argued the Franco-Dutch treaty only applied to defensive actions, so provoking the Dutch into declaring war would give Louis XIV the chance to remain neutral. Following English attacks on convoys off C\u00e1diz and in the English Channel, the Dutch declared war on 4 March 1665.\nOpposing forces and tactics.\nSome historians argue that just as the tactics used by 17th century armies were transformed by the Military Revolution, the Anglo-Dutch Wars marked a similar change in naval practice. The ships on either side have been described as the \"most advanced, complex, expensive and manpower-intensive weapons systems of their day\". With the fleets involved increasing to over 100 ships per side, maximising firepower required greater levels of organisation, discipline and co-ordination. One solution to these problems was the Line of battle formation.\nIn 1664, the Royal Navy issued new \"Fighting Instructions\", formalising the \"line of battle\" as standard practice. They also established a signalling system allowing commanders to control their fleets, something the Dutch then lacked. Over the course of the war, the formation was employed by both, although it better suited the heavier ships used by the Royal Navy, and its emphasis on gunnery to sink opponents. The Dutch preferred the use of boarding, with individual ships fighting one another.\nDifficulties in communicating orders meant during combat many captains focused on avoiding collisions rather than engaging the enemy, making battles chaotic and often indecisive. In addition, both navies consisted of significant numbers of purpose-built warships, bulked out by private merchantmen. Although many of the latter were well-armed, they were often less capable of standing up to sustained fire. Dutch merchant ships were particularly vulnerable to the larger English warships.\nBased on lessons learned from the First Anglo-Dutch War, post-1653 the Dutch navy was re-organised around sixty-four newly built and larger Ships of the line, each with between 40 and 60 guns. However, they remained inferior to English vessels such as , which carried over 100 guns. In 1664, it was decided to create a new core of sixty even heavier ships of sixty to eighty cannon, which were mostly still under construction when fighting began in 1665. Stronger finances allowed the Dutch to complete these plus another twenty during the war, compared to only a dozen built by England.\nAlthough the Royal Navy was superior in ships and leadership at the beginning of the war, these advantages were gradually eroded by Parliament's reluctance to fund it. Downing, and other observers who argued the Dutch could not afford a war, overlooked recent reforms that improved their credit, and made it relatively easy to raise money. In contrast, English expectations that profits from Dutch ships captured by privateers would cover costs proved unfounded. In December 1664, Parliament approved \u00a32.5 million in taxes for the navy, but much of this was spent on essential repairs, or allegedly stolen by officials. To fund operations, Charles had to rely on short-term loans from the City of London, at ever increasing interest rates. By the end of 1666, lack of money led him to discharge most of the fleet, with disastrous results.\nHistory.\nWar.\nEurope; 1665.\nBoth sides planned a short war, since the English could not afford a long one, while the Dutch wanted to minimise any potential economic damage. De Witt ordered his naval commander Jacob van Wassenaer to bring the English fleet to battle, although his ships were inferior in organisation, training, discipline and firepower. At the Battle of Lowestoft on 13 June 1665, the Dutch navy suffered the worst defeat in its history, losing some sixteen ships. Most of the fleet escaped, but over 30% of its personnel were killed or captured, with van Wassenaer himself among the dead.\nDefeat led to an extensive overhaul of Dutch tactics and command structures, with several captains either executed for alleged cowardice, or dismissed. In July, Michiel de Ruyter became the new commander in chief, and followed the English in formalising the line battle formation. Dutch finances also received a boost when the VOC Spice Fleet returned home safely after the battle of V\u00e5gen. This was offset when the eastern province of Overijssel was over-run by troops from M\u00fcnster under Christoph Bernhard von Galen, who was backed by English subsidies.\nM\u00fcnster's invasion threatened to involve further German states of the Holy Roman Empire in the fighting, and thus provide an excuse for Emperor Leopold to intervene. Concerned by this, Louis sent French soldiers to prevent supplies reaching von Galen's troops. Reports Charles was negotiating an alliance with Spain meant he also stepped up attempts to mediate a settlement, but the English in general remained deeply suspicious of French intentions. Although the Dutch offered to renounce their territorial claims in North America, and cede three West African posts, success at Lowestoft prompted Charles to demand further concessions and a Dutch agreement to bear the costs of the war. In December 1665, Louis withdrew his ambassadors from London, signalling his intention to declare war.\nDowning now contacted the Orangist party in Overijssel, which had suffered severely from von Galen's invasion, asking that they demand the States General make peace with England. De Witt's position was too strong for this to succeed, and on 11 December he declared the only acceptable peace terms were a return to the \"status quo ante bellum\", or a quick end to hostilities under a \"uti possidetis\" clause.\nEurope; 1666.\nOn 16 January 1666, Louis declared war on England. In return for a large French subsidy, Denmark\u2013Norway did the same in February, effectively closing the Baltic trade to English ships, and with it access to vital naval supplies. The payments promised to von Galen by Charles largely failed to materialise, and when Brandenburg-Prussia threatened to attack M\u00fcnster, he made peace with the Republic at Cleves in April.\nAnglo-Dutch negotiations had progressed far enough that de Witt invited Charles II to start formal negotiations. Talks made little progress, as both sides felt they were negotiating from a position of strength. Despite the French declaration of war, Charles knew Louis wanted to avoid being dragged into the conflict, and through informal correspondence was aware he considered Dutch demands excessive. By now, the French king had also concluded the Dutch would never voluntarily make the concessions he required in the Spanish Netherlands, and began planning the 1667 War of Devolution.\nOn the other hand, Dutch morale rose with the completion of thirty new warships, most carrying up to 72 guns, heavier than any available in early 1665. They were supposed to link up with a French naval force in the English Channel, giving them a significant numerical advantage. However, most of the French ships were based in the Mediterranean Sea, and despite leaving Toulon in April, delays meant they failed to arrive in time. One contemporary diplomat suggested the relatively new and inexperienced French navy did so deliberately, being \"dismayed by the difficulties of the enterprise\".\nNevertheless, the threat of French intervention forced the English to send a detachment to block the Strait of Dover, leaving 60 ships facing a Dutch fleet of around 84. In the initial stages of the Four Days' Battle, fought from 11 to 15 June, the Dutch inflicted heavy damage on their opponents. After the return of the detached squadron, depleted ammunition stocks forced both sides to break off the engagement. The English lost ten ships compared to only four Dutch, but any hope the Royal Navy was too damaged to renew hostilities soon proved incorrect.\nAfter extensive repairs, the English fleet put to sea again and confronted the Dutch in the St. James's Day Battle of 4 and 5 August. Generally considered an English victory, it ultimately had little strategic value. Although the Dutch suffered heavy casualties and many ships were badly damaged, their fleet remained intact, while lack of money meant the English could scarcely afford to pay their sailors or purchase supplies. A more significant economic loss occurred on 19 August, when up to 150 Dutch merchantmen sheltering in the Vlie estuary were destroyed in an action known as Holmes's Bonfire.\nOver a period of eighteen months from 1665 to 1666, the Great Plague of London killed more than a quarter of its population. In September 1666, the Fire of London destroyed much of the city, causing huge economic damage, and public opinion now turned against the war. Charles could no longer rely on London merchants to supply the loans needed to fund it, and the Navy Board was forced to discharge many sailors unpaid.\nParliament was recalled for the first time in a year, and approved new taxes of \u00a31.8 million. However, their payment was subject to various conditions, and disputes over these meant delays in its collection. Lack of money made it almost impossible to plan naval operations for 1667.\nEurope; 1667.\nBy early 1667, lack of funds meant much of the Royal Navy was laid up at the naval base of Chatham. Only a small \"Flying Fleet\" was operational, leaving English merchant shipping vulnerable to Dutch attack. Since Charles refused to make the concessions to Parliament which would allow him to continue the war, his only option was to initiate peace talks, which began in March at Breda. As England was also now at war with France, Charles sent envoys to Paris for unofficial preliminary talks.\nThe deterioration of Franco-Dutch relations meant these talks produced a third option not considered by Clarendon: a secret alliance with France. In April, Charles concluded his first secret treaty with Louis, stipulating England would not oppose a French conquest of the Spanish Netherlands. In May, the French invaded, starting the War of Devolution. By stalling the talks at Breda, Charles hoped to gain concessions from the Dutch, using the French advance as leverage.\nAware of Charles's general intentions, although not of the secret treaty, De Witt decided to attempt to end the war with a single stroke. The Dutch navy had made a special study of amphibious operations, with the Dutch Marine Corps established in 1665. After the Four Days' Battle, a marine contingent had been ready to land in Kent or Essex following a possible Dutch victory at sea. The Dutch fleet was, however, in 1666 unable to force a safe passage into the Thames as navigational buoys had been removed and a strong English squadron was ready to dispute their passage. With no English ships available to oppose a similar attack in 1667, de Witt planned to land marines at Chatham and destroy the ships there.\nIn June, De Ruyter, with Cornelis de Witt supervising, launched the Dutch raid on the Medway at the mouth of the River Thames. After capturing the fort at Sheerness, the Dutch fleet went on to break through the massive chain protecting the entrance to the Medway and, on the 13th, attacked the laid up English fleet.\nThe raid had a substantial impact on English public opinion and remains one of the biggest disasters in Royal Navy history. Fifteen smaller ships were either destroyed or sunk as blockships by the English, with another three major warships burnt, \"Royal Oak\", \"Loyal London\" and \"Royal James\". , was taken to the Netherlands as a trophy, although the Dutch failed to inflict substantial damage on the Chatham dockyards. In response, Clarendon ordered his envoys at Breda to agree terms without further delay, as Charles feared open revolt.\nWar in the Caribbean.\nIn early 1665 Michiel de Ruyter raided the Caribbean. In late 1665 an English force, mainly consisting of buccaneers under the command of Lieutenant-colonel Edward Morgan, the Deputy Governor of Jamaica, assisted by his nephew Thomas Morgan, quickly captured the Dutch islands of Sint Eustatius and Saba. After his uncle's death in December 1665, Thomas Morgan was appointed as governor of these two islands. Also in late 1665, an English force from Jamaica and Barbados captured the Dutch possession of Tobago. The French declaration of war on the side of the Dutch altered the balance of power in the Caribbean and facilitated a Dutch counterattack. The first successes of the new allies were the French recapture of Tobago in August 1666, a joint Franco-Dutch recapture of Sint Eustatius in November 1666 and a French capture of the English island of Antigua in the same month. The arrival of a French squadron under Joseph-Antoine de La Barre in January 1667 allowed the French to occupy the English half of St Kitts and Montserrat, leaving only Nevis of the Leeward Islands in English hands, together with Jamaica and Barbados to the west.\nA Dutch force under Admiral Abraham Crijnssen, organised by the province of Zeeland, not the States General, arrived at Cayenne in February 1667 and captured Suriname from the English in the same month. Crijnssen delayed in Suriname until April, then sailed to Tobago, which had been vacated by the French after expelling the English garrison, where he rebuilt the fort and left a small garrison. Although Crijnssen was instructed not to delay, it was not until early May that he and de La Barre combined forces, agreeing to a Franco-Dutch invasion of Nevis, which sailed on 17 May 1667. However, their attack was repelled in the Battle of Nevis on 17 May by a smaller English force. This confused naval action was the only one in this war where all three navies fought: it failed largely through de la Barre's incompetence. After this failed attack, Crijnssen left in disgust and sailed to the north to attack the Virginia colony, while the French, under de la Barre, moved to Martinique. The Battle of Nevis restored English naval control in the Caribbean and allowed the early recapture of Antigua and Montserrat and an unsuccessful attack on St Kitts soon after.\nIn April, a new English squadron of nine warships and two fireships under the command of Rear-Admiral Sir John Harman sailed for the West Indies, reaching them in early June. Harman encountered the French with seven larger and 14 smaller warships and three fireships under la Barre anchored under the batteries of Fort St Pierre, Martinique. He attacked on 6 July and sunk, burnt or captured all but two of the French ships. With the French fleet neutralised, Harman then attacked the French at Cayenne on 15 September forcing its garrison to surrender. The English fleet then went on to recapture Fort Zeelandia in Suriname in October. News of these English victories only reached England in September, after the Treaty of Breda had been signed, and possessions captured after 31 July had to be returned. Crijnssen sailed back to the Caribbean only to find the French fleet destroyed and the English back in possession of Suriname.\nAftermath.\nTreaty of Breda.\nOn 31 July 1667, what is generally known as the Treaty of Breda concluded peace between England and the Netherlands. Under normal cirumstances the Dutch victory in the Medway would probably have been followed by new demands, but the large scale French invasion of the Spanish Netherlands meant that the English came off lightly. Fears of growing French power meant that Johan de Witt and many of his fellow Dutch \"regenten\" preferred a quick end to the war with the English.\nThe treaty allowed the English to keep possession of New Netherland, while the Dutch kept control over Pulau Run, Fort Cormantin and the valuable sugar plantations of Suriname, while also regaining Tobago, St Eustatius, and its West African trading posts. This \"uti possidetis\" solution was later confirmed in the Treaty of Westminster. The Act of Navigation was modified in favour of the Dutch by England agreeing to treat the German states as part of the Netherlands' commercial hinterland, so that Dutch ships would now be allowed to carry German goods to English ports. The English were also forced to accept the Dutch 'Free Ship, Free Goods' principle.\nOn the same date and also at Breda, a public treaty was concluded between England and France that stipulated the return to England of the former English part of St Christopher and the islands of Antigua and Montserrat, all of which the French had occupied in the war, and that England should surrender its claim to Acadia to France, although the extent of Acadia was not defined. This public treaty had been preceded by a secret treaty signed on 17 April in which, in addition to these exchanges of territory, Louis and Charles agreed not to enter into alliances opposed to the interests of the other, by which Louis secured the neutrality of England in the war he planned against Spain.\nThe order of priorities whereby the Dutch preferred to give up what would become a major part of the United States, and instead retain a tropical colony, would seem strange by present-day standards. However, in the 17th century tropical colonies producing agricultural products which could not be grown in Europe were deemed more valuable than ones with a climate similar to that of Europe where Europeans could settle in comfort.\nThe peace was generally seen as a personal triumph for Johan de Witt and an embarrassment to the Orangists, who seemed reluctant to support the war and eager to accept a disadvantageous early peace. The Republic was jubilant about the Dutch victory. De Witt used the occasion to induce four provinces to adopt the Perpetual Edict of 1667 abolishing the stadtholderate forever. However, De Witt also faced criticism. The war exposed a severe neglect of the Dutch army, which had struggled to repel the invasion of the Bishop of M\u00fcnster. The situation only shifted in the Republic's favor after the arrival of 6,000 French auxiliary troops. In addition, the diplomatic situation also seemed bleak for the Dutch. A French conquest of the Spanish Netherlands could only be stopped by entering an alliance with England.\nThe next year Johan de Witt entered the Triple Alliance of 1668 with England, although reluctantly, as he considered Charles II an untrustworthy ally. The Alliance between the Dutch Republic, England and Sweden was formed to mediate between France and Spain and forced Louis to temporarily abandon his plans for the conquest of the southern Netherlands. At first this seemed like another major diplomatic success for the Dutch, but de Witt's fears of English treachery proved justified. Charles had only entered the Triple Alliance to break the Franco-Dutch one. Both humiliated monarchs intensified their secret cooperation through the Secret Treaty of Dover and would, joined by the bishop of M\u00fcnster, attack the Dutch in 1672 in the Third Anglo-Dutch War. Initially the Dutch Republic seemed unable to counter this attack, and De Witt was scapegoated. He resigned and the young William III became stadtholder. That same year de Witt was assassinated.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65616", "revid": "50958975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65616", "title": "List of British comedians", "text": "British people who perform comedy\nThis is a list of comedians of British birth or famous mainly in Britain. Many of the comedy panel-game regulars and sitcom actors may not be regarded as comedians by some people but they are included here because this page uses the word \"comedian\" in its broadest possible sense. Fictional comedians are not included.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65617", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65617", "title": "Crib death", "text": ""}
{"id": "65618", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65618", "title": "British comedian", "text": ""}
{"id": "65621", "revid": "35138333", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65621", "title": "Peter III of Aragon", "text": "King of Aragon and Valencia (1276\u201385); King of Sicily (1282\u201385)\nPeter III of Aragon (In Aragonese, \"Pero\"; in Catalan, \"Pere\"; in Italian, \"Pietro\"; c.\u20091239 \u2013 11 November 1285) was King of Aragon, King of Valencia (as Peter I), and Count of Barcelona (as Peter II) from 1276 to his death. At the invitation of some rebels, he conquered the Kingdom of Sicily and became King of Sicily (as Peter I) in 1282, pressing the claim of his wife, Constance II of Sicily, uniting the kingdom to the crown.\nYouth and succession.\nPeter was the eldest son of James I of Aragon and his second wife Violant of Hungary. On 13 June 1262, Peter married Constance II of Sicily, daughter and heiress of Manfred of Sicily. During his youth and early adulthood, Peter gained a great deal of military experience in his father's wars of the \"Reconquista\" against the Moors.\nIn June 1275, Peter besieged, captured, and executed his rebellious half-brother Fernando S\u00e1nchez de Castro at Pomar de Cinca.\nOn his father's death in 1276, the lands of the Crown of Aragon were divided amongst his two sons. The Kingdom of Aragon, the Kingdom of Valencia and the Principality of Catalonia went to Peter III as being the eldest son; while the Kingdom of Majorca and the Catalan counties beyond the Pyrenees went to the second son, who became James II of Majorca.\nPeter and Constance were crowned in Zaragoza in November 1276 by the archbishop of Tarragona.\nEarly rebellions.\nPeter's first act as king was to complete the pacification of his Valencian territory, an action which had been underway before his father's death.\nHowever, a revolt soon broke out in the Principality of Catalonia, led by the viscount of Cardona and abetted by Roger-Bernard III of Foix, Arnold Roger I of Pallars Sobir\u00e0, and Ermengol X of Urgell. The rebels had developed a hatred for Peter as a result of the severity of his dealings with them during the reign of his father. Now they opposed him for not summoning the Catalan Courts, and confirming its privileges after his ascension to the throne.\nAt the same time, a succession crisis continued in the County of Urgell. When \u00c0lvar of Urgell died in 1268, the families of his two wives, Constance, a daughter of Pere de Montcada of Bearn, and Cecilia, a daughter of Roger-Bernard II of Foix, began a long fight over the inheritance of his county. Meanwhile, a good portion of the county had been repossessed by Peter's father, James I, and was thus inherited by Peter in 1276. In 1278, Ermengol X, \u00c0lvar's eldest son, succeeded in recovering most of his lost patrimony and came to an agreement with Peter whereby he recognised the latter as his suzerain.\nIn 1280, Peter defeated the stewing rebellion led by Roger-Bernard III after besieging the rebels in Balaguer for a month. Most of the rebel leaders were imprisoned in Lleida until 1281, while Roger-Bernard was imprisoned until 1284.\nWars abroad.\nTunisia.\nWhen Muhammad I al-Mustansir, the Hafsid Emir of Tunisia who had put himself under James I of Aragon, died in 1277, Tunisia threw off the yoke of Aragonese suzerainty. Peter first sent an expedition to Tunis in 1280 under Conrad de Llansa designed to re-establish his suzerainty. In 1281, he himself prepared to lead a fleet of 140 ships with men to invade Tunisia on behalf of the governor of Constantine. The fleet landed at Alcoyll in 1282. It was these Aragonese troops that received a Sicilian embassy after the Vespers of 30 March asking Peter to take their throne from Charles I of Anjou.\nWar of the Sicilian Vespers.\nIn 1266, Charles I of Naples, with the approval of Pope Clement IV, invaded the Kingdom of Sicily, governed by the house of Hohenstaufen, which was the house of Peter's wife, Constance II of Sicily, daughter of Manfred of Sicily and rightful heir to the throne of Sicily after the deaths of her father and cousin Conradin fighting against Charles's invading forces. This made Peter the heir of Manfred of Sicily in right of his wife.\nThe Italian physician John of Procida acted on behalf of Peter in Sicily. John had fled to Aragon after Charles' success at the Battle of Tagliacozzo. John travelled to Sicily to stir up the discontents in favour of Peter and thence to Constantinople to procure the support of Michael VIII Palaiologos. Michael refused to aid the Aragonese king without papal approval, and so John voyaged to Rome and there gained the consent of Pope Nicholas III, who feared the ascent of Charles in the Mezzogiorno. John then returned to Barcelona but the Pope died, to be replaced by Pope Martin IV, a Frenchman and a staunch ally of Charles and the Anjou dynasty. This set the stage for the upcoming conflict.\nConstance thus claimed to her father's throne, supported by her husband, but the claim was fruitless, as Charles was supported by the Papacy and his power remained stronger. The election of a new Pope Nicholas III in 1277 gave the King of Aragon a glimpse of hope, but Nicholas died in 1280 and a pro-French Pope Martin IV dissipated hopes.\nPeter nevertheless had begun making strategic alliances with his neighbouring monarchs. Peter made his brother James II of Majorca sign the treaty of Perpignan in 1279, in which he recognized the Kingdom of Majorca as a feudal kingdom of Peter III (making the Crown of Aragon an indissoluble unity). Peter pressed his advantage and by February 1283 had taken most of the Calabrian coastline. Charles, perhaps feeling desperate, sent letters to Peter demanding they resolve the conflict by personal combat. Peter accepted and Charles returned to France to arrange the duel. Both kings chose six knights to settle on places and dates, and a duel was scheduled for 1 June at Bordeaux. A hundred knights would accompany each side and Edward I of England would adjudge the contest; the English king, heeding the pope, however, refused to take part. Peter left John of Procida in charge of Sicily and returned via his own kingdom to Bordeaux, which he entered in disguise to evade a suspected French ambush. Needless to say, no combat ever took place and Peter returned to find a very turbulent Aragon.\nHe also had a long-lasting friendly relationship with the Kingdom of Castile, establishing a strong alliance between realms by signing the treaties of Campillo and \u00c1greda in 1281 with Alfonso X of Castile and infant Sancho.\nWith the Kingdom of Portugal, Peter established a marital alliance by which his eldest daughter Elizabeth of Aragon married Denis I of Portugal. Peter also made alliance with the Kingdom of England, engaging his heir Alfonso III with Eleanor of England, daughter of Edward I of England. Despite all these alliances, Peter kept his bad relationship with the Kingdom of France.\nOn 30 March 1282 there was a popular uprising in the Kingdom of Sicily called the Sicilian Vespers, against the government of Charles I of Anjou. The noble sicilian rebels asked for Peter for help and offered him the crown as they considered his wife Constance their rightful Queen, and after receiving an embassy from the people of Palermo at Alcoy, Peter landed at Trapani on 30 August 1282. He was proclaimed King in Palermo on 4 September. Charles was forced to flee across the Straits of Messina and be content with his Kingdom of Naples. Pope Martin IV excommunicated both Peter and Michael VIII Palaiologos for providing Peter with gold pieces to invade Sicily.\nCatalan ground troops were commanded by Guillem Galceran de Cartell\u00e0, and were formed by the famous and feared almogavars, crossbowmen, and lancers. Peter's powerful fleet was commanded by Roger of Lauria, and constantly repelled Angevin attacks to the island. Roger de Lauria defeated the French forces at the Battle of Malta, and at the Gulf of Naples in 1284, where Charles of Salerno, son of Charles I, was made prisoner.\nThe conquest of Sicily was financed by Jewish contributions and taxes charged to the \"aljamas.\" The infant Alfonso demanded them an allowance of \"sous\" in 1282. The \"aljamas\" from the Kingdom of Valencia gave \"sous,\" the Aragonese and were charged to the Catalan \"aljamas\". The Kingdom of Sicily was to be a tenaciously pursued inheritance for the Aragonese royal house and its heirs for the next five centuries.\nLater domestic unrest.\nPeter was dealing with domestic unrest at the time when the French were preparing an invasion of Aragon. He took Albarrac\u00edn from the rebellious noble Juan N\u00fa\u00f1ez de Lara, he renewed the alliance with Sancho IV of Castile, and he attacked Tudela in an attempt to prevent Philip I of Navarre from invading on that front. Peter held meetings of the \"cortes\" at Tarragona and Zaragoza in 1283. He was forced to grant the \"Privilegio General\" to the newly formed Union of Aragon.\nAlso in 1283, Peter's brother James II of Majorca joined the French and recognised their suzerainty over Montpellier. This gave the French free passage into Catalonia through Roussillon as well as access to the Balearic Islands. In October, Peter began preparing the defences of Catalonia. In 1284, Pope Martin IV granted the Kingdom of Aragon to Charles, Count of Valois, another son of the French king and great-nephew of Charles I of Anjou. Papal sanction was given to a war to conquer Aragon on behalf of Charles of Valois.\nAragonese Crusade.\nIn 1284, the first French armies under Philip and Charles entered Roussillon. They included cavalry, crossbowmen, and infantry, along with 100 ships in south French ports. Though the French had James's support, the local populace rose against them. The city of Elne was valiantly defended by the so-called \"bastard of Roussillon\", the illegitimate son of Nu\u00f1o S\u00e1nchez, late count of Roussillon. Eventually he was overcome and the cathedral was burnt; the royal forces progressed.\nIn 1285, Philip entrenched himself before Girona in an attempt to besiege it. The resistance was strong, but the city was taken. Charles was crowned there, but without an actual crown. The French soon experienced a reversal, however, at the hands of Roger de Lauria, back from the Italian theatre of the drawn-out conflict. The French fleet was defeated and destroyed at the Battle of Les Formigues on 4 September 1285. In addition, the French camp was hit hard by an epidemic of dysentery.\nThe King of France himself was afflicted. The King of Navarre, the heir apparent to the French throne, opened negotiations with Peter for free passage for the royal family through the Pyrenees. But the troops were not offered such passage and were decimated at the Battle of the Col de Panissars. Philip III of France died in October at Perpignan, the capital of James II of Majorca (who had fled in fear after being confronted by Peter), and was buried in Narbonne. James was declared a vassal of Peter.\nTroubadour works.\nPeter matched his father in patronage of the arts and literature, but unlike him he was a lover of verse, not prose. He favoured the troubadours, having himself created two \"sirventesos\". The first is in the form of an exchange between himself and Peironet, a troubadour. The second is part of a compilation of five compositions from Peter himself, Bernat d'Auriac, Pere Salvatge, Roger-Bernard III of Foix, and an anonymous contributor.\nAs well the wars with Philip III of France and James II of Majorca furnished material for new \"sirventesos\" and during this period the \"sirventes\" was converted into a convenient tool of political propaganda in which each side could, directly or allegorically, present its case and procure sympathy propitious to its cause.\nDeath and legacy.\nPeter died from unknown causes at Vilafranca del Pened\u00e8s in November 1285, just one month after Philip III of France, and was buried in the Monastery of Santes Creus. His deathbed absolution occurred after he declared that his conquests had been in the name of his familial claims and never against the claims of the church. His remains are entombed in a porphyry sarcophagus at the monastery.\nPeter made his final testament on 2 November 1285. In it he instructed his successor to return the kingdom of Sicily to the pope and to release all Angevin prisoners of war. Although the will was copied into the royal register, it was ignored by his successors. Peter's eldest son, Alfonso III, inherited Aragon while Sicily went to his second son, James II. His third son, Frederick, later succeeded James as king of Sicily. Peter did not provide for his illegitimate youngest son and namesake, Peter. This Peter left Spain for Portugal with his half-sister Elizabeth.\nIn the \"Divine Comedy\", (Purgatory, Canto VII) Dante Alighieri sees Peter \"singing in accord\" with his former rival, Charles I of Anjou, outside the gates of Purgatory.\nChildren.\nPeter and Constance II of Sicily had:\nPeter had a relationship with Ines Zapata between 1275-1280 and had the following children:\nAdditionally, he had 3 illegitimate children with Maria Nicolau before marrying Constance of Sicily:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65622", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65622", "title": "Clinical chemistry", "text": "Area of clinical pathology that is generally concerned with analysis of bodily fluids\nClinical chemistry (also known as chemical pathology, clinical biochemistry or medical biochemistry) is a division in pathology and medical laboratory sciences focusing on qualitative tests of important compounds, referred to as analytes or markers, in bodily fluids and tissues using analytical techniques and specialized instruments. This interdisciplinary field includes knowledge from medicine, biology, chemistry, biomedical engineering, informatics, and an applied form of biochemistry (not to be confused with medicinal chemistry, which involves basic research for drug development).\nThe discipline originated in the late 19th century with the use of simple chemical reaction tests for various components of blood and urine. Many decades later, clinical chemists use automated analyzers in many clinical laboratories. These instruments perform experimental techniques ranging from pipetting specimens and specimen labelling to advanced measurement techniques such as spectrometry, chromatography, photometry, potentiometry, etc. These instruments provide different results that help identify uncommon analytes, changes in light and electronic voltage properties of naturally occurring analytes such as enzymes, ions, electrolytes, and their concentrations, all of which are important for diagnosing diseases.\nBlood and urine are the most common test specimens clinical chemists or medical laboratory scientists collect for clinical routine tests, with a main focus on serum and plasma in blood. There are now many blood tests and clinical urine tests with extensive diagnostic capabilities. Some clinical tests require clinical chemists to process the specimen before testing. Clinical chemists and medical laboratory scientists serve as the interface between the laboratory side and the clinical practice, providing suggestions to physicians on which test panel to order and interpret any irregularities in test results that reflect on the patient's health status and organ system functionality. This allows healthcare providers to make more accurate evaluation of a patient's health and to diagnose disease, predicting the progression of a disease (prognosis), screening, and monitoring the treatment's efficiency in a timely manner. The type of test required dictates what type of sample is used.\nCommon Analytes.\nSome common analytes that clinical chemistry tests analyze include:\nPanel tests.\nA physician may order many laboratory tests on one specimen, referred to as a test panel, when a single test cannot provide sufficient information to make a swift and accurate diagnosis and treatment plan. A test panel is a group of many tests a clinical chemists do on one sample to look for changes in many analytes that may be indicative of specific medical concerns or the health status of an organ system. Thus, panel tests provide a more extensive evaluation of a patient's health, have higher predictive values for confirming or disproving a disease, and are quick and cost-effective.\nMetabolic Panel.\nA Metabolic Panel (MP) is a routine group of blood tests commonly used for health screenings, disease detection, and monitoring vital signs of hospitalized patients with specific medical conditions. MP panel analyzes common analytes in the blood to assess the functions of the kidneys and liver, as well as electrolyte and acid-base balances. There are two types of MPs - Basic Metabolic Panel (BMP) or Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP).\nBasic Metabolic Panel.\nBMP is a panel of tests that measures eight analytes in the blood's fluid portion (plasma). The results of the BMP provide valuable information about a patient's kidney function, blood sugar level, electrolyte levels, and the acid-base balance. Abnormal changes in one or more of these analytes can be a sign of serious health issues:\nComprehensive Metabolic Panel.\nComprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) - 14 tests - above BMP plus total protein, albumin, alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine amino transferase (ALT), aspartate amino transferase (AST), bilirubin.\nSpecimen Processing.\nFor blood tests, clinical chemists must process the specimen to obtain plasma and serum before testing for targeted analytes. This is most easily done by centrifugation, which packs the denser blood cells and platelets to the bottom of the centrifuge tube, leaving the liquid serum fraction resting above the packed cells. This initial step before analysis has recently been included in instruments that operate on the \"integrated system\" principle. Plasma is obtained by centrifugation \"before\" clotting occurs.\nInstruments.\nMost current medical laboratories now have highly automated analyzers to accommodate the high workload typical of a hospital laboratory, and accept samples for up to about 700 different kinds of tests. Even the largest of laboratories rarely do all these tests themselves, and some must be referred to other labs. Tests performed are closely monitored and quality controlled.\nSpecialties.\nThe large array of tests can be categorised into sub-specialities of:\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65623", "revid": "1317027001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65623", "title": "Creatinine", "text": "Breakdown product of creatine phosphate\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nCreatinine (; from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'flesh') is a breakdown product of creatine phosphate from muscle and protein metabolism. It is released at a constant rate by the body (depending on muscle mass).\nBiological relevance.\nSerum creatinine (a blood measurement) is an important indicator of kidney function, because it is an easily measured byproduct of muscle metabolism that is excreted unchanged by the kidneys. Creatinine itself is produced via a biological system involving creatine, phosphocreatine (also known as creatine phosphate), and adenosine triphosphate (ATP, the body's immediate energy supply).\nCreatine is synthesized primarily in the liver by methylation of glycocyamine (guanidino acetate, synthesized in the kidney from the amino acids arginine and glycine) by S-adenosyl methionine. It is then transported in the blood to other organs, muscles, and the brain, where it is phosphorylated to phosphocreatine, a high-energy compound. Creatine conversion to phosphocreatine is catalysed by creatine kinase; spontaneous formation of creatinine occurs during the reaction.\nCreatinine is removed from the blood chiefly by the kidneys, primarily by glomerular filtration, but also by proximal tubular secretion. Little or no tubular reabsorption of creatinine occurs. If filtration in the kidney is deficient, blood creatinine concentrations rise. Therefore, creatinine concentrations in blood and urine may be used to calculate the creatinine clearance (CrCl), which correlates approximately with the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Blood creatinine concentrations may also be used alone to calculate the estimated GFR (eGFR).\nThe GFR is clinically important as a measurement of kidney function. However, in cases of severe kidney dysfunction the CrCl rate will overestimate the GFR, because hypersecretion of creatinine by the proximal renal tubules will account for a larger fraction of the total creatinine cleared. Ketoacids, cimetidine, and trimethoprim reduce creatinine tubular secretion and therefore increase the accuracy of the GFR estimate, in particular in severe kidney dysfunction. (In the absence of secretion, creatinine behaves like inulin.)\nAn alternative estimation of kidney function can be made when interpreting the blood plasma concentration of creatinine along with that of urea. BUN-to-creatinine ratio (the ratio of blood urea nitrogen to creatinine) can indicate other problems besides those intrinsic to the kidney; for example, a urea concentration raised out of proportion to the creatinine may indicate a prerenal problem, such as volume depletion.\nCounterintuitively, supporting the observation of higher creatinine production in women than in men, and putting into question the algorithms for GFR that do not distinguish for sex, women have higher muscle protein synthesis and higher muscle protein turnover across their life span. As HDL supports muscle anabolism, higher muscle protein turnover links increased creatine to the generally higher serum HDL in women compared with serum HDL in men and the HDL associated benefits, such as reduced incidence of cardiovascular complications and reduced COVID-19 severity.\nAntibacterial and potential immunosuppressive properties.\nStudies suggest that creatinine can be effective in killing bacteria of many species, both Gram positive and Gram negative, as well as diverse antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains. Creatinine appears not to affect the growth of fungi and yeasts; this can be used to isolate slower growing fungi free from the normal bacterial populations found in most environmental samples. The mechanism by which creatinine kills bacteria is not currently known. Some reports also suggest that creatinine may have immunosuppressive properties.\nDiagnostic use.\nSerum creatinine is the most commonly used indicator (although not a direct measure) of renal function. A raised creatinine is not always representative of a true reduction in GFR. A high reading may be due to: increased production of creatinine (with no association to reduced kidney function), interference with the assay, or reduced tubular secretion of creatinine. An increase in serum creatinine can be due to increased ingestion of cooked meat (which contains creatinine converted from creatine by the heat from cooking) or excessive intake of protein and creatine supplements, taken to enhance athletic performance. Intense exercise can increase creatinine by increasing muscle breakdown. \nDehydration secondary to an inflammatory process with fever may cause a false increase in creatinine concentrations not related to actual kidney impairment, as in some cases associated with cholecystitis. Several medications and chromogens can interfere with the chemical assay. Creatinine secretion by the renal tubules can be blocked by some medications, again increasing measured creatinine.\nSerum creatinine.\nDiagnostic serum creatinine studies are used to determine renal function. The reference interval is 0.6\u20131.3\u00a0mg/dL (53\u2013115 \u03bcmol/L). It is simple to measure serum creatinine, and it is the most commonly used indicator of renal function.\nA rise in blood creatinine concentration is a late marker, observed only with marked damage to functioning nephrons. The test is therefore unsuitable for detecting early-stage kidney disease. A better estimate of kidney function is given by calculating the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). eGFR can be calculated without a 24-hour urine collection, using serum creatinine concentration and some or all of the following variables: sex, age, and weight, as suggested by the American Diabetes Association. Many laboratories will automatically calculate eGFR when a creatinine test is requested. Algorithms to estimate GFR from creatinine concentration and other parameters are discussed in the renal function article. Unfortunately, the MDRD Study equation was developed in people with chronic kidney disease, and its major limitations are imprecision and systematic underestimation of measured GFR (bias) at higher/normal values. \nA concern as of late 2010 relates to the adoption of a new analytical method, and the possible effect this may have in clinical medicine. Most clinical laboratories now align their creatinine measurements against a new standardized isotope dilution mass spectrometry (IDMS) method to measure serum creatinine. IDMS appears to give lower values than older methods when the serum creatinine values are relatively low, for example 0.7\u00a0mg/dL. The IDMS method would result in comparative overestimation of the corresponding calculated GFR in some patients with normal renal function. A few medicines are dosed even in normal renal function using that derived value of GFR. The dose, unless further modified, could then be higher than desired, potentially causing increased drug-related toxicity. To counter the effect of changing to IDMS, new FDA guidelines have suggested limiting doses of carboplatin, a chemotherapy drug, to specified maxima.\nUrine creatinine.\nMales produce approximately 150\u00a0\u03bcmol to 200\u00a0\u03bcmol of creatinine per kilogram of body weight per 24\u00a0h, while females produce approximately 100\u00a0\u03bcmol/kg/24\u00a0h to 150\u00a0\u03bcmol/kg/24\u00a0h. In normal circumstances, all the creatinine produced is excreted in the urine.\nCreatinine concentration is checked during standard urine drug tests. An expected creatinine concentration indicates that the test sample is undiluted, whereas low amounts of creatinine in the urine indicate either a manipulated test or low initial baseline creatinine concentrations. Test samples considered manipulated due to low creatinine are not tested, and the test is sometimes considered failed.\nInterpretation.\nIn the United States and in most European countries creatinine is usually reported in mg/dL, whereas in Canada, Australia, and a few European countries, such as the UK, \u03bcmol/L is the usual unit. One\u00a0mg/dL of creatinine equals 88.4\u00a0\u03bcmol/L.\nThe typical human reference ranges for serum creatinine are 0.5\u00a0mg/dL to 1.0\u00a0mg/dL (about 45\u00a0\u03bcmol/L to 90\u00a0\u03bcmol/L) for women and 0.7\u00a0mg/dL to 1.2\u00a0mg/dL (60\u00a0\u03bcmol/L to 110\u00a0\u03bcmol/L) for men. The significance of a single creatinine value must be interpreted in light of the patient's muscle mass. Patients with greater muscle mass have higher creatinine concentrations.\nThe trend of serum creatinine concentrations over time is more important than the absolute creatinine concentration.\nSerum creatinine concentrations may increase when an ACE inhibitor (ACEI) is taken for heart failure and chronic kidney disease. ACE inhibitors provide survival benefits for patients with heart failure and slow disease progression in patients with chronic kidney disease. An increase not exceeding 30% is to be expected with use of an ACE inhibitor. Therefore, an ACE inhibitor should not be withdrawn when the serum creatinine increases, unless the increase exceeds 30% or hyperkalemia develops.\nChemistry.\nIn chemical terms, creatinine is a lactam and an imidazolidinone, a spontaneously formed cyclic derivative of creatine.\nSeveral tautomers of creatinine exist; ordered by contribution, they are:\nCreatinine starts to decompose at around 300\u00a0\u00b0C.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65626", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65626", "title": "Peterloo Massacre", "text": "1819 massacre by government troops in Manchester\nThe Peterloo Massacre took place at St Peter's Field, Manchester, England, on Monday 16 August 1819. Eighteen people were killed and 400\u2013700 were injured when the cavalry of the Yeomen charged into a crowd of around 60,000 people who had gathered to demand the reform of parliamentary representation.\nAfter the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, there was an acute economic slump, accompanied by chronic unemployment and harvest failure due to the Year Without a Summer, and worsened by the Corn Laws, which kept the price of bread high. At that time, only around 11 percent of adult males had the right to vote, very few of them in the industrial north of England, which was worst hit. Radicals identified parliamentary reform as the solution, and a mass campaign to petition parliament for manhood suffrage gained three-quarters of a million signatures in 1817 but was flatly rejected by the House of Commons. When a second slump occurred in early 1819, Radicals sought to mobilise huge crowds to force the government to back down. The movement was particularly strong in the north-west, where the Manchester Patriotic Union organised a mass rally in August 1819, addressed by well-known Radical orator Henry Hunt.\nShortly after the meeting began, local magistrates called on the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry to arrest Hunt and several others on the platform with him. The Yeomanry charged into the crowd, knocking down a woman and killing a child, and finally apprehended Hunt. Cheshire Magistrates' chairman William Hulton then summoned the 15th Hussars to disperse the crowd. They charged with sabres drawn, and contemporary accounts estimated that between nine and seventeen people were killed and 400 to 700 injured in the ensuing confusion. The event was first labelled the \"Peterloo massacre\" by the radical \"Manchester Observer\" newspaper in a bitterly ironic reference to the bloody Battle of Waterloo which had taken place four years earlier.\nHistorian Robert Poole has called the Peterloo Massacre \"the bloodiest political event of the 19th century in English soil\", and \"a political earthquake in the northern powerhouse of the industrial revolution\". The London and national papers shared the horror felt in the Manchester region, but Peterloo's immediate effect was to cause the Tory government under Lord Liverpool to pass the Six Acts, which were aimed at suppressing any meetings for the purpose of radical reform. It also led indirectly to the foundation of \"The Manchester Guardian\" newspaper. In a survey conducted by \"The Guardian\" (the modern iteration of \"The\" \"Manchester Guardian\") in 2006, Peterloo came second to the Putney Debates as the event from radical British history that most deserved a proper monument or a memorial.\nFor some time, Peterloo was commemorated only by a blue plaque, criticised as being inadequate and referring only to the \"dispersal by the military\" of an assembly. In 2007, the city council replaced the blue plaque with a red plaque referring to \"a peaceful rally\" being \"attacked by armed cavalry\" and mentioning \"15 deaths and over 600 injuries\". In 2019, on the 200th anniversary of the massacre, Manchester City Council inaugurated a new Peterloo Memorial by the artist Jeremy Deller, featuring eleven concentric circles of local stone engraved with the names of the dead and the places from which the victims came.\nBackground.\nSuffrage.\nIn 1819, Lancashire was represented by two county members of parliament (MPs) and a further twelve borough members sitting for the towns of Clitheroe, Newton, Wigan, Lancaster, Liverpool, and Preston, with a total of 17,000 voters in a county population of nearly a million. Thanks to deals by Whig and Tory parties to carve up the seats between them, most had not seen a contested election within living memory.\nNationally, the so-called rotten boroughs had a hugely disproportionate influence on the membership of the Parliament of the United Kingdom compared to the size of their populations: Old Sarum in Wiltshire, with one voter, elected two MPs, as did Dunwich in Suffolk, which by the early 19th century had almost completely disappeared into the sea. The major urban centres of Manchester, Salford, Bolton, Blackburn, Rochdale, Ashton-under-Lyne, Oldham and Stockport had no MPs of their own, and only a few hundred county voters. By comparison, more than half of all MPs were returned by a total of just 154\u00a0owners of rotten or closed boroughs. In 1816, Thomas Oldfield's \"The Representative History of Great Britain and Ireland; being a History of the House of Commons, and of the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs of the United Kingdom from the earliest Period\" claimed that of the 515 MPs for England and Wales 351 were returned by the patronage of 177 individuals and a further 16 by the direct patronage of the government: all 45 Scottish MPs owed their seats to patronage. These inequalities in political representation led to calls for reform.\nEconomic conditions.\nAfter the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815, a brief boom in textile manufacture was followed by periods of chronic economic depression, particularly among cotton textile weavers and spinners. The cotton textile trade was concentrated in Lancashire and the wool textile trade was concentrated over the border in West and North Yorkshire. Weavers who could have expected to earn 15\u00a0shillings for a six-day week in 1803, saw their wages cut to 5\u00a0shillings or even 4s\u00a06d by 1818. The industrialists, who were cutting wages without offering relief, blamed market forces generated by the aftershocks of the Napoleonic Wars. Exacerbating matters were the Corn Laws, the first of which was passed in 1815, imposing a tariff on foreign grain in an effort to protect English grain producers. The cost of food rose as people were forced to buy the more expensive and lower quality British grain, and periods of famine and chronic unemployment ensued, increasing the desire for political reform both in Lancashire and in the country at large.\nRadical mass meetings in Manchester.\nIn the winter of 1816\u201317 massed reform petitions were rejected by the House of Commons, the largest of them from Manchester with over 30,000 signatures. On 10 March 1817 a crowd of 5,000 gathered in St Peter's Fields to send some of their number to march to London to petition the Prince Regent to force parliament into reform; the so-called 'blanket march', after the blankets which the protesters carried with them to sleep in on the way. After the magistrates read the Riot Act, the crowd was dispersed without injury by the King's Dragoon Guards. The ringleaders were detained for several months without charge under the emergency powers then in force, which suspended \"habeas corpus\", the right to be either charged or released. In September 1818 three former leading Blanketeers were again arrested for allegedly urging striking weavers in Stockport to demand their political rights, 'sword in hand', and were convicted of sedition and conspiracy at Chester Assizes in April 1819.\nBy the beginning of 1819, pressure generated by poor economic conditions was at its peak and had enhanced the appeal of political radicalism among the cotton loom weavers of south Lancashire. In January 1819, a crowd of about 10,000 gathered at St Peter's Fields to hear the radical orator Henry Hunt and called on the Prince Regent to choose ministers who would repeal the Corn Laws. The meeting, conducted in the presence of the cavalry, passed off without incident, apart from the collapse of the hustings.\nA series of mass meetings in the Manchester region, Birmingham, and London over the next few months alarmed the government. \"Your country [i.e. county] will not be tranquillised until blood shall have been shed, either by the law or the sword\", the Home Secretary, Lord Sidmouth wrote to the Lancashire magistrates in March. Over the next few months the government worked to find a legal justification for the magistrates to send in troops to disperse a meeting when riot was expected but not actually begun. In July 1819, the magistrates wrote to Lord Sidmouth warning they thought a \"general rising\" was imminent, the \"deep distress of the manufacturing classes\" was being worked on by the \"unbounded liberty of the press\" and \"the harangues of a few desperate demagogues\" at weekly meetings. \"Possessing no power to prevent the meetings\" the magistrates admitted they were at a loss as to how to stem the doctrines being disseminated. The Home Office assured them privately that in \"an extreme case a magistrate may feel it incumbent upon him to act even without evidence, and to rely on Parliament for an indemnity.\"\nAugust meeting.\nAgainst this background, a \"great assembly\" was organised by the Manchester Patriotic Union formed by radicals from the \"Manchester Observer\". Johnson, the union's secretary, wrote to Henry Hunt asking him to chair a meeting in Manchester on 2 August 1819. Johnson wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nothing but ruin and starvation stare one in the face [in the streets of Manchester and the surrounding towns], the state of this district is truly dreadful, and I believe nothing but the greatest exertions can prevent an insurrection. Oh, that you in London were prepared for it.\nUnknown to Johnson and Hunt, the letter was intercepted by government spies and copied before being sent to its destination, confirming the government's belief that an armed rising was planned.\nThe mass public meeting planned for 2 August was delayed until 9 August. The \"Manchester Observer\" reported it was called \"to take into consideration the most speedy and effectual mode of obtaining Radical reform in the Common House of Parliament\" and \"to consider the propriety of the 'Unrepresented Inhabitants of Manchester' electing a person to represent them in Parliament\". The government's legal advice was that to elect a representative without a royal writ for an election was a criminal offence, and the magistrates decided to declare the meeting illegal.\nOn 3 August, however, the Home Office conveyed to the magistrates the view of the Attorney-General that it was not the \"intention\" to elect an MP that was illegal, but the execution of that intention. It advised against any attempt to forcibly prevent the 9 August meeting unless there was an actual riot:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe radicals' own legal advice, however, urged caution, and so the meeting was accordingly cancelled and rearranged for 16 August, with its declared aim solely \"to consider the propriety of adopting the most LEGAL and EFFECTUAL means of obtaining a reform in the Common House of Parliament\".\nSamuel Bamford, a local radical who led the Middleton contingent, wrote that \"It was deemed expedient that this meeting should be as morally effective as possible, and, that it should exhibit a spectacle such as had never before been witnessed in England.\" Instructions were given to the various committees forming the contingents that \"Cleanliness, Sobriety, Order and Peace\" and a \"prohibition of all weapons of offence or defence\" were to be observed throughout the demonstration. Each contingent was drilled and rehearsed in the fields of the towns around Manchester adding to the concerns of the authorities. A royal proclamation forbidding the practice of drilling had been posted in Manchester on 3 August but on 9 August an informant reported to Rochdale magistrates that at Tandle Hill the previous day, 700 men were \"drilling in companies\" and \"going through the usual evolutions of a regiment\" and an onlooker had said the men \"were fit to contend with any regular troops, only they wanted [i.e. lacked] arms\". The magistrates were convinced that the situation was indeed an emergency which would justify pre-emptive action, as the Home Office had previously explained, and set about lining up dozens of local loyalist gentlemen to swear the necessary oaths that they believed the town to be in danger.\nAssembly.\nPreparations.\nSt Peter's Field was a piece of land alongside Mount Street which was being cleared to enable the last section of Peter Street to be constructed. Piles of timber lay at the end of the field nearest to the Friends Meeting House, but the remainder of the field was clear. Thomas Worrell, Manchester's Assistant Surveyor of Paving, arrived to inspect the field at 7:00\u00a0am. His job was to remove anything that might be used as a weapon, and he duly had \"about a quarter of a load\" of stones carted away.\nMonday, 16 August 1819, was a hot summer's day, with a cloudless blue sky. The fine weather almost certainly increased the size of the crowd significantly; marching from the outer townships in the cold and rain would have been a much less attractive prospect.\nThe Manchester magistrates met at 9:00\u00a0am, to breakfast at the Star Inn on Deansgate and to consider what action they should take on Henry Hunt's arrival at the meeting. By 10:30\u00a0am they had come to no conclusions, and moved to a house on the south-eastern corner of St Peter's Field, from where they planned to observe the meeting.\nThey were concerned that it would end in a riot, or even a rebellion, and had arranged for a substantial number of regular troops and militia yeomanry to be deployed. The military presence comprised 600\u00a0men of the 15th Hussars; several hundred infantrymen; a Royal Horse Artillery unit with two six-pounder guns; 400\u00a0men of the Cheshire Yeomanry; 400\u00a0special constables; and 120\u00a0cavalry of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry. The Manchester &amp; Salford Yeomanry were relatively inexperienced militia recruited from among local shopkeepers and tradesmen, the most numerous of which were publicans. Recently mocked by the \"Manchester Observer\" as \"generally speaking, the fawning dependents of the great, with a few fools and a greater proportion of coxcombs, who imagine they acquire considerable importance by wearing regimentals,\" they were subsequently variously described as \"younger members of the Tory party in arms\", and as \"hot-headed young men, who had volunteered into that service from their intense hatred of Radicalism.\" Socialist writer Mark Krantz has described them as \"the local business mafia on horseback\". R J White described them as \"exclusively cheesemongers, ironmongers and newly enriched manufacturers, (who) the people of Manchester ... thought ... a joke.\"\nThe British Army in the north was under the overall command of General Sir John Byng. When he had initially learned that the meeting was scheduled for 2 August he wrote to the Home Office stating that he hoped the Manchester magistrates would show firmness on the day:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I will be prepared to go there, and will have in that neighbourhood, that is within an easy day's march, 8\u00a0squadron of cavalry, 18\u00a0companies of infantry and the guns. I am sure I can add to the Yeomanry if requisite. I hope therefore the civil authorities will not be deterred from doing their duty.\nHe then excused himself from attendance, however, as the meeting on the 9th clashed with the horse races at York, a fashionable event at which Byng had entries in two races. He wrote to the Home Office, saying that although he would still be prepared to be in command in Manchester on the day of the meeting if it was thought really necessary, he had absolute confidence in his deputy commander, Lieutenant Colonel Guy L'Estrange. The postponement to 16 August made it possible for Byng to attend after the races but he chose not to, having had enough of dealing with the Manchester magistrates. He had dealt firmly and bloodlessly with the Blanketeers two years before; L'Estrange was to exhibit no such qualities of command.\nMeeting.\nThe crowd that gathered in St Peter's Field arrived in disciplined and organised contingents. Contingents were sent from all around the region, the largest and \"best dressed\" of which was a group of 10,000 who had travelled from Oldham Green, comprising people from Oldham, Royton (which included a sizeable female section), Crompton, Lees, Saddleworth and Mossley. Other sizeable contingents marched from Middleton and Rochdale (6,000 strong) and Stockport (1,500\u20135,000 strong). Reports of the size of the crowd vary substantially. Contemporaries estimated it from 30,000 to as many as 150,000; modern estimates have been 50,000\u201380,000. Recent work however has reduced these numbers. A reasonably reliable count of the numbers on the various marches indicates a total of around 20,000 who came in from outside Manchester, but the number who attended informally from Manchester and Salford is much harder to estimate. Bush argues from the casualty figures that two-thirds were from Manchester and Salford, suggesting a total crowd of 50,000, but Poole revises this to a half, bringing the total down to 40,000. Steele's estimate of the capacity of the ground suggests 30,000 which, if correct, lowers the attendance but raises the casualty rate.\nThe assembly was intended by its organisers to be a peaceful meeting; Henry Hunt had exhorted everyone attending to come \"armed with no other weapon but that of a self-approving conscience\", and many were wearing their \"Sunday best\" clothes. Samuel Bamford recounts the following incident, which occurred as the Middleton contingent reached the outskirts of Manchester:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the bank of an open field on our left I perceived a gentleman observing us attentively. He beckoned me, and I went to him. He was one of my late employers. He took my hand, and rather concernedly, but kindly, said he hoped no harm was intended by all those people who were coming in. I said \"I would pledge my life for their entire peaceableness.\" I asked him to notice them, \"did they look like persons wishing to outrage the law? were they not, on the contrary, evidently heads of decent working families? or members of such families?\" \"No, no,\" I said, \"my dear sir, and old respected master, if any wrong or violence take place, they will be committed by men of a different stamp from these.\" He said he was very glad to hear me say so; he was happy he had seen me, and gratified by the manner in which I had expressed myself. I asked, did he think we should be interrupted at the meeting? he said he did not believe we should; \"then,\" I replied, \"all will be well\"; and shaking hands, with mutual good wishes, I left him, and took my station as before.\nAlthough William Robert Hay, chairman of the Salford Hundred Quarter Sessions, claimed that \"The active part of the meeting may be said to have come in wholly from the country\", others such as John Shuttleworth, a local cotton dealer, estimated that most were from Manchester, a view that would subsequently be supported by the casualty lists. Of the casualties whose residence was recorded, sixty-one per cent lived within a three-mile radius of the centre of Manchester. Some groups carried banners with texts like \"No Corn Laws\", \"Annual Parliaments\", \"Universal suffrage\" and \"Vote By Ballot\". The first female reform societies were established in the textile areas in 1819 and women from the Manchester Female Reform Society, dressed in white, accompanied Hunt to the platform. The society's president Mary Fildes rode in Hunt's carriage carrying its flag. The only banner known to have survived is in Middleton Public Library; it was carried by Thomas Redford, who was injured by a yeomanry sabre. Made of green silk embossed with gold lettering, one side of the banner is inscribed \"Liberty and Fraternity\" and the other \"Unity and Strength.\" It is the world's oldest political banner.\nAt about noon, several hundred special constables were led onto the field. They formed two lines in the crowd a few yards apart, in an attempt to form a corridor through the crowd between the house where the magistrates were watching and the hustings, two wagons lashed together. Believing that this might be intended as the route by which the magistrates would later send their representatives to arrest the speakers, some members of the crowd pushed the wagons away from the constables, and pressed around the hustings to form a human barrier.\nHunt's carriage arrived at the meeting shortly after 1:00\u00a0pm, and he made his way to the hustings. Alongside Hunt on the speakers' stand were John Knight, a cotton manufacturer and reformer, Joseph Johnson, the organiser of the meeting, John Thacker Saxton, managing editor of the \"Manchester Observer\", the publisher Richard Carlile, and George Swift, reformer and shoemaker. There were also a number of reporters, including John Tyas of \"The Times\", John Smith of the \"Liverpool Mercury\" and Edward Baines Jr, the son of the editor of the \"Leeds Mercury.\" By this time St Peter's Field, an area of , was packed with tens of thousands of men, women and children. The crowd around the speakers was so dense that \"their hats seemed to touch\"; large groups of curious spectators gathered on the outskirts of the crowd.\nCavalry charge.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen I wrote these two letters, I considered at that moment that the lives and properties of all the persons in Manchester were in the greatest possible danger. I took this into consideration, that the meeting was part of a great scheme, carrying on throughout the country.\n\u2014William Hulton\nWilliam Hulton, the chairman of the magistrates watching from the house on the edge of St Peter's Field, saw the enthusiastic reception that Hunt received on his arrival at the assembly, and it encouraged him to action. He issued an arrest warrant for Henry Hunt, Joseph Johnson, John Knight, and James Moorhouse. On being handed the warrant the Constable, Jonathan Andrews, offered his opinion that the press of the crowd surrounding the hustings would make military assistance necessary for its execution. Hulton then wrote two letters, one to Major Thomas Trafford, the commanding officer of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry Cavalry, and the other to the overall military commander in Manchester, Lieutenant Colonel Guy L'Estrange. The contents of both notes were similar:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sir, as chairman of the select committee of magistrates, I request you to proceed immediately to no.\u00a06\u00a0Mount Street, where the magistrates are assembled. They consider the Civil Power wholly inadequate to preserve the peace. I have the honour, &amp; c. Wm. Hulton.\u2014\u200a\nThe notes were handed to two horsemen who were standing by. The Manchester and Salford Yeomanry were stationed just a short distance away in Portland Street, and so received their note first. They immediately drew their swords and galloped towards St Peter's Field. One trooper, in a frantic attempt to catch up, knocked down Ann Fildes in Cooper Street, causing the death of her son when he was thrown from her arms; two-year-old William Fildes was the first casualty of Peterloo.\nSixty cavalrymen of the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry, led by Captain Hugh Hornby Birley, a local factory owner, arrived at the house from where the magistrates were watching; some reports allege that they were drunk. Andrews, the Chief Constable, instructed Birley that he had an arrest warrant which he needed assistance to execute. Birley was asked to take his cavalry to the hustings to allow the speakers to be removed; it was by then about 1:40\u00a0pm.\nThe route towards the hustings between the special constables was narrow, and as the inexperienced horses were thrust further and further into the crowd they reared and plunged as people tried to get out of their way. The arrest warrant had been given to the Deputy Constable, Joseph Nadin, who followed behind the yeomanry. As the cavalry pushed towards the speakers' stand they became stuck in the crowd, and in panic started to hack about them with their sabres. On his arrival at the stand Nadin arrested Hunt, Johnson and a number of others including John Tyas, the reporter from \"The Times\". Their mission to execute the arrest warrant having been achieved, the yeomanry set about destroying the banners and flags on the stand. According to Tyas, the yeomanry then attempted to reach flags in the crowd \"cutting most indiscriminately to the right and to the left to get at them\" \u2013 only then (said Tyas) were brickbats thrown at the military: \"From this point the Manchester and Salford Yeomanry lost all command of temper\".\nFrom his vantage point William Hulton perceived the unfolding events as an assault on the yeomanry, and on L'Estrange's arrival at 1:50\u00a0pm, at the head of his hussars, he ordered them into the field to disperse the crowd with the words: \"Good God, Sir, don't you see they are attacking the Yeomanry; disperse the meeting!\" The 15th Hussars formed themselves into a line stretching across the eastern end of St Peter's Field, and charged into the crowd. At about the same time the Cheshire Yeomanry charged from the southern edge of the field. At first the crowd had some difficulty in dispersing, as the main exit route into Peter Street was blocked by the 88th Regiment of Foot, standing with bayonets fixed. One officer of the 15th Hussars was heard trying to restrain the by now out of control Manchester and Salford Yeomanry, who were \"cutting at every one they could reach\": \"For shame! For shame! Gentlemen: forbear, forbear! The people cannot get away!\"\nOn the other hand, Lieutenant Jolliffe of the 15th Hussars said \"It was then for the first time that I saw the Manchester troop of Yeomanry; they were scattered singly or in small groups over the greater part of the Field, literally hemmed up and powerless either to make an impression or to escape; in fact, they were in the power of those whom they were designed to overawe and it required only a glance to discover their helpless position, and the necessity of our being \"brought to their rescue\"\" Further Jolliffe asserted that \"... nine out of ten of the sabre wounds were caused by the \"Hussars\" ... however, the far greater amount of injuries were from the pressure of the routed multitude.\"\nWithin ten minutes the crowd had been dispersed, at the cost of 11 dead and more than 600 injured. Only the wounded, their helpers, and the dead were left behind; a woman living nearby said she saw \"a very great deal of blood.\" For some time afterwards there was rioting in the streets, most seriously at New Cross, where troops fired on a crowd attacking a shop belonging to someone rumoured to have taken one of the women reformers' flags as a souvenir. Peace was not restored in Manchester until the next morning, and in Stockport and Macclesfield rioting continued on the 17th. There was also a major riot in Oldham that day, during which one person was shot and wounded.\nVictims.\nThe exact number of those killed and injured at Peterloo has never been established with certainty, for there was no official count or inquiry and many injured people fled to safety without reporting their injuries or seeking treatment. The Manchester Relief Committee, a body set up to provide relief for the victims of Peterloo, gave the number of injured as 420, while Radical sources listed 500. The true number is difficult to estimate, as many of the wounded hid their injuries for fear of retribution by the authorities. Three of William Marsh's six children worked in the factory belonging to Captain Hugh Birley of the Manchester Yeomanry, and lost their jobs because their father had attended the meeting. James Lees was admitted to Manchester Infirmary with two severe sabre wounds to the head, but was refused treatment and sent home after refusing to agree with the surgeon's insistence that \"he had had enough of Manchester meetings.\"\nA particular feature of the meeting at Peterloo was the number of women present. Female reform societies had been formed in North West England during June and July 1819, the first in Britain. Many of the women were dressed distinctively in white, and some formed all-female contingents, carrying their own flags. Of the 654\u00a0recorded casualties, at least 168 were women, four of whom died either at St Peter's Field or later as a result of their wounds. It has been estimated that less than 12 per cent of the crowd was made up of women, suggesting that they were at significantly greater risk of injury than men by a factor of almost 3:1. Richard Carlile claimed that the women were especially targeted, a view apparently supported by the large number who suffered from wounds caused by weapons. A recently unearthed set of 70 victims' petitions in the parliamentary archives reveals some shocking tales of ferocity, including the accounts of the female reformers Mary Fildes, who carried the flag on the platform, and Elizabeth Gaunt, who suffered a miscarriage following ill-treatment during eleven days' detention without trial.\nEleven of the fatalities listed occurred on St Peter's Field. Others, such as John Lees of Oldham, died later of their wounds, and some like Joshua Whitworth were killed in the rioting that followed the crowd's dispersal from the field. Bush puts the fatalities at 18 and Poole supports this figure, albeit a slightly different 18 based on new information. It is these 18 whose names are carved on the 2019 memorial, including the unborn child of Elizabeth Gaunt.\nReaction and aftermath.\nPublic.\nThe Peterloo Massacre has been called one of the defining moments of its age. Many of those present at the massacre, including local masters, employers and owners, were horrified by the carnage. One of the casualties, Oldham cloth-worker and ex-soldier John Lees, who died from his wounds on 9 September, had been present at the Battle of Waterloo. Shortly before his death he said to a friend that he had never been in such danger as at Peterloo: \"At Waterloo there was man to man but there it was downright murder.\" When news of the massacre began to spread, the population of Manchester and surrounding districts was horrified and outraged.\nAfter the events at Peterloo, many commemorative items such as plates, jugs, handkerchiefs and medals were produced; they were carried by radical supporters and may also have been sold to raise money for the injured. The People's History Museum in Manchester has one of these Peterloo handkerchiefs on display. All the mementos carried the iconic image of Peterloo; cavalrymen with swords drawn riding down and slashing at defenceless civilians. The reverse of the Peterloo commemorative medal carried a Biblical text, derived from Psalm 37 ():\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The wicked have drawn out the sword, they have cast down the poor and needy and such as be of upright conversation.\nPeterloo was the first public meeting at which journalists from important, distant newspapers were present and within a day or so of the event, accounts were published in London, Leeds and Liverpool. The London and national papers shared the horror felt in the Manchester region, and the feeling of indignation throughout the country became intense. James Wroe, editor of the \"Manchester Observer\", was the first to describe the incident as the \"Peterloo Massacre\", coining his headline by creating the ironic portmanteau from St Peter's Field and the Battle of Waterloo that had taken place four years earlier. He also wrote pamphlets entitled \"The Peterloo Massacre: A Faithful Narrative of the Events\". Priced at 2d each, they sold out every print run for 14 weeks and had a large national circulation. Sir Francis Burdett, a reformist MP, was jailed for three months for publishing a seditious libel.\nPercy Bysshe Shelley was in Italy and did not hear of the massacre until 5 September. His poem \"The Masque of Anarchy\", subtitled \"Written on the Occasion of the Massacre at Manchester\", was sent for publication in the radical periodical \"The Examiner\", but because of restrictions on the radical press it was not published until 1832, ten years after the poet's death.\nPolitical.\nThe immediate effect of Peterloo was a crackdown on reform. The government instructed the police and courts to go after the journalists, presses and publication of the \"Manchester Observer.\" Wroe was arrested and charged with producing a seditious publication. Found guilty he was sentenced to 12 months in prison and fined \u00a3100. Outstanding court cases against the \"Manchester Observer\" were rushed through the courts and a continual change of sub-editors was not sufficient defence against a series of police raids, often on the suspicion that someone was writing a radical article. The \"Manchester Observer\" closed in February 1820.\nHunt and eight others were tried at York Assizes on 16 March 1820, charged with sedition. After a two-week trial, five defendants were found guilty, on a single one of the seven charges. Hunt was sentenced to 30\u00a0months in Ilchester Gaol; Bamford, Johnson, and Healey were given one year each, and Knight was jailed for two years on a subsequent charge. A civil case on behalf of a weaver wounded at Peterloo was brought against four members of the Manchester Yeomanry, Captain Birley, Captain Withington, Trumpeter Meagher, and Private Oliver, at Lancaster Assizes, on 4 April 1822. All were acquitted, as the court ruled their actions had been justified to disperse an illegal gathering and that the murders were nothing more than self-defence.\nThe government declared its support for the actions taken by the magistrates and the army. The Manchester magistrates held a supposedly public meeting on 19 August, so that resolutions supporting the action they had taken three days before could be published. Cotton merchants Archibald Prentice (later editor of \"The Manchester Times\") and Absalom Watkin (a later corn-law reformer), both members of the \"Little Circle\", organised a petition of protest against the violence at St Peter's Field and the validity of the magistrates' meeting. Within a few days it had collected 4,800\u00a0signatures. Nevertheless, the Home Secretary, Lord Sidmouth, on 27 August conveyed to the magistrates the thanks of the Prince Regent for their action in the \"preservation of the public peace.\" That public exoneration was met with fierce anger and criticism. During a debate at Hopkins Street Robert Wedderburn declared \"The Prince is a fool with his Wonderful letters of thanks\u00a0... What is the Prince Regent or King to us, we want no King\u00a0\u2013 he is no use to us.\" In an open letter, Richard Carlile said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Unless the Prince calls his ministers to account and relieved his people, he would surely be deposed and make them all REPUBLICANS, despite all adherence to ancient and established institutions.\nFor a few months following Peterloo it seemed to the authorities that the country was heading towards an armed rebellion. Encouraging them in that belief were two abortive uprisings, in Huddersfield and Burnley, the Yorkshire West Riding Revolt, during the autumn of 1820, and the discovery and foiling of the Cato Street conspiracy to blow up the cabinet that winter. By the end of the year, the government had introduced legislation, later known as the Six Acts, to suppress radical meetings and publications, and by the end of 1820 every significant working-class radical reformer was in jail; civil liberties had declined to an even lower level than they were before Peterloo. Historian Robert Reid has written that \"it is not fanciful to compare the restricted freedoms of the British worker in the post-Peterloo period in the early nineteenth century with those of the black South African in the post-Sharpeville period of the late twentieth century.\" Peterloo is also partially credited for pushing the British government to pass the Vagrancy Act 1824, and for the creation of the London Metropolitan Police (sometimes described as the first police department).\nThe Peterloo Massacre also influenced the naming of the 1821 Cinderloo Uprising in the Coalbrookdale Coalfield of east Shropshire. The uprising saw 3,000 protesting workers confronted by the South Shropshire Yeomanry, leading to the deaths of three crowd members.\nOne direct consequence of Peterloo was the foundation of \"The Manchester Guardian\" newspaper in 1821, by the Little Circle group of non-conformist Manchester businessmen headed by John Edward Taylor, a witness to the massacre. The prospectus announcing the new publication proclaimed that it would \"zealously enforce the principles of civil and religious Liberty\u00a0... warmly advocate the cause of Reform\u00a0... endeavour to assist in the diffusion of just principles of Political Economy and\u00a0... support, without reference to the party from which they emanate, all serviceable measures.\"\nEvents such as the Pentrich rising, the March of the Blanketeers and the Spa Fields meeting, all serve to indicate the breadth, diversity and widespread geographical scale of the demand for economic and political reform at the time. Peterloo had no effect on the speed of reform, but in due course all but one of the reformers' demands, annual parliaments, were met. Following the Great Reform Act 1832, the newly created Manchester parliamentary borough elected its first two MPs. Five candidates including William Cobbett stood, and the Whigs, Charles Poulett Thomson and Mark Philips, were elected. Manchester became a municipal borough in 1838, and the manorial rights were purchased by the borough council in 1846.\nOn the other hand, R. J. White has affirmed the true significance of Peterloo as marking the point of final conversion of provincial England to the struggle for enfranchisement of the working class.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The ship which had tacked and lain for so long among the shoals and shallows of Luddism, hunger-marching, strikes and sabotage, was coming to port\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Henceforth, the people were to stand with ever greater fortitude behind that great movement, which, stage by stage throughout the nineteenth century, was to impose a new political order upon society\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"With Peterloo, and the departure of Regency England, parliamentary reform had come of age.\"\nCommemorations.\nThe Skelmanthorpe Flag, believed to have been made in Skelmanthorpe, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in 1819, was made to honour the victims of the Peterloo Massacre and was flown at mass meetings held in the area demanding the reform of Parliament. The flag consisted of a white field divided into quadrants, three charged with radical suffrage slogans and a fourth charged with a version of \"Am I not a man and brother?\". This was one of dozens of mass protest meetings held in 1819, until the Six Acts put an end to protests. Throughout the nineteenth century, the memory of Peterloo was a political rallying point for both radicals and liberals to attack the Tories and demand further reforms of parliament. These came at the rate of one per generation in 1832, 1867, 1884, and 1918, when universal manhood suffrage and partial female suffrage was achieved.\nThe Free Trade Hall, home of the Anti-Corn Law League, was built partly as a \"cenotaph raised on the shades of the victims\" of Peterloo, but one which acknowledged only the reformers' demand for the repeal of the corn laws and not for the vote. At the centenary in 1919, just two years after the Russian Revolution and the Bolshevik coup, trade unionists and communists alike saw Peterloo as a lesson that workers needed to fight back against capitalist violence. The Conservative majority on Manchester City Council in 1968\u20131969 declined to mark the 150th anniversary of Peterloo, but their Labour successors in 1972 placed a blue plaque high up on the wall of the Free Trade Hall, now the Radisson Hotel. This in turn was criticised for failing to recognise that anyone was killed or injured. In a 2006 survey conducted by \"The Guardian\", Peterloo came second to St. Mary's Church, Putney, the venue for the Putney Debates, as the event from radical British history that most deserved a proper monument. The euphemism on the blue plaque was described by comedian and activist Mark Thomas as \"an act of historical vandalism akin to Stalin airbrushing dissidents out of photographs\". A Peterloo Memorial Campaign was set up to lobby for a 'Respectful, Informative and Permanent' (RIP) monument to an event that has been described as \"Manchester's Tiananmen Square\".\nIn 2007, Manchester City Council replaced the original blue plaque with a red one, giving a fuller account of the events of 1819. It was unveiled on 10 December 2007 by the Lord Mayor of Manchester, Councillor Glynn Evans. Under the heading \"St. Peter's Fields: The Peterloo Massacre\", the present plaque reads, \"On 16thAugust 1819 a peaceful rally of 60,000 pro-democracy reformers, men, women and children, was attacked by armed cavalry resulting in 15\u00a0deaths and over 600\u00a0injuries.\"\nMemorial.\nIn 2019, shortly before the 200th anniversary of the massacre, Manchester City Council \"quietly unveiled\" a new memorial by the artist Jeremy Deller. It was inaugurated at a large public gathering on 16 August 2019, widely reported in the press, covered extensively on regional TV and radio, and marked by a special edition of the \"Manchester Evening News\".\nThe 1.5-metre-high memorial features 11 concentric steps engraved, sculpted from polished local stone and carved with the names of the dead and the places from which the victims came. The material not visible from the ground is reproduced at ground level, and there is a floor plaque. While this met the official standards for access, it was also interpreted by some as a 'speaking platform' made inaccessible by its stepped design. The city council has promised that it will be modified to rectify this. Some disability campaigners described the memorial as 'vile' and calling for it to be demolished, a stance which in turn caused offence by appearing to dismiss the experiences of the many disabled victims of Peterloo. It has in practice proved very difficult to design a wheelchair ramp that does not damage or block substantial parts of the inscriptions.\nThe memorial has meanwhile become widely appreciated and visited, and the Peterloo Memorial Campaign site states that it is 'Proud to have campaigned for a respectful, informative and permanent Peterloo Memorial at the heart of Manchester'.\nRepresentations in popular culture.\nIn 1968, in celebration of the centenary of its first meeting, the Trades Union Congress commissioned British composer Sir Malcolm Arnold to write the \"Peterloo Overture\". The organist Jonathan Scott recorded a solo work, 'Peterloo 1819', at the parish church in the radical village of Royton in 2017. Scott is a descendant of the wider family of the Peterloo radical Samuel Bamford from nearby Middleton. Several musical pieces in different genres from rap to oratorio were commissioned and performed in connection with the 2019 Peterloo bicentenary. Other musical commemorations include Harvey Kershaw MBE's folk revival song, which was recorded by the Oldham Tinkers https://, \"Ned Ludd Part 5\" on British folk rock group Steeleye Span's 2006 album \"Bloody Men\", and Rochdale rock band Tractor's suite of five songs written and recorded in 1973, later included on their 1992 release \"Worst Enemies\". The long history of verse about Peterloo is covered in Alison Morgan's 2018 book \"Ballads and Songs of Peterloo.\" In 2019 a whole volume of essays was devoted to the commemoration of Peterloo, including an essay by Ian Haywood on 'The Sounds of Peterloo' and other contributions covering Hunt, Cobbett, Castlereagh, Bentham, Wordsworth, Shelley, Scotland, and Ireland.\nThe 2018 Mike Leigh film \"Peterloo\" is based on the events at Peterloo. The 1947 film \"Fame Is the Spur\", based on the Howard Spring novel of the same name, depicts the rise of a politician inspired by his grandfather's account of the massacre. Recent novels about Peterloo include Carolyn O'Brien's \"The Song of Peterloo\" and Jeff Kaye's \"All the People.\" The most important fictional treatment remains Isabella Banks's 1876 novel, \"The Manchester Man\", for its author lived in Manchester at the time and wove into her account numerous testimonies she picked up from people who were involved. It was also the subject of a graphic novel in 'verbatim' form, \"Peterloo: Witnesses to a Massacre,\" with the story told mainly through words written and spoken at the time.\nIn 2016, Big Finish released a Doctor Who audio adventure based around the events of the Peterloo Massacre.\nSean Cooney, songwriter, folk singer and member of The Young'uns, wrote a work consisting of 15 original songs and a spoken narrative commemorating the Peterloo Massacre. The work received its premiere at FolkEast on 16 August 2024, the 205th anniversary of Peterloo, with Eliza Carthy and Sam Carter joining Sean Cooney on the Moot Hall stage.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65627", "revid": "84755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65627", "title": "V\u00f6lusp\u00e1", "text": "Poem from the Poetic Edda\nV\u00f6lusp\u00e1 (also V\u01eblusp\u00e1, V\u01eblosp\u00e1, or V\u01eblusp\u01eb\u0301; Old Norse: 'Prophecy of the v\u00f6lva, a seeress') is the best known poem of the \"Poetic Edda\". It dates back to the tenth century and tells the story from Norse Mythology of the creation of the world, its coming end, and its subsequent rebirth that is related to the audience by a v\u00f6lva addressing Odin. Her name is given twice as Hei\u00f0r. The poem is one of the most important primary sources for the study of Norse mythology. Parts of the poem appear in the \"Prose Edda\", but the earliest known wholly preserved version of the poem is in the Codex Regius and Hauksb\u00f3k manuscripts.\nPreservation.\nMany of stanzas of \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" appear first in the Prose Edda (composed c.\u20091220, of which the oldest extant manuscript dates from the beginning of the fourteenth century, c.\u20091300), in which the stanzas are quoted or paraphrased. The full poem is found in the Icelandic Codex Regius manuscript (c.\u20091270) and in the Haukr Erlendsson \"Hauksb\u00f3k\" Codex (c.\u20091334); the Codex Regius version is usually taken as a base for editions of the poem.\nThe order and number of the stanzas varies in the existing sources. Some editors and translators have further rearranged the material.\nSynopsis.\nThe poem starts with the v\u00f6lva requesting silence from \"the sons of Heimdallr\" (human beings) and she then asks Odin whether he wants her to recite ancient lore based on her memory. She says she remembers j\u00f6tnar born in antiquity who reared her, nine worlds, and the \"famous tree\" (\"mj\u01ebtvi\u00f0r m\u00e6rr\", perhaps Yggdrasill).\nThe v\u00f6lva proceeds to recite a creation myth, mentioning Ymir and that the world was nothing but the magical void, Ginnungagap, until the sons of Burr lifted the earth out of the sea. The \u00c6sir then established order in the cosmos by finding places for the sun, the moon, and the stars, thereby starting the cycle of day and night. A golden age ensued in which the \u00c6sir had plenty of gold and they happily constructed temples and made tools. But then three mighty maidens came from J\u00f6tunheimar and the golden age came to an end. The \u00c6sir then created the dwarfs, of whom M\u00f3tsognir and Durinn are the mightiest.\nAt this point ten of the poem's stanzas are considered complete. A section then appears in some versions that usually is considered an interpolation. It is entitled the \"Dvergatal\" (\"Catalogue of Dwarfs\") and it contains six stanzas with names of dwarves. The antiquity and role of this section in the poem is not clear and sometimes is omitted by editors and translators. \nThe poem continues with the creations of the first humans that are recounted along with a description of the world-tree, Yggdrasil. The v\u00f6lva recalls the burning of Gullveig that led to the first \"folk\" war, where Hei\u00f0r is a name assumed by Gullveig in connection with the war of the deities, and what occurred in the struggle between the \u00c6sir and Vanir. She then recalls the time the goddess Freyja was given to the j\u00f6tnar, which is commonly interpreted as a reference to the myth of the j\u00f6tunn builder, as told in Gylfaginning 42.\nThe v\u00f6lva then reveals to Odin that she knows some of his own secrets and that he sacrificed an eye in pursuit of knowledge. She tells him that she knows where his eye is hidden and how he gave it up in exchange for knowledge. In several refrains she asks him whether he understands or whether he would like to hear more.\nIn the Codex Regius version, the v\u00f6lva goes on to describe the slaying of Baldr, best and fairest of the deities and the enmity of Loki, and of others. Then the v\u00f6lva prophesies the destruction of the deities where fire and flood overwhelm heaven and earth as the deities fight their final battles with their enemies. This is the \"fate of the gods\", Ragnar\u00f6k. She describes the summons to battle, the deaths of many of the deities, including the death of Odin, who is slain by Fenrir, the great wolf. The god of thunder and sworn protector of the earth, Thor, faces the world serpent J\u00f6rmungandr and wins, but Thor is only able to take nine steps afterward before collapsing due to the serpent's venom. V\u00ed\u00f0arr faces Fenrir and kicks his jaw open before stabbing the wolf in the heart with his spear. The god Freyr fights the giant Surtr, who wields a fiery sword that shines brighter than the sun, and Freyr falls. \nFinally, the v\u00f6lva prophesies that a beautiful reborn world will rise from the ashes of death and destruction where Baldr and H\u00f6\u00f0r will live again in a new world and where the earth sprouts abundance without sowing seed. The surviving \u00c6sir reunite with H\u0153nir and meet together at the field of I\u00f0av\u00f6llr, discussing J\u00f6rmungandr, great events of the past, and the runic alphabet. A final stanza describes the sudden appearance of the dragon Nidhogg, bearing corpses in his wings, after which the v\u00f6lva emerges from her trance.\nReception.\n\"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" is one of the most discussed poems of the \"Poetic Edda\" and dates to the tenth century, the century before the Christianization of Iceland. In March 2018, a team of medieval historians and scientists from the University of Cambridge suggested that the Icelandic poem, V\u01eblusp\u00e1, that is estimated to date from 961 was a roughly contemporary chronicle of the eruption of the volcano Eldgj\u00e1 in 939. These researchers suggested that the dramatic imagery of the Eldgj\u00e1 eruption was purposefully invoked in order to accelerate the Christianization of Iceland.\nSome scholars hold that there are Christian influences in the text, emphasizing parallels with the Sibylline Prophecies. Henry Adams Bellows stated in 1936 that the author of \"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\" would have had knowledge of Christianity and infused it into the poem. Bellows dates the poem to the tenth century that was a transitional period between paganism and Christianity and the two religions would have co-existed before Christianity was declared the official religion of Iceland and after which the old paganism was tolerated if practiced in private. He suggests that this infusion allowed the pagan traditions to survive to an extent in Iceland, unlike in mainland Scandinavia. Several researchers have suggested that the entire \"Dvergatal\" section and references to the \"mighty one who rules over all\" are later insertions. Although some have identified the latter figure with Jesus, Bellows thought this was not necessarily the case.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65628", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65628", "title": "Sunna", "text": "Sunna has multiple meanings.\nIt may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "65635", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65635", "title": "Chirp", "text": "Frequency swept signal\nA chirp is a signal in which the frequency increases (\"up-chirp\") or decreases (\"down-chirp\") with time. In some sources, the term \"chirp\" is used interchangeably with sweep signal. It is commonly applied to sonar, radar, and laser systems, and to other applications, such as in spread-spectrum communications (see chirp spread spectrum). This signal type is biologically inspired and occurs as a phenomenon due to dispersion (a non-linear dependence between frequency and the propagation speed of the wave components). It is usually compensated for by using a matched filter, which can be part of the propagation channel. Depending on the specific performance measure, however, there are better techniques both for radar and communication. Since it was used in radar and space, it has been adopted also for communication standards. For automotive radar applications, it is usually called linear frequency modulated waveform (LFMW).\nIn spread-spectrum usage, surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices are often used to generate and demodulate the chirped signals. In optics, ultrashort laser pulses also exhibit chirp, which, in optical transmission systems, interacts with the dispersion properties of the materials, increasing or decreasing total pulse dispersion as the signal propagates. The name is a reference to the chirping sound made by birds; see bird vocalization.\nDefinitions.\nThe basic definitions here translate as the common physics quantities location (phase), speed (angular velocity), acceleration (chirpyness).\nIf a waveform is defined as:\nformula_1\nthen the instantaneous angular frequency, \"\u03c9\", is defined as the phase rate as given by the first derivative of phase,\nwith the instantaneous ordinary frequency, \"f\", being its normalized version:\nformula_2\nFinally, the instantaneous angular chirpyness (symbol \"\u03b3\") is defined to be the second derivative of instantaneous phase or the first derivative of instantaneous angular frequency, \nformula_3\nAngular chirpyness has units of radians per square second (rad/s2); thus, it is analogous to \"angular acceleration\".\nThe instantaneous ordinary chirpyness (symbol \"c\") is a normalized version, defined as the rate of change of the instantaneous frequency:\nformula_4\nOrdinary chirpyness has units of square reciprocal seconds (s\u22122); thus, it is analogous to \"rotational acceleration\".\nTypes.\nLinear.\nIn a linear-frequency chirp or simply linear chirp, the instantaneous frequency formula_5 varies exactly linearly with time:\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 is the starting frequency (at time formula_8) and formula_9 is the chirp rate, assumed constant:\nformula_10\nHere, formula_11 is the final frequency and formula_12 is the time it takes to sweep from formula_13 to formula_11.\nThe corresponding time-domain function for the phase of any oscillating signal is the integral of the frequency function, as one expects the phase to grow like formula_15, i.e., that the derivative of the phase is the angular frequency formula_16.\nFor the linear chirp, this results in:\nformula_17\nwhere formula_18 is the initial phase (at time formula_8). Thus this is also called a quadratic-phase signal.\nThe corresponding time-domain function for a sinusoidal linear chirp is the sine of the phase in radians:\nformula_20\nExponential.\nIn a geometric chirp, also called an exponential chirp, the frequency of the signal varies with a geometric relationship over time. In other words, if two points in the waveform are chosen, formula_21 and formula_22, and the time interval between them formula_23 is kept constant, the frequency ratio formula_24 will also be constant.\nIn an exponential chirp, the frequency of the signal varies exponentially as a function of time:\nformula_25\nwhere formula_7 is the starting frequency (at formula_8), and formula_28 is the rate of exponential change in frequency.\nformula_29\nWhere formula_11 is the ending frequency of the chirp (at formula_31).\nUnlike the linear chirp, which has a constant chirpyness, an exponential chirp has an exponentially increasing frequency rate.\nThe corresponding time-domain function for the phase of an exponential chirp is the integral of the frequency:\nformula_32\nwhere formula_18 is the initial phase (at formula_8).\nThe corresponding time-domain function for a sinusoidal exponential chirp is the sine of the phase in radians:\nformula_35\nAs was the case for the Linear Chirp, the instantaneous frequency of the Exponential Chirp consists of the fundamental frequency formula_36 accompanied by additional harmonics.\nHyperbolic.\nHyperbolic chirps are used in radar applications, as they show maximum matched filter response after being distorted by the Doppler effect.\nIn a hyperbolic chirp, the frequency of the signal varies hyperbolically as a function of time:\nformula_37\nThe corresponding time-domain function for the phase of a hyperbolic chirp is the integral of the frequency:\nformula_38\nwhere formula_18 is the initial phase (at formula_8).\nThe corresponding time-domain function for a sinusoidal hyperbolic chirp is the sine of the phase in radians:\nformula_41\nGeneration.\nA chirp signal can be generated with analog circuitry via a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), and a linearly or exponentially ramping control voltage. It can also be generated digitally by a digital signal processor (DSP) and digital-to-analog converter (DAC), using a direct digital synthesizer (DDS) and by varying the step in the numerically controlled oscillator. It can also be generated by a YIG oscillator.\nRelation to an impulse signal.\nA chirp signal shares the same spectral content with an impulse signal. However, unlike in the impulse signal, spectral components of the chirp signal have different phases, i.e., their power spectra are alike but the phase spectra are distinct. Dispersion of a signal propagation medium may result in unintentional conversion of impulse signals into chirps (whistler). On the other hand, many practical applications, such as chirped pulse amplifiers or echolocation systems, use chirp signals instead of impulses because of their inherently lower peak-to-average power ratio (PAPR).\nUses and occurrences.\nChirp modulation.\nChirp modulation, or linear frequency modulation for digital communication, was patented by Sidney Darlington in 1954 with significant later work performed by Winkler in 1962. This type of modulation employs sinusoidal waveforms whose instantaneous frequency increases or decreases linearly over time. These waveforms are commonly referred to as linear chirps or simply chirps.\nHence the rate at which their frequency changes is called the \"chirp rate\". In binary chirp modulation, binary data is transmitted by mapping the bits into chirps of opposite chirp rates. For instance, over one bit period \"1\" is assigned a chirp with positive rate \"a\" and \"0\" a chirp with negative rate \u2212\"a\". Chirps have been heavily used in radar applications and as a result advanced sources for transmission and matched filters for reception of linear chirps are available.\nChirplet transform.\nAnother kind of chirp is the projective chirp, of the form:\nformula_42\nhaving the three parameters \"a\" (scale), \"b\" (translation), and \"c\" (chirpiness). The projective chirp is ideally suited to image processing, and forms the basis for the projective chirplet transform.\nKey chirp.\nA change in frequency of Morse code from the desired frequency, due to poor stability in the RF oscillator, is known as chirp, and in the R-S-T system is given an appended letter 'C'.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65636", "revid": "8571592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65636", "title": "National Socialist Workers Party of Germany", "text": ""}
{"id": "65637", "revid": "1306878824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65637", "title": "Metrology", "text": "Science of measurement and its application\nMetrology is the scientific study of measurement. It establishes a common understanding of units, crucial in linking human activities. Modern metrology has its roots in the French Revolution's political motivation to standardise units in France when a length standard taken from a natural source was proposed. This led to the creation of the decimal-based metric system in 1795, establishing a set of standards for other types of measurements. Several other countries adopted the metric system between 1795 and 1875; to ensure conformity between the countries, the \"Bureau International des Poids et Mesures\" (BIPM) was established by the Metre Convention. This has evolved into the International System of Units (SI) as a result of a resolution at the 11th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) in 1960.\nMetrology is divided into three basic overlapping activities: \nThese overlapping activities are used in varying degrees by the three basic sub-fields of metrology: \nIn each country, a national measurement system (NMS) exists as a network of laboratories, calibration facilities and accreditation bodies which implement and maintain its metrology infrastructure. The NMS affects how measurements are made in a country and their recognition by the international community, which has a wide-ranging impact in its society (including economics, energy, environment, health, manufacturing, industry and consumer confidence). The effects of metrology on trade and economy are some of the easiest-observed societal impacts. To facilitate fair trade, there must be an agreed-upon system of measurement.\nHistory.\nThe ability to measure alone is insufficient; standardisation is crucial for measurements to be meaningful. The first record of a permanent standard was in 2900 BC, when the royal Egyptian cubit was carved from black granite. The cubit was decreed to be the length of the Pharaoh's forearm plus the width of his hand, and replica standards were given to builders. The success of a standardised length for the building of the pyramids is indicated by the lengths of their bases differing by no more than 0.05 percent.\nIn China weights and measures had a semi religious meaning as it was used in the various crafts by the Artificers and in ritual utensils and is mentioned in the book of rites along with the steelyard balance and other tools.\nOther civilizations produced generally accepted measurement standards, with Roman and Greek architecture based on distinct systems of measurement. The collapse of the empires and the Dark Ages that followed lost much measurement knowledge and standardisation. Although local systems of measurement were common, comparability was difficult since many local systems were incompatible. England established the Assize of Measures to create standards for length measurements in 1196, and the 1215 Magna Carta included a section for the measurement of wine and beer.\nModern metrology has its roots in the French Revolution. With a political motivation to harmonise units throughout France, a length standard based on a natural source was proposed. In March 1791, the metre was defined. This led to the creation of the decimal-based metric system in 1795, establishing standards for other types of measurements. Several other countries adopted the metric system between 1795 and 1875; to ensure international conformity, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (, or BIPM) was formed by the Metre Convention. Although the BIPM's original mission was to create international standards for units of measurement and relate them to national standards to ensure conformity, its scope has broadened to include electrical and photometric units and ionizing radiation measurement standards. The metric system was modernised in 1960 with the creation of the International System of Units (SI) as a result of a resolution at the 11th General Conference on Weights and Measures (, or CGPM).\nSubfields.\nMetrology is defined by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) as \"the science of measurement, embracing both experimental and theoretical determinations at any level of uncertainty in any field of science and technology\". It establishes a common understanding of units, crucial to human activity. Metrology is a wide reaching field, but can be summarized through three basic activities: the definition of internationally accepted units of measurement, the realisation of these units of measurement in practice, and the application of chains of traceability (linking measurements to reference standards). These concepts apply in different degrees to metrology's three main fields: scientific metrology; applied, technical or industrial metrology, and legal metrology.\nScientific metrology.\nScientific metrology is concerned with the establishment of units of measurement, the development of new measurement methods, the realisation of measurement standards, and the transfer of traceability from these standards to users in a society. This type of metrology is considered the top level of metrology which strives for the highest degree of accuracy. BIPM maintains a database of the metrological calibration and measurement capabilities of institutes around the world. These institutes, whose activities are peer-reviewed, provide the fundamental reference points for metrological traceability. In the area of measurement, BIPM has identified nine metrology areas, which are acoustics, electricity and magnetism, length, mass and related quantities, photometry and radiometry, ionizing radiation, time and frequency, thermometry, and chemistry.\nAs of May 2019 no physical objects define the base units. The motivation in the change of the base units is to make the entire system derivable from physical constants, which required the removal of the prototype kilogram as it is the last artefact the unit definitions depend on. Scientific metrology plays an important role in this redefinition of the units as precise measurements of the physical constants is required to have accurate definitions of the base units. To redefine the value of a kilogram without an artefact the value of the Planck constant must be known to twenty parts per billion. Scientific metrology, through the development of the Kibble balance and the Avogadro project, has produced a value of Planck constant with low enough uncertainty to allow for a redefinition of the kilogram.\nApplied, technical or industrial metrology.\nApplied, technical or industrial metrology is concerned with the application of measurement to manufacturing and other processes and their use in society, ensuring the suitability of measurement instruments, their calibration and quality control. Producing good measurements is important in industry as it has an impact on the value and quality of the end product, and a 10\u201315% impact on production costs. Although the emphasis in this area of metrology is on the measurements themselves, traceability of the measuring-device calibration is necessary to ensure confidence in the measurement. Recognition of the metrological competence in industry can be achieved through mutual recognition agreements, accreditation, or peer review. Industrial metrology is important to a country's economic and industrial development, and the condition of a country's industrial-metrology program can indicate its economic status.\nLegal metrology.\nLegal metrology \"concerns activities which result from statutory requirements and concern measurement, units of measurement, measuring instruments and methods of measurement and which are performed by competent bodies\". Such statutory requirements may arise from the need for protection of health, public safety, the environment, enabling taxation, protection of consumers and fair trade. The International Organization for Legal Metrology (OIML) was established to assist in harmonising regulations across national boundaries to ensure that legal requirements do not inhibit trade. This harmonisation ensures that certification of measuring devices in one country is compatible with another country's certification process, allowing the trade of the measuring devices and the products that rely on them. WELMEC was established in 1990 to promote cooperation in the field of legal metrology in the European Union and among European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member states. In the United States legal metrology is under the authority of the Office of Weights and Measures of National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), enforced by the individual states.\nConcepts.\nDefinition of units.\nThe International System of Units (SI) defines seven base units: length, mass, time, electric current, thermodynamic temperature, amount of substance, and luminous intensity. By convention, each of these units are considered to be mutually independent and can be constructed directly from their defining constants. All other SI units are constructed as products of powers of the seven base units.\nSince the base units are the reference points for all measurements taken in SI units, if the reference value changed all prior measurements would be incorrect. Before 2019, if a piece of the international prototype of the kilogram had been snapped off, it would have still been defined as a kilogram; all previous measured values of a kilogram would be heavier. The importance of reproducible SI units has led the BIPM to complete the task of defining all SI base units in terms of physical constants.\nBy defining SI base units with respect to physical constants, and not artefacts or specific substances, they are realisable with a higher level of precision and reproducibility. As of the revision of the SI on 20 May 2019 the kilogram, ampere, kelvin, and mole are defined by setting exact numerical values for the Planck constant (\"h\"), the elementary electric charge (\"e\"), the Boltzmann constant (\"k\"), and the Avogadro constant (\"N\"A), respectively. The second, metre, and candela have previously been defined by physical constants (the caesium standard (\u0394\"\u03bd\"Cs), the speed of light (\"c\"), and the luminous efficacy of visible light radiation (\"K\"cd)), subject to correction to their present definitions. The new definitions aim to improve the SI without changing the size of any units, thus ensuring continuity with existing measurements.\nRealisation of units.\nThe realisation of a unit of measure is its conversion into reality. Three possible methods of realisation are defined by the (VIM): a physical realisation of the unit from its definition, a highly-reproducible measurement as a reproduction of the definition (such as the quantum Hall effect for the ohm), and the use of a material object as the measurement standard.\nStandards.\nA standard (or etalon) is an object, system, or experiment with a defined relationship to a unit of measurement of a physical quantity. Standards are the fundamental reference for a system of weights and measures by realising, preserving, or reproducing a unit against which measuring devices can be compared. There are three levels of standards in the hierarchy of metrology: primary, secondary, and working standards. Primary standards (the highest quality) do not reference any other standards. Secondary standards are calibrated with reference to a primary standard. Working standards, used to calibrate (or check) measuring instruments or other material measures, are calibrated with respect to secondary standards. The hierarchy preserves the quality of the higher standards. An example of a standard would be gauge blocks for length. A gauge block is a block of metal or ceramic with two opposing faces ground precisely flat and parallel, a precise distance apart. The length of the path of light in vacuum during a time interval of 1/299,792,458 of a second is embodied in an artefact standard such as a gauge block; this gauge block is then a primary standard which can be used to calibrate secondary standards through mechanical comparators.\nTraceability and calibration.\nMetrological traceability is defined as the \"property of a measurement result whereby the result can be related to a reference through a documented unbroken chain of calibrations, each contributing to the measurement uncertainty\". It permits the comparison of measurements, whether the result is compared to the previous result in the same laboratory, a measurement result a year ago, or to the result of a measurement performed anywhere else in the world. The chain of traceability allows any measurement to be referenced to higher levels of measurements back to the original definition of the unit.\nTraceability is obtained directly through calibration, establishing the relationship between an indication on a standard traceable measuring instrument and the value of the comparator (or comparative measuring instrument). The process will determine the measurement value and uncertainty of the device that is being calibrated (the comparator) and create a traceability link to the measurement standard. The four primary reasons for calibrations are to provide traceability, to ensure that the instrument (or standard) is consistent with other measurements, to determine accuracy, and to establish reliability. Traceability works as a pyramid, at the top level there is the international standards, which beholds the world's standards. The next level is the national Metrology institutes that have primary standards that are traceable to the international standards. The national Metrology institutes standards are used to establish a traceable link to local laboratory standards, these laboratory standards are then used to establish a traceable link to industry and testing laboratories. Through these subsequent calibrations between national metrology institutes, calibration laboratories, and industry and testing laboratories the realisation of the unit definition is propagated down through the pyramid. The traceability chain works upwards from the bottom of the pyramid, where measurements done by industry and testing laboratories can be directly related to the unit definition at the top through the traceability chain created by calibration.\nUncertainty.\nMeasurement uncertainty is a value associated with a measurement which expresses the spread of possible values associated with the measurand\u2014a quantitative expression of the doubt existing in the measurement. There are two components to the uncertainty of a measurement: the width of the uncertainty interval and the confidence level. The uncertainty interval is a range of values that the measurement value expected to fall within, while the confidence level is how likely the true value is to fall within the uncertainty interval. Uncertainty is generally expressed as follows:\nformula_1 \nCoverage factor: \"k\" = 2\nWhere \"y\" is the measurement value and \"U\" is the uncertainty value and \"k\" is the coverage factor indicates the confidence interval. The upper and lower limit of the uncertainty interval can be determined by adding and subtracting the uncertainty value from the measurement value. The coverage factor of \"k\" = 2 generally indicates a 95% confidence that the measured value will fall inside the uncertainty interval. Other values of \"k\" can be used to indicate a greater or lower confidence on the interval, for example \"k\" = 1 and \"k\" = 3 generally indicate 66% and 99.7% confidence respectively. The uncertainty value is determined through a combination of statistical analysis of the calibration and uncertainty contribution from other errors in measurement process, which can be evaluated from sources such as the instrument history, manufacturer's specifications, or published information.\nInternational infrastructure.\nSeveral international organizations maintain and standardise metrology.\nMetre Convention.\nThe Metre Convention created three main international organizations to facilitate standardisation of weights and measures. The first, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM), provided a forum for representatives of member states. The second, the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM), was an advisory committee of metrologists of high standing. The third, the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM), provided secretarial and laboratory facilities for the CGPM and CIPM.\nGeneral Conference on Weights and Measures.\nThe General Conference on Weights and Measures (, or CGPM) is the convention's principal decision-making body, consisting of delegates from member states and non-voting observers from associate states. The conference usually meets every four to six years to receive and discuss a CIPM report and endorse new developments in the SI as advised by the CIPM. The last meeting was held on 13\u201316 November 2018. On the last day of this conference there was vote on the redefinition of four base units, which the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM) had proposed earlier that year. The new definitions came into force on 20 May 2019.\nInternational Committee for Weights and Measures.\nThe International Committee for Weights and Measures (, or CIPM) is made up of eighteen (originally fourteen) individuals from a member state of high scientific standing, nominated by the CGPM to advise the CGPM on administrative and technical matters. It is responsible for ten consultative committees (CCs), each of which investigates a different aspect of metrology; one CC discusses the measurement of temperature, another the measurement of mass, and so forth. The CIPM meets annually in S\u00e8vres to discuss reports from the CCs, to submit an annual report to the governments of member states concerning the administration and finances of the BIPM and to advise the CGPM on technical matters as needed. Each member of the CIPM is from a different member state, with France (in recognition of its role in establishing the convention) always having one seat.\nInternational Bureau of Weights and Measures.\nThe International Bureau of Weights and Measures (, or BIPM) is an organisation based in S\u00e8vres, France which has custody of the international prototype of the kilogram, provides metrology services for the CGPM and CIPM, houses the secretariat for the organisations and hosts their meetings. Over the years, prototypes of the metre and of the kilogram have been returned to BIPM headquarters for recalibration. The BIPM director is an ex officio member of the CIPM and a member of all consultative committees.\nInternational Organization of Legal Metrology.\nThe International Organization of Legal Metrology (, or OIML), is an intergovernmental organization created in 1955 to promote the global harmonisation of the legal metrology procedures facilitating international trade. This harmonisation of technical requirements, test procedures and test-report formats ensure confidence in measurements for trade and reduces the costs of discrepancies and measurement duplication. The OIML publishes a number of international reports in four categories:\nAlthough the OIML has no legal authority to impose its recommendations and guidelines on its member countries, it provides a standardised legal framework for those countries to assist the development of appropriate, harmonised legislation for certification and calibration. OIML provides a mutual acceptance arrangement (MAA) for measuring instruments that are subject to legal metrological control, which upon approval allows the evaluation and test reports of the instrument to be accepted in all participating countries. Issuing participants in the agreement issue MAA Type Evaluation Reports of MAA Certificates upon demonstration of compliance with ISO/IEC 17065 and a peer evaluation system to determine competency. This ensures that certification of measuring devices in one country is compatible with the certification process in other participating countries, allowing the trade of the measuring devices and the products that rely on them.\nInternational Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation.\nThe International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (ILAC) is an international organisation for accreditation agencies involved in the certification of conformity-assessment bodies. It standardises accreditation practices and procedures, recognising competent calibration facilities and assisting countries developing their own accreditation bodies. ILAC originally began as a conference in 1977 to develop international cooperation for accredited testing and calibration results to facilitate trade. In 2000, 36 members signed the ILAC mutual recognition agreement (MRA), allowing members work to be automatically accepted by other signatories, and in 2012 was expanded to include accreditation of inspection bodies. Through this standardisation, work done in laboratories accredited by signatories is automatically recognised internationally through the MRA. Other work done by ILAC includes promotion of laboratory and inspection body accreditation, and supporting the development of accreditation systems in developing economies.\nJoint Committee for Guides in Metrology.\nThe Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) is a committee which created and maintains two metrology guides: \"Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement\" (GUM) and \"International vocabulary of metrology \u2013 basic and general concepts and associated terms\" (VIM). The JCGM is a collaboration of eight partner organisations:\nThe JCGM has two working groups: JCGM-WG1 and JCGM-WG2. JCGM-WG1 is responsible for the GUM, and JCGM-WG2 for the VIM. Each member organization appoints one representative and up to two experts to attend each meeting, and may appoint up to three experts for each working group.\nNational infrastructure.\nA national measurement system (NMS) is a network of laboratories, calibration facilities and accreditation bodies which implement and maintain a country's measurement infrastructure. The NMS sets measurement standards, ensuring the accuracy, consistency, comparability, and reliability of measurements made in the country. The measurements of member countries of the CIPM Mutual Recognition Arrangement (CIPM MRA), an agreement of national metrology institutes, are recognized by other member countries. As of March 2018, there are 102 signatories of the CIPM MRA, consisting of 58 member states, 40 associate states, and 4 international organizations.\nMetrology institutes.\nA national metrology institute's (NMI) role in a country's measurement system is to conduct scientific metrology, realise base units, and maintain primary national standards. An NMI provides traceability to international standards for a country, anchoring its national calibration hierarchy. For a national measurement system to be recognized internationally by the CIPM Mutual Recognition Arrangement, an NMI must participate in international comparisons of its measurement capabilities. BIPM maintains a comparison database and a list of calibration and measurement capabilities (CMCs) of the countries participating in the CIPM MRA. Not all countries have a centralised metrology institute; some have a lead NMI and several decentralised institutes specialising in specific national standards. Some examples of NMI's are the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in the United States, the National Research Council (NRC) in Canada, the Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB) in Germany, and the National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom) (NPL).\nCalibration laboratories.\nCalibration laboratories are generally responsible for calibrations of industrial instrumentation. Calibration laboratories are accredited and provide calibration services to industry firms, which provides a traceability link back to the national metrology institute. Since the calibration laboratories are accredited, they give companies a traceability link to national metrology standards. \nAccreditation bodies.\nAn organisation is accredited when an authoritative body determines, by assessing the organisation's personnel and management systems, that it is competent to provide its services. For international recognition, a country's accreditation body must comply with international requirements and is generally the product of international and regional cooperation. A laboratory is evaluated according to international standards such as ISO/IEC 17025 general requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories. To ensure objective and technically-credible accreditation, the bodies are independent of other national measurement system institutions. The National Association of Testing Authorities in Australia and the United Kingdom Accreditation Service are examples of accreditation bodies.\nImpacts.\nMetrology has wide-ranging impacts on a number of sectors, including economics, energy, the environment, health, manufacturing, industry, and consumer confidence. The effects of metrology on trade and the economy are two of its most-apparent societal impacts. To facilitate fair and accurate trade between countries, there must be an agreed-upon system of measurement. Accurate measurement and regulation of water, fuel, food, and electricity are critical for consumer protection and promote the flow of goods and services between trading partners. A common measurement system and quality standards benefit consumer and producer; production at a common standard reduces cost and consumer risk, ensuring that the product meets consumer needs. Transaction costs are reduced through an increased economy of scale. Several studies have indicated that increased standardisation in measurement has a positive impact on GDP. In the United Kingdom, an estimated 28.4 per cent of GDP growth from 1921 to 2013 was the result of standardisation; in Canada between 1981 and 2004 an estimated nine per cent of GDP growth was standardisation-related, and in Germany the annual economic benefit of standardisation is an estimated 0.72% of GDP.\nLegal metrology has reduced accidental deaths and injuries with measuring devices, such as radar guns and breathalyzers, by improving their efficiency and reliability. Measuring the human body is challenging, with poor repeatability and reproducibility, and advances in metrology help develop new techniques to improve health care and reduce costs. Environmental policy is based on research data, and accurate measurements are important for assessing climate change and environmental regulation. Aside from regulation, metrology is essential in supporting innovation, the ability to measure provides a technical infrastructure and tools that can then be used to pursue further innovation. By providing a technical platform which new ideas can be built upon, easily demonstrated, and shared, measurement standards allow new ideas to be explored and expanded upon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65638", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65638", "title": "History of South Africa", "text": "The first modern humans are believed to have inhabited South Africa more than 100,000 years ago. South Africa's first known inhabitants have been collectively referred to as the Khoisan, the Khoekhoe and the San. Starting in about 400 AD, these groups were then joined by the Bantu ethnic groups who migrated from Western and Central Africa during what is known as the Bantu expansion. These Bantu groups were mainly limited to the area north of the Soutpansberg and the northeastern part of South Africa until the later Middle Iron Age (AD 1000-1300), after which they started migrating south into the interior of the country.\nEuropean exploration of the African coast began in the late 14th century when Portugal sought an alternative route to the Silk Road to China. During this time, Portuguese explorers traveled down the west African Coast, detailing and mapping the coastline and in 1488 they rounded the Cape of Good Hope. The Dutch East India Company established a trading post in Cape Town under the command of Jan van Riebeeck in April 1652, mostly Dutch workers who settled at the Cape became known as the Free Burghers and gradually established farms in the Dutch Cape Colony. Following the Invasion of the Cape Colony by the British in 1795 and 1806, mass migrations collectively known as the Great Trek occurred during which the Voortrekkers established several Boer Republics in the interior of South Africa. The discoveries of diamonds and gold in the nineteenth century had a profound effect on the fortunes of the region, propelling it onto the world stage and introducing a shift away from an exclusively agrarian-based economy towards industrialisation and the development of urban infrastructure. The discoveries also led to new conflicts culminating in open warfare between the Boer settlers and the British Empire, fought for control over the nascent mining industry.\nFollowing the defeat of the Boers in the Second Anglo\u2013Boer War or South African War (1899\u20131902), the Union of South Africa was created as a self-governing dominion of the British Empire on 31 May 1910 in terms of the South Africa Act 1909, which amalgamated the four previously separate British colonies: Cape Colony, Colony of Natal, Transvaal Colony, and Orange River Colony. The country became a fully sovereign nation state within the British Empire in 1934 following enactment of the Status of the Union Act. The monarchy came to an end on 31 May 1961, replaced by a republic as the consequence of a 1960 referendum.\nFrom 1948\u20131994, South African politics was dominated by Afrikaner nationalism. A comprehensive system of racial segregation and white minority rule known as apartheid was introduced from 1948.\nOn 2 February 1990, F. W. de Klerk, then president of South Africa and leader of the National Party, unbanned the African National Congress (ANC) and freed Nelson Mandela from life imprisonment on Robben Island. The CODESA talks negotiated the creation of a new non-racial democratic South Africa, for which de Klerk and Mandela were later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.\nThese negotiations led to the creation of a democratic constitution for all South Africa. On 27 April 1994, after decades of ANC-led resistance to white minority rule and international opposition to apartheid, the ANC achieved a majority in the country's first democratic election. Since then, despite a continually decreasing electoral majority, the ANC has ruled South Africa. In 2024, the ANC lost its parliamentary majority for the first time since the transition to democracy.\nHigh rates of crime, corruption, unemployment, low economic growth, an ongoing energy crisis, and poorly maintained infrastructure are some of the problems challenging contemporary South Africa.\nEarly history (before 1652).\nPrehistory.\nScientists researching the periods before written historical records were made have established that the territory of what is now referred to generically as South Africa was one of the important centers of human evolution. It was inhabited by Australopithecines since at least 2.5 million years ago. Modern human settlement occurred around 125,000 years ago in the Middle Stone Age, as shown by archaeological discoveries at Klasies River Caves. The first human habitation is associated with a DNA group originating in a northwestern area of southern Africa and still prevalent in the indigenous Khoisan (Khoi and San). Southern Africa was later populated by Bantu-speaking people who migrated from the western region of central Africa during the early centuries AD.\nProfessor Raymond Dart discovered the skull of a 2.51 million year old Taung Child in 1924, the first example of \"Australopithecus africanus\" ever found. Following in Dart's footsteps Robert Broom discovered a new much more robust hominid in 1938 \"Paranthropus robustus\" at Kromdraai, and in 1947 uncovered several more examples of \"Australopithecus africanus\" at Sterkfontein. At the Blombos cave in 2002, stones were discovered engraved with grid or cross-hatch patterns, dated to some 70,000 years ago. This has been interpreted as the earliest example ever discovered of abstract art or symbolic art created by \"Homo sapiens\".\nMany more species of early hominid have come to light in recent decades. The oldest is Little Foot, a collection of footbones of an unknown hominid between 2.2 and 3.3 million years old, discovered at Sterkfontein by Ronald J. Clarke. An important recent find was that of 1.9 million year old \"Australopithecus sediba\", discovered in 2008. In 2015, the discovery near Johannesburg of a previously unknown species of \"Homo\" was announced, named \"Homo naledi\". It has been described as one of the most important paleontological discoveries in modern times.\nSan and Khoikhoi.\nThe descendants of the Middle Paleolithic populations are thought to be the aboriginal San and Khoikhoi tribes. These are collectively known as the \"Khoisan\", a modern European portmanteau of these two tribes' names. The settlement of southern Africa by the Khoisan corresponds to the earliest separation of the extant \"Homo sapiens\" populations altogether, associated in genetic science with what is described in scientific terms as matrilinear haplogroup L0 (mtDNA) and patrilinear haplogroup A (Y-DNA), originating in a northwestern area of southern Africa.\nThe San and Khoikhoi are essentially distinguished only by their respective occupations. Whereas the San were hunter-gatherers, the Khoikhoi were pastoral herders. The initial origin of the Khoikhoi remains uncertain.\nArchaeological discoveries of livestock bones on the Cape Peninsula indicate that the Khoikhoi began to settle there by about 2000 years ago.\nIn the late 15th and early 16th centuries, Portuguese mariners, who were the first Europeans at the Cape, encountered pastoral Khoikhoi with livestock.\nLater, English and Dutch seafarers in the late 16th and 17th centuries exchanged metals for cattle and sheep with the Khoikhoi.\nThe conventional view is that availability of livestock was one reason why, in the mid-17th century, the Dutch East India Company established a staging post where the port city of Cape Town is today situated.\nThe establishment of the staging post by the Dutch East India Company at the Cape in 1652 soon brought the Khoikhoi into conflict with Dutch settlers over land ownership. Competition between Dutch and Khoikhoi pastoralists over grazing land led to livestock theft and conflict. The Khoikhoi were ultimately expelled from the peninsula by force, after a succession of wars. The first Khoikhoi\u2013Dutch War broke out in 1659, the second in 1673, and the third 1674\u20131677. By the time of their defeat and expulsion from the Cape Peninsula and surrounding districts, the Khoikhoi population was decimated by a smallpox epidemic introduced by Dutch sailors against which the Khoikhoi had no natural resistance or indigenous medicines.\nThe Bantu people.\nThe Bantu expansion was one of the major demographic movements in human prehistory, sweeping much of the African continent during the 2nd and 1st millennia BC. Bantu-speaking communities reached southern Africa from the Congo basin as early as the 4th century BC. \nSome groups, ancestral to today's Nguni peoples (the Zulu, Xhosa, Swazi, and Ndebele), preferred to live near the eastern coast of what is present-day South Africa. Others, now known as the Sotho\u2013Tswana peoples (Tswana, Pedi, and Sotho), settled in the interior on the plateau known as the Highveld, while today's Venda and Tsonga peoples made their homes in the north-eastern areas of present-day South Africa.\nThe Kingdom of Mapungubwe, which was located near the northern border of present-day South Africa, at the confluence of the Limpopo and Shashe rivers adjacent to present-day Zimbabwe and Botswana, was the first indigenous kingdom in southern Africa between AD 900 and 1300. It developed into the largest kingdom in the sub-continent before it was abandoned because of climatic changes in the 14th century. Smiths created objects of iron, copper and gold both for local decorative use and for foreign trade. The kingdom controlled trade through the east African ports to Arabia, India and China, and throughout southern Africa, making it wealthy through the exchange of gold and ivory for imports such as Chinese porcelain and Persian glass beads.\nSpecifics of the contact between Bantu-speakers and the indigenous Khoisan ethnic group remain largely unresearched, although linguistic proof of assimilation exists, as several southern Bantu languages (notably Xhosa and Zulu) are theorised in that they incorporate many click consonants from the Khoisan languages, as possibilities of such developing independently are valid as well.\nColonization.\nPortuguese role.\nThe Portuguese mariner Bartolomeu Dias was the first European to explore the coastline of South Africa in 1488, while attempting to discover a trade route to the Far East via the southernmost cape of South Africa, which he named \"Cabo das Tormentas\", meaning Cape of Storms. In November 1497, a fleet of Portuguese ships under the command of the Portuguese mariner Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope. By 16 December, the fleet had passed the Great Fish River on the east coast of South Africa, where Dias had earlier turned back. Da Gama gave the name Natal to the coast he was passing, which in Portuguese means Christmas. Da Gama's fleet proceeded northwards to Zanzibar and later sailed eastwards, eventually reaching India and opening the Cape Route between Europe and Asia. Many Portuguese words are still found along the coast of South Africa including Saldanha, Algoa, Natal, Agulhas, Benguela and Lucia.\nDutch colonization (1652\u20131815).\nThe Dutch East India Company (in the Dutch of the day: \"Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie\", or VOC) decided to establish a permanent settlement at the Cape in 1652. The VOC, one of the major European trading houses sailing the spice route to the East, had no intention of colonizing the area, instead wanting only to establish a secure base camp where passing ships could be serviced and restock on supplies. To this end, a small VOC expedition under the command of Jan van Riebeeck reached Table Bay on 6 April 1652.\nThe VOC had settled at the Cape in order to supply their trading ships. The Cape and the VOC had to import Dutch farmers to establish farms to supply the passing ships as well as to supply the growing VOC settlement. The small initial group of free burghers, as these farmers were known, steadily increased in number and began to expand their farms further north and east into the territory of the Khoikhoi. The free burghers were ex-VOC soldiers and gardeners, who were unable to return to Holland when their contracts were completed with the VOC. The VOC also brought around 71,000 slaves to Cape Town from India, Indonesia, East Africa (including Mauritius), and Madagascar.\nThe majority of burghers had Dutch ancestry and belonged to the Dutch Reformed Church, but there were also some Germans, who often happened to be Lutherans. In 1688, the Dutch and the Germans were joined by French Huguenots, Calvinist Protestants fleeing religious persecution in France under its Catholic ruler, King Louis XIV.\nVan Riebeeck considered it impolitic to enslave the local Khoi and San aboriginals, so the VOC began to import large numbers of slaves, primarily from the Dutch colonies in Indonesia. Eventually, van Riebeeck and the VOC began to make indentured servants out of the Khoikhoi and the San. The descendants of unions between the Dutch settlers and the Khoi-San and Malay slaves became known officially as the Cape Coloureds and the Cape Malays, respectively. A significant number of the offspring from the white and slave unions were absorbed into the local proto-Afrikaans speaking white population. The racially mixed genealogical origins of many white South Africans have been traced to interracial unions at the Cape between the European occupying population and imported Asian and African slaves, the indigenous Khoi and San, and their mixed-ethnicity descendants. Simon van der Stel, the first Governor of the Dutch settlement, famous for his development of the lucrative South African wine industry, was himself of mixed race-origin.\nBritish colonisation, Mfecane and Boer Republics (1815\u20131910).\nBritish at the Cape.\nIn 1787, shortly before the French Revolution, a faction within the politics of the Dutch Republic known as the Patriot Party attempted to overthrow the regime of stadtholder William V. Though the revolt was crushed, it was resurrected after the French invasion of the Netherlands in 1794/1795 which resulted in the stadtholder fleeing the country. The Patriot revolutionaries then proclaimed the Batavian Republic, which was closely allied to revolutionary France. In response, the stadtholder, who had taken up residence in England, issued the Kew Letters, ordering colonial governors to surrender to the British. The British then seized the Cape in 1795 to prevent it from falling into French hands. The Cape was relinquished back to the Dutch in 1803. In 1805, the British inherited the Cape as a prize during the Napoleonic Wars, again seizing the Cape from the French controlled Kingdom of Holland which had replaced the Batavian Republic.\nLike the Dutch before them, the British initially had little interest in the Cape Colony, other than as a strategically located port. As one of their first tasks they outlawed the use of the Dutch language in 1806 with the view of converting the European settlers to the British language and culture. The Cape Articles of Capitulation of 1806 allowed the colony to retain \"all their rights and privileges which they have enjoyed hitherto\", and this launched South Africa on a divergent course from the rest of the British Empire, allowing the continuance of Roman-Dutch law. British sovereignty of the area was recognised at the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the Dutch accepting a payment of 6 million pounds (equivalent to \u00a331,2 billion in 2023) for the colony. This had the effect of forcing more of the Dutch colonists to move (or trek) away from British administrative reach. Much later, in 1820 the British authorities persuaded about 5,000 middle-class British immigrants (most of them \"in trade\") to leave Great Britain. Many of the 1820 Settlers eventually settled in Grahamstown and Port Elizabeth.\nBritish policy with regard to South Africa would vacillate with successive governments, but the overarching imperative throughout the 19th century was to protect the strategic trade route to India while incurring as little expense as possible within the colony. This aim was complicated by border conflicts with the Boers, who soon developed a distaste for British authority.\nEuropean exploration of the interior.\nColonel Robert Jacob Gordon of the Dutch East India Company was the first European to explore parts of the interior while commanding the Dutch garrison at the renamed Cape of Good Hope, from 1780 to 1795. The four expeditions Gordon undertook between 1777 and 1786 are recorded in a series of several hundred drawings known collectively as the Gordon Atlas, as well as in his journals, which were only discovered in 1964.\nEarly relations between the European settlers and the Xhosa, the first Bantu peoples they met when they ventured inward, were peaceful. However, there was competition for land, and this tension led to skirmishes in the form of cattle raids from 1779.\nThe British explorers David Livingstone and William Oswell, setting out from a mission station in the northern Cape Colony, are believed to have been the first white men to cross the Kalahari desert in 1849. The Royal Geographical Society later awarded Livingstone a gold medal for his discovery of Lake Ngami in the desert.\nZulu militarism and expansionism.\nThe Zulu people are part of the Nguni ethnic group and were originally a minor clan in what is today northern KwaZulu-Natal, founded ca. 1709 by Zulu kaNtombela.\nThe 1820s saw a time of immense upheaval relating to the military expansion of the Zulu Kingdom, which replaced the original African clan system with kingdoms. Sotho-speakers know this period as the \"difaqane\" (\"forced migration\"); Zulu-speakers call it the \"mfecane\" (\"crushing\").\nVarious theories have been advanced for the causes of the \"difaqane\", ranging from ecological factors to competition in the ivory trade. Another theory attributes the epicentre of Zulu violence to the slave trade out of Delgoa Bay in Mozambique situated to the north of Zululand. Most historians recognise that the Mfecane wasn't just a series of events caused by the founding of the Zulu kingdom but rather a multitude of factors caused before and after Shaka Zulu came into power.\nIn 1818, Nguni tribes in Zululand created a militaristic kingdom between the Tugela River and Pongola River, under the driving force of Shaka kaSenzangakhona, son of the chief of the Zulu clan. Shaka built large armies, breaking from clan tradition by placing the armies under the control of his own officers rather than of hereditary chiefs. He then set out on a massive programme of expansion, killing or enslaving those who resisted in the territories he conquered. His \"impis\" (warrior regiments) were rigorously disciplined: failure in battle meant death.\n The Zulu resulted in the mass movement of many tribes who in turn tried to dominate those in new territories, leading to widespread warfare and waves of displacement spread throughout southern Africa and beyond. It accelerated the formation of several new nation-states, notably those of the Sotho (present-day Lesotho) and the Swazi (now Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)). It caused the consolidation of groups such as the Matebele, the Mfengu and the Makololo.\nIn 1828 Shaka was killed by his half-brothers Dingaan and Umhlangana. The weaker and less-skilled Dingaan became king, relaxing military discipline while continuing the despotism. Dingaan also attempted to establish relations with the British traders on the Natal coast, but events had started to unfold that would see the demise of Zulu independence. Estimates for the death toll resulting from the Mfecane range from 1 million to 2 million.\nBoer people and republics.\nAfter 1806, a number of Dutch-speaking inhabitants of the Cape Colony trekked inland, first in small groups. Eventually, in the 1830s, large numbers of Boers migrated in what came to be known as the Great Trek. Among the initial reasons for their leaving the Cape colony were the English language rule. Religion was a very important aspect of the settlers culture and the bible and church services were in Dutch. Similarly, schools, justice and trade up to the arrival of the British, were all managed in the Dutch language. The language law caused friction, distrust and dissatisfaction.\nAnother reason for Dutch-speaking white farmers trekking away from the Cape was the abolition of slavery by the British government on Emancipation Day, 1 December 1838. The farmers complained they could not replace the labour of their slaves without losing an excessive amount of money. The farmers had invested large amounts of capital in slaves. Owners who had purchased enslaved people on credit or put them up as surety against loans faced financial ruin.\nSouth African Republic.\n The South African Republic (Dutch: \"Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek\" or ZAR, not to be confused with the much later Republic of South Africa), is often referred to as The Transvaal and sometimes as the Republic of Transvaal. It was an independent and internationally recognised nation-state in southern Africa from 1852 to 1902. Independent sovereignty of the republic was formally recognised by Great Britain with the signing of the Sand River Convention on 17 January 1852. The republic, under the premiership of Paul Kruger, defeated British forces in the First Boer War and remained independent until the end of the Second Boer War on 31 May 1902, when it was forced to surrender to the British. The territory of the South African Republic became known after this war as the Transvaal Colony.\nFree State Republic.\nThe independent Boer republic of Orange Free State evolved from colonial Britain's Orange River Sovereignty, enforced by the presence of British troops, which lasted from 1848 to 1854 in the territory between the Orange and Vaal rivers, named Transorange. Britain, due to the military burden imposed on it by the Crimean War in Europe, then withdrew its troops from the territory in 1854, when the territory along with other areas in the region was claimed by the Boers as an independent Boer republic, which they named the Orange Free State. In March 1858, after land disputes, cattle rustling and a series of raids and counter-raids, the Orange Free State declared war on the Basotho kingdom, which it failed to defeat. A succession of wars were conducted between the Boers and the Basotho for the next 10 years. The name Orange Free State was again changed to the Orange River Colony, created by Britain after the latter occupied it in 1900 and then annexed it in 1902 during the Second Boer War. The colony, with an estimated population of less than 400,000 in 1904 ceased to exist in 1910, when it was absorbed into the Union of South Africa as the Orange Free State Province.\nNatalia.\nNatalia was a short-lived Boer republic established in 1839 by Boer Voortrekkers emigrating from the Cape Colony. In 1824 a party of 25 men under British Lieutenant F G Farewell arrived from the Cape Colony and established a settlement on the northern shore of the Bay of Natal, which would later become the port of Durban, so named after Benjamin D'Urban, a governor of the Cape Colony. Boer \"Voortrekkers\" in 1838 established the Republic of Natalia in the surrounding region, with its capital at Pietermaritzburg. On the night of 23/24 May 1842 British colonial forces attacked the \"Voortrekker\" camp at Congella. The attack failed, with British forces then retreating back to Durban, which the Boers besieged. A local trader Dick King and his servant Ndongeni, who later became folk heroes, were able to escape the blockade and ride to Grahamstown, a distance of 600\u00a0km (372.82 miles) in 14 days to raise British reinforcements. The reinforcements arrived in Durban 20 days later; the siege was broken and the \"Voortrekkers\" retreated. The Boers accepted British annexation in 1844. Many of the Natalia Boers who refused to acknowledge British rule trekked over the Drakensberg mountains to settle in the Orange Free State and Transvaal republics.\nCape Colony.\nBetween 1847 and 1854, Harry Smith, governor and high commissioner of the Cape Colony, annexed territories far to the north of the original British and Dutch settlement.\nSmith's expansion of the Cape Colony resulted in conflict with disaffected Boers in the Orange River Sovereignty who in 1848 mounted an abortive rebellion at Boomplaats, where the Boers were defeated by a detachment of the Cape Mounted Rifles. Annexation also precipitated a war between British colonial forces and the indigenous Xhosa nation in 1850, in the eastern coastal region.\nStarting from the mid-1800s, the Cape of Good Hope, which was then the largest state in southern Africa, began moving towards greater independence from Britain. In 1854, the Cape of Good Hope elected its first parliament on the basis of the multi-racial Cape Qualified Franchise unlike the Boer republics, whereby suffrage qualifications applied universally, regardless of race. The Cape Colony was unusual in southern Africa for this manner of carrying out an election and because its laws prohibited any other discrimination on the basis of race.\nIn 1872, after a long political struggle, it attained responsible government with a locally accountable executive and Prime Minister. The Cape nonetheless remained nominally part of the British Empire, even though it was self-governing in practice.\nThe Orange Order established in South Africa in the 19th century, with the first lodge being established in the Cape Colony. Its growth was tied to British immigration and the presence of British soldiers. The organization served as a fraternal and social group for British settlers and military personnel, often with a focus on mutual support and maintaining ties to their home culture. The lodges were most prominent in cities like Cape Town and Port Elizabeth.\nInitially, a period of strong economic growth and social development ensued. However, an ill-informed British attempt to force the states of southern Africa into a British federation led to inter-ethnic tensions and the First Boer War. Meanwhile, the discovery of diamonds around Kimberley and gold in the Transvaal led to a later return to instability, particularly because they fueled the rise to power of the ambitious colonialist Cecil Rhodes. As Cape Prime Minister, Rhodes curtailed the multi-racial franchise, and his expansionist policies set the stage for the Second Boer War.\nNatal.\nIndian slaves from the Dutch colonies in India had been introduced into the Cape area of South Africa by the Dutch settlers in 1654.\nBy the end of 1847, following annexation by Britain of the former Boer republic of Natalia, nearly all the Boers had left their former republic, which the British renamed Natal. The role of the Boer settlers was replaced by subsidised British immigrants of whom 5,000 arrived between 1849 and 1851.\nBy 1860, with slavery having been abolished in 1834, and after the annexation of Natal as a British colony in 1843, the British colonists in Natal (now kwaZulu-Natal) turned to India to resolve a labour shortage, as men of the local Zulu warrior nation were refusing to work on the plantations and farms established by the colonists. In that year, the SS \"Truro\" arrived in Durban harbour with over 300 Indians on board.\nOver the next 50 years, 150,000 more indentured Indian servants and labourers arrived, as well as numerous free \"passenger Indians,\" building the base for what would become the largest Indian diasporic community outside India.\nBy 1893, when the lawyer and social activist Mahatma Gandhi arrived in Durban, Indians outnumbered whites in Natal. The civil rights struggle of Gandhi's Natal Indian Congress failed; until the 1994 advent of democracy, Indians in South Africa were subject to most of the discriminatory laws that applied to all non-white inhabitants of the country.\nGriqua people.\nBy the late 1700s, the Cape Colony population had grown to include a large number of mixed-race so-called \"coloureds\" who were the offspring of extensive interracial relations between male Dutch settlers, Khoikhoi women, and enslaved women imported from Dutch colonies in the East. Members of this mixed-race community formed the core of what was to become the Griqua people.\nUnder the leadership of a former slave named Adam Kok, these \"coloureds\" or \"Basters\" (meaning mixed race or multiracial) as they were named by the Dutch\u2014a word derived from \"baster\", meaning \"bastard\"\u2014started trekking northward into the interior, through what is today named Northern Cape Province. The trek of the Griquas to escape the influence of the Cape Colony has been described as \"one of the great epics of the 19th century.\" They were joined on their long journey by a number of San and Khoikhoi aboriginal people, local African tribesmen, and also some white renegades. Around 1800, they started crossing the northern frontier formed by the Orange River, arriving ultimately in an uninhabited area, which they named Griqualand.\nIn 1825, a faction of the Griqua people was induced by Dr John Philip, superintendent of the London Missionary Society in Southern Africa, to relocate to a place called Philippolis, a mission station for the San, several hundred miles southeast of Griqualand. Philip's intention was for the Griquas to protect the missionary station there against banditti in the region, and as a bulwark against the northward movement of white settlers from the Cape Colony. Friction between the Griquas and the settlers over land rights resulted in British troops being sent to the region in 1845. It marked the beginning of nine years of British intervention in the affairs of the region, which the British named Transorange.\nIn 1861, to avoid the imminent prospect of either being colonised by the Cape Colony or coming into conflict with the expanding Boer Republic of Orange Free State, most of the Philippolis Griquas embarked on a further trek. They moved about 500 miles eastward, over the Quathlamba (today known as the Drakensberg mountain range), settling ultimately in an area officially designated as \"Nomansland\", which the Griquas renamed Griqualand East. East Griqualand was subsequently annexed by Britain in 1874 and incorporated into the Cape Colony in 1879.\nThe original Griqualand, north of the Orange River, was annexed by Britain's Cape Colony and renamed Griqualand West after the discovery in 1871 of the world's richest deposit of diamonds at Kimberley, so named after the British Colonial Secretary, Earl Kimberley.\nAlthough no formally surveyed boundaries existed, Griqua leader Nicolaas Waterboer claimed the diamond fields were situated on land belonging to the Griquas. The Boer republics of Transvaal and the Orange Free State also vied for ownership of the land, but Britain, being the preeminent force in the region, won control over the disputed territory. In 1878, Waterboer led an unsuccessful rebellion against the colonial authorities, for which he was arrested and briefly exiled.\nFactional conflicts.\nWars against the Xhosa.\nIn early South Africa, European notions of national boundaries and land ownership had no counterparts in African political culture. To Moshoeshoe the BaSotho chieftain from Lesotho, it was customary tribute in the form of horses and cattle represented acceptance of land use under his authority. To European settlers in Southern Africa, the same form of tribute was believed to constitute purchase and permanent ownership of the land under independent authority.\nAs European settlers started establishing permanent farms after trekking across the country in search of prime agricultural land, they encountered resistance from the local Bantu people who had originally migrated southwards from central Africa hundreds of years earlier. The consequent frontier wars became known as the Xhosa Wars (which were also referred to in contemporary discussion as the Kafir Wars or the Cape Frontier Wars). In the southeastern part of South Africa, Boer settlers and the Xhosa clashed along the Great Fish River, and in 1779 the First Xhosa War broke out. For nearly 100 years subsequently, the Xhosa fought the settlers sporadically, first the Boers or Afrikaners and later the British. In the Fourth Xhosa War, which lasted from 1811 to 1812, the British colonial authorities forced the Xhosa back across the Great Fish River and established forts along this boundary.\nThe increasing economic involvement of the British in southern Africa from the 1820s, and especially following the discovery of first diamonds at Kimberley and gold in the Transvaal, resulted in pressure for land and African labour, and led to increasingly tense relations with Southern African states.\nIn 1818 differences between two Xhosa leaders, Ndlambe and Ngqika, ended in Ngqika's defeat, but the British continued to recognise Ngqika as the paramount chief. He appealed to the British for help against Ndlambe, who retaliated in 1819 during the Fifth Frontier War by attacking the British colonial town of Grahamstown.\nWars against the Zulu.\nIn the eastern part of what is today South Africa, in the region named Natalia by the Boer trekkers, the latter negotiated an agreement with Zulu King Dingane kaSenzangakhona allowing the Boers to settle in part of the then Zulu kingdom. Cattle rustling ensued and a party of Boers under the leadership of Piet Retief were killed.\nSubsequent to the killing of the Retief party, the Boers fought against the Zulus, at the Ncome River on 16 December 1838. The Boers took a defensive position with the high banks of the Ncome River forming a natural barrier to their rear with their ox waggons as barricades between themselves and the attacking Zulu army in the clash known historically as the Battle of Blood River.\nIn the later annexation of the Zulu kingdom by imperial Britain, an Anglo-Zulu War was fought in 1879. Following Lord Carnarvon's successful introduction of federation in Canada, it was thought that similar political effort, coupled with military campaigns, might succeed with the African kingdoms, tribal areas and Boer republics in South Africa.\nIn 1874, Henry Bartle Frere was sent to South Africa as High Commissioner for the British Empire to bring such plans into being. Among the obstacles were the presence of the independent states of the South African Republic and the Kingdom of Zululand and its army. Frere, on his own initiative, without the approval of the British government and with the intent of instigating a war with the Zulu, had presented an ultimatum on 11 December 1878, to the Zulu king Cetshwayo with which the Zulu king could not comply. Bartle Frere then sent Lord Chelmsford to invade Zululand. The war is notable for several particularly bloody battles, including an overwhelming victory by the Zulu at the Battle of Isandlwana, as well as for being a landmark in the timeline of imperialism in the region.\nBritain's eventual defeat of the Zulus, marking the end of the Zulu nation's independence, was accomplished with the assistance of Zulu collaborators who harboured cultural and political resentments against centralised Zulu authority. The British then set about establishing large sugar plantations in the area today named KwaZulu-Natal Province.\nWars with the Basotho.\nFrom the 1830s onwards, numbers of white settlers from the Cape Colony crossed the Orange River and started arriving in the fertile southern part of territory known as the Lower Caledon Valley, which was occupied by Basotho cattle herders under the authority of the Basotho founding monarch Moshoeshoe I. In 1845, a treaty was signed between the British colonists and Moshoeshoe, which recognised white settlement in the area. No firm boundaries were drawn between the area of white settlement and Moshoeshoe's kingdom, which led to border clashes. Moshoeshoe was under the impression he was loaning grazing land to the settlers in accordance with African precepts of occupation rather than ownership, while the settlers believed they had been granted permanent land rights. Afrikaner settlers in particular were loath to live under Moshoesoe's authority and among Africans.\nThe British, who at that time controlled the area between the Orange and Vaal Rivers called the Orange River Sovereignty, decided a discernible boundary was necessary and proclaimed a line named the Warden Line, dividing the area between British and Basotho territories. This led to conflict between the Basotho and the British, who were defeated by Moshoeshoe's warriors at the battle of Viervoet in 1851.\nAs punishment to the Basotho, the governor and commander-in-chief of the Cape Colony, George Cathcart, deployed troops to the Mohokare River; Moshoeshoe was ordered to pay a fine. When he did not pay the fine in full, a battle broke out on the Berea Plateau in 1852, where the British suffered heavy losses. In 1854, the British handed over the territory to the Boers through the signing of the Sand River Convention. This territory and others in the region then became the Republic of the Orange Free State.\nA succession of wars followed from 1858 to 1868 between the Basotho kingdom and the Boer republic of Orange Free State. In the battles that followed, the Orange Free State tried unsuccessfully to capture Moshoeshoe's mountain stronghold at Thaba Bosiu, while the Sotho conducted raids in Free State territories. Both sides adopted scorched-earth tactics, with large swathes of pasturage and cropland being destroyed. Faced with starvation, Moshoeshoe signed a peace treaty on 15 October 1858, though crucial boundary issues remained unresolved. War broke out again in 1865. After an unsuccessful appeal for aid from the British Empire, Moshoeshoe signed the 1866 treaty of Thaba Bosiu, with the Basotho ceding substantial territory to the Orange Free State. On 12 March 1868, the British parliament declared the Basotho Kingdom a British protectorate and part of the British Empire. Open hostilities ceased between the Orange Free State and the Basotho. The country was subsequently named Basutoland and is presently named Lesotho.\nWars with the Ndebele.\nIn 1836, when Boer V\"oortrekkers\" (pioneers) arrived in the northwestern part of present-day South Africa, they came into conflict with a Ndebele sub-group that the settlers named \"Matabele\", under chief Mzilikazi. A series of battles ensued, in which Mzilikazi was eventually defeated. He withdrew from the area and led his people northwards to what would later become the Matabele region of Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe).\nOther members of the Ndebele ethnic language group in different areas of the region similarly came into conflict with the Voortrekkers, notably in the area that would later become the Northern Transvaal. In September 1854, 28 Boers accused of cattle rustling were killed in three separate incidents by an alliance of the Ndebele chiefdoms of Mokopane and Mankopane. Mokopane and his followers, anticipating retaliation by the settlers, retreated into the mountain caves known as Gwasa, (or Makapansgat in Afrikaans). In late October, Boer commandos supported by local Kgatla tribal collaborators laid siege to the caves. By the end of the siege, about three weeks later, Mokopane and between 1,000 and 3,000 people had died in the caves. The survivors were captured and allegedly enslaved.\nWars with the Bapedi.\nThe Bapedi wars, also known as the Sekhukhune wars, consisted of three separate campaigns fought between 1876 and 1879 against the Bapedi under their reigning monarch King Sekhukhune I, in the northeastern region known as Sekhukhuneland, bordering on Swaziland. Further friction was caused by the refusal of Sekhukhune to allow prospectors to search for gold in territory he considered to be sovereign and independent under his authority. The First Sekhukhune War of 1876 was conducted by the Boers, and the two separate campaigns of the Second Sekhukhune War of 1878/1879 were conducted by the British.\nDuring the final campaign, Sekukuni (also spelled Sekhukhune) and members of his entourage took refuge in a mountain cave where he was cut off from food and water. He eventually surrendered to a combined deputation of Boer and British forces on 2 December 1879. Sekhukhune, members of his family and some Bapedi generals were subsequently imprisoned in Pretoria for two years, with Sekhukhuneland becoming part of the Transvaal Republic. No gold was ever discovered in the annexed territory.\nDiscovery of diamonds.\nThe first diamond discoveries between 1866 and 1867 were alluvial, on the southern banks of the Orange River. By 1869, diamonds were found at some distance from any stream or river, in hard rock called blue ground, later called kimberlite, after the mining town of Kimberley where the diamond diggings were concentrated. The diggings were located in an area of vague boundaries and disputed land ownership. Claimants to the site included the South African (Transvaal) Republic, the Orange Free State Republic, and the mixed-race Griqua nation under Nicolaas Waterboer. Cape Colony Governor Henry Barkly persuaded all claimants to submit themselves to a decision of an arbitrator and so Robert W Keate, Lieutenant-Governor of Natal was asked to arbitrate. Keate awarded ownership to the Griquas. Waterboer, fearing conflict with the Boer republic of Orange Free State, subsequently asked for and received British protection. Griqualand then became a separate Crown Colony renamed Griqualand West in 1871, with a Lieutenant-General and legislative council.\nThe Crown Colony of Griqualand West was annexed into the Cape Colony in 1877, enacted into law in 1880. No material benefits accrued to the Griquas as a result of either colonisation or annexation; they did not receive any share of the diamond wealth generated at Kimberley. The Griqua community became subsequently dissimulated.\nBy the 1870s and 1880s the mines at Kimberley were producing 95% of the world's diamonds. The widening search for gold and other resources were financed by the wealth produced and the practical experience gained at Kimberley. Revenue accruing to the Cape Colony from the Kimberley diamond diggings enabled the Cape Colony to be granted responsible government status in 1872, since it was no longer dependent on the British Treasury and hence allowing it to be fully self-governing in similar fashion to the federation of Canada, New Zealand and some of the Australian states. The wealth derived from Kimberley diamond mining, having effectively tripled the customs revenue of the Cape Colony from 1871 to 1875, also doubled its population, and allowed it to expand its boundaries and railways to the north.\nIn 1888, British mining magnate Cecil John Rhodes co-founded De Beers Consolidated Mines at Kimberley, after buying up and amalgamating the individual claims with finance provided by the Rothschild dynasty. Abundant, cheap African labour was central to the success of Kimberley diamond mining, as it would later also be to the success of gold mining on the Witwatersrand. It has been suggested in some academic circles that the wealth produced at Kimberley was a significant factor influencing the Scramble for Africa, in which European powers had by 1902 competed with each other in drawing arbitrary boundaries across almost the entire continent and dividing it among themselves.\nDiscovery of gold.\nAlthough many tales abound, there is no conclusive evidence as to who first discovered gold or the manner in which it was originally discovered in the late 19th century on the Witwatersrand (meaning White Waters Ridge) of the Transvaal. The discovery of gold in February 1886 at a farm called Langlaagte on the Witwatersrand in particular precipitated a gold rush by prospectors and fortune seekers from all over the world. Except in rare outcrops, however, the main gold deposits had over many years become covered gradually by thousands of feet of hard rock. Finding and extracting the deposits far below the ground called for the capital and engineering skills that would soon result in the deep-level mines of the Witwatersrand producing a quarter of the world's gold, with the \"instant city\" of Johannesburg arising astride the main Witwatersrand gold reef.\nWithin two years of gold being discovered on the Witwatersrand, four mining finance houses had been established. The first was formed by Hermann Eckstein in 1887, eventually becoming Rand Mines. Cecil Rhodes and Charles Rudd followed, with their Gold Fields of South Africa company. Rhodes and Rudd had earlier made fortunes from diamond mining at Kimberley. In 1895 there was an investment boom in Witwatersrand gold-mining shares. The precious metal that underpinned international trade would dominate South African exports for decades to come.\nOf the leading 25 foreign industrialists who were instrumental in opening up deep level mining operations at the Witwatersrand gold fields, 15 were Jewish, 11 of the total were from Germany or Austria, and nine of that latter category were also Jewish. The commercial opportunities opened by the discovery of gold attracted many other people of European Jewish origin. The Jewish population of South Africa in 1880 numbered approximately 4,000; by 1914 it had grown to more than 40,000, mostly migrants from Lithuania.\nThe working environment of the mines, meanwhile, as one historian has described it, was \"dangerous, brutal and onerous\", and therefore unpopular among local black Africans. Recruitment of black labour began to prove difficult, even with an offer of improved wages. In mid-1903 there remained barely half of the 90,000 black labourers who had been employed in the industry in mid-1899. The decision was made to start importing Chinese indentured labourers who were prepared to work for far less wages than local African labourers. The first 1,000 indentured Chinese labourers arrived in June 1904. By January 1907, 53,000 Chinese labourers were working in the gold mines.\nFirst Anglo\u2013Boer War.\nThe Transvaal Boer republic was forcefully annexed by Britain in 1877, during Britain's attempt to consolidate the states of southern Africa under British rule. Long-standing Boer resentment turned into full-blown rebellion in the Transvaal and the first Anglo\u2013Boer War, also known as the Boer Insurrection, broke out in 1880. The conflict ended almost as soon as it began with a decisive Boer victory at Battle of Majuba Hill (27 February 1881).\nThe republic regained its independence as the \"Zuid-Afrikaansche Republiek\" (\"South African Republic\"), or ZAR. Paul Kruger, one of the leaders of the uprising, became President of the ZAR in 1883. Meanwhile, the British, who viewed their defeat at Majuba as an aberration, forged ahead with their desire to federate the Southern African colonies and republics. They saw this as the best way to come to terms with the fact of a white Afrikaner majority, as well as to promote their larger strategic interests in the area.\nThe cause of the Anglo\u2013Boer wars has been attributed to a contest over which nation would control and benefit most from the Witwatersrand gold mines. The enormous wealth of the mines was in the hands of European \"Randlords\" overseeing the mainly British foreign managers, mining foremen, engineers and technical specialists, characterised by the Boers as \"uitlander\", meaning aliens. The \"aliens\" objected to being denied parliamentary representation and the right to vote, and they complained also of bureaucratic government delays in the issuing of licenses and permits, and general administrative incompetence on the part of the government.\nIn 1895, a column of mercenaries in the employ of Cecil John Rhodes' Rhodesian-based Charter Company and led by Captain Leander Starr Jameson had entered the ZAR with the intention of sparking an uprising on the Witwatersrand and installing a British administration there. The armed incursion became known as the Jameson Raid. It ended when the invading column was ambushed and captured by Boer commandos. President Kruger suspected the insurgency had received at least the tacit approval of the Cape Colony government under the premiership of Cecil John Rhodes, and that Kruger's South African Republic faced imminent danger. Kruger reacted by forming an alliance with the neighbouring Boer republic of Orange Free State. This did not prevent the outbreak of a Second Anglo\u2013Boer war.\nSecond Anglo\u2013Boer War.\nRenewed tensions between Britain and the Boers peaked in 1899 when the British demanded voting rights for the 60,000 foreign whites on the Witwatersrand. Until that point, President Paul Kruger's government had excluded all foreigners from the franchise. Kruger rejected the British demand and called for the withdrawal of British troops from the borders of the South African Republic. When the British refused, Kruger declared war. This Second Anglo\u2013Boer War, also known as the South African War lasted longer than the first, with British troops being supplemented by colonial troops from Southern Rhodesia, Canada, India, Australia and New Zealand. It has been estimated that the total number of British and colonial troops deployed in South Africa during the war outnumbered the population of the two Boer Republics by more than 150,000.\nBy June 1900, Pretoria, the last of the major Boer towns, had surrendered. Yet resistance by Boer \"bittereinders\" (meaning those who would fight to the bitter end) continued for two more years with guerrilla warfare, which the British met in turn with scorched earth tactics. The Boers kept on fighting.\nThe British suffragette Emily Hobhouse visited British concentration camps in South Africa and produced a report condemning the appalling conditions there. By 1902, 26,000 Boer women and children had died of disease and neglect in the camps.\nThe Anglo\u2013Boer War affected all ethnic groups in South Africa. Black people were recruited or conscripted by both sides into working for them either as combatants or non-combatants to sustain the respective war efforts of both the Boers and the British. The official statistics of blacks killed in action are inaccurate. Most of the bodies were dumped in unmarked graves. It has, however, been verified that 17,182 black people died mainly of diseases in the Cape concentration camps alone, but this figure is not accepted historically as a true reflection of the overall numbers. Concentration camp superintendents did not always record the deaths of black inmates in the camps.\nFrom the outset of hostilities in October 1899 to the signing of peace on 31 May 1902 the war claimed the lives of 22,000 imperial soldiers and 7,000 republican fighters. In terms of the peace agreement known as the Treaty of Vereeniging, the Boer republics acknowledged British sovereignty, while the British in turn committed themselves to reconstruction of the areas under their control.\nUnion of South Africa (1910\u20131948).\nDuring the years immediately following the Anglo\u2013Boer wars, Britain set about unifying the four colonies including the former Boer republics into a single self-governed country called the Union of South Africa. This was accomplished after several years of negotiations, when the South Africa Act 1909 consolidated the Cape Colony, Natal, Transvaal, and Orange Free State into one nation. Under the provisions of the act, the Union became an independent Dominion of the British Empire, governed under a form of constitutional monarchy, with the British monarch represented by a Governor-General. This status was affirmed and further defined at the 1926 Imperial Conference, where the Balfour Declaration officially recognized the Dominions, including South Africa, as \"autonomous communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another in any aspect of their domestic or external affairs.\" Prosecutions before the courts of the Union of South Africa were instituted in the name of the Crown and government officials served in the name of the Crown. The British High Commission territories of Basutoland (now Lesotho), Bechuanaland (now Botswana), and Swaziland (now Eswatini) continued under direct rule from Britain.\nAmong other harsh segregationist laws, including denial of voting rights to black people, the Union parliament enacted the 1913 Natives' Land Act, which earmarked only eight percent of South Africa's available land for black occupancy. White people, who constituted 20 percent of the population, held 90 percent of the land. The Land Act would form a cornerstone of legalised racial discrimination for the next nine decades.\nGeneral Louis Botha headed the first government of the new Union, with General Jan Smuts as his deputy. Their \"South African National Party\", later known as the South African Party or SAP, followed a generally pro-British, white-unity line. The more radical Boers split away under the leadership of General Barry Hertzog, forming the National Party (NP) in 1914. The National Party championed Afrikaner interests, advocating separate development for the two white groups, and independence from Britain.\nDissatisfaction with British influence in the Union's affairs reached a climax in September 1914, when impoverished Boers, anti-British Boers and \"bitter-enders\" launched a rebellion. The rebellion was suppressed, and at least one officer was sentenced to death and executed by firing squad.\nIn 1924 the Afrikaner-dominated National Party came to power in a coalition government with the Labour Party. Afrikaans, previously regarded as a low-level Dutch patois, replaced Dutch as an official language of the Union. English and Dutch became the two official languages in 1925.\nThe Union of South Africa came to an end after a referendum on 5 October 1960, in which a majority of white South Africans voted in favour of unilateral withdrawal from the British Commonwealth and the establishment of a Republic of South Africa.\nFirst World War.\nAt the outbreak of World War I, South Africa joined Great Britain and the Allies against the German Empire. Both Prime Minister Louis Botha and Defence Minister Jan Smuts were former Second Boer War generals who had previously fought against the British, but they now became active and respected members of the Imperial War Cabinet. Elements of the South African Army refused to fight against the Germans and along with other opponents of the government; they rose in an open revolt known as the Maritz Rebellion. The government declared martial law on 14 October 1914, and forces loyal to the government under the command of generals Louis Botha and Jan Smuts defeated the rebellion. The rebel leaders were prosecuted, fined heavily and sentenced to imprisonment ranging from six to seven years.\nPublic opinion in South Africa split along racial and ethnic lines. The British elements strongly supported the war, and formed by far the largest military component. Likewise the Indian element (led by Mahatma Gandhi) generally supported the war effort. Afrikaners were split, with some like Botha and Smuts taking a prominent leadership role in the British war effort. This position was rejected by many rural Afrikaners who supported the Maritz Rebellion. The trade union movement was divided. Many urban blacks supported the war expecting it would raise their status in society. Others said it was not relevant to the struggle for their rights. The Coloured element was generally supportive and many served in a Coloured Corps in East Africa and France, also hoping to better themselves after the war.\nWith a population of roughly 6 million, between 1914\u20131918, over 250,000 South Africans of all races voluntarily served their country. Thousands more served in the British Army directly, with over 3,000 joining the British Royal Flying Corps and over 100 volunteering for the Royal Navy. It is likely that around 50% of white men of military age served during the war, more than 146,000 whites. 83,000 Black men and 2,500 Coloured and Asian men also served in either German South-West Africa, East Africa, the Middle East, or on the Western Front in Europe. Over 7,000 South Africans were killed, and nearly 12,000 were wounded during the course of the war. Eight South Africans won the Victoria Cross for gallantry, the Empire's highest and most prestigious military medal. The Battle of Delville Wood and the sinking of the SS \"Mendi\" being the greatest single incidents of loss of life.\n25,000 Black South Africans were recruited at the request of the British War Cabinet to serve as non-combatant labourers in the South African Native Labour Contingent (SANLC). 21,000 of these people were deployed to France as stevedores at French ports, where they were housed in segregated compounds. A total of 616 men from the Fifth Battalion of the SANLC drowned on 21 February 1917 when the troopship \"SS Mendi\", on which they were being transported to France, collided with another vessel near the Isle of Wight. The \"Mendi\" disaster was one of South Africa's worst tragedies of the Great War, second perhaps only to the Battle of Delville Wood. The South African government issued no war service medal to the black servicemen and the special medal issued by King George V to \"native troops\" that served the Empire, the British War Medal in bronze, was disallowed and not issued to the SANLC.\nBlack and mixed-race South Africans who had supported the war were embittered when post-war South Africa saw no easing of white domination and racial segregation.\nThe assistance that South Africa gave the British Empire was significant. Two German African colonies were occupied, either by South Africa alone or with significant South African assistance. Manpower, from all races, helped Allied operations not just on the Western Front and Africa, but also in the Middle East against the Ottoman Empire. South Africa's ports and harbours on the Home Front were a crucial strategic asset when conducting a war on a global scale. Providing important rest and refuelling stations, the Royal Navy could ensure vital sea lane connections to the British Raj, and the Far East stayed open.\nEconomically, South Africa supplied two-thirds of gold production in the British Empire, with most of the remainder coming from Australia. At the start of the war, Bank of England officials in London worked with South Africa to block gold shipments to Germany, and force mine owners to sell only to the British Treasury, at prices set by the Treasury. This facilitated purchases of munitions and food in the United States and neutral countries.\nSecond World War.\nDuring World War II, South Africa's ports and harbours, such as at Cape Town, Durban, and Simon's Town, were important strategic assets to the British Royal Navy. South Africa's top-secret Special Signals Service played a significant role in the early development and deployment of radio detection and ranging (radar) technology used in protecting the vital coastal shipping route around southern Africa. By August 1945, South African Air Force aircraft in conjunction with British and Dutch aircraft stationed in South Africa had intercepted 17 enemy ships, assisted in the rescue of 437 survivors of sunken ships, attacked 26 of the 36 enemy submarines operating the vicinity of the South African coast, and flown 15,000 coastal patrol sorties.\nAbout 334,000 South Africans volunteered for full-time military service in support of the Allies abroad. Nearly 9,000 were killed in action. On 21 June 1942 nearly 10,000 South African soldiers, representing one-third of the entire South African force in the field, were taken prisoner by German Field Marshal Rommel's forces in the fall of Tobruk, Libya. A number of South African fighter pilots served with distinction in the Royal Air Force during the Battle of Britain, including Group Captain Adolph \"Sailor\" Malan who led 74 Squadron and established a record of personally destroying 27 enemy aircraft.\nGeneral Jan Smuts was the only important non-British general whose advice was constantly sought by Britain's war-time Prime Minister Winston Churchill. Smuts was invited to the Imperial War Cabinet in 1939 as the most senior South African in favour of war. On 28 May 1941, Smuts was appointed a Field Marshal of the British Army, becoming the first South African to hold that rank. When the war ended, Smuts represented South Africa in San Francisco at the drafting of the United Nations Charter in May 1945. Just as he had done in 1919, Smuts urged the delegates to create a powerful international body to preserve peace; he was determined that, unlike the League of Nations, the UN would have teeth. Smuts also signed the Paris Peace Treaty, resolving the peace in Europe, thus becoming the only signatory of both the treaty ending the First World War, and that which ended the Second.\nPro-German and pro-Nazi attitudes.\nAfter the suppression of the abortive, pro-German Maritz Rebellion during the South African World War I campaign against German South West Africa in 1914, the South African rebel General Manie Maritz escaped to Spain. He returned in 1923, and continued working in the Union of South Africa as a German Spy for the Third Reich.\nIn 1896, the German Kaiser Kaiser Wilhelm had enraged Britain by sending congratulations to Boer republican leader Paul Kruger after Kruger's commandos captured a column of British South Africa Company soldiers engaged in an armed incursion and abortive insurrection, known historically as the Jameson Raid, into Boer territory. Germany was the primary supplier of weapons to the Boers during the subsequent Anglo\u2013Boer war. Kaiser Wilhelm's government arranged for the two Boer Republics to purchase modern breech-loading Mauser rifles and millions of smokeless gunpowder cartridges. Germany's Ludwig Loewe company, later known as Deutsche Waffen-und Munitionfabriken, delivered 55,000 of these rifles to the Boers in 1896.\nThe early-1940s saw the pro-Nazi \"Ossewa Brandwag\" (OB) movement become half-a-million strong, including future prime minister John Vorster and Hendrik van den Bergh, the future head of police intelligence. The anti-semitic \"Boerenasie\" (Boer Nation) and other similar groups soon joined them. When the war ended, the OB was one of the anti-parliamentary groups absorbed into the National Party.\nThe South African \"Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging\" or AWB (meaning Afrikaner Resistance Movement), a militant neo-Nazi, mainly Afrikaner white supremacist movement that arose in the 1970s, and was active until the mid-1990s, used a flag that closely resembled the swastika. In the early to mid-1990s, the AWB attempted unsuccessfully through various acts of public violence and intimidation to derail the country's transition to democracy. After the country's first multiracial democratic elections in 1994, a number of terrorist bomb blasts were linked to the AWB. On 11 March 1994, several hundred AWB members formed part of an armed right-wing force that invaded the nominally independent \"homeland\" territory of Bophuthatswana, in a failed attempt to prop up its unpopular, conservative leader Chief Lucas Mangope. The AWB leader Eug\u00e8ne Terre'Blanche was murdered by farm workers on 3 April 2010.\nA majority of politically moderate Afrikaners were pragmatic and did not support the AWB's extremism.\nApartheid era (1948\u20131994).\nApartheid legislation.\nThe segregationist policies of apartheid stemmed from colonial legislation introduced during the period of Dutch rule in the 17th century, which was continued and expanded upon during the British colonial era, and reached its apogee during the Boer-dominated Union of South Africa.\nFrom 1948, successive National Party administrations formalised and extended the existing system of racial discrimination and denial of human rights into the legal system of \"apartheid\", which lasted until 1991. A key act of legislation during this time was the Homeland Citizens Act of 1970. This act augmented the Native Land Act of 1913 through the establishment of so-called \"homelands\" or \"reserves\". It authorised the forced evictions of thousands of African people from urban centres in South Africa and South West Africa (now Namibia) to what became described colloquially as \"Bantustans\" or the \"original homes\", as they were officially referred to, of the black ethnic groups of South Africa. The same legislation applied also to South West Africa over which South Africa had continued after World War I to exercise a disputed League of Nations mandate. Pro-apartheid South Africans attempted to justify the Bantustan policy by citing the British government's 1947 partition of India, which they claimed was a similar situation that did not arouse international condemnation.\nAlthough many important events occurred during this period, apartheid remained the central pivot around which most of the historical issues of this period revolved, including violent conflict and the militarisation of South African society. By 1987, total military expenditure amounted to about 28% of the national budget.\nIn the aftermath of the 1976 Soweto uprising and the security clampdown that accompanied it, Joint Management Centres (JMCs) operating in at least 34 State-designated \"high-risk\" areas became the key element in a National Security Management System. The police and military who controlled the JMCs by the mid-1980s were endowed with influence in decision-making at every level, from the Cabinet down to local government.\nUN embargo.\nOn 16 December 1966, United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2202 A (XXI) identified apartheid as a \"crime against humanity\".\nThe Apartheid Convention, as it came to be known, was adopted by the General Assembly on 30 November 1973 with 91 member states voting in favour, four against (Portugal, South Africa, the United Kingdom and the United States) and 26 abstentions. The convention came into force on 18 July 1976. On 23 October 1984 the UN Security Council endorsed this formal determination. The convention declared that apartheid was both unlawful and criminal because it violated the Charter of the United Nations.\nThe General Assembly had already suspended South Africa from the UN organisation on 12 November 1974. On 4 November 1977, the Security Council imposed a mandatory arms embargo in terms of Resolution 181 calling upon all States to cease the sale and shipment of arms, ammunition and military vehicles to South Africa. The country would only be readmitted to the UN in 1994 following its transition to democracy. Apartheid South Africa reacted to the UN arms embargo by strengthening its military ties with Israel, and establishing its own arms manufacturing industry with the help of Israel. Four hundred M-113A1 armoured personnel carriers, and 106mm recoilless rifles manufactured in the United States were delivered to South Africa via Israel.\nExtra-judicial killings.\nIn the mid-1980s, police and army death squads conducted state-sponsored assassinations of dissidents and activists. By mid-1987 the Human Rights Commission knew of at least 140 political assassinations in the country, while about 200 people died at the hands of South African agents in neighbouring states. The exact numbers of all the victims may never be known. Strict censorship disallowed journalists from reporting, filming or photographing such incidents, while the government ran its own covert disinformation programme that provided distorted accounts of the extrajudicial killings. At the same time, State-sponsored vigilante groups carried out violent attacks on communities and community leaders associated with resistance to apartheid. The attacks were then falsely attributed by the government to \"black-on-black\" or factional violence within the communities.\nThe Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) would later establish that a covert, informal network of former or still serving army and police operatives, frequently acting in conjunction with extreme right-wing elements, was involved in actions that could be construed as fomenting violence and which resulted in gross human rights violations, including random and targeted killings.\nBetween 1960\u20131994, according to statistics from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, the Inkatha Freedom Party was responsible for 4,500 deaths, South African Police 2,700, and the ANC about 1,300.\nIn early 2002, a planned military coup by a white supremacist movement known as the \"Boeremag\" (Boer Force) was foiled by the South African police. Two dozen conspirators including senior South African Army officers were arrested on charges of treason and murder, after a bomb explosion in Soweto. The effectiveness of the police in foiling the planned coup strengthened public perceptions that the post-1994 democratic order was irreversible.\nThe TRC, at the conclusion of its mandate in 2004, handed over a list of 300 names of alleged perpetrators to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for investigation and prosecution by the NPA's Priority Crimes Litigation Unit. Less than a handful of prosecutions were ever pursued.\nMilitary operations in frontline states.\nSouth African security forces during the latter part of the apartheid era had a policy of destabilising neighbouring states, supporting opposition movements, conducting sabotage operations and attacking ANC bases and places of refuge for exiles in those states. These states, forming a regional alliance of southern African states, were named collectively as the Frontline States: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and, from 1980, Zimbabwe.\nIn early-November 1975, immediately after Portugal granted independence to its former African colony of Angola, civil war broke out between the rival UNITA and MPLA movements. In order to prevent UNITA's collapse and cement the rule of a friendly government, South Africa intervened on 23 October, sending between 1,500 and 2,000 troops from Namibia into southern Angola in order to fight the MPLA. In response to the South African intervention, Cuba sent 18,000 soldiers as part of a large-scale military intervention nicknamed Operation Carlota in support of the MPLA. Cuba had initially provided the MPLA with 230 military advisers prior to the South African intervention. The Cuban intervention was decisive in helping reverse SADF and UNITA advances and cement MPLA rule in Angola. More than a decade later 36,000 Cuban troops were deployed throughout the country helping providing support for MPLA's fight with UNITA. The civil war in Angola resulted in 550,000\u20131,250,000 deaths in total mostly from famine. Most of the deaths occurred between 1992 and 1993, after South African and Cuban involvement had ended.\nBetween 1975 and 1988, the SADF continued to stage massive conventional raids into Angola and Zambia to eliminate PLAN's forward operating bases across the border from Namibia as well as provide support for UNITA. A controversial bombing and airborne assault conducted by 200 South African paratroopers on 4 May 1978 at Cassinga in southern Angola, resulted in around 700 South West Africans being killed, including PLAN militants and a large number of women and children. Colonel Jan Breytenbach, the South African parachute battalion commander, claimed it was \"recognised in Western military circles as the most successful airborne assault since World War II.\" The Angolan government described the target of the attack as a refugee camp. The United Nations Security Council on 6 May 1978 condemned South Africa for the attack. On 23 August 1981 South African troops again launched an incursion into Angola with collaboration and encouragement provided by the American Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). The Angolan army, in resisting what it perceived as a South African invasion, was supported by a combination of Cuban forces and PLAN and ANC guerrillas, all armed with weapons supplied by the Soviet Union. The apartheid-era South African military and political intelligence services, for their part, worked closely with American, British and West German secret services throughout the Cold War.\nBoth South Africa and Cuba claimed victory at the decisive battle of Cuito Cuanavale, which have been described as \"the fiercest in Africa since World War II\". However, the South African military had lost air superiority and its technological advantage, largely due to an international arms embargo against the country. South African involvement in Angola ended formally after the signing of a United Nations-brokered agreement known as the New York Accords between the governments of Angola, Cuba and South Africa, resulting in the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Angola and also South Africa's withdrawal from South West Africa (now Namibia), which the UN regarded as illegally occupied since 1966.\nSouth Africa in the 1980s also provided logistical and other covert support to \"Resist\u00eancia Nacional Mo\u00e7ambicana\" (RENAMO) rebels, in neighbouring Mozambique fighting the FRELIMO-run government during the Mozambique Civil War, and it launched cross-border raids into Lesotho, Swaziland and Botswana, killing or capturing a number of South African exiles.\nResistance to apartheid.\nFrom the 1940s to the 1960s, anti-apartheid resistance within the country took the form mainly of passive resistance, influenced in part by the pacifist ideology of Mahatma Gandhi. After the March 1960 massacre of 69 peaceful demonstrators at Sharpeville, and the subsequent declaration of a state of emergency, and the banning of anti-apartheid parties including the African National Congress (ANC), the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), and the Communist Party of South Africa, the focus of national resistance turned to armed struggle and underground activity. The armed wing of the ANC, Umkhonto weSizwe (abbreviation MK, meaning Spear of the Nation) claimed moral legitimacy for the resort to violence on the grounds of necessary defence and just war. From the 1960s onwards until 1989, MK carried out numerous acts of sabotage and attacks on military and police personnel. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission noted in 2003 that, despite the ANC's stated policy of attacking only military and police targets, \"the majority of casualties of MK operations were civilians.\"\nOrganised resistance to Afrikaner nationalism was not confined exclusively to Black and Coloured activists. A movement known as the Torch Commando was formed in the 1950s, led by white war veterans who had fought the Axis powers in Europe and North Africa during World War II. With 250,000 paid-up members at the height of its existence, it was the largest white protest movement in the country's history. By 1952, the brief flame of mass-based white radicalism was extinguished, when the Torch Commando disbanded due to government legislation under the Suppression of Communism Act, 1950. Some members of the Torch Commando subsequently became leading figures in the armed wing of the banned African National Congress.\nThe national liberation movement was divided in the early 1960s when an \"Africanist\" faction within the ANC objected to an alliance between the ANC and the Communist Party of South Africa. Leaders of the Communist Party of South Africa were mostly white. The Africanists broke away from the ANC to form the Pan-Africanist Congress and its military wing named Poqo, which became active mainly in the Cape provinces. During the early-1990s, Poqo was renamed Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA). Its underground cells conducted armed robberies to raise funds and obtain weapons and vehicles. Civilians were killed or injured in many of these robberies. In 1993, attacks on white civilian targets in public places increased. APLA denied the attacks were racist in character, claiming that the attacks were directed against the apartheid government as all whites, according to the PAC, were complicit in the policy of apartheid. An attack on a Christian church in Cape Town in 1993, left eleven people dead and 58 injured.\nHundreds of students and others who fled to neighbouring countries, especially Botswana, to avoid arrest after the Soweto uprising of 16 June 1976, provided a fertile recruiting ground for the military wings of both the ANC and PAC. The uprising had been precipitated by Government legislation forcing African students to accept Afrikaans as the official medium for tuition, with support from the wider Black Consciousness Movement. The uprising spread throughout the country. By the time it was finally quelled, hundreds of protesters had been shot dead with many more wounded or arrested by police.\nA non-racial United Democratic Front (UDF) coalition of about 400 civic, church, student, trade union and other organisations emerged in 1983. At its peak in 1987, the UDF had some 700 affiliates and about 3,000,000 members. A strong relationship existed between the African National Congress (ANC) and the UDF, based on the shared mission statement of the Freedom Charter. Following restrictions placed on its activities, the UDF was replaced in 1988 by the Mass Democratic Movement, a loose and amorphous alliance of anti-apartheid groups that had no permanent structure, making it difficult for the government to place a ban on its activities.\nA total of 130 political prisoners were hanged on the gallows of Pretoria Central Prison between 1960 and 1990. The prisoners were mainly members of the Pan Africanist Congress and United Democratic Front.\nDemocratic period (1994\u2013present).\nThe dissolution of the Soviet Union in the late-1980s meant the African National Congress (ANC) in alliance with the South African Communist Party, could no longer depend on the Soviet Union for weaponry and political support. It also meant the apartheid government could no longer link apartheid and its purported legitimacy to the protection of Christian values and civilisation in the face of the \"rooi gevaar\", meaning \"red danger\" or the threat of communism. Both sides were forced to the negotiating table, with the result that in June 1991, all apartheid laws were finally rescinded- opening the way for the country's first multiracial democratic elections three years later. As the culmination of mounting local and international opposition to apartheid in the 1980s, including the armed struggle, widespread civil unrest, economic and cultural sanctions by the international community, and pressure from the anti-apartheid movement around the world, State President F. W. de Klerk announced the lifting of the ban on the African National Congress, the Pan Africanist Congress and the South African Communist Party, as well as the release of political prisoner Nelson Mandela on 2 February 1990, after twenty-seven years in prison. In a referendum held on 17 March 1992, the white electorate voted 68% in favour of democracy.\nAfter lengthy negotiations under the auspices of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA), a draft constitution was published on 26 July 1993, containing concessions towards all sides: a federal system of regional legislatures, equal voting-rights regardless of race, and a bicameral legislature.\nFrom 26\u201329 April 1994, the South African population voted in the first universal suffrage general elections. The African National Congress won, well ahead of the governing National Party and the Inkatha Freedom Party. The Democratic Party and Pan Africanist Congress, among others, formed a parliamentary opposition in the country's first non-racial parliament. Nelson Mandela was elected as President on 9 May 1994 and formed a Government of National Unity, consisting of the ANC, the National Party and Inkatha. On 10 May 1994 Mandela was inaugurated as South Africa's new President in Pretoria with Thabo Mbeki and F. W. De Klerk as his vice-presidents. The Government of National Unity lapsed at the end of the first parliament sitting in 1999, with the ANC becoming the sole party in power while maintaining a strategic alliance with the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the South African Communist Party. After considerable debate, and following submissions from advocacy groups, individuals and ordinary citizens, the Parliament enacted a new Constitution and Bill of Rights in 1996. The death penalty was abolished, land reform and redistribution policies were introduced, and equitable labour laws legislated.\nThe ANC had risen to power on the strength of a socialist agenda embodied in a Freedom Charter, which was intended to form the basis of ANC social, economic and political policies. The Charter decreed that \"the national wealth of our country, the heritage of South Africans, shall be restored to the people; the mineral wealth beneath the soil, the banks and monopoly industry shall be transferred to the ownership of the people\". ANC icon Nelson Mandela, asserted in a statement released on 25 January 1990: \"The nationalisation of the mines, banks and monopoly industries is the policy of the ANC, and a change or modification of our views in this regard is inconceivable.\"\nFollowing the ANC's electoral victory in 1994, the eradication of mass poverty through nationalisation was never implemented. The ANC-led government, in a historic reversal of policy, adopted neoliberalism instead. A wealth tax on the super-rich to fund developmental projects was set aside, while domestic and international corporations, enriched by apartheid, were excused from any financial reparations. Large corporations were allowed to shift their main listings abroad. According to Solomon Johannes Terreblanche, a South African academic economist, the government's concessions to big business represented \"treacherous decisions that [will] haunt South Africa for generations to come\". In the 2024 national election the African National Congress (ANC) failed to secure more than 50% of the vote for the first time in the democratic era.\nEmigration.\nThe immediate post-apartheid period was marked by an exodus of skilled, white South Africans amid crime related safety concerns. The South African Institute of Race Relations estimated in 2008 that 800,000 or more white people had emigrated since 1995, out of the approximately 4,000,000 who were in South Africa when apartheid formally ended the year before. Large white South African diasporas, both English- and Afrikaans-speaking, sprouted in Australia, New Zealand, North America, and especially in the UK, to which around 550,000 South Africans emigrated. As of 2021, tens of thousands of white South Africans continue to emigrate each year. By 2019 the number of skilled black South Africans emigrating out of the country had surpassed the number of white emigres.\nFinancial burdens.\nThe apartheid government had declared a moratorium on foreign debt repayments in the mid-1980s, when it declared a state of emergency in the face of escalating civil unrest. With the formal end of apartheid in 1994, the new democratic government was saddled with an onerous foreign debt amounting to R86.7B (US$14B at then current exchange rates) accrued by the former apartheid regime. The cash-strapped post-apartheid government was obliged to repay this debt or else face a credit downgrading by foreign financial institutions. The debt was finally settled in September 2001.\nA further financial burden was imposed on the new post-apartheid government through its obligation to provide antiretroviral (ARV) treatment to impoverished victims of the HIV/AIDS epidemic sweeping the country. South Africa had the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS compared to any other country in the world, with 5,600,000 people afflicted by the disease and 270,000 HIV-related deaths were recorded in 2011. By that time, more than 2,000,000 children were orphaned due to the epidemic. The provision of ARV treatment resulted in 100,000 fewer AIDS-related deaths in 2011 than in 2005.\nLabour relations.\n Migrant labour remained a fundamental aspect of the South African mining industry, which employed half a million mostly black miners. Labour unrest in the industry resulted in a massacre in mid-August 2012, when anti-riot police shot dead 34 striking miners and wounded many more in what is known as the Marikana massacre. The incident was widely criticised by the public, civil society organisations and religious leaders. The migrant labour system was identified as a primary cause of the unrest. Multi-national mining corporations including Anglo-American Corporation, Lonmin, and Anglo Platinum, were accused of failing to address the enduring legacies of apartheid.\nPoverty.\nIn 2014, around 47% of (mostly black) South Africans lived in poverty, making it one of the most unequal countries in the world. Widespread dissatisfaction with the slow pace of socio-economic transformation, government incompetence and maladministration, and other public grievances in the post-apartheid era, precipitated many violent protest demonstrations. In 2007, less than half the protests were associated with some form of violence, compared with 2014, when almost 80% of protests involved violence on the part of the participants or the authorities. The slow pace of transformation also fomented tensions within the tripartite alliance between the ANC, the Communist Party and the Congress of South African Trade Unions.\nCorruption.\nDuring the administration of President Jacob Zuma corruption in South Africa had also become a growing problem. Notable corruption related scandals during this period included incidents of widespread state capture often involving allegations against the Gupta family. These also involved corruption related financial difficulties at some state owned enterprises such as Eskom and South African Airways that had a notable negative economic impact on the country's finances. Other corruption related scandals to emerge during this period included the collapse of VBS Mutual Bank and Bosasa. The Zondo Commission of Inquiry was appointed during the Presidency of Cyril Ramaphosa to investigate allegations of state capture related corruption.\nEnergy crisis.\nSince 2007 South Africa has experienced an ongoing energy crisis that has negatively impacted the country's economy, its ability to create jobs, and reduce poverty. A lack of investment in new power generating capacity and an aging fleet of existing power plants was the initial cause of the crisis. The government owned power utility Eskom has been plagued with corruption and mismanagement, most notability during the presidency of Jacob Zuma, which has limited its ability to resolve the crisis.\nXenophobia.\nThe post-apartheid period has been marked by numerous outbreaks of xenophobic attacks against foreign migrants and asylum seekers from various conflict zones in Africa. An academic study conducted in 2006, found that South Africans showed levels of xenophobia greater than anywhere else in the world. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) found that competition over jobs, business opportunities, public services and housing gave rise to tension among refugees, asylum seekers, migrants and host communities, identified as a main cause of the xenophobic violence. South Africa received more than 207,000 individual asylum applications in 2008 and a further 222,300 in 2009, representing nearly a four-fold rise in both years over the levels seen in 2007. These refugees and asylum seekers originated mainly from Zimbabwe, Burundi, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Eritrea, Ethiopia and Somalia.\n2021 civil unrest.\nCivil unrest occurred in South Africa's KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng provinces in July 2021, sparked by the imprisonment of former President Jacob Zuma for contempt of court, after he declined to testify at the Zondo Commission, an inquiry into allegations of corruption during his term as president from 2009 to 2018. Protests against the incarceration triggered wider rioting and looting, further exacerbated by job layoffs and economic woes worsened by the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe Economist called it the worst violence that South Africa had experienced since the end of Apartheid.\nPolice and military authorities were mobilised to quell the unrest. By mid-July, the South African National Defense Forces had deployed approximately 25,000 military personnel. As of 18 July, over 3,400 people had been arrested, while as of 22 July, 337 people had died in connection with the unrest.\nThe July 2021 unrest coincided with the Cape Town taxi conflict and Transnet ransomware attack leading to unproven speculation that they might have been connected.\nPost-apartheid heads of state.\nUnder the post-apartheid Constitution the president is head of both state and government. The president is elected by the National Assembly and serves a term that expires at the next general election. A president may serve a maximum of two terms. In the event of a vacancy the Deputy President serves as Acting President.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVOC period.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65639", "revid": "47822643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65639", "title": "Geography of South Africa", "text": "South Africa occupies the southern tip of Africa, its coastline stretching more than from the desert border with Namibia on the Atlantic (western) coast southwards around the tip of Africa and then northeast to the border with Mozambique on the Indian (eastern) coast. The low-lying coastal zone is narrow for much of that distance, soon giving way to a mountainous escarpment (Great Escarpment) that separates the coast from the high inland plateau. In some places, notably the province of KwaZulu-Natal in the east, a greater distance separates the coast from the escarpment. Although much of the country is classified as semi-arid, it has considerable variation in climate as well as topography. The total land area is . It has the 23rd largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .\nThe South African central plateau contains only two major rivers: the Limpopo (a stretch of which is shared with Zimbabwe), and the Orange (with its tributary, the Vaal) which runs with a variable flow across the central landscape from east to west, emptying into the Atlantic Ocean at the Namibian border.\nThe eastern and southern coastal regions are drained by numerous shorter rivers. There are very few coastal rivers along the arid west coast north of 31\u00b030\u2032S.\nIn such a dry country, dams and irrigation are extremely important: the largest dam is the Gariep on the Orange River.\nTopographical divisions.\nLike much of the African continent south of the Sahara, South Africa's landscape is dominated by a high Central Plateau surrounded by coastal lowlands. This plateau is rimmed by the Great Escarpment which extends northwards to about 10\u00b0\u00a0south of the Equator (i.e. into Angola in the west, and the Muchinga Escarpment in Zambia in the east.)\nGreat Escarpment.\nIn South Africa the plateau is at its highest in the east where its edge varies in altitude between 2,000\u00a0m and 3,300\u00a0m. This edge of the plateau, as the land drops sharply to the coastal plain, forms a very high, steep escarpment known as the Drakensberg Mountains. The southern and western extents of the escarpment are not so high as Drakensberg, but also are known by a wide variety of local names, all termed \"mountains\" (or \"berge\" in Afrikaans), in spite of being parts of an escarpment whose top is the central plateau, such as Groenberg Mountain. From the coastal plain the escarpment does, however, look like a range of mountains, hence the names.\nThe portion of the Great Escarpment that could be designated a \"mountain\" is where it forms the international border between KwaZulu-Natal and Lesotho. The Lesotho Highlands form a localized high spot on the Central Plateau. This is because it is capped by a 1,400\u00a0m thick layer of erosion resistant lava which welled up and spread across most of Southern Africa when it was still part of Gondwana. Most of this lava has eroded away together with a layer of Karoo sedimentary rocks several kilometres thick on top of which the lava was poured out 182\u00a0million years ago. Only a small patch of this lava remains and covers much of Lesotho. It has been deeply eroded by the tributaries of the Orange River which drain these highlands towards the south-west (i.e. away from the Escarpment). This gives this high region its very rugged, mountainous appearance.\nCentral plateau.\nThe central plateau (apart from the Lesotho Highlands) forms a largely flat, tilted surface which, as indicated above, is highest in the east, sloping gently downwards to the west (at about 1,000\u00a0m above sea level). The downward slope to the south is less pronounced (the southern and south-western edges of the plateau are at about 1600 to 1900\u00a0m above sea level). The plateau also slopes downwards, northwards from about the 25\u00b0\u00a030'\u00a0S line of latitude, into a 150\u2011million-year-old failed rift valley which cuts into the central plateau and locally obliterates the Great Escarpment, forming what is today known as the Limpopo Lowveld at less than 500\u00a0m above sea level. The rivers which drain the plateau therefore run west, ultimately, via the Orange River, into the Atlantic Ocean. North of the Witwatersrand, where the land starts to slope down towards the north, the drainage is into the Limpopo River and from there into the Indian Ocean.\nCoastal plain.\nThe coastal plain, which varies in width from about 60\u00a0km in the north-west to over 250\u00a0km in the north-east, generally slopes gently downwards from the foot of the escarpment to the coast. Numerous relatively small rivers drain the area, being more numerous in the KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Midlands regions, where they arise on the well watered slopes of the high escarpment, than elsewhere. In the west there are very few such rivers because of the aridity of the region.\nCape Fold Mountains.\nIn the south and south-west the coastal plain contains a series of mountain ranges that run parallel to the coastline. These are the Cape Fold Mountains, whose rocks were laid down 510 \u2013 350\u00a0million years ago, and were then crumpled into a series of parallel folds by the collision of the Falkland Plateau into the south of what was to become Africa when it was part of Gondwana. These series of parallel folds are in the form of an \"L\", with the western section running north\u2013south, and the eastern section running east\u2013west, for a total length of about 800\u00a0km. The right angle of the \"L\" occurs in the south-western corner of the country, just inland from the Cape Peninsula and Cape Town. These folds lie along the coastline in the south and are not much more than 100\u00a0km wide in total along most of their length. In the west they are separated from the coast by a pronounced coastal plain.\nThe floors of the long valleys between the parallel mountains ranges consist of fertile soils composed of weathered mudstones belonging to the Bokkeveld Group of the Cape Supergroup, as opposed to the nutrient-poor, sandy soils on the quartzitic sandstone mountains, on either side of the valleys. However, the rainfall is, in general, low, bordering on the semiarid (or frankly semiarid in, for instance, the Little Karoo). Agriculture, which includes viniculture and fruit-growing, therefore depends on irrigation from rivers with sources in the mountains, which are frequently covered in snow during winter. The Little Karoo is famous for its ostrich farming, initially, in the late 1800s, for their feathers, but today includes ostrich leather and ostrich meat, which is very lean and particularly tasty.\nThe Cape Fold Mountains are separated from the Great Escarpment by an approximately 100\u2013150\u00a0km wide plain known as the Lower Karoo (not to be confused with the \"Little Karoo\") at an altitude of about 600\u2013800\u00a0m above sea level. Geologically and geographically the Cape Fold Mountains and the Great Escarpment are quite different and independent entities.\nCoastline.\nSouth Africa's coastline is remarkably smooth, with very few natural harbours. The reason is that Southern Africa has been continuously uplifted for the past 180\u00a0million years, and especially so during the past 20\u00a0million years. The present coastline was therefore once part of the underwater continental shelf, which contains very few deep ravines or gorges. In contrast, a subsiding coastline, like Norway's, tends to become deeply indented where the sea has flooded old river gorges and glacial valleys.\nRegional divisions.\nHighveld.\nThe Central Plateau is divided into several distinctly different regions (though with very vague boundaries), largely as a result of the rainfall distribution across South Africa: wet in the east and increasingly drier and more arid in the west. The wettest and most fertile portion of the Central Plate is the Highveld, which occupies the central eastern portion of the Plateau. It is generally between 1,500 \u2013 2,100\u00a0m above sea level, highest on the edge of the Escarpment to the east (the Mpumalanga Drakensberg), and sloping downwards to the south and west. Its southern boundary is often taken to be the Orange River, from where the continuation of the plateau is known as the Great Karoo, except for a small strip just south of Lesotho which is often included in the Highveld. To the west the Highveld fades into the dry savannah of Griqualand West, beyond which lies the Kalahari desert. This boundary is very vague. The Highveld therefore encompasses the entire Free State, and an adjoining strip of the Provinces to the north of it. It receives between 400 and 1200\u00a0mm of rain annually, and is largely a flat grassland plain. Much of the area is devoted to commercial farming, but it also contains South Africa's largest conurbation in Gauteng Province, the centre of the gold mining industry. But there are also important coal mines on the Highveld which are associated with South Africa's major electricity generating power stations.\nThe land is generally flat or gently undulating. Only a few rocky ridges protrude from this flatness: the Vredefort Dome, the Witwatersrand Ridge and the Magaliesberg just north of Pretoria, from where the Highveld gives way to the Bushveld to the north.\nLowveld.\nThe South African portion of the coastal strip between the Limpopo and Mpumalanga Drakensberg and the ocean, together with the Limpopo River valley, is called the Lowveld. These lowlands, below about altitude, form South Africa's northern border with Botswana and Zimbabwe, where a 180\u2011million-year-old failed rift valley cuts into Southern Africa's central plateau and locally obliterates the Great Escarpment. The Limpopo and Save rivers run from the central African highlands via the Lowveld into the Indian Ocean to the east. The Limpopo Lowveld extends southwards, east of the Drakensberg escarpment through Mpumalanga Province and ultimately into eastern Eswatini. This southern limb of the Lowveld is bounded by South Africa's border with Mozambique to the east, and the north-eastern part of the Drakensberg to the west. This region is generally hotter and less intensely cultivated than the Highveld.\nThe Lowveld used to be known as \"fever country\" because malaria, carried by mosquitoes, was endemic to almost the entire area. Before the middle of the 20th century, the Lowveld was also home to the tsetse fly, which transmits sleeping sickness to humans and nagana to animals, especially the horses of the travelers trying to reach the Highveld and Witwatersrand Gold Fields from Maputo.\nThe Lowveld is known for its high concentration of big game, including the larger animals, like African elephants, rhino, African buffalo, the big cats (lions, leopards, and cheetahs), the plains zebra, and a wide variety of antelope, while the slow-flowing streams and wetlands of the Lowveld are a haven for the hippos and crocodiles. The bird life is also astoundingly abundant and varied. This wildlife is particularly concentrated in the Kruger National Park located in the eastern Lowveld areas of Mpumalanga and Limpopo Provinces, along almost the entire border with Mozambique. But many private game farms and game reserves can also be found elsewhere in the Lowveld.\nBushveld.\nThe Lowveld partly overlaps with a dry savanna ecoregion known as the Bushveld, a basin characterized by open grasslands with scattered trees and bushes. Elevation varies between 600 metres and about 900 metres above sea level. The Bushveld is one of the largest and best known layered igneous mineral complexes in the world. Covering an area roughly 350 kilometres by 150 kilometres, the Bushveld has extensive deposits of platinum and chromium and significant reserves of copper, fluorspar, gold, nickel, and iron.\nThe northern edge of the Bushveld, where the plains rise to a series of high plateaus and low mountain ranges, form the southern edge of the Lowveld and the Limpopo River Valley in Northern Province. These mountains include the Waterberg, and the Soutpansberg Range. The Soutpansberg Range reaches an elevation of 1,700 meters before dropping off into the Limpopo River Valley and the border between South Africa and Zimbabwe. West of the Bushveld, Highveld, and Lowveld is the southern basin of the Kalahari Desert, which borders Namibia and Botswana at an elevation of 600 meters to 900 meters.\nKaroo.\nThe western section of South Africa on the inland side of the Cape Fold Mountains is dominated by the Great Karoo, a semi-desert region that is divided by the Great Escarpment into the Upper Karoo (at an elevation of 1,100\u20131,600 m) and the Lower Karoo (at an elevation of 600\u2013800 m). Separated from the Great Karoo by the Swartberg mountain range is the Little Karoo.\nIn the southwest, running parallel to the coastline, the mountains of the Cape Fold Belt form a series of ranges that run in the form of an \"L\" by a series running north\u2013south, and another set running east\u2013west, with the junction between the two at the Cape Peninsula. The north\u2013south ranges, paralleling the Atlantic coastline, include the Cederberg and the Groot Winterhoek and have peaks close to 2,000 metres high. The east\u2013west ranges, paralleling the southern coastline, include the Swartberg and the Langeberg with peaks exceeding 2,200 metres. The mountains of the Cape Fold Belt form the southern and western boundaries of the Great Karoo. The other boundaries of the Great Karoo are arbitrary and ill-defined. To the north the Karoo grades into even more arid Bushmanland. To the north-east, the Orange River is often regarded as the boundary between Karoo and the Highveld. To the east the Karoo fades into the grasslands of the Eastern Midlands.\nThe town of Sutherland is located in the Roggeveld region of the Upper Karoo, with midwinter temperatures as low as \u221215\u00a0\u00b0C, and is thought to be the coldest inhabited place in South Africa.\nThe Little Karoo is separated from the Great Karoo by the Swartberg mountain range. It lies in a 290\u00a0km long, narrow (40\u201360\u00a0km wide) valley in of the Cape Fold Mountains, with the Swartberg range to the north and the Langeberg-Outeniqua range to the south. It is as arid as the Great Karoo, except along the foothills of the Swartberg, which are well-watered by streams that cascade down the mountains. The Little Karoo is the centre of the Ostrich farming industry, especially around the town of Oudtshoorn.\nKwaZulu-Natal.\nKwaZulu-Natal is a South African Province that lies entirely below the Great Escarpment, which forms its western and south-western boundaries. It therefore constitutes part of the South African \"Coastal Belt\", which is, over much of this region, more than 220\u00a0km wide. The region can be subdivided into three distinct geographic areas. The lowland region along the Indian Ocean coast is extremely narrow in the south, widening in the northern part of the province, while the central Natal Midlands consist of an undulating hilly, 1,000\u00a0m high plateau, rising to 1,500\u00a0m towards the west, at the foot of the Great Escarpment. The Great Escarpment, known here as the Drakensberg, together with the Lebombo Mountains in the north form the mountainous regions of the province.\nThe coastal regions are typically covered with subtropical thickets, while the deeper ravines and steep slopes of the river valleys host Afromontane Forest. The midlands are covered in moist grasslands with isolated pockets of Afromontane Forest. The north consists, in the main, of moist savanna habitat, whilst the Drakensberg region hosts mostly alpine grassland.\nMost of the KwaZulu-Natal Drakensberg are at an altitude of 2,000\u00a0m, but where they form the border with Lesotho they rise to over 3,000\u00a0m. The Lebombo mountains are a long narrow range, not much higher than 700\u00a0m, that runs along Mozambique's border with South Africa and Eswatini. From Eswatini the range continues south-eastwards for about 40\u00a0km into KwaZulu-Natal.\nA great number of rivers arise in the Drakensberg. These have cut fairly deep valleys, and occasionally gorges, into the KwaZulu-Natal landscape giving the province a very hilly appearance. The Valley of a Thousand Hills, between Durban and Pietermaritzburg, is particularly spectacular. The largest of the rivers is the Tugela, portion of whose waters are pumped over the escarpment on to the Highveld to supplement the water supply to the large industrial cities of Gauteng.\nThe province contains rich areas of biodiversity of a range of flora and fauna. The iSimangaliso Wetland Park and the uKhahlamba Drakensberg Park have been declared UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The iSimangaliso Wetland Park, along with uKhahlamba Drakensberg Park and Ndumo, are wetlands of international importance for migratory species, and are designated as Ramsar sites. South Africa signed the 1971 Ramsar Convention to try to conserve and protect important wetlands because of their importance to habitats and numerous species. \nThe region has a varied yet verdant climate thanks to its diverse, complex topography. Generally, the coast is subtropical with inland regions becoming progressively cooler in winter, but hotter in summer (except on the Escarpment). Durban on the coast has an average annual rainfall of 1010\u00a0mm. The average midday temperature during summer (January\u2013March) is 28\u00a0\u00b0C, with the minimum temperatures in the early morning averaging 21\u00a0\u00b0C. In winter (June\u2013August) the average maximum temperature is 23\u00a0\u00b0C, and the minimum is 11\u00a0\u00b0C. The summer temperatures in Pietermaritzburg are similar to those in Durban, but it is considerably cooler in winter. The temperature in Ladysmith, further inland, in the Tugela River Valley, reaches 30\u00a0\u00b0C in the summer, but may drop below freezing point on winter evenings. The Drakensberg can experience heavy winter snow, with light snow occasionally experienced on the highest peaks in summer. The Zululand coastal region, in the north of the province, has a tropical climate with high humidities, supporting many sugar cane farms.\nBeaches of KwaZulu-Natal are of world-class quality. The warm coastal climate means that visitors are attracted to them all year round. Some of the visitors, however, come for the annual late-autumn or early-winter \"sardine run\" along the KwaZulu-Natal coastline, south of Durban. Referred to as \"the greatest shoal on earth\", the sardine run occurs when millions of sardines migrate from their spawning grounds south of the southern tip of Africa northward along the Eastern Cape coastline toward KwaZulu-Natal. They follow a route close inshore, often resulting in many fish washing up on beaches. The huge shoal of tiny fish can stretch for many kilometres; it is preyed upon by thousands of predators, including game fish, sharks, dolphins, and seabirds. Usually the shoals break up and the fish disappear into deeper water around Durban. Scientists have been unable to answer many questions surrounding this exceptional seasonal event.\nBushmanland.\nBushmanland is an arid area inland from Namaqualand (see below). Its northern boundary is the Orange River beyond which lies Namibia. In the south it grades into the north-western part of the Great Karoo. To the west lies Griqualand West. It is probably the most inhospitable area in South Africa, because of its aridity, infertile soil and highly saline groundwater. Together with the Kalahari Desert to the north-east, its rainfall is the most highly variable (in percentage deviation from the annual average), and its temperature range the greatest (difference between the average temperature in January and in July) in South Africa. Its wildlife however, both fauna and flora, though sparse, is full of interest. Although the veld is too arid to bloom like that of the West Coast of Namaqualand, even when there is some spring rain, what does appear is highly unusual and often hauntingly beautiful.\nA highly productive base metal mine on the Aggeneys Farm close to the N14 highway between Upington and Springbok exploits an ore rich in zinc, lead, copper, and silver since 1977. Close by, to the east, is Ghaamsberg which has very large zinc deposits, but the ore is low-grade and, therefore, at present, unprofitable to large scale mining.\nVaalputs, a nuclear waste repository, has been sited between Bushmanland and the north-west of the Great Karoo, and acts as a \"de facto\" nature reserve.\nNamaqualand.\nThis is the arid region along the north-western coastline (northwards from approximately the 31\u00b0S line of latitude) of South Africa, partly above and partly below the Great Escarpment. The region extends into Namibia, north of the Orange River, where it is known as \"Great Namaqualand\", or \"Namaland\". The South African portion of Namaqualand is known as \"Little Namaqualand\", and falls within the Northern Cape Province. The region is sparsely populated, mainly by Afrikaans speaking people of Nama, and Khoikhoi descent. The original Nama and Khoikhoi languages are spoken in only a few remote areas. The main economic activities are mining, and fishing along the coast.\nSome of the more prominent towns in this area are Springbok, being the capital of this region, as well as Kleinzee and Koiingnaas, both private mining towns owned by De Beers Diamond Mines. This area is rich in alluvial diamonds, deposited along the coast by the Orange River. Oranjemund is another mining town along this coast, situated in Namibia, but very much on the border. As the name suggests, it is at the mouth of the Orange River which forms the border between South Africa and Namibia. The town of Alexander Bay is located on the opposite side of the river mouth (i.e. in South Africa) and is linked to Oranjemund by the Ernest Oppenheimer Bridge. Other links crossing the river further upstream are a reintroduced pontoon at Sendelingsdrift in the Richtersveld National Park, and road bridges at Vioolsdrif (the main border crossing between the two countries) and at the remote border crossing of Onseepkans.\nA vibrant fishing industry is found along this stretch of the South African west coast, especially in Port Nolloth, which is also a major resort town for people living in the interior of South Africa (e.g. Gauteng), and Hondeklipbaai, (or Dogstonebay), so called because of a large boulder outside the town which, when viewed correctly, looks vaguely like a dog sitting down.\nThe copper bangles worn by the Khoikhoi aroused the interests of the Dutch officials of the Dutch settlement established by Jan van Riebeeck in the Cape in 1652. Several expeditions were consequently mounted to find the source of this copper. A mineshaft was dug in the \"Copper Mountains\" in northern Namaqualand in 1685, which still can be seen near the disused Carolusberg mine a few kilometers east of Springbok. However commercial mining was only started in 1859, and over the next 140 years vast quantities of ore have been extracted from 23 mines in the area. Springbok and its surrounding towns (Nababeep and Okiep) were the center of this mining activity. But, in the early 2000s the last mine was closed. However, about 115\u00a0km further inland, in Bushmanland (see above), a large new mine is extracting copper, lead, zinc, and silver from the \"Black Mountain\" (originally \"Swartberg\") deposits at Aggeneys since 1977. High grade granite is mined in several places (e.g. near Kamieskroon, and Concordia) in this granite-rich landscape.\nNamaqualand is popular with both local and international tourists during early springtime (August - September), when for a short period this normally arid area becomes covered with a kaleidoscope of colour during the flowering season. This is known throughout South Africa as the Namaqualand daisy season, when orange and white daisies, as well as hundreds of other flowering species, spring up from a previously barren landscape. A part of Little Namaqualand, known as the Richtersveld, is a national park and a World Heritage Site, while the often-visited Namaqua National Park and the Goegap Nature Reserve are located short distances from Kamieskroon and Springbok, respectively.\nSurrounding oceans.\nThe vast majority of South Africa's border consists of the ocean\u2014or two oceans, which, according to the International Hydrographic Organization, officially meet at Cape Agulhas, the most southern point of Africa. Its territory includes Marion and Prince Edward Islands, nearly south of Cape Town in the sub-antarctic Indian Ocean.\nThe cold Benguela current is a mineral-rich upwelling current, which flows away to the north along the western coastline, after having come up from the cold depths of the Atlantic Ocean. Plankton grow in these fertile waters, and support large numbers of fish, and therefore a prosperous (in the past) fishing industry. Over-fishing has, however, reduced the importance of this fishing industry both for the local as well as the country's economy. The east coast has the north-to-south Mozambique/Agulhas Current, which provides warm waters. These two currents have a major effect on the country's climate, the ready evaporation of the eastern seas providing generous rainfall while the Benguela current retains its moisture to cause desert conditions in the west.\nSeveral small rivers run into the sea along the coastline, but none is navigable and none provides useful natural harbours. The coastline itself, being fairly smooth, provides only one good natural harbour at Saldanha Bay north of Cape Town. A lack of fresh water, however, prevented permanent settlement here until relatively recently. The Bay of Natal looks, on the map, like a good natural harbour, but, in its natural state, it was dry at low tide. Nevertheless, busy harbours now exist at Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, East London, Durban in the Bay of Natal, and Richards Bay. Saldanha Bay is today an important harbour at the end of the Sishen\u2013Saldanha railway line for the export of Iron ore from the interior.\nClimate.\nSouth Africa is largely a dry country, with most of its western regions being semi-desert. The rainfall increases in the east, (the Highveld, KwaZulu-Natal, and the Eastern Midlands), and falls primarily in summer. The narrow southern coastal strip receives all-year rainfall in the east (the Garden Route), and winter rainfall in the west (on the Cape Peninsula and its surrounds). The summers are warm to hot, while the winter temperatures can vary, depending on locality from bitterly cold to cool. Thus the Karoo, which occupies a large part of the western Central Plateau, has a climate which is extremely hot in summer and bitterly cold in winter. In contrast, the eastern coastline on the Indian Ocean is lush, well watered and warmed by the Mozambique Current; patches of Southern Africa mangroves grow along this coast.\nThe southern coast, part of which is known as the Garden Route, is temperate and green. The Cape Peninsula and surrounds have a Mediterranean climate, with cool, wet winters and warm, dry summers (becoming hotter in interior valleys). Snow commonly falls in winter on the higher ground of the Cape Fold Mountains, during winter. The Cape Peninsula has a reputation for its wind: the dry \"South-Easter\" which blows almost incessantly in summer (December\u2013February), and the \"North-Wester\" which accompanies the cold fronts that roll in from the Atlantic during winter (June\u2013August). The vegetation of the Cape area consists of fynbos, some grassland and Albany thickets.\nThe eastern section of the Karoo does not extend as far north as the western part, giving way to the flat landscape of the Free State, which \u2013 though still semi-arid \u2013 receives somewhat more rain. North of the Vaal River the Highveld is better watered, with an annual rainfall of and a high altitude (around ) which mitigates the extremes of heat of an inland area at this latitude. Winters are cold, though snow is rare.\nFurther north and to the east, especially where a drop in altitude beyond the escarpment gives the Lowveld its name, the temperature rises. The Tropic of Capricorn slices through the extreme north. Here one finds the typical South African Bushveld.\nThere is skiing in winter in the high mountainous regions: the Drakensberg mountains that form the eastern escarpment along the KwaZulu-Natal/Lesotho border, and on the Hex River Mountains of the Cape Fold Belt, but the coldest place in the country is Sutherland in the western Roggeveld region of the Upper Karoo, with minimum midwinter temperatures as low as \u221215\u00a0\u00b0C. The deep interior provides the hottest temperatures: in 1948 the mercury hit in the Northern Cape Kalahari near Upington.\nClimate change.\nClimate change in South Africa is expected to bring considerable warming and drying to much of this already semi-arid region, with greater frequency and intensity of extreme weather events such as heatwaves, flooding and drought. According to computer generated climate modelling produced by the South African National Biodiversity Institute parts of southern Africa will see an increase in temperature by about one degree Celsius along the coast to more than four degrees Celsius in the already hot hinterland such as the Northern Cape in late spring and summertime by 2050. The Cape Floral Kingdom, identified as one of the global biodiversity hotspots, is predicted to be hit very hard by climate change. Drought, increased intensity and frequency of fire and climbing temperatures are expected to push many rare species towards extinction.\nMultiple entities are working to combat the effects of degradation and drought. In the Port Elizabeth region, national NGO Living Lands had in cooperation with an agricultural insurance company, planted 3.7 million trees as of late 2015, in order to restore the water catchment system and halt erosion.\nEnvironmental issues.\nSouth Africa has lost a large area of natural habitat in the last four decades, primarily due to overpopulation, sprawling development patterns and deforestation during the 19th century. South Africa is one of the worst affected countries in the world when it comes to invasion by alien species with many (e.g. black wattle, Port Jackson willow, \"Hakea\", \"Lantana\" and \"Jacaranda\") posing a significant threat to the native biodiversity and the already scarce water resources. The original temperate forest found by the first European settlers was exploited ruthlessly until only small patches remained. Currently, South African hardwood trees like real yellowwood (\"Podocarpus latifolius\"), stinkwood (\"Ocotea bullata\"), and South African black ironwood (\"Olea laurifolia\") are under government protection. Statistics from the South African Environmental Affairs department show a record 1215 rhinos were killed in 2014.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of South Africa, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location in the country.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65643", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65643", "title": "Demographics of South Africa", "text": "According to the 2022 census, the population of South Africa is about 62 million people of diverse origins, cultures, languages, and religions, with a majority being Black Africans. The South African National Census of 2022 was the most recent census held; the next will be in 2032.\nIn 2011, Statistics South Africa counted 2.1 million foreigners in total. Reports suggest that is an underestimation. The real figure may be as high as five million, including some three million Zimbabweans.\nHistory.\nThe earliest creatures that can be identified as human ancestors in South Africa are australopithecines. The first evidence of this was a child's skull found in the Taung quarry site. This was in the modern day North-West province. More fossils australopithecines were found in limestone caves Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, and Kromdaai.\nPopulation.\nEarlier Censuses, 1904 to 2011.\n1904 Census.\nSouth African population figures for the 1904 Census.\n1960 Census.\nSources: \"Statesman's Year-Book\" 1967\u20131968; \"Europa Year Book\" 1969 \n1904\u201385 national census numbers.\nBantustan demographics were removed from South African census data during Apartheid and for this reason official figures on the national population of the country during that period will be inaccurate.\n1996 Census.\nSource: \"The People of South Africa: Population Census, 1996\"\n2001 Census.\nSource: \"Statistics South Africa: Census 2001\"\n2011 Census.\nSource: \"Census 2011: Census in Brief\"\n2022 Census.\nSource: \"Census 2022 Statistical Release\"\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n &lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Population estimates for South Africa 2002-2020\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorical and projected population for the years 1 to 2022.\nUN age and population estimates: 1950 to 2030.\nAccording to the 2019 revision of the \"United Nations World Population Prospects\", South Africa's total population was 55,386,000 in 2015, compared to only 13,628,000 in 1950. In 2015, 29.3% of the people were children under the age of 15, 65.7% were between 15 and 64 years of age, and 5.0% were 65 or older. All population estimates are rounded to the nearest thousand.\nUN population projections: 2019 to 2100.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVital statistics.\nVital statistics.\nThe following statistics are obtained from the mid-year population estimates published by Statistics South Africa:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nUnited Nations Population Estimates.\nThe Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates. (Natural increase or decrease over a time period is the difference between that period's live births and deaths, before accounting for inward or outward migration.)\nAge and race distribution.\nAge distribution within each racial group.\nBy generation.\nRacial composition of each age group in 2015 (estimates)\nRacial composition of each age group in 2020 (estimates).\nSource:\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nFertility rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and CBR (Crude Birth Rate):\nFertility rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) by ethnic group.\nLife expectancy.\nLife expectancy at birth from 1950 to 2020 (\"UN World Population Prospects\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Life expectancy in South Africa 1950\u20132020 (per 5 yr clusters)\n &lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0Life expectancy in South Africa 1950\u20132021 (per 5 yr clusters)\n &lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nStatistics South Africa asks people to describe themselves in the census in terms of five racial population groups. The 2011 census figures for these groups were African at 80.2%, White at 8.4%, Coloured at 8.8%, Indian/Asian at 2.5%, and Other/Unspecified at 0.5%.\nThe white percentage of the population has sharply declined. The first census in South Africa in 1911 showed that whites made up 22% of the population. This declined to 16% in 1980, 8.9% in 2011 and 7.65% in 2022. Coloured South Africans replaced Whites as the largest minority group around 2010.\nLanguages.\nSouth Africa has twelve official languages: isiZulu 24.4%, isiXhosa 16.3%, Afrikaans 10.6%, English 8.7%, Sepedi 10.0%, Setswana 8.3%, Sesotho 7.8%, Xitsonga 4.7%, siSwati 2.8%, Tshivenda 2.5%, isiNdebele 1.7% and South African Sign Language.\nIn this regard, it is third only to Bolivia and India in number. While all the languages are formally equal, some languages are spoken more than others. According to the 2022 census, the three most spoken languages in the household are Zulu (24.4%), Xhosa (16.3%), and Afrikaans (10.6%).\nBetween 1996 and 2022, the proportion of Afrikaans speakers declined from 14.5% to 10.6% and English held steady at 8.7%, whle isiZulu grew from 22.8% to 24.4%, and Xhosa declined from 17.9% to 16.3%\nThe country also recognises several unofficial languages, including Sekholokoe, Fanagalo, Khwe, Lobedu, Nama, Northern Ndebele, Phuthi and San. These unofficial languages may be used in certain official uses in limited areas where it has been determined that these languages are prevalent. Nevertheless, their populations are not such that they require nationwide recognition.\nMany of the \"unofficial languages\" of the San and Khoikhoi people contain regional dialects stretching northwards into Namibia and Botswana, and elsewhere. These people, who are a physically distinct population from other Africans, have their own cultural identity based on their hunter-gatherer societies. They have been marginalised to a great extent, and many of their languages are in danger of becoming extinct.\nMany white South Africans also speak other European languages, such as Portuguese (also spoken by black Angolans and Mozambicans), German, Serbian and Greek, while some Indians and other Asians in South Africa speak South Asian languages, such as Bhojpuri, Tamil, Hindi, Gujarati, Urdu and Telugu. Although many South Africans are of Huguenot (French) origin, South African French is spoken by fewer than 10,000 individuals country-wide. Congolese French is also spoken in South Africa by migrants.\nThe primary sign language of deaf South Africans is South African Sign Language. Other sign languages among indigenous peoples are also used.\nBy ethnicity.\nIn 2011, the first language was Zulu for 28.1% of Black South African residents, Xhosa for 19.8%, Sepedi for 11.2%, Tswana for 9.7%, Sesotho for 9.3%, Tsonga for 5.5%, siSwati for 3.1%, Venda for 2.9%, English for 2.8%, Southern Ndebele for 2.6%, Afrikaans for 1.5%, while 3.4% had another first language.\nAmong whites, Afrikaans was the first language for 59.1% of the population, compared to 35.0% for English. Other languages accounted for the remaining 5.9%.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2022 national census, Christians accounted for 85.3% of the population. This includes Protestant (36.6%), Zionist Christian (11.1%), Pentecostal/Charismatic (8.2%), Roman Catholic (7.1%), Methodist (6.8%), Dutch Reformed (6.7%), Anglican (3.8%); members of other Christian churches accounted for another 36% of the population. Muslims accounted for 1.5% of the population, Other 2.3%, and 1.4% were Unspecified and None 15.1%.\nMuslims are largely found among the Coloured and Indian ethnic groups. They have been joined by black or white South African converts as well as immigrants from other parts of Africa. \nThe Hindu population has its roots in the British colonial period, but later waves of immigration from India have also contributed to it. Most Hindus are of South Asian origin, but there are many who come from mixed racial stock. Some are converts due to the efforts of ISKCON.\nOther minority religions in South Africa are Sikhism, Jainism, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith and Judaism.\nBy ethnicity.\n86.0% of black residents are Christian, 3.0% have no religion, 0.3% are Muslim, 0.0% are Jewish, 0.0% are Hindu, 9.5% Traditional African and 1.2% have other or undetermined beliefs (2022 Census).\n90.1% of white residents are Christian, 4.9% have no religion, 0.3% are Muslim, 0.7% are Jewish, and 0.1% are Hindu. 3.9% have other or undetermined beliefs (2022 Census).\nOther demographic statistics.\nThe following demographics are from the CIA World Factbook unless otherwise indicated.\n57,516,665 (2022 est.)\n55,380,210 (July 2018 est.)\n\"0-14 years:\" 27.94% (male 7,894,742/female 7,883,266)\n\"15-24 years:\" 16.8% (male 4,680,587/female 4,804,337)\n\"25-54 years:\" 42.37% (male 12,099,441/female 11,825,193)\n\"55-64 years:\" 6.8% (male 1,782,902/female 2,056,988)\n\"65 years and over:\" 6.09% (2020 est.) (male 1,443,956/female 1,992,205)\n\"0-14 years:\" 28.18% (male 7,815,651 /female 7,793,261)\n\"15-24 years:\" 17.24% (male 4,711,480 /female 4,837,897)\n\"25-54 years:\" 42.05% (male 11,782,848 /female 11,503,831)\n\"55-64 years:\" 6.71% (male 1,725,034 /female 1,992,035)\n\"65 years and over:\" 5.81% (male 1,351,991 /female 1,866,182) (2018 est.)\n18.56 births/1,000 population (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 77th\n19.9 births/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 78th\n9.26 deaths/1,000 population (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 52nd\n9.3 deaths/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 57th\n2.18 children born/woman (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 90th\n2.26 children born/woman (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 91st\n0.93% (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 103rd\n0.97% (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 114th\nTotal: 28 years. Country comparison to the world: 142nd\nMale: 27.9 years\nFemale: 28.1 years (2020 est.)\nTotal: 27.4 years. Country comparison to the world: 144th\nMale: 27.2 years \nFemale: 27.6 years (2018 est.)\n54.6% (2016)\n0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2022 est.) Country comparison to the world: 98th\n-0.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2018 est.) Country comparison to the world: 138th\nTotal dependency ratio: 52.5 (2015 est.)\nYouth dependency ratio: 44.8 (2015 est.)\nElderly dependency ratio: 7.7 (2015 est.)\nPotential support ratio: 12.9 (2015 est.)\nUrban population: 68.3% of total population (2022)\nRate of urbanization: 1.72% annual rate of change (2020-25 est.)\nUrban population: 66.4% of total population (2018)\nRate of urbanization: 1.97% annual rate of change (2015-20 est.)\nTotal population: 65.32 years. Country comparison to the world: 202nd\nMale: 63.99 years\nFemale: 66.68 years (2022 est.)\nTotal population: 64.1 years (2018 est.)\nDegree of risk: intermediate (2020)\nFood or waterborne diseases: bacterial diarrhea, hepatitis A, and typhoid fever\nWater contact diseases: schistosomiasis\nMajor infectious diseases.\nnote: widespread ongoing transmission of a respiratory illness caused by the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) is occurring throughout South Africa; as of 6 June 2022, South Africa has reported a total of 3,968,205 cases of COVID-19 or 6,690.7 cumulative cases of COVID-19 per 100,000 population with a total of 101,317 cumulative deaths or a rate of 170.83 cumulative deaths per 100,000 population; as of 6 June 2022, 36.33% of the population has received at least one dose of COVID-19 vaccine\nBlack African 80.9%, coloured 8.8%, white 7.8%, Indian/Asian 2.6% (2021 est.)\nisiZulu (official) 24.7%, isiXhosa (official) 15.6%, Afrikaans (official) 12.1%, Sepedi (official) 9.8%, Setswana (official) 8.9%, English (official) 8.4%, Sesotho (official) 8%, Xitsonga (official) 4%, siSwati (official) 2.6%, Tshivenda (official) 2.5%, Khoi, Nama, and San languages 1.9% isiNdebele (official) 1.6% (2017 est.)\nnote: data represent language spoken most often at home\n6.8% of GDP (2020) Country comparison to the world: 22nd\n6.1% of GDP (2017) Country comparison to the world: 34th\nLiteracy.\nDefinition: age 15 and over can read and write (2015 est.)\nTotal population: 95%\nMale: 95.5%\nFemale: 94.5% (2019)\nTotal population: 94.4% \nMale: 95.4% \nFemale: 95.4% (2015 est.)\nTotal: 14 years\nMale: 13 years\nFemale: 14 years (2019)\nTotal: 59.4%\nMale: 55.4%\nFemale: 64.1% (2020 est.)\nImmigration.\nSouth Africa hosts a sizeable refugee and asylum seeker population. According to the \"World Refugee Survey 2008\", published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, this population numbered approximately 144,700 in 2007. Groups of refugees and asylum seekers numbering over 10,000 included people from Zimbabwe (48,400), the Democratic Republic of the Congo (24,800), and Somalia (12,900). These populations mainly lived in Johannesburg, Pretoria, Durban, Cape Town, and Port Elizabeth. Many refugees have now also started to work and live in rural areas in provinces such as Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal.\nStatistics SA assumes in some of their calculations that there are fewer than 2 million immigrants in South Africa. Other institutions, like the police and M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res place estimate the figure at 4 million.\nImmigration figures.\nMain countries of immigration in South Africa according to the 2011 Census and 2022 Census: \nImmigration assumptions by Statistics South Africa to South Africa based on race. Negative numbers represent net migration from South Africa to other countries.\n &lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n Immigration to SA by Race (Negative values indicate net migration from SA elsewhere)\nUrbanisation.\n\"Urban areas contain about two-thirds of the population; many of these consist of huge informal or squatter settlements.\""}
{"id": "65645", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65645", "title": "Psychogenic amnesia", "text": ""}
{"id": "65646", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65646", "title": "Kangasala", "text": " is a town in Finland, located in the Pirkanmaa region. It lies to the east of the regional capital, Tampere. The population of Kangasala is approximately , while the metropolitan area has a population of approximately . It is the most populous municipality in Finland.\nKangasala was founded in 1865. The town covers an area of of which is water. The population density is .\nKangasala is known for its mansions, such as Liuksiala, where the Swedish queen Karin M\u00e5nsdotter lived as a widow, and W\u00e4\u00e4ksy. Kangasala has a long history of tourism due to its cultural aspect, especially its museums. The landscape includes ridges and lakes. For example, the lakes Roine, L\u00e4ngelm\u00e4vesi and Vesij\u00e4rvi are located in Kangasala. These lakes are mentioned in Topelius' poem. Lake Vesij\u00e4rvi is known as the lake with the scenic view described in the poem.\nThe municipality of Sahalahti was merged with Kangasala in 2005 and the municipality of Kuhmalahti in 2011.\nTourism.\nSprings.\nKangasala was known to be a popular destination in the 18th century. At that time, the waters of Kuohu Spring (Kuohunl\u00e4hde) were believed to have healing powers on those who ventured into it and Kangasala became known among tourists as a place to rest. Refreshing in a health spa, bathing, taking outdoor exercise and \"taking the waters\" were popular amongst the aristocracy. It was also the reason why the first tourists came to Kangasala to spend their holidays there.\nA water well building was built by the Kuohu Spring, which was later followed by a separate restaurant and hotel. Spa tourism if often considered to be a predecessor of modern holiday making. However, at the time, it was primarily a pastime of the nobles and the prosperous bourgeoisie only.\nRidges.\nThe golden age of spa tourism lasted about a hundred years, as interest in health springs began to decline in the 1840s. The artists of the Romantic period admired nature and frequently praised its beauty. Artists were drawn to Kangasala to view the landscapes. Amongst university students, wandering their homeland's natural environment became a way of showing patriotic love.\nIn 1775, the king of Sweden, Gustav III, was so taken by the scenery of the Syrj\u00e4nkorkee ridge that he believed it to have been the very place where Satan tempted Jesus and promised him all the wonders of the world. Syrj\u00e4nkorkee also made an impression on the Russian tsar and Grand Duke of Finland, Alexander I, in 1819. Thus, it was later renamed Keisarinharju, which can be translated as 'Emperor's Ridge'.\nIn addition to Keisarinharju, there are three other ridges that are popular panoramic sightseeing locations. The largest and highest of these is Kirkkoharju, also called Helaam\u00e4ki, which stretches from Vatiala to the church of Kangasala. Kuohunharju (Kuohu Ridge) and Vehoniemenharju (Vehoniemi Ridge) are also well known for their views. Haralanvuori, or Haralanharju, located in Suinula, northern Kangasala, is a rocky hill, despite its second name.\nA Summer's Day in Kangasala.\nIn the Summer of 1853, Helsinki suffered from a cholera epidemic. Zacharias Topelius escaped the disease by retreating to the countryside. He visited lieutenant-colonel Aminoff's farm near Haralanvuori with his female acquaintance, Lotta Lindqvist. Topelius became fond of the views from the \"Harjula ridge\" and wrote his famous poem \"A Summer's Day in Kangasala\". Later, Gabriel Lins\u00e9n composed a melody for the poem. From 1995, the melody has been the provincial hymn of the Pirkanmaa region, and it is one of the most widely known Finnish melodies.\nLandscapes.\nThe landscapes of Kangasala made an impression on other Finnish authors as well. Poets like Frans Mikael Franz\u00e9n, Johan Jakob Nervander, Emil von Qvanten, and Johan Ludvig Runeberg wrote about the environment.\nThese landscapes were a source for an arising sense of nationality and arts that were means of concretizing the admiration and pride directed at them. In particular, the early 19th-century art of painting, with its idyllic portraits of country and nature, expresses the intellectual world of Romanticism. The countryside is filled with fields, forests, hills, ridges, lakes, and rivers.\nIn the 19th century, Kangasala's landscapes were painted by several famous painters. The earliest portrayers of the local landscape include Emanuel Thelning, a Swede sent to Kangasala by baron Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt, after he himself had visited the healing spring of Kuohu in 1811, and the German Carl von K\u00fcgelgen, royal painter of Alexander I, who painted at least three paintings representing Kangasala. His workpiece \"Vues pittoresques de la Finlande,\" which includes 15 lithographs, is often considered the start of Finnish landscape painting. The Hermitage in St. Petersburg contains pieces of art by von K\u00fcgelgen.\nOther artists who painted Kangasala were Werner Holmberg, Einar Ilmoni, Eero J\u00e4rnefelt, Hjalmar Munsterhjelm, Sigurd Wettenhovi-Aspa and Magnus von Wright, who painted six paintings on Kangasala in the 1860s.\nThe invention of dry plate photography in 1882 made taking photographs easier and cheaper. Furthermore, landscape photography has started to gain popularity in the city. As far as is currently known, the first actual landscape photographs in Kangasala were taken by Gustin Lojander in 1893. His series of photographs presented the landscapes and sightseeing of Kangasala.\nThe increased popularity of landscape photography decreased artists' interest in the province of Tavastia (H\u00e4me). The search for the roots of Finnishness has now turned towards Karelia (Karjala). Still, Kangasala wasn't forgotten by artists. The number of local artists \u2013 who often were landscapists of their home district \u2013 kept on growing. Photographs helped in making the nation aware of Kangasala's landscapes. At the end of the 19th century, advances in the printing press made it possible to spread pictures throughout the country in the form of affordable picture postcards.\nObservation towers.\nThe artists' descriptions of Kangasala lured more and more travelers to the parish. People had to climb high, even up the trees, to be able to see the views. Although the ridgetops were relatively treeless at that time \u2013 because of the sawmill industry's great demand for wood \u2013 the construction of observation towers was considered necessary to provide new viewpoints. Many lookout spots (except Kuohunharju) got their own observation towers in the 1880s or 1890s. The first observation tower was built on Keisarinharju in 1881. A panoramic pavilion had been built there at the time of the visit of Alexander I, but it had already vanished by the 1850s. The towers at Haralanharju and Keisarinharju were destroyed by an arsonist in 2006 and 2007. Now only the towers at Vehoniemenharju and Kirkkoharju remain, but plans were in progress for rebuilding both towers within a year of the first arson. The Haralanharju tower was rebuilt and finished in 2008, however the Keisarinharju tower was never built into its original height. Instead a shorter observation spot known as Keisarinportaat was built on its place.\nThe ridges of Kangasala and Tampere are part of the same ridge formation. Travelers often used to visit both the ridges of Kangasala and Pyynikinharju (Pyynikki Ridge) in Tampere. Together, they were the most popular tourist attractions in Western Finland. In 1890, approximately 800 visitors came to Kangasala, 1,200\u20131,400 visited Pyynikki, and Imatra, the most popular tourist attraction in Finland at the time, was a destination for about 5,000 tourists.\nThe ideological conceptions created by the artist had a great influence on the Finnish sense of nationality, as had picture postcards and the lake views from the observation towers. When the period of Russification began at the end of the 19th-century, Finnish nature worked as an upbringing force for national self-esteem and as a unifier of Finnish culture. Kangasala played a role in that development.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65647", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65647", "title": "So\u010da Reggae Riversplash", "text": "So\u010da Reggae Riversplash was a music festival in Tolmin, Slovenia at the confluence of the So\u010da and the Tolminka rivers. It mainly features reggae music by international musicians.\n1st So\u010da Reggae Riversplash 2000 (July 13\u201315), Tolmin (confluence).\nNew Born Creation (The Netherlands)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65648", "revid": "50878784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65648", "title": "Maureen Lipman", "text": "British actress, writer and comedian (born 1946)\nDame Maureen Diane Turner (n\u00e9e\u00a0Lipman; born 10 May 1946) is an English actress, columnist and comedian. She trained at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art and her stage work has included appearances with the National Theatre and the Royal Shakespeare Company. She was made a dame in the 2020 Queen's Birthday Honours for services to charity, entertainment and the arts.\nLipman has been nominated for seven Olivier Awards across categories commending acting in plays, musicals and comedy, winning in 1984 for \"See How They Run\". On film, Lipman was BAFTA nominated for \"Educating Rita\" (1983) and has also appeared in \"The Wildcats of St Trinian's\" (1980), \"Carry On Columbus\" (1992), \"Solomon &amp; Gaenor\" (1999) and \"The Pianist\" (2002). On television, Lipman had prominent roles in \"Agony\" (1979\u20131981), \"Smiley's People\" (1982), \"Eskimo Day\" (1996) and \"Ladies of Letters\" (2009\u20132010). Since 2018, she has starred in \"Coronation Street\" as Evelyn Plummer.\nEarly life and education.\nLipman was born on 10 May 1946 in Kingston upon Hull, East Riding of Yorkshire, England, the daughter of Maurice Julius Lipman and Zelma Pearlman. Her father was a tailor; he used to have a shop between the Ferens Art Gallery and Monument Bridge. Lipman grew up Jewish and found post-war Hull a welcoming place for the Jewish community. She lived in Northfield Road, Hull and attended Wheeler Primary School. The family later moved to The Greenway in Anlaby Park.\nLipman then attended Newland School for Girls in Hull, and in her youth became interested in performing. She performed in school productions, attended an early Beatles concert, and watched Elizabeth Taylor's \"Butterfield 8\" fifteen times. Her first performances at home included impersonations of Alma Cogan; \"a nice Jewish girl, she was big in our house\", and she was encouraged into an acting career by her mother, who used to take her to the pantomime and push her onto the stage.\nLipman trained at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art.\nCareer.\nTheatre.\nLipman worked extensively in the theatre following her d\u00e9but in a stage production of \"The Knack\" at the Watford Palace Theatre. In order to get the post, she pretended that a documentary producer wanted to follow her finding her first job \u2013 this was a lie but it seemed to work.\nLipman was a member of Laurence Olivier's National Theatre Company at the Old Vic from 1971 to 1973 and of the Royal Shakespeare Company for its 1973 Stratford season.\nLipman has continued to work in the theatre for more than fifty years, playing, among other roles, Aunt Eller in the National Theatre's \"Oklahoma!\".\nFrom November 2005 to April 2006 she played Florence Foster Jenkins in the Olivier Award-nominated show \"Glorious!\" at the Duchess Theatre in London's West End.\nFrom October 2010 to February 2011, Lipman starred in a production of J.B. Priestley's \"When We Are Married\" at the Garrick Theatre. In 2012, she directed and appeared in a production of \"Barefoot in the Park\" on tour and starred in \"Old Money\" at Hampstead Theatre. In 2013, she starred in \"Daytona\" at the Park Theatre followed by a tour, and in 2014 a season at the Theatre Royal Haymarket. In 2015, she starred with James Dreyfus in Mary Chase's play \"Harvey\" at Birmingham Repertory Theatre, on tour and at the Theatre Royal Haymarket. In 2016, she starred in \"My Mother Said I Never Should\" at the St. James Theatre. In 2017, she starred with Felicity Kendal in a revival of \"Lettice and Lovage\" at the Menier Chocolate Factory. In 2018, she starred with Martin Shaw in \"The Best Man\" at the Playhouse Theatre, as well as returning to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe for the first time in fifty years with a one-woman show of jokes and storytelling called \"Up For It\".\nTelevision.\nLipman's first television role was in \"The Inquisitors\" opposite Diana Dors; other early appearances included the sitcoms \"The Lovers\", and \"Doctor at Large\", and a role in \"The Evacuees\" (1975). Lipman first gained prominence on television in the situation comedy \"Agony\" (1979\u201381), in which she played an agony aunt with a troubled private life. In her role as Stella Craven in \"Smiley's People\" (1982), Lipman appeared with Alec Guinness.\nShe performed the Joyce Grenfell monologue \"The Committee\" for the first time on \"The Green Tie on the Little Yellow Dog\", which was recorded 1982, and broadcast by Channel 4 in 1983.\nShe played the lead role in the television series \"All at No 20\" (1986\u201387) and took on a range of diverse characters when starring in the series of comedy plays \"About Face\" (1989\u201391). She is known for playing Joyce Grenfell in the biographical show \"Re: Joyce!\", which she co-wrote with James Roose-Evans.\nIn 1996 she appeared in the BBC comedy drama \"Eskimo Day\", written by husband Jack Rosenthal and directed by Piers Haggard, about the trials and tribulations of three young would-be students as they arrive with their families at Queens' College, Cambridge, on interview day. There was a sequel, \"Cold Enough for Snow\", in 1997.\nShe appeared as snooty landlady Lillian Spencer in \"Coronation Street\" for six episodes in 2002. The character was employed by Fred Elliott (John Savident) to run The Rovers Return Inn. She re-joined the cast of \"Coronation Street\" in August 2018, this time playing Evelyn Plummer, the long-lost grandmother of Tyrone Dobbs (Alan Halsall).\nIn 2003 she appeared in \"Jonathan Creek\" in the episode \"The Tailor's Dummy\". Lipman played Maggie Wych in the children's television show \"The Fugitives\", broadcast in 2005. She has narrated two television series on the subject of design, one for UKTV about Art Deco and one about 20th-century design for ITV/Sky Travel.\nShe performed as a villain, The Wire, in the 2006 series of \"Doctor Who\" in the episode entitled \"The Idiot's Lantern\".\nShe has also appeared on \"Just a Minute\", \"The News Quiz\", \"That Reminds Me\", \"This Week\" and \"Have I Got News for You\". In 2007, Lipman appeared as a celebrity contestant on \"Comic Relief Does The Apprentice\" to raise money for Comic Relief. The show saw her helping to run a funfair. Later in 2007, she made a guest appearance in \"Casualty\"; this was followed by an appearance in a December 2011 episode of the \"Casualty\" spin-off \"Holby City\", playing a different character.\nIn May 2008, she appeared in the BBC documentary series \"Comedy Map of Britain\". On Sunday 11 January 2009, BBC Four was devoted to a \"Maureen Lipman Night\". On 5 February 2009, she appeared in the third series of teen drama \"Skins\", in the episode entitled \"Thomas\" as Pandora Moon's Aunt Elizabeth.\nShe played Irene Spencer in the ITV3 comedy \"Ladies of Letters\", in which she starred alongside Anne Reid. The show's first series started in 2009, and it returned for a second series in 2010.\nFilm.\nLipman made an early film appearance in \"Up the Junction\" (1968). She played the title character's mother in Roman Polanski's film \"The Pianist\" (2002).\nIn the 1999 film \"Solomon &amp; Gaenor\", the character she played spoke Yiddish throughout.\nAdvertising.\nIn 1987, she was cast as the character \"Beatrice Bellman\" (\"Beatie/BT\"), a Jewish grandmother in a series of television commercials for British Telecom, a role which became sufficiently well known to launch a book \"You Got An Ology\" in 1989, and which was still referred to 25 years later by politicians.\nBooks, newspapers and magazines.\nAfter her husband died in May 2004 she completed his autobiography \"By Jack Rosenthal\", and played herself in her daughter's four-part adaptation of the book, \"Jack Rosenthal's Last Act\", on BBC Radio Four in July 2006. Her anthology, \"The Gibbon's In Decline But The Horse Is Stable\", is a book of animal poems that is illustrated by established cartoonists, including Posy Simmonds and Gerald Scarfe, to raise money for Myeloma UK, to combat the cancer to which she lost her husband.\nShe also wrote a monthly column for \"Good Housekeeping\" magazine for more than ten years, which formed the basis for several autobiographical books, including \"How Was It For You?\", \"Something To Fall Back On\", \"Thank You For Having Me\", \"You Can Read Me Like A Book\" and \"Lip Reading\". Lipman has also contributed a weekly column in \"The Guardian\" in the newspaper's \"G2\" section.\nShe writes for \"The Oldie\" and is on the editorial advisory board of \"Jewish Renaissance\" magazine.\nPersonal life.\nLipman is a practising Jew, and a member of the West London Synagogue. \nShe was married to dramatist Jack Rosenthal from 1974 until his death in 2004, and had a number of roles in his works. The couple had two children, writers Amy and Adam Rosenthal.\nFollowing Jack's death, she moved from Muswell Hill, north London, to Paddington. She also has a small apartment in Manchester, where she stays when filming \"Coronation Street\".\nRetired computer expert Guido Castro, an Egyptian Jew, was her partner from 2008 until his death in January 2021.\nIn August 2024, Lipman became engaged to David Turner, co-founder of gym chain LA Fitness (now owned by PureGym). The couple were married at his home in September 2025.\nPolitical views.\nBurma.\nLipman supports the work of the Burma Campaign UK, Europe's largest NGO regarding Myanmar (Burma). She supports the process of democratisation in the country, and the work of Prospect Burma, a non-political charity that offers Burmese students the opportunity to study at university overseas. Lipman spoke on behalf of Prospect Burma in the BBC Radio 4 Appeal, broadcast in September 2009.\nPro-Israel activism.\nLipman supported Israel's cause during the 2006 Israel\u2013Hezbollah conflict. On 13 July 2006, in a debate on the BBC's \"This Week\", she argued that \"human life is not cheap to the Israelis, and human life on the other side is quite cheap actually, because they strap bombs to people and send them to blow themselves up.\" These comments were condemned by columnist Yasmin Alibhai-Brown who said \"Brutally straight, she sees no equivalence between the lives of the two tribes\". Lipman responded to Alibhai-Brown's accusation of racism by arguing that the columnist had deliberately misrepresented Lipman's comments as generalisations about Muslims rather than specific comments about terrorists. Australian scholar and journalist John Pilger characterised Lipman as a \"promoter of selective good causes\" who is \"allowed to say, without serious challenge\" that human life on the other side is cheap.\nIn \"The Jewish Chronicle\", Lipman argued that media reporting of the conflict was \"heavily distorted\":\nIn May 2015, Lipman joined pro-Israel groups, including the Zionist Federation, in a protest against the Palestinian play \"The Siege\" in its London premiere at Battersea Arts Centre. In a 2016 interview, she ridiculed the Palestinians' \"so-called\" right to return, arguing that nobody \"in history has ever had the right to return,\" and dismissed any United Nations' resolutions censuring Israel for its no-return policy, saying \"This is all voted by people who don't allow women to drive and make them cover their heads with black bags.\" \nIn an interview to \"The Guardian\", on 18 August 2020, Lipman inaccurately asserted that Hezbollah had claimed responsibility for the 2020 Beirut explosion, stating: \"I'm very grateful that Hezbollah said they did it\". She also stated she would not be prepared to work alongside pro-Palestinian actors, citing Maxine Peake and Miriam Margolyes as examples.\nIn 2023 shortly after the start of the Gaza war, Lipman publicised a supportive letter sent to an IDF soldier stating 'if I could I would hug you and tell you how inspirational you are'.\nIn 2024, during the Gaza war, Lipman said that protests against Israel are \"close to fascism\". She stated: \"These bleeding, heartless liberals care so deeply for the Palestinians? That they espouse their cause at the expense of every other oppressed people of the world ... Shame. Shame. Shame on every one of you.\"\nAntisemitism.\nIn a January 2015 interview on LBC Radio, Lipman said she was considering emigrating to the United States or Israel in response to what she perceived as increasing antisemitism in the United Kingdom.\nIn November 2023, Lipman joined a march against antisemitism in London alongside prominent celebrities including Vanessa Feltz, Robert Rinder, Tracy-Ann Oberman, Elliot Levey, Rachel Riley, Eddie Marsan, and David Baddiel.\nThe Labour Party.\nAt the 2005 general election, Lipman supported the Labour Party, but declared in October 2014 that she could no longer do so due to leader Ed Miliband's support for a parliamentary motion in favour of recognising the State of Palestine. In April 2018, Lipman criticised Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn for the way he had ostensibly handled antisemitism in the Labour Party and the party's reputed failure to address the issue. Lipman attended a protest outside Labour's head office and said she was there \"as a disenfranchised socialist\". She identified with a placard reading \"Corbyn made me a Tory\". In a 2020 interview, she described herself as a \"Labour luvvie\" under the tenure of Tony Blair, as opposed to a \"party member\". She also said she would have to be \"stark raving mad to support Conservative Party leader Boris Johnson\".\nHonours.\nLipman was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 1999 New Year Honours and Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2020 Birthday Honours for services to charity, entertainment and the arts. Accompanied by her son, Adam Rosenthal, she received her award from Charles, Prince of Wales at Windsor Castle on 28 October 2021.\nLegacy.\nHer papers, and those of her husband Jack Rosenthal, are held at the University of Sheffield.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65651", "revid": "48048144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65651", "title": "Holocaust denial", "text": "Antisemitic conspiracy theory\nHolocaust denial is the negationist and antisemitic claim that Nazi Germany and its collaborators did not commit genocide against European Jews during World War II, ignoring overwhelming historical evidence to the contrary. Theories assert that the genocide of Jews is a fabrication or exaggeration. Holocaust denial includes making one or more of the following false claims: that Nazi Germany's \"Final Solution\" was aimed only at deporting Jews from the territory of the Third Reich and did not include their extermination; that Nazi authorities did not use extermination camps and gas chambers for the mass murder of Jews; that the actual number of Jews murdered is significantly lower than the accepted figure of approximately six million; and that the Holocaust is a hoax perpetrated by the Allies, Jews, or the Soviet Union.\nHolocaust denial has roots in postwar Europe, beginning with writers such as Maurice Bard\u00e8che and Paul Rassinier. In the United States, the Institute for Historical Review gave Holocaust denial a pseudo-scholarly platform and helped spread it globally. In the Islamic world, Holocaust denial has been used to delegitimize Israel; deniers portray the Holocaust as a fabrication to justify the creation of a Jewish state. Iran is the leading state sponsor, embedding Holocaust denial into its official ideology through state-backed conferences and cartoon contests. In former Eastern Bloc countries, deniers do not deny the mass murder of Jews but deny the participation of their own nationals.\nThe methodologies of Holocaust deniers are based on a predetermined conclusion that ignores historical evidence. Scholars use the term \"denial\" to describe the views and methodology of Holocaust deniers in order to distinguish them from legitimate historical revisionists, who challenge orthodox interpretations of history using established historical methodologies. Holocaust deniers generally do not accept \"denial\" as an appropriate description of their activities and use the euphemism \"revisionism\" instead. Holocaust denial is considered a serious societal problem in many places where it occurs. It is illegal in Canada, Israel, and many European countries, including Germany itself. In 2007 and 2022, the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolutions condemning Holocaust denial.\nTerminology and etymology.\nHolocaust deniers prefer to refer to their work as historical revisionism, and object to being referred to as \"deniers\". Emory University professor Deborah Lipstadt has written that: \"The deniers' selection of the name revisionist to describe themselves is indicative of their basic strategy of deceit and distortion and of their attempt to portray themselves as legitimate historians engaged in the traditional practice of illuminating the past.\" Scholars consider this misleading since the methods of Holocaust denial differ from those of legitimate historical revision. Legitimate historical revisionism is explained in a resolution adopted by the Duke University History Department, November 8, 1991, and reprinted in \"Duke Chronicle\", November 13, 1991, in response to an advertisement produced by Bradley R Smith's Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That historians are constantly engaged in historical revision is certainly correct; however, what historians do is very different from this advertisement. Historical revision of major events ... is not concerned with the actuality of these events; rather, it concerns their historical interpretation \u2013 their causes and consequences generally.\nLipstadt writes that modern Holocaust denial draws its inspiration from various sources, including a school of thought which used an established method to question government policies.\nIn 1992, Donald L. Niewyk gave some examples of how legitimate historical revisionism\u2014the re-examination of accepted history and its updating with newly discovered, more accurate, or less-biased information\u2014may be applied to the study of the Holocaust as new facts emerge to change the historical understanding of it:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With the main features of the Holocaust clearly visible to all but the willfully blind, historians have turned their attention to aspects of the story for which the evidence is incomplete or ambiguous. These are not minor matters by any means, but turn on such issues as Hitler's role in the event, Jewish responses to persecution, and reactions by onlookers both inside and outside Nazi-controlled Europe.\nIn contrast, the Holocaust denial movement bases its approach on the predetermined idea that the Holocaust, as understood by mainstream historiography, did not occur. Sometimes referred to as \"negationism\", from the French term introduced by Henry Rousso, Holocaust deniers attempt to rewrite history by minimizing, denying, or simply ignoring essential facts. Koenraad Elst writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Negationism means the denial of historical crimes against humanity. It is not a reinterpretation of known facts, but the denial of known facts. The term negationism has gained currency as the name of a movement to deny a specific crime against humanity, the Nazi genocide on the Jews in 1941\u201345, also known as the Holocaust (Greek: complete burning) or the \"Shoah\" (Hebrew: disaster). Negationism is mostly identified with the effort at re-writing history in such a way that the fact of the Holocaust is omitted.\nIn \"Secondary Anti-Semitism: From Hard-Core to Soft-Core Denial of the Shoah\", political scientist Clemens Heni writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Contrary to the hard-core version, soft-core denial is often not easily identifiable. Often it is tolerated, or even encouraged and reproduced in the mainstream, not only in Germany. Scholars have only recently begun to unravel this disturbing phenomenon. Manfred Gerstenfeld discusses Holocaust trivialization in an article published in 2008. In Germany in 2007 two scholars, Thorsten Eitz and Georg St\u00f6tzel, published a voluminous dictionary of German language and discourse regarding National Socialism and the Holocaust. It includes chapters on Holocaust trivialization and contrived comparisons, such as the infamous \"atomic Holocaust\", \"Babycaust\", \"Holocaust of abortion\", \"red Holocaust\" or \"biological Holocaust\".\nCauses.\nThere are a wide variety of motivations for denying the Holocaust, which can include antisemitism, German nationalism, and sympathy for National Socialism.\nEnzo Traverso argues that instrumentalization of the Holocaust could lead to Holocaust denial: \"many will come to believe that the Holocaust is a myth invented to defend the interests of Israel and its allies\".\nAlthough some have argued that Holocaust denial is rising over time, other evidence indicates that it remains a fringe belief.\nBackground.\nDenial as a means of genocide.\nLawrence Douglas argues that denial was invented by the perpetrators and employed as a means of genocide. For example, trucks of Zyklon B were labeled with Red Cross symbols and victims were told that they would be \"resettled\". Douglas also cites the Posen speeches as an example of denial while genocide was ongoing, with Himmler referring to the Holocaust as \"an unnamed and never to be named page of glory\". According to Douglas, the denial of mass murder using gas chambers recalls the Nazi efforts to persuade the victims that they were actually harmless showers.\nEfforts to conceal the historical record.\nGerman efforts.\nWhile the Second World War was still underway, the Nazis had already formed a contingency plan that if defeat was imminent they would carry out the total destruction of German records. Historians have documented evidence that as Germany's defeat became imminent and Nazi leaders realized they would most likely be captured and brought to trial, great effort was made to destroy all evidence of mass extermination. Heinrich Himmler instructed his camp commandants to destroy records, crematoria, and other signs of mass extermination. As one of many examples, the bodies of the 25,000 mostly Latvian Jews whom Friedrich Jeckeln and the soldiers under his command had shot at Rumbula (near Riga) in late 1941 were dug up and burned in 1943. Similar operations were undertaken at Belzec, Treblinka and other death camps.\nFrench collaboration in archive destruction.\nIn occupied France, the situation with respect to preserving war records was not much better, partly as a result of French state secrecy rules dating back to well before the war aimed at protecting the French government and the state from embarrassing revelations, and partly to avoid culpability. For example, at Liberation, the Prefecture of Police destroyed nearly all of the massive archive of Jewish arrest and deportation.\nEfforts to preserve the historical record.\nDuring the war.\nOne of the earliest efforts to save historical record of the Holocaust occurred during the war in France, where Drancy internment camp records were carefully preserved and turned over to the new National Office for Veterans and Victims of War. However, the bureau then held them in secret, refusing to release copies later, including to the Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation (CDJC).\nIn 1943, Isaac Schneersohn, anticipating the need for a center to document and preserve the memory of the persecution for historical reasons and also support claims post-war, gathered together 40 representatives from Jewish organizations in Grenoble which was under Italian occupation at the time in order to form a \"center de documentation\". Exposure meant the death penalty, and as a result little actually happened before liberation. Serious work began after the center moved to Paris in late 1944 and was renamed the CDJC.\nImmediate post-war period.\nIn 1945, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Supreme Allied Commander, anticipated that someday an attempt would be made to recharacterize the documentation of Nazi crimes as propaganda and took steps against it. Eisenhower, upon finding the victims of Nazi concentration camps, ordered all possible photographs to be taken, and for the German people from surrounding villages to be ushered through the camps and made to bury the dead.\nNuremberg trials.\nThe Nuremberg trials took place in Germany after the war in 1945\u20131946. The stated aim was to dispense justice in retribution for atrocities of the German government. This Allied intention to administer justice post-war was first announced in 1943 in the Declaration on German Atrocities in Occupied Europe and reiterated at the Yalta Conference and at Berlin in 1945. While the intention was not specifically to preserve the historical record of the Holocaust, some of the core documents required to prosecute the cases were provided to them by the CDJC, and much of the huge trove of archives were then transferred to the CDJC after the trials and became the core of future Holocaust historiography.\nThe Nuremberg trials were important historically, but the events were still very recent, television was in its infancy and not present, and there was little public impact. There were isolated moments of limited public awareness from Hollywood films such as \"The Diary of Anne Frank\" (1959) or the 1961 \"Judgment at Nuremberg\" which had some newsreel footage of actual scenes from liberated Nazi concentration camps including scenes of piles of naked corpses laid out in rows and bulldozed into large pits, which was considered exceptionally graphic for the time.\nPublic awareness changed when the Eichmann trial riveted the world's attention fifteen years after Nuremberg.\nTrial of Adolf Eichmann.\nIn 1961, the Israeli government captured Adolf Eichmann in Argentina and brought him to Israel to stand trial for war crimes. Chief prosecutor Gideon Hausner's intentions were not only to demonstrate Eichmann's guilt personally but to present material about the entire Holocaust, thus producing a comprehensive record.\nThe Israeli government arranged for the trial to have prominent media coverage. Many major newspapers from all over the globe sent reporters and published front-page coverage of the story. Israelis had the opportunity to watch live television broadcasts of the proceedings, and videotape was flown daily to the United States for broadcast the following day.\nSignificant individuals and organizations.\nIn the immediate aftermath of the war, before the Allied forces had fully documented the extent of the Holocaust, many people reacted with disbelief and even denied the first reports of what had happened. Compounding this disbelief was the memory of forged newspaper accounts of the German Corpse Factory, an anti-German atrocity propaganda campaign during WWI, which was widely known to be false by 1945.\nDuring the 1930s, the Nazi government used this propaganda against the British, claiming allegations of concentration camps were malicious lies put forward by the British government, and historians Joachim Neander and Randal Marlin note that this story \"encouraged later disbelief when early reports circulated about the Holocaust under Hitler\". Victor Cavendish-Bentinck, chairman of the British Joint Intelligence Committee, noted that these reports were similar to \"stories of employment of human corpses during the last war for the manufacture of fat which was a grotesque lie\"; likewise, \"The Christian Century\" commented that \"The parallel between this story and the 'corpse factory' atrocity tale of the First World War is too striking to be overlooked.\" Neander notes that \"There can be no doubt that the reported commercial use of the corpses of the murdered Jews undermined the credibility of the news coming from Poland and delayed action that might have rescued many Jewish lives.\"\nThe Neo-Nazi movement has been revitalized by Holocaust denial. Small but vocal numbers of neo-Nazis realized that recreation of a Hitlerite-style regime may be impossible, but a replica might be produced in the future; the rehabilitation of Nazism, they concluded, required the discrediting of the Holocaust. Neo-fascism has likewise relied upon Holocaust denial as a means of rehabilitation.\nAs a movement, modern Holocaust denial is associated with historical revisionism based on pseudoscientific evidence and fringe academic networks including intradiegetic pseudoscientific journals, conferences, and professional organizations (e.g. \"Journal of Historical Review\", International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust, Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust).\nMaurice Bard\u00e8che.\nThe first person to openly write after the end of World War II that he doubted the reality of the Holocaust was French art critic Maurice Bard\u00e8che in his 1948 book (\"Nuremberg or the Promised Land\"). In the 1950 book \"Nuremberg II, ou les Faux-Monnayeurs\", designed around the tale of Paul Rassinier, a former deportee from Nazi concentration camps (not to be confused with extermination camps) turned into a Holocaust denier, Bard\u00e8che concluded that kapos were in reality worse than SS, and expressed his \"doubts\" about the existence of gas chambers.\nViewed as \"the father-figure of Holocaust denial\", Bard\u00e8che introduced in his works many aspects of neo-fascist and Holocaust denial propaganda techniques and ideological structures; his work is deemed influential in regenerating post-war European far-right ideas at a time of identity crisis in the 1950\u20131960s. His arguments formed the basis of numerous works of Holocaust denial that followed: \"testimonies are not reliable, essentially coming from the mouth of Jews and communists\", \"atrocities committed in camps were the work of deportees [essentially the kapos]\", \"disorganization occurred in Nazi camps following the first German defeats\", \"the high mortality is due to the 'weakening' of prisoners and epidemics\", \"only lice were gassed in Auschwitz\", etc.\nHarry Elmer Barnes.\nHarry Elmer Barnes, at one time a mainstream American historian, assumed a Holocaust-denial stance in his later years. Between World War I and World War II, Barnes was an anti-war writer and a leader of the historical revisionism movement. Starting in 1924, Barnes worked closely with the Centre for the Study of the Causes of the War, a German government-funded think tank whose sole purpose was to disseminate the official government position that Germany was the victim of Allied aggression in 1914 and that the Versailles Treaty was morally invalid. Headed by Major Alfred von Wegerer, a activist, the organization portrayed itself as a scholarly society, but historians later described it as \"a clearinghouse for officially desirable views on the outbreak of the war.\"\nFollowing World War II, Barnes became convinced that allegations made against Germany and Japan, including the Holocaust, were wartime propaganda that had been used to justify the United States' involvement in World War II. Barnes claimed that there were two false claims made about World War II, namely that Germany started the war in 1939, and the Holocaust, which Barnes claimed did not happen.\nIn his 1962 pamphlet, \"Revisionism and Brainwashing\", Barnes claimed that there was a \"lack of any serious opposition or concerted challenge to the atrocity stories and other modes of defamation of German national character and conduct\". Barnes argued that there was \"a failure to point out the atrocities of the Allies were more brutal, painful, mortal and numerous than the most extreme allegations made against the Germans\". He claimed that in order to justify the \"horrors and evils of the Second World War\", the Allies made the Nazis the \"scapegoat\" for their own misdeeds.\nBarnes cited the French Holocaust denier Paul Rassinier, whom Barnes called a \"distinguished French historian\" who had exposed the \"exaggerations of the atrocity stories\". In a 1964 article, \"Zionist Fraud\", published in \"The American Mercury\", Barnes wrote: \"The courageous author [Rassinier] lays the chief blame for misrepresentation on those whom we must call the swindlers of the crematoria, the Israeli politicians who derive billions of marks from nonexistent, mythical and imaginary cadavers, whose numbers have been reckoned in an unusually distorted and dishonest manner.\" Using Rassinier as his source, Barnes claimed that Germany was the victim of aggression in both 1914 and 1939 and that reports of the Holocaust were propaganda to justify a war of aggression against Germany.\nBeginnings of modern denialism.\nIn 1961, a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Barnes, David L. Hoggan, published (\"The Forced War\") in West Germany, which claimed that Germany had been the victim of an Anglo-Polish conspiracy in 1939. Though \"Der erzwungene Krieg\" was primarily concerned with the origins of World War II, it also down-played or justified the effects of Nazi antisemitic measures in the pre-1939 period. For example, Hoggan justified the huge one billion Reichsmark fine imposed on the entire Jewish community in Germany after the 1938 as a reasonable measure to prevent what he called \"Jewish profiteering\" at the expense of German insurance companies and alleged that no Jews were killed in the \"Kristallnacht\" (in fact, 91 German Jews were murdered in the ). Subsequently, Hoggan explicitly denied the Holocaust in 1969 in a book entitled \"The Myth of the Six Million\", which was published by the Noontide Press, a small Los Angeles publisher specializing in antisemitic literature.\nIn 1964, Paul Rassinier published \"The Drama of the European Jews\". Rassinier was himself a concentration camp survivor (he was held in Buchenwald for having helped French Jews escape the Nazis), and modern-day deniers continue to cite his works as scholarly research that questions the accepted facts of the Holocaust. Critics argued that Rassinier did not cite evidence for his claims and ignored information that contradicted his assertions; he nevertheless remains influential in Holocaust denial circles for being one of the first deniers to propose that a vast Zionist/Allied/Soviet conspiracy faked the Holocaust, a theme that would be picked up in later years by other authors.\nAustin App, a La Salle University medieval English literature professor, is considered the first major mainstream American holocaust denier. App defended the Germans and Nazi Germany during World War II. He published numerous articles, letters, and books on Holocaust denial, quickly building a loyal following. App's work inspired the Institute for Historical Review, a California center founded in 1978 whose sole task is the denial of the Holocaust.\nThe publication of Arthur Butz's \"The Hoax of the Twentieth Century: The case against the presumed extermination of European Jewry\" in 1976 brought other similarly inclined individuals into the fold. Butz was a tenured associate professor of electrical engineering at Northwestern University. In December 1978 and January 1979, Robert Faurisson, a French professor of literature at the University of Lyon, wrote two letters to \"Le Monde\" claiming that the gas chambers used by the Nazis to exterminate the Jews did not exist. A colleague of Faurisson, Jean-Claude Pressac, who initially shared Faurisson's views, later became convinced of the Holocaust's evidence while investigating documents at Auschwitz in 1979. He published his conclusions along with much of the underlying evidence in his 1989 book, \"Auschwitz: Technique and operation of the gas chambers\".\nHenry Bienen, the former president of Northwestern University, has described Arthur Butz's view of the Holocaust as an \"embarrassment to Northwestern\". In 2006, sixty of Butz's colleagues from the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science faculty signed a censure describing Butz's Holocaust denial as \"an affront to our humanity and our standards as scholars\". The letter also called for Butz to \"leave our Department and our University and stop trading on our reputation for academic excellence\".\nInstitute for Historical Review.\nIn 1978, the American far-right activist Willis Carto founded the Institute for Historical Review (IHR), an organization dedicated to publicly challenging the commonly accepted history of the Holocaust. The IHR's founding was inspired by Austin App, a La Salle professor of medieval English literature and considered the first major American holocaust denier. The IHR sought from the beginning to establish itself within the broad tradition of historical revisionism, by soliciting token supporters who were not from a neo-Nazi background such as James J. Martin and Samuel Edward Konkin III, and by promoting the writings of French socialist Paul Rassinier and American anti-war historian Harry Elmer Barnes, in an attempt to show that Holocaust denial had a base of support beyond neo-Nazis. The IHR republished most of Barnes's writings, which had been out of print since his death. While it included articles on other topics and sold books by mainstream historians, the majority of material published and distributed by IHR was devoted to questioning the facts surrounding the Holocaust.\nIn 1980, the IHR promised a $50,000 reward to anyone who could prove that Jews were gassed at Auschwitz. Mel Mermelstein wrote a letter to the editors of the \"Los Angeles Times\" and others including \"The Jerusalem Post\". The IHR wrote back, offering him $50,000 for proof that Jews were, in fact, gassed in the gas chambers at Auschwitz. Mermelstein, in turn, submitted a notarized account of his internment at Auschwitz and how he witnessed Nazi guards ushering his mother and two sisters and others towards (as he learned later) gas chamber number five. Despite this, the IHR refused to pay the reward. Represented by public interest attorney William John Cox, Mermelstein subsequently sued the IHR in the Los Angeles County Superior Court for breach of contract, anticipatory repudiation, libel, injurious denial of established fact, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and declaratory relief. On October 9, 1981, both parties in the Mermelstein case filed motions for summary judgment in consideration of which Judge Thomas T. Johnson of the Los Angeles County Superior Court took \"judicial notice of the fact that Jews were gassed to death at the Auschwitz Concentration Camp in Poland during the summer of 1944,\" judicial notice meaning that the court treated the gas chambers as common knowledge, and therefore did not require evidence that the gas chambers existed. On August 5, 1985, Judge Robert A. Wenke entered a judgment based upon the Stipulation for Entry of Judgment agreed upon by the parties on July 22, 1985. The judgment required IHR and other defendants to pay $90,000 to Mermelstein and to issue a letter of apology to \"Mr. Mel Mermelstein, a survivor of Auschwitz-Birkenau and Buchenwald, and all other survivors of Auschwitz\" for \"pain, anguish and suffering\" caused to them.\nIn the \"About the IHR\" statement on their website, the IHR states, \"The IHR does not 'deny' the Holocaust. Indeed, the IHR as such has no 'position' on any specific event...\" British historian Richard J. Evans wrote that the Institute's acknowledgment \"that a relatively small number of Jews were killed\" was a means to draw attention away from its primary beliefs, i.e. that the number of victims was not in the millions and that Jews were not systematically murdered in gas chambers.\nJames Keegstra.\nIn 1984, James Keegstra, a Canadian high-school teacher, was charged under the Canadian \"Criminal Code\" for \"promoting hatred against an identifiable group by communicating anti-Semitic statements to his students\". During class, he would describe Jews as a people of profound evil who had \"created the Holocaust to gain sympathy.\" He also tested his students in exams on his theories and opinion of Jews.\nKeegstra was charged under s 281.2(2) of the \"Criminal Code\" (now s 319(2)), which provides that \"Every one who, by communicating statements, other than in private conversation, wilfully promotes hatred against any identifiable group\" commits a criminal offense. He was convicted at trial before the Alberta Court of Queen's Bench. The court rejected the argument, advanced by Keegstra and his lawyer, Doug Christie, that promoting hatred is a constitutionally protected freedom of expression as per s 2(b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Keegstra appealed to the Alberta Court of Appeal. That court agreed with Keegstra, and he was acquitted. The Crown then appealed the case to the Supreme Court of Canada, which ruled by a 4\u20133 majority that promoting hatred could be justifiably restricted under s 1 of the Charter. The Supreme Court restored Keegstra's conviction. He was fired from his teaching position shortly afterward.\nZ\u00fcndel trials.\nThe Toronto-based photo retoucher Ernst Z\u00fcndel operated a small-press called Samisdat Publishers, which published and distributed Holocaust-denial material such as \"Did Six Million Really Die?\" by Richard Harwood (a pseudonym of Richard Verrall\u00a0\u2013 a British neo-Nazi). In 1985, he was tried in \"R. v. Zundel\" and convicted under a \"false news\" law and sentenced to 15 months imprisonment by an Ontario court for \"disseminating and publishing material denying the Holocaust\". The Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg was a witness for the prosecution at the 1985 trial. Z\u00fcndel's conviction was overturned in an appeal on a legal technicality, leading to a second trial in 1988, in which he was again convicted. The 1988 trial included, as witnesses for the defense, Fred A. Leuchter, David Irving and Robert Faurisson. The pseudo-scientific Leuchter report was presented as a defense document and was published in Canada in 1988 by Zundel's Samisdat Publishers, and in Britain in 1989 by Irving's Focal Point Publishing. In both of his trials, Z\u00fcndel was defended by Douglas Christie and Barbara Kulaszka. His conviction was overturned in 1992 when the Supreme Court of Canada declared the \"false news\" law unconstitutional.\nZ\u00fcndel had a website, web-mastered by his wife Ingrid, which publicized his viewpoints. In January 2002, the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal delivered a ruling in a complaint involving his website, in which it was found to be contravening the Canadian Human Rights Act. The court ordered Z\u00fcndel to cease communicating hate messages. In February 2003, the American INS arrested him in Tennessee, US, on an immigration violations matter, and few days later, Z\u00fcndel was sent back to Canada, where he tried to gain refugee status. Z\u00fcndel remained in prison until March 1, 2005, when he was deported to Germany and prosecuted for disseminating hate propaganda. On February 15, 2007, Z\u00fcndel was convicted on 14 counts of incitement under Germany's \"Volksverhetzung\" law, which bans the incitement of hatred against a portion of the population and given the maximum sentence of five years in prison.\nBradley Smith and the CODOH.\nIn 1987, Bradley R. Smith, a former media director of the Institute for Historical Review, founded the Committee for Open Debate on the Holocaust (CODOH). In the United States, CODOH has repeatedly attempted to place advertisements questioning whether the Holocaust happened, especially in college campus newspapers.\nBradley Smith took his message to college students\u2014with little success. Smith referred to his tactics as the CODOH campus project. He said, \"I don't want to spend time with adults anymore, I want to go to students. They are superficial. They are empty vessels to be filled.\" \"What I wanted to do was I wanted to set forth three or four ideas that students might be interested in, that might cause them to think about things or to have questions about things. And I wanted to make it as simple as possible, and to set it up in a way that could not really be debated.\" Holocaust deniers have placed \"Full-page advertisements in college and university newspapers, including those of Brandeis University, Boston College, Pennsylvania State University, and Queens College. Some of these ads arguing that the Holocaust never happened ran without comment; others generated op-ed pieces by professors and students\". On September 8, 2009, student newspaper \"The Harvard Crimson\" ran a paid ad from Bradley R Smith. It was quickly criticized, and the editor issued an apology, saying publishing the ad was a mistake.\nErnst Nolte.\nThe German philosopher and historian Ernst Nolte, starting in the 1980s, advanced a set of theories, which though not denying the Holocaust appeared to flirt with an Italian Holocaust denier, Carlo Mattogno, as a serious historian. In a letter to the Israeli historian Otto Dov Kulka of December 8, 1986, Nolte criticized the work of the French Holocaust denier Robert Faurisson on the ground that the Holocaust did occur, but went on to argue that Faurisson's work was motivated by what Nolte claimed were the admirable motives of sympathy towards the Palestinians and opposition to Israel. In his 1987 book (\"The European Civil War\"), Nolte claimed that the intentions of Holocaust deniers are \"often honourable\", and that some of their claims are \"not obviously without foundation\". Nolte himself, though he has never denied the occurrence of the Holocaust, has claimed that the Wannsee Conference of 1942 never happened and that the minutes of the conference were post-war forgeries done by \"biased\" Jewish historians designed to discredit Germany.\nThe British historian Ian Kershaw has argued that Nolte was operating on the borderlines of Holocaust denial with his implied claim that the \"negative myth\" of Nazi Germany was created by Jewish historians, his allegations of the domination of Holocaust scholarship by \"biased\" Jewish historians, and his statements that one should withhold judgment on Holocaust deniers, whom Nolte takes considerable pains to stress are not exclusively Germans or fascists. In Kershaw's opinion, Nolte is attempting to imply that perhaps Holocaust deniers are on to something.\nIn a 1990 interview, Nolte implied that there was something to the Leuchter report: \"If the revisionists [Holocaust deniers] and Leuchter among them have made it clear to the public that even 'Auschwitz' must be an object of scientific inquiry and controversy then they should be given credit for this. Even if it finally turned out that the number of victims was even greater and the procedures were even more horrific than has been assumed until now.\" In his 1993 book (\"Points of Contention\"), Nolte praised the work of Holocaust deniers as superior to \"mainstream scholars\". Nolte wrote that \"radical revisionists have presented research which, if one is familiar with the source material and the critique of the sources, is probably superior to that of the established historians of Germany\". In a 1994 interview with magazine, Nolte stated \"I cannot rule out the importance of the investigation of the gas chambers in which they looked for remnants of the [chemical process engendered by Zyklon B]\", and that \"'Of course, I am against revisionists, but Fred Leuchter's 'study' of the Nazi gas ovens has to be given attention because one has to stay open to 'other' ideas.\"\nThe British historian Richard J. Evans in his 1989 book \"In Hitler's Shadow\" expressed the view that Nolte's reputation as a scholar was in ruins as a result of these and other controversial statements on his part. The American historian Deborah Lipstadt in a 2003 interview stated: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Historians such as the German Ernst Nolte are, in some ways, even more dangerous than the deniers. Nolte is an anti-Semite of the first order, who attempts to rehabilitate Hitler by saying that he was no worse than Stalin; but he is careful not to deny the Holocaust. Holocaust-deniers make Nolte's life more comfortable. They have, with their radical argumentation, pulled the center a little more to their side. Consequently, a less radical extremist, such as Nolte, finds himself closer to the middle ground, which makes him more dangerous.\nMayer controversy.\nIn 1988, the American historian Arno J. Mayer published a book entitled \"Why Did the Heavens Not Darken?\", which did not explicitly deny the Holocaust, but according to Lucy Dawidowicz lent support to Holocaust denial by stating that most people who died at Auschwitz were the victims of \"natural causes\" such as disease, not gassing. Dawidowicz argued that Mayer's statements about Auschwitz were \"a breathtaking assertion\". Holocaust historian Robert Jan van Pelt has written that Mayer's book is as close as a mainstream historian has ever come to supporting Holocaust denial. Holocaust deniers such as David Irving have often cited Mayer's book as one reason for embracing Holocaust denial. Though Mayer has been often condemned for his statement about the reasons for the Auschwitz death toll, his book does not deny the use of gas chambers at Auschwitz, as Holocaust deniers often claim.\nSome mainstream Holocaust historians have labeled Mayer a denier. The Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer wrote that Mayer \"popularizes the nonsense that the Nazis saw in Marxism and Bolshevism their main enemy, and the Jews unfortunately got caught up in this; when he links the destruction of the Jews to the ups and downs of German warfare in the Soviet Union, in a book that is so cocksure of itself that it does not need a proper scientific apparatus, he is really engaging in a much more subtle form of Holocaust denial\".\nDefenders of Mayer argue that his statement that \"Sources for the study of the gas chambers are at once rare and unreliable\" has been taken out of context, particularly by Holocaust deniers. Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman observe that the paragraph from which the statement is taken asserts that the SS destroyed the majority of the documentation relating to the operation of the gas chambers in the death camps, which is why Mayer feels that sources for the operation of the gas chambers are \"rare\" and \"unreliable\".\nFalse equivalence and effect.\nDenialist focus on Allied war crimes.\nIn countries where outright denial of the Holocaust is illegal, Holocaust denial authors focus \"on so-called Allied atrocities against the Germans during and after the war.\" According to historian Deborah Lipstadt, the concept of \"comparable Allied wrongs\", such as the expulsion of Germans after World War II and the bombing of Dresden, is at the center of, and a continuously repeated theme of, contemporary Holocaust denial; she calls the phenomenon \"immoral equivalencies\". In 1977, historian Martin Broszat, in a review of David Irving's book \"Hitler's War\", maintained that the picture of World War II drawn by Irving was done in a such way to imply moral equivalence between the actions of the Axis and Allied states with both sides equally guilty of terrible crimes, leading to Hitler's \"fanatical, destructive will to annihilate\" being downgraded to being \"no longer an exceptional phenomenon\".\nPropaganda.\nAccording to James Najarian, Holocaust deniers working for the Institute for Historical Review are not trained in history and \"put out sham scholarly articles in the mock-academic publication, the \"Journal of Historical Review\"\". They appeal to \"our objectivity, our sense of fair play, and our distrust of figurative language\". Thus, they rely on facts to grab the readers' attention. These facts, however, are strung by what Najarian calls \"fabricated decorum\" and are re-interpreted for their use. For example, they pay particular attention to inconsistencies in numbers.\nHolocaust denial propaganda in all forms has been shown to influence the audiences that it reaches. In fact, even the well-educated\u2014that is, college graduates and current university students alike\u2014are susceptible to such propaganda when it is presented before them. This stems from the growing disbelief that audiences feel after being exposed to such information, especially since Holocaust witnesses themselves are decreasing in number. Studies centered on the psychological effects of Holocaust denial propaganda confirm this assertion. Linda M. Yelland and William F. Stone, in particular, show that Denial essays decrease readers' belief in the Holocaust, regardless of their prior Holocaust awareness.\nEastern Europe.\nGeneral.\nIn some Eastern European countries, such as Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, and Romania, Holocaust deniers do not deny the very fact of mass murder of Jews but deny some national or regional elements of the Holocaust.\nSoviet Union and Russia.\nAccording to Zvi Gitelman, Soviet writers tended either to ignore or downplay the Holocaust, treating it as one small part of a larger phenomenon of 20 million dead Soviet citizens during the Great Patriotic War. According to Gitelman, Soviet authorities were concerned about raising the consciousness of Soviet Jews and retarding their assimilation to the greater Soviet population. The Holocaust also raised the issue of collaboration with the Nazi occupiers, an uncomfortable topic for Soviet historiography. According to historian Yuri Pivovarov, in modern Russia, this trend has returned with the Russian invasion on Ukraine, culminating with July 19, 2023, article of Maria Zakharova who argued that it were the Soviet citizens who were the victims of Holocaust in the first place. In a number of popular history projects sponsored by the Russian state Jews were mentioned as one of many victim groups, or not mentioned at all. Holocaust denial literature is freely published in Russia, and one of the most prominent authors, J\u00fcrgen Graf, lives there since his escape from prosecution in Switzerland in the 2000s.\nUkraine.\nThe post-Soviet radical right activists in Ukraine do not question the existence of Nazi death camps or Jewish ghettos. However, they deny the participation of local population in anti-Jewish pogroms or the contribution of national paramilitary organizations in capture and execution of Jews. Thus, denial of the antisemitic nature and participation in the Holocaust of the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army has become a central component of the intellectual history of the Ukrainian diaspora and nationalists.\nCroatia.\nIn 2018, the United States Department of State warned about \"the glorification of the Ustasha regime and denial of the Holocaust\" in Croatia, citing the placement of a plaque with the Ustasha-era salute 'Za dom spremni' on the grounds of a concentration camp memorial site, far-right rallies and the concert of the controversial band Thompson among other events. Efraim Zuroff of the Simon Wiesenthal Center describes Croatia as a \"cradle of Holocaust distortion\". Holocaust denial in Croatia typically involves the downplaying or denial of the Holocaust carried out by the Ustasha regime, particularly against Serbs and Jews at the Jasenovac concentration camp and it is done by public figures, though the regime's victims also included Roma and anti-fascist Croats. The Society for Research of the Threefold Jasenovac Camp in Croatia, an NGO with authors and academics among its members, claims that Jasenovac was a labor camp during World War II and that it was later used by Yugoslav Communists to imprison Ustasha members and regular Croatian Home Guard army troops until 1948, then alleged Stalinists until 1951. Following a series of book publications denying the Ustashe regime's crimes, the Simon Wiesenthal Center urged Croatian authorities in 2019 to ban such works, noting that they \"would immediately be banned in Germany and Austria and rightfully so\".\nHungary.\nIn Hungary, Holocaust distortion and denial take place in the form of downplaying the country's role in the killing and deportation of Jews. The Arrow Cross Party committed numerous crimes and killed or deported Jews. A total of 437,000 Jews were deported by Mikl\u00f3s Horthy's government in the Kingdom of Hungary, an Axis collaborator.\nSerbia.\nIn Serbia, Holocaust distortion and denial is manifested in the downplaying of Milan Nedi\u0107 and Dimitrije Ljoti\u0107's roles in the extermination of Serbia's Jews in concentration camps in Nedi\u0107's Serbia, by a number of Serbian historians. Serb collaborationist armed forces, including the Chetniks, were involved, either directly or indirectly, in the mass killings of mainly Jews and Roma as well as Croats, Muslims and those Serbs who sided with any anti-German resistance. Since the end of the war, Serbian collaboration in the Holocaust has been the subject of historical revisionism by Serbian leaders.\nSlovakia.\nIn Slovakia, some anti-communist writers claim that Jozef Tiso was a savior of Jews or that the Slovak State was not responsible for the Holocaust in Slovakia.\nWestern Europe.\nBelgium.\nIn Belgium in 2001, Roeland Raes, the ideologue and vice-president of one of the country's largest political parties, the Vlaams Blok, gave an interview on Dutch TV where he cast doubt over the number of Jews murdered by the Nazis during the Holocaust. In the same interview, he questioned the scale of the Nazis' use of gas chambers and the authenticity of Anne Frank's diary. In response to the media assault following the interview, Raes was forced to resign his position but vowed to remain active within the party. Three years later, the Vlaams Blok was convicted of racism and chose to disband. Immediately afterwards, it legally reformed under the new name Vlaams Belang (Flemish Interest) with the same leaders and the same membership.\nIn September 2024, the Belgian far-right Vlaams Belang party sparked controversy by putting a convicted Holocaust denier as one of its candidates in the upcoming municipal elections.\nFrance.\nIn France, Holocaust denial became more prominent in the 1990s as , though the movement has existed in ultra-left French politics since at least the 1960s, led by figures such as Pierre Guillaume (who was involved in the bookshop La Vieille Taupe during the 1960s). Elements of the extreme far-right in France have begun to build on each other's negationist arguments, which often span beyond the Holocaust to cover a range of antisemitic views, incorporating attempts to tie the Holocaust to the Biblical massacre of the Canaanites, critiques of Zionism, and other material fanning what has been called a \"conspiratorial Judeo-phobia\" designed to legitimize and \"banalize\" antisemitism.\nGermany.\nThe trial of a Canadian woman, Monika Schaefer, and her German-Canadian brother, Alfred Schaefer started in Germany in early July 2018. They were charged with (literally 'incitement of the people', often phrased as 'incitement to hatred' in English-language media). The pair had published video clips on YouTube of their denial of the genocide of Jews. In the clips, Alfred Schaefer said that Jews wanted to destroy Germans, blamed them for starting both World Wars, and referred to the Holocaust as a \"Jewish fantasy\". Monika Schaefer was arrested in January 2018 in Germany while attending a court hearing of Sylvia Stolz. Schaefer had been the Green Party candidate in the Alberta riding of Yellowhead during the federal elections in 2006, 2008, and 2011, but was expelled from the party after news reports surfaced of a July 2016 video where she describes the Holocaust as \"the most persistent lie in all of history\" and insisted that those in concentration camps had been kept as healthy and as well-fed as possible. In late October 2018, Monika Schaefer was convicted of the charge of 'incitement of hatred'. She was sentenced to ten months while Alfred Schaefer, also convicted, received a sentence of three years and two months.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn January 2019, a survey conducted by Opinion Matters, on behalf of the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust found that 5% of UK adults did not believe the Holocaust took place and one in 12 (8%) believed its scale has been exaggerated. One in five respondents incorrectly answered that less than 2 million Jews were murdered, and 45% couldn't say how many people were murdered in the Holocaust. Speaking in light of the survey's findings, Karen Pollock, chief executive of the Holocaust Educational Trust, said: \"One person questioning the truth of the Holocaust is one too many, and so it is up to us to redouble our efforts to ensure future generations know that it did happen and become witnesses to one of the darkest episodes in our history.\" The BBC Radio 4 programme \"More or Less\", specializing on statistics, investigated the survey finding it was unlikely to be accurate. Participants were incentivized to complete the online survey by shopping vouchers encouraging speedy answering, and the principal question was a \"reverse question\" with most participants having to give the reverse answer to surrounding questions requiring careful answering. Another question asked how many Jewish people had been murdered in the holocaust with only 0.2% of participants giving the answer zero, which was considered to be a closer estimate of the number of UK adults that did not believe the Holocaust took place.\nMiddle East.\nGeneral.\nGamal Abdel Nasser, the President of Egypt, told a German newspaper in 1964 that \"no person, not even the most simple one, takes seriously the lie of the six million Jews that were murdered [in the Holocaust].\"\nDenials of the Holocaust have been promoted by various Middle Eastern figures and media. Holocaust denial is sponsored by some Middle Eastern governments, including Iran and Syria. In 2006 Robert Satloff writing in \"The Washington Post\", reported that \"A respected Holocaust research institution recently reported that Egypt, Qatar and Saudi Arabia all promote Holocaust denial and protect Holocaust deniers.\"\nProminent figures from the Middle East have rarely made publicized visits to Auschwitz\u2014Israel's Arab community being the exception. In 2010, Hadash MK Mohammed Barakeh visited, following a previous visit of two other Arab-Israeli lawmakers, and a group of about 100 Arab-Israeli writers and clerics in 2003.\nIran.\nUntil recently, the Islamic Republic was the only state whose leadership and institutions openly engaged in Holocaust denial (and at times, justification) as part of official ideology. Iranian discourse often portrays the Holocaust as a fabricated myth, allegedly invented by a Zionist\u2013American alliance to justify the creation of Israel and expand Western influence. This framing serves to delegitimize Jewish statehood and legitimize the destruction of Israel. The Iranian government has also shifted blame for global injustice during World War II from Nazi Germany to the United States, which is seen as greatest cultural threat to Islam. Mark Weitzman of the World Jewish Restitution Organization described Iran as the \"center of Muslim Holocaust denial.\"\nFormer Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad frequently denied the Holocaust, formally 'questioning' the reliability of the historical evidence, although he on occasion confirmed belief in it. In a December 2005 speech, Ahmadinejad said that a legend was fabricated and had been promoted to protect Israel. He said:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They have fabricated a legend, under the name of the Massacre of the Jews, and they hold it higher than God himself, religion itself and the prophets themselves... If somebody in their country questions God, nobody says anything, but if somebody denies the myth of the massacre of Jews, the Zionist loudspeakers and the governments in the pay of Zionism will start to scream.\nThe remarks immediately provoked international controversy as well as swift condemnation from government officials in Israel, Europe, and the United States. All six political parties in the German parliament signed a joint resolution condemning Ahmadinejad's Holocaust denial. In contrast, Hamas political leader Khaled Mashal described Ahmadinejad's comments as \"courageous\" and stated, \"Muslim people will defend Iran because it voices what they have in their hearts, in particular the Palestinian people.\" In the United States, the Muslim Public Affairs Council condemned Ahmadinejad's remarks. In 2005, the Egyptian Muslim Brotherhood leader, Mohammed Mahdi Akef, denounced what he called \"the myth of the Holocaust\" in defending Ahmadinejad's denial of the Holocaust.\nOn December 11, 2006, the Iranian state-sponsored \"International Conference to Review the Global Vision of the Holocaust\" began to widespread condemnation. The conference, called for and held at the behest of Ahmadinejad, was widely described as a \"Holocaust denial conference\" or a \"meeting of Holocaust deniers\", though Iran denied it was a Holocaust denial conference. A few months before it opened, the Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Hamid Reza Asefi stated: \"The Holocaust is not a sacred issue that one can't touch. I have visited the Nazi camps in Eastern Europe. I think it is exaggerated.\"\nIran was the only country to vote against UN Resolution 61/255 condemning Holocaust denial in 2007. The editor of \"Kayhan\", a newspaper linked to the Supreme Leader, dismissed the resolution as \"\u201cpreparing the United Nations' corpse for burial in the graveyard of history.\" Some Iranian officials claim the Holocaust was exploited to suppress anti-Zionist sentiment in Europe and enable Zionist \"murderous goals.\"\nIn 2013, in an interview with CNN, newly elected Iranian President Hassan Rouhani condemned the Holocaust, stating: \"I can tell you that any crime that happens in history against humanity, including the crime the Nazis created towards the Jews as well as non-Jews is reprehensible and condemnable. Whatever criminality they committed against the Jews, we condemn.\" Iranian media later accused CNN of fabricating Rouhani's comments.\nIn his official 2013 Nowruz address, Supreme Leader of Iran Grand Ayatollah Ali Khamenei questioned the veracity of the Holocaust, remarking that \"The Holocaust is an event whose reality is uncertain and if it has happened, it's uncertain how it has happened.\" This was consistent with Khamenei's previous comments regarding the Holocaust.\nIn 2015, the House of Cartoon and the Sarcheshmeh Cultural Complex in Iran organized the Second International Holocaust Cartoon Competition, a competition in which artists were encouraged to submit cartoons on the theme of Holocaust denial. The winner of the contest will receive $12,000. \"Hamshahri\", a popular Iranian newspaper, held a similar contest in 2006.\nIsrael.\nIsrael's Prime Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, at a speech to the World Zionist Congress in 2015, claimed Adolf Hitler did not want to exterminate Jews but only wanted to expel them from Europe, and the extermination of the Jews was the idea of Haj Amin al-Husseini, the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem. Scholars denied this claim, including Moshe Zimmermann who said that it reinforced the opinions of the far-right and Holocaust deniers. Zimmerman stated that \"Any attempt to deflect the burden from Hitler to others is a form of Holocaust denial\". Netanyahu later told reporters that he was not letting Hitler off the hook for the Holocaust and that the Mufti's role should not be ignored.\nPalestine.\nIndividuals from the Palestinian Authority, Hamas, and a number of Palestinian groups have engaged in various aspects of Holocaust denial.\nHamas has promoted Holocaust denial; Abdel Aziz al-Rantisi held the view that the Holocaust never occurred, that Zionists were behind the action of Nazis, and that Zionists funded Nazism. A press release by Hamas in April 2000 decried \"the so-called Holocaust, which is an alleged and invented story with no basis\". In August 2009, Hamas' told UNRWA that it would \"refuse\" to allow Palestinian children to study the Holocaust, which it called \"a lie invented by the Zionists\" and referred to Holocaust education as a \"war crime\". Hamas continued to hold this position in 2011, when the organization's Ministry for Refugee Affairs said that Holocaust education was \"intended to poison the minds of our children.\"\nThe thesis of the 1982 doctoral dissertation of Mahmoud Abbas, a co-founder of Fatah and president of the Palestinian Authority, was \"The Secret Connection between the Nazis and the Leaders of the Zionist Movement\". In his 1983 book \"\" based on the dissertation, Abbas denied that six million Jews had died in the Holocaust; dismissing it as a \"myth\" and a \"fantastic lie\". At most, he wrote, 890,000 Jews were murdered by the Germans. Abbas claimed that the number of deaths has been exaggerated for political purposes. \"It seems that the interest of the Zionist movement, however, is to inflate this figure [of Holocaust deaths] so that their gains will be greater. This led them to emphasize this figure [six million] in order to gain the solidarity of international public opinion with Zionism. Many scholars have debated the figure of six million and reached stunning conclusions\u2014fixing the number of Jewish victims at only a few hundred thousand.\"\nIn his March 2006 interview with \"Haaretz\", Abbas stated, \"I wrote in detail about the Holocaust and said I did not want to discuss numbers. I quoted an argument between historians in which various numbers of casualties were mentioned. One wrote there were 12\u00a0million victims and another wrote there were 800,000. I have no desire to argue with the figures. The Holocaust was a terrible, unforgivable crime against the Jewish nation, a crime against humanity that cannot be accepted by humankind. The Holocaust was a terrible thing and nobody can claim I denied it.\" While acknowledging the existence of the Holocaust in 2006 and 2014, Abbas has defended the position that Zionists collaborated with the Nazis to perpetrate it. In 2012, Abbas told Al Mayadeen, a Beirut TV station affiliated with Iran and Hezbollah, that he \"challenges anyone who can deny that the Zionist movement had ties with the Nazis before World War II\".\nSurveys conducted by Sammy Smooha of the University of Haifa found that the fraction of Palestinian citizens of Israel denying the Holocaust increased from 28% in 2006 to 40% in 2008. Smooha commented:\nIn Arab eyes disbelief in the very happening of the Shoah is not hate of Jews (embedded in the denial of the Shoah in the West) but rather a form of protest. Arabs not believing in the event of Shoah intend to express strong objection to the portrayal of the Jews as the ultimate victim and to the underrating of the Palestinians as a victim. They deny Israel's right to exist as a Jewish state that the Shoah gives legitimacy to. Arab disbelief in the Shoah is a component of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, unlike the ideological and anti-Semitic denial of the Holocaust and the desire to escape guilt in the West.\nMohammed Dajani, a Palestinian professor at Al-Quds University and founding director of its American Studies Institute, took a group of students to visit the Auschwitz concentration camp in 2014. Following the trip, he faced strong opposition and pressure from within the university, ultimately leading to his resignation. Dajani later explained that critics believed the knowledge students might gain from the visit would contradict the prevailing collective narrative, in which some viewed the Holocaust as a Zionist narrative intended to garner international support for Israel. Still, he defended Holocaust education as essential for peace, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Holocaust denial and distortion are historically incorrect, and factually wrong, and constitute a significant threat to morality and human dignity, and to the prospects of reconciliation and peace between Palestinians and Israelis.\nSyria.\nIn a speech delivered at the Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party's central committee meeting in December 2023, the Ba'ath party secretary-general Bashar al-Assad claimed that there was \"no evidence\" of the killings of six million Jews during the Holocaust. Assad alleged that the Holocaust was \"politicized\" by Allied powers to facilitate the mass-deportation of European Jews to Palestine. Assad also accused the U.S. government of financially and militarily sponsoring the rise of Nazism during the inter-war period. Highlighting the deaths of 26 million Soviet citizens during the Second World War, Assad said: \"there was no specific method of torture or killing specific to the Jews. The Nazis used the same methods everywhere.\"\nTurkey.\nIn Turkey, in 1996, the Islamic preacher Adnan Oktar under the pen name of Harun Yahya, distributed thousands of copies of a book which was originally published the previous year, entitled \"Soyk\u0131r\u0131m Yalan\u0131\" (\"The Genocide Lie\", referring to the Holocaust) and mailed unsolicited texts to American and European schools and colleges. The publication of \"Soyk\u0131r\u0131m Yalan\u0131\" sparked much public debate. This book claims, \"what is presented as Holocaust is the death of some Jews due to the typhus plague during the war and the famine towards the end of the war caused by the defeat of the Germans.\" In March 1996, a Turkish painter and intellectual, Bedri Baykam, published a strongly worded critique of the book in the Ankara daily newspaper \"Siyah-Beyaz\" (\"Black and White\"). A legal suit for slander was brought against him. During the trial in September, Baykam exposed the real author of the book as Adnan Oktar. The suit was withdrawn in March 1997.\nOther.\nFinland.\nHolocaust denial started in Finland almost immediately after the war, with many Finns who had been involved in the far-right and Nazi movements publishing articles questioning the Holocaust. Prominent early Finnish Holocaust deniers include professor C. A. J. Gadolin, CEO Carl-Gustaf Herlitz, architech Carl O. Nordling and ambassador Teo Snellman. In early 1970s, a Finnish translation of a pamphlet denying Holocaust written by Vera Oredsson was distributed in Finland. Pekka Siitoin's Patriotic Popular Front started distributing a Finnish translation of Richard Harwood's Did Six Million Really Die? in 1976.\nIn the late 1980 and early 1990s, National Radical Party's newspaper \"Uusi Suunta\" wrote how the supposed Jewish owned media maligned fascism with Holocaust \"sob stories\" that \"have never been proven\" to undermine the nationalist movement. One issue of \"Uusi Suunta\" stated that \"The horrors of the concentration camps, that are not true by half, have been tied to the nationalist movement regardless of nationality.\" In the 1990s the party secretary of the National Democratic Party Olavi Koskela said that \"the unbelievable Holocaust lies\" enable the Jewish rulership over multicultural, multiracial and multilingual society. Finland - Fatherland's newspaper \"Kansallinen Rintama\" made similar arguments.\nAntisemitism has also experienced a resurgence after the Cold War, both in the internet and real life. Medical Licentiate Vesa-Ilkka Laurio wrote a blog frequently denying the Holocaust and criticizing democracy from a Christian fundamentalist perspective. Swedenborgian \"Nova Hierosolyma\"-society's \"Uusi Jerusalem\" website also publishes Holocaust denial material, an article written by Erkki Kivilohkare claiming only 100,000 Jews died in the Holocaust. Another Swedenborgian fundamentalist Markku Juutinen has also denied holocaust in the \"Kumouksen \u00e4\u00e4ni\"-magazine.\nIn 2013, the Simon Wiesenthal Center asked President Niinist\u00f6 to condemn a neo-Nazi newspaper circulated to some 660,000 households. The newspaper published articles denying the Holocaust and articles such as \"Zionist terrorism\" and \"CNN, Goldman Sachs and Zionist Control\" translated from David Duke. Popular Finnish alternative media sites MV-media, Verkkomedia and Magneettimedia are known for publishing articles denying the Holocaust. Prominent modern Finnish Holocaust deniers include the owner of KauppaSuomi newspaper and department store tycoon Juha K\u00e4rkk\u00e4inen. Members of the Nordic Resistance Movement have also distributed material denying the Holocaust.\nFar-right Finns Party General Secretary Olli Immonen has also multiple times shared a blog criticizing the \"Holocaust-religion\". The Finns Party leader Jussi Halla-aho also referred to Holocaust as \"holohoax\". Pseudonymous Thomas Dalton who is a prolific author of Holocaust denial books and has republished On the Jews and Their Lies and The Protocols of the Elders of Zion is suspected of being a researcher in University of Helsinki according to Demokraatti.\nJapan.\nJapanese Holocaust denial first appeared in 1989 and reached its peak in 1995 with the publication in February 1995 by the Japanese magazine \"Marco Polo\", a 250,000-circulation monthly published by Bungeishunju, of a Holocaust denial article by physician Masanori Nishioka which stated: \"The 'Holocaust' is a fabrication. There were no execution gas chambers in Auschwitz or in any other concentration camp. Today, what is displayed as 'gas chambers' at the remains of the Auschwitz camp in Poland are a post-war fabrication by the Polish communist regime or by the Soviet Union, which controlled the country. Not once, neither at Auschwitz nor in any territory controlled by the Germans during the Second World War, was there 'mass murder of Jews' in 'gas chambers.\" The Los Angeles-based Simon Wiesenthal Center instigated a boycott of Bungei Shunju advertisers, including Volkswagen, Mitsubishi, and Cartier. Within days, Bungei Shunju shut down \"Marco Polo\" and its editor, Kazuyoshi Hanada, quit, as did the president of Bungei Shunju, Kengo Tanaka.\nUnited States.\nAccording to a 2020 survey of US youth by the Claims Conference, 23% of US adults aged 18\u201339 said they believed the Holocaust was a myth, had been exaggerated, or were not sure.\nReactions to Holocaust denial.\nIn 2022, the United Nations adopted a resolution aimed at combating Holocaust denial and antisemitism. The resolution was proposed by Germany and Israel.\nScholars.\nScholarly response to Holocaust denial can be roughly divided into three categories. Some academics refuse to engage Holocaust deniers or their arguments at all, on grounds that doing so lends them unwarranted legitimacy. The second group of scholars, typified by the American historian Deborah Lipstadt, have tried to raise awareness of the methods and motivations of Holocaust denial without legitimizing the deniers themselves. \"We need not waste time or effort answering the deniers' contentions,\" Lipstadt wrote. \"It would be never-ending... Their commitment is to an ideology and their 'findings' are shaped to support it.\" A third group, typified by the Nizkor Project, responds to arguments and claims made by Holocaust denial groups by pointing out inaccuracies and errors in their evidence.\nIn December 1991 the American Historical Association, the oldest and largest society of historians and teachers of history in the United States, issued the following statement: \"The American Historical Association Council strongly deplores the publicly reported attempts to deny the fact of the Holocaust. No serious historian questions that the Holocaust took place.\" This followed a strong reaction by many of its members and commentary in the press against a near-unanimous decision that the AHA had made in May 1991 that studying the \"significance of the Holocaust\" should be encouraged. The association's May 1991 statement was in response to an incident where certain of its members had questioned the reality of the Holocaust. The December 1991 declaration is a reversal of the AHA's earlier stance that the association should not set a precedent by certifying historical facts. The AHA has also stated that Holocaust denial is \"at best, a form of academic fraud\".\nLiterary theorist Jean Baudrillard described Holocaust denial as \"part of the extermination itself\". Holocaust survivor and Nobel Prize winner Elie Wiesel, during a 1999 discussion at the White House in Washington, D.C., called the Holocaust \"the most documented tragedy in recorded history. Never before has a tragedy elicited so much witness from the killers, from the victims and even from the bystanders\u2014millions of pieces here in the museum what you have, all other museums, archives in the thousands, in the millions.\"\nDeborah Lipstadt's 1993 book, \"Denying the Holocaust\", sharply criticized various Holocaust deniers, including British author David Irving, for deliberately misrepresenting evidence to justify their preconceived conclusions. In the book, Lipstadt named Irving as \"one of the more dangerous\" Holocaust deniers, because he was a published author, and was viewed by some as a legitimate military historian. He was \"familiar with historical evidence\", she wrote, and \"bends it until it conforms with his ideological leanings and political agenda\". In 1996, Irving filed a libel suit against Lipstadt and her publisher, Penguin Books. Irving, who appeared as a defense witness in Ernst Z\u00fcndel's trial in Canada, and once declared at a rally of Holocaust deniers that \"more women died in the back seat of Edward Kennedy's car than ever died in a gas chamber at Auschwitz\", claimed that Lipstadt's allegation damaged his reputation. American historian Christopher R. Browning, an expert witness for the defense, wrote a comprehensive essay for the court summarizing the voluminous evidence for the reality of the Holocaust, and under cross-examination, effectively countered all of Irving's principal arguments to the contrary.[96] Cambridge historian Richard J. Evans, another defense expert witness, spent two years examining Irving's writings and confirmed his misrepresentations, including evidence that he had knowingly used forged documents as source material. After a two-month trial in London the trial judge, Justice Charles Gray, issued a 333-page ruling against Irving, which referred to him as a \"Holocaust denier\" and \"right-wing pro-Nazi polemicist\".\nKen McVay, an American resident in Canada, was disturbed by the efforts of organizations like the Simon Wiesenthal Center to suppress the speech of the Holocaust deniers, feeling that it was better to confront them openly than to try to censor them. On the Usenet newsgroup \"alt.revisionism\" he began a campaign of \"truth, fact, and evidence\", working with other participants on the newsgroup to uncover factual information about the Holocaust and counter the arguments of the deniers by proving them to be based upon misleading evidence, false statements, and outright lies. He founded the Nizkor Project to expose the activities of the Holocaust deniers, who responded to McVay with personal attacks, slander, and death threats.\nPublic figures.\nA number of public figures have spoken out against Holocaust denial. In 2006, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan said: \"Remembering is a necessary rebuke to those who say the Holocaust never happened or has been exaggerated. Holocaust denial is the work of bigots; we must reject their false claims whenever, wherever and by whomever they are made.\" In January 2007, the United Nations General Assembly condemned \"without reservation any denial of the Holocaust\", though Iran disassociated itself from the resolution.\nIn July 2013, Iran's then president-elect Hassan Rohani described Ahmadinejad's remarks about the Holocaust and Israel as \"hate rhetoric\" and in September 2013 Rohani stated that \"The Nazis carried out a massacre that cannot be denied, especially against the Jewish people\" and \"The massacre by the Nazis was condemnable. We never want to sit by side with the Nazis...They committed a crime against Jews \u2014 which is a crime against ... all of humanity.\" While declining to give a specific number of Jewish victims, Iranian analysts suggested that \"Rouhani pushed the envelope as far as it could go ... without infuriating the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and other conservatives back home.\"\nFormer Auschwitz SS personnel.\nCritics of Holocaust denial also include members of the Auschwitz SS. Camp physician and SS-\"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" Hans M\u00fcnch considered the facts of Auschwitz \"so firmly determined that one cannot have any doubt at all\", and described those who negate what happened at the camp as \"malevolent\" people who have \"personal interest to want to bury in silence things that cannot be buried in silence\". Zyklon B handler and SS-\"Oberscharf\u00fchrer\" Josef Klehr said that anyone who maintains that nobody was gassed at Auschwitz must be \"crazy or in the wrong\". SS-\"Unterscharf\u00fchrer\" Oswald Kaduk stated that he did not consider those who maintain such a thing as normal people. Hearing about Holocaust denial compelled former SS-\"Rottenf\u00fchrer\" Oskar Gr\u00f6ning to publicly speak about what he witnessed at Auschwitz, and denounce Holocaust deniers, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHolocaust denial and antisemitism.\nHolocaust denial is given as an example of antisemitism in the IHRA definition of antisemitism, adopted by the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance as well as the United Kingdom, Israel, Austria, Scotland, Romania, Germany and Bulgaria. The European Parliament voted in favor of a resolution calling for member states to adopt the definition on June 1, 2017.\nThe \"Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity\" defines Holocaust denial as \"a new form of anti-Semitism, but one that hinges on age-old motifs\". The Anti-Defamation League has stated that \"Holocaust denial is a contemporary form of the classic anti-Semitic doctrine of the evil, manipulative and threatening world Jewish conspiracy\" and French historian Val\u00e9rie Igounet has written that \"Holocaust denial is a convenient polemical substitute for anti-semitism.\"\nAccording to Walter Reich, psychiatrist and then a senior scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, one-time director of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, and now professor of international affairs at George Washington University:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe French historian Pierre Vidal-Naquet described the motivation of deniers more succinctly, explaining, \"One revives the dead in order the better to strike the living.\" German political scientist Matthias K\u00fcntzel has argued, \"Every denial of the Holocaust... contains an appeal to repeat it.\"\nExamination of claims.\nThe key claims which cause Holocaust denial to differ from established fact are:\nOther claims include the following:\nHolocaust denial is widely viewed as failing to adhere to principles for the treatment of evidence that mainstream historians (as well as scholars in other fields) regard as basic to rational inquiry.\nThe Holocaust was well documented by the bureaucracy of the Nazi government itself. It was further witnessed by the Allied forces who entered Germany and its associated Axis states towards the end of World War II. It was also witnessed from the inside by non-Jewish captives such as Catholic French Resistance member Andr\u00e9 Rogerie who wrote extensively and testified about his experiences in seven camps including Auschwitz-Birkenau and also produced the oldest contemporary sketch of a camp crematorium.\nAccording to researchers Michael Shermer and Alex Grobman, there is a \"convergence of evidence\" that proves that the Holocaust happened. This evidence includes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMuch of the controversy surrounding the claims of Holocaust deniers' centers on the methods used to present arguments that the Holocaust allegedly \"never happened as commonly accepted\". Numerous accounts have been given by Holocaust deniers (including evidence presented in court cases) of claimed facts and evidence; however, independent research has shown these claims to be based upon flawed research, biassed statements, or even deliberately falsified evidence. Opponents of Holocaust denial have documented numerous instances in which such evidence was altered or manufactured (see Nizkor Project and David Irving). According to Pierre Vidal-Naquet, \"in our society of image and spectacle, extermination on paper leads to extermination in reality.\"\nLaws against Holocaust denial.\nHolocaust denial is explicitly or implicitly illegal in 18 countries: Austria, Belgium, Canada, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Israel, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, and Switzerland. Romania officially denied the Holocaust occurred on its territory up until the Wiesel Commission in 2004. The European Union's Framework decision on Racism and Xenophobia states that denying or grossly trivializing \"crimes of genocide\" should be made \"punishable in all EU Member States\".\nSuch legislation remains controversial. In October 2007, a tribunal declared Spain's genocide denial law unconstitutional. In 2007 Italy rejected a denial law proposing a prison sentence of up to four years. In 2006 the Netherlands rejected a draft law proposing a maximum sentence of one year on denial of genocidal acts in general, although specifically denying the Holocaust remains a criminal offense there. The United Kingdom has twice rejected Holocaust denial laws. Denmark and Sweden have also rejected such legislation.\nA number of deniers have been prosecuted under various countries' denial laws. French literature professor Robert Faurisson, for example, was convicted and punished under the Gayssot Act in 1990. Some historians oppose such laws, among them Pierre Vidal-Naquet, an outspoken critic of Faurisson, on the grounds that denial legislation imposes \"historical truth as legal truth\". Other academics favor criminalization. Holocaust denial, they contend, is \"the worst form of racism and its most respectable version because it pretends to be a research\". Holocaust historian Deborah Lipstadt expressed her opposition to laws against expressing Holocaust denial, saying, \"I don't think they work. I think they turn whatever is being outlawed into forbidden fruit.\" She also said that politicians should not be able to decide what can and cannot be said.\nDavid Irving conviction.\nIn February 2006, Irving was convicted in Austria, where Holocaust denial is illegal, for a speech he had made in 1989 in which he denied the existence of gas chambers at Auschwitz. Irving was aware of the outstanding arrest warrant but chose to go to Austria anyway \"to give a lecture to a far-right student fraternity\". Although he pleaded guilty to the charge, Irving said he had been \"mistaken\", and had changed his opinions on the Holocaust. \"I said that then, based on my knowledge at the time, but by 1991 when I came across the Eichmann papers, I wasn't saying that anymore and I wouldn't say that now. The Nazis did murder millions of Jews.\" Irving served 13 months of a 3-year sentence in an Austrian prison, including the period between his arrest and conviction, and was deported in early 2007. The episode sparked intense international debate over the limits of freedom of speech. Upon hearing of Irving's sentence, Lipstadt said:I am not happy when censorship wins, and I don't believe in winning battles via censorship... The way of fighting Holocaust deniers is with history and with truth.According to \"CNN\", upon Irving's return to the UK, he \"vow[ed] to repeat views denying the Holocaust that led to his conviction\" stating he felt \"no need any longer to show remorse\" for his Holocaust views.\nGenocide denials.\nOther acts of genocide have met similar attempts to deny and minimize them. Gregory Stanton, formerly of the US State Department and the founder of Genocide Watch, lists denial as the final stage of a genocide development: \"Denial is the eighth stage that always follows a genocide. It is among the surest indicators of further genocidal massacres. The perpetrators of genocide dig up the mass graves, burn the bodies, try to cover up the evidence and intimidate the witnesses. They deny that they committed any crimes, and often blame what happened on the victims.\"\nHolocaust denial is often compared to Armenian genocide denial because of similar tactics of misrepresenting evidence, false equivalence, claiming that atrocities were invented by war propaganda and that powerful lobbies manufacture genocide allegations for their own profit, subsuming one-sided systematic extermination into war deaths, and shifting blame from the perpetrators to the victims of genocide. Both forms of negationism share the goal of rehabilitating the ideologies which brought genocide about.\nSee also.\nHolocaust:\nOther:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65656", "revid": "46259913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65656", "title": "The Gambia", "text": "Country in West Africa\nThe Gambia, officially the Republic of the Gambia, is a country in West Africa. Geographically, the Gambia is the smallest country in continental Africa; it is surrounded by Senegal on all sides except for the western part, which is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean.\nIts territory is on both sides of the lower reaches of the Gambia River, which flows through the center of the country and empties into the Atlantic. The national namesake river demarcates the elongated shape of the country, which has an area of and a population of 2,422,712 people at the 1st of May 2024 Census which is a 30.45% population increase from 2013. The capital city is the island Banjul, formerly called Bathurst during the colonial era, which is the most extensive metropolitan area in the country. The second- and third-largest cities are Serekunda and Brikama. Other significant cities are Kanifing and Farafenni in the north bank, Basse in Upper River Region, and Soma in lower river region.\nArab Muslim merchants traded with indigenous West Africans in the Gambia, under an arrangement known as the trans Saharan trade, using a barter exchange system. Throughout the 9th and 10th centuries, Islam was introduced by the Arab traders to Western Sudan. In 1455, the Portuguese were the first Europeans to enter the Gambia, although they never established significant trade there. The British Empire established a colony in 1765. In 1965, 200 years later, the Gambia gained independence under the leadership of Dawda Jawara. Jawara remained the president, winning several elections, until he was overthrown by Yahya Jammeh in a bloodless coup on July 22, 1994.\nAdama Barrow was elected as the Gambia's third president in December 2016; He defeated Yahya Jammeh with the help of a coalition of other opposition political parties. Jammeh initially accepted the results, but then refused to leave office claiming he was cheated, triggering a constitutional crisis. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) conducted a military intervention and achieved Jammeh's removal two days after his term was initially scheduled to end. In a swearing-in ceremony at the Gambian embassy in Dakar, Senegal, on January 19, 2017, Adama Barrow formally became president of the Gambia. \nThe Gambia's economy is dominated by farming, fishing, and especially tourism. In 2022, 17.2% of the population lived in extreme poverty, defined as living on less than US$2.15 (2017 PPP) per day. The Gambia is a founding member of the ECOWAS. It rejoined the Commonwealth of Nations in 2018 after previously withdrawing in 2013. English is the country's sole official language; it became widely used during British rule.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Gambia\" is derived from the Mandinka term \"Kambra\"/\"Kambaa\", meaning the Gambia River. (It may be derived from the sacred Serer \"gamba\", a drum made from a calabash beaten when a Serer elder dies.) Portuguese explorers, who reached the region in the 15th century, adopted a variation of this local name, which was later anglicized to \"Gambia\" during British colonial rule.\nUpon independence in 1965, the country used the name \"The Gambia\". Following the proclamation of a republic in 1970, the long-form name of the country became the \"Republic of the Gambia\".\nThe Gambia is one of only two countries for which the definite article is commonly used in its English-language name and where the name is neither plural nor descriptive (e.g., \"the Philippines\" or \"the United Kingdom\"), the other being the Bahamas. The article is also officially used by the country's government and by international bodies. In 1964, shortly prior to the country's independence, Prime Minister Dawda Jawara wrote to the Permanent Committee on Geographical Names for British Official Use requesting that the name \"the Gambia\" retain the definite article, in part to reduce confusion with Zambia which had also recently become independent. Some scholars suggest it also emphasizes the nation's connection to the Gambia River, a defining geographical feature.\nThe administration of Yahya Jammeh changed the long-form name to \"Islamic Republic of the Gambia\" in December 2015. On 29 January 2017 newly elected President Adama Barrow changed the name back to \"Republic of the Gambia\".\nHistory.\nMuslim and Portuguese influence (9th\u201316th centuries).\nArab traders provided the first written accounts of The Gambia area in the ninth and tenth centuries. During the tenth century, Muslim merchants and scholars established communities in several West African commercial centres. Both groups established trans-Saharan trade routes. They carried out a large export trade of local people taken captive in raids and sold as slaves. Gold and ivory were also exported, and the trade routes were used to import manufactured goods to these areas.\nBy the 11th or 12th century, the rulers of kingdoms such as Takrur (a monarchy centred on the Senegal River just to the north), ancient Ghana and Gao had converted to Islam. They had appointed to their courts Muslims who were literate in the Arabic language. At the beginning of the 14th century, most of what is today called The Gambia was part of the Mali Empire. The Portuguese reached this area by sea in the mid-15th century and began to dominate overseas trade.\nEnglish and French administration (17th\u201319th centuries).\nIn 1588, the claimant to the Portuguese throne, Ant\u00f3nio, Prior of Crato, sold exclusive trade rights on the Gambia River to English merchants. Letters patent from Queen Elizabeth I confirmed the grant. In 1618, King James I of England granted a charter to an English company for trade with The Gambia and the Gold Coast (now Ghana). Between 1651 and 1661, some parts of The Gambia \u2013 St. Andrew's Island in the Gambia River, including Fort Jakob, and St. Mary Island (modern day Banjul) and Fort Jillifree \u2013 came under the rule of the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, a vassal state of Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth in what is now Latvia, having been bought by Prince Jacob Kettler. The colonies were formally ceded to England in 1664.\nDuring the late 17th century and throughout the 18th century, the British Empire and the French Empire struggled continually for political and commercial supremacy in the regions of the Senegal River and the Gambia River. The British Empire occupied The Gambia when an expedition led by Augustus Keppel landed there following the capture of Senegal in 1758. The 1783 Treaty of Versailles gave Great Britain possession of the Gambia River, but the French retained a tiny enclave at Albreda on the river's north bank. This was finally ceded to the United Kingdom in 1856.\nSlavery.\nSlave ships intercepted by the Royal Navy's West Africa Squadron in the Atlantic were also returned to The Gambia, with people who had been slaves released on MacCarthy Island far up The Gambia River where they were expected to establish new lives. The British established the military post of Bathurst (now Banjul) in 1816.\nGambia Colony and Protectorate (1821\u20131965).\nIn the ensuing years, Bathurst (now Banjul) was at times under the jurisdiction of the British Governor-General in Sierra Leone. In 1888, The Gambia became a separate colony.\nAn agreement between Britain and France in 1889 established the boundaries of the colony. In 1891, a joint Anglo-French Boundary Commission faced resistance from local leaders whose lands would be divided. The Gambia became a British Crown colony called British Gambia, divided for administrative purposes into the colony (city of Banjul and the surrounding area) and the protectorate (remainder of the territory). The Gambia received its own executive and legislative councils in 1901, and it gradually progressed toward self-government. Slavery was abolished in 1906 and following a brief conflict between the British colonial forces and indigenous Gambians, British colonial authority was firmly established. In 1919, a romantic relationship between Travelling Commissioner J. K. McCallum and Wolof woman Fatou Khan scandalized the administration.\nDuring World War II, some soldiers fought with the Allies of World War II. Though these soldiers fought mostly in Burma, some died closer to home and a Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemetery is in Fajara (close to Banjul). Banjul contained an airstrip for the US Army Air Forces and a port of call for Allied naval convoys.\nAfter World War II, the pace of constitutional reform increased. Following general elections in 1962, the United Kingdom granted full internal self-governance in the following year.\nContemporary (1965\u2013present).\nIndependence and formation of the republic.\nThe Gambia achieved independence on 18 February 1965, as a constitutional monarchy within the Commonwealth, with Elizabeth II as Queen of The Gambia, represented by the Governor-General. Shortly thereafter, the national government held a referendum proposing that the country become a republic. This referendum failed to receive the two-thirds majority required to amend the constitution, but the results won widespread attention abroad as testimony to The Gambia's observance of secret balloting, honest elections, civil rights, and liberties.\nOn 24 April 1970, The Gambia became a Republic within the Commonwealth, following a second referendum. Prime Minister Sir Dawda Kairaba Jawara assumed the office of President, an Executive Post, combining the offices of head of state and head of government which he held since 1962. President Sir Dawda Jawara was re-elected five times.\nAn attempted coup on 29 July 1981 followed a weakening of the economy and allegations of corruption against leading politicians. The coup attempt occurred while President Jawara was attending the Royal Wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana in London and was carried out by a rogue group of leftists calling themselves the National Revolutionary Council, composed of Kukoi Samba Sanyang's Socialist and Revolutionary Labour Party (SRLP) and elements of the Field Force, a paramilitary force which constituted the bulk of the country's armed forces.\nPresident Jawara requested military aid from Senegal, which deployed 400 troops to The Gambia on 31 July. By 6 August, some 2,700 Senegalese troops had been deployed, defeating the rebel force. Between 500 and 800 people were killed during the coup and the ensuing violence.\nIn 1982, in the aftermath of the 1981 attempted coup, Senegal and The Gambia signed a treaty of confederation. The Senegambia Confederation aimed to combine the armed forces of the two states and to unify their economies and currencies. The Gambia permanently withdrew from the confederation in 1989.\nIn the general election of April 1992, Dawda Jawara once again won a fifth term as president of The Gambia.\nFollowing dissolution of the Senegambia Confederation.\nIn 1994, the Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council (AFPRC) deposed the Jawara government and banned opposition political activity. Lieutenant Yahya Jammeh, chairman of the AFPRC, became head of state. Jammeh was just 29 years old at the time of the coup. The AFPRC announced a transition plan to return to a democratic civilian government.\nThe Provisional Independent Electoral Commission (PIEC) was established in December 1995 to conduct national elections and it supervised a referendum on a revised Constitution, the elections for president and the National Assembly by early January 1997. In 1997 the was established to replace the PIEC, responsible for the registration of voters and for the conduct of elections and referendums.\nThe IEC organized the next 5-year elections for late 2001 and early 2002, and The Gambia completed a full cycle of presidential, legislative, and local elections, which foreign observers deemed free, fair, and transparent. President Yahya Jammeh, who was elected to continue in the position he had assumed during the coup, took the oath of office again on 21 December 2001. Jammeh's Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and Construction (APRC) maintained its strong majority in the National Assembly, particularly after the main opposition United Democratic Party (UDP) boycotted the legislative elections.\nOn 2 October 2013, The Gambian Interior Minister announced that The Gambia would leave the Commonwealth with immediate effect, ending 48 years of membership of the organisation. The Gambian government said it had \"decided that The Gambia will never be a member of any Neo-Colonial institution and will never be a party to any institution that represents an extension of colonialism\".\nOn 11 December 2015, President Jammeh (without any legal authority) unilaterally declared The Gambia an Islamic Republic, calling it a break from the country's colonial past, although the constitution remained secular.\nThe months leading up to the 2016 presidential election were tense. The youth leader of the main opposition UDP, Solo Sandeng, died in detention at the notorious National Intelligence Agency. Ousainou Darboe, the leader of the UDP, and many senior members of his party were sent to jail for demanding the release of Solo Sandeng dead or alive. President Jammeh faced opposition leaders Adama Barrow from the Independent Coalition of parties and Mamma Kandeh from The Gambia Democratic Congress party. The high court of the Gambia sentenced main opposition leader and human rights advocate Ousainou Darboe to 3 years in prison in July 2016, disqualifying him from running in the presidential election. This gave Adama Barrow to contest under the UDP ticket.\nFollowing the 1 December 2016 elections, the elections commission declared Adama Barrow the winner. Jammeh, who had ruled for 22 years, first announced he would step down after losing the 2016 election before declaring the results void and calling for a new vote, sparking a constitutional crisis and leading to an invasion by an ECOWAS coalition. On 20 January 2017, Jammeh announced that he had agreed to step down and would leave the country.\nIn January 2017, President Barrow removed the \"Islamic\" title from The Gambia's name. On 14 February 2017, The Gambia began the process of returning to its membership of the Commonwealth and formally presented its application to re-join to Secretary-General Patricia Scotland on 22 January 2018. Boris Johnson, who became the first British foreign secretary to visit The Gambia since the country gained independence in 1965, announced that the British government welcomed The Gambia's return to the Commonwealth. The Gambia officially rejoined the Commonwealth on 8 February 2018. On 28 February 2018, Jaha Dukureh, a women's rights activist was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize for her work in combating female genital mutilation.\nOn 4 December 2021, Adama Barrow won re-election in the presidential election. On 20 December 2022, a supposed coup attempt by the Gambian army was foiled, with four soldiers arrested. The Gambian Armed Forces have denied that any attempt at a coup was made. Barrow's use of foreign troops for his security and for protection of some infrastructure has hurt his popularity.\nGeography.\nThe Gambia is a very small and narrow country whose borders mirror the meandering Gambia River. It lies between latitudes 13 and 14\u00b0N, and longitudes 13 and 17\u00b0W.\nThe Gambia is less than wide at its widest point, with a total area of . About (11.5%) of The Gambia's area are covered by water. It is the smallest country on the African mainland. In comparative terms, The Gambia has a total area slightly more than that of the island of Jamaica.\nSenegal surrounds The Gambia on three sides, with of coastline on the Atlantic Ocean marking its western extremity.\nThe present boundaries were defined in 1889 after an agreement between the United Kingdom and France. During the negotiations between the French and the British in Paris, the French initially gave the British around of The Gambia River to control. Starting with the placement of boundary markers in 1891, it took nearly 15 years after the Paris meetings to determine the final borders of The Gambia. The resulting series of straight lines and arcs gave the British control of areas about north and south of The Gambia River.\nThe Gambia contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, West Sudanian savanna, and Guinean mangroves. It had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 4.56/10, ranking it 120th globally out of 172 countries.\nClimate.\nThe Gambia has a tropical savannah climate. A short rainy season normally lasts from June until September, but from then until May, lower temperatures predominate, with less precipitation. The climate in The Gambia closely resembles that of neighboring Senegal, of Mali, and of the northern part of Guinea.\nNature and wildlife.\nBiodiversity in The Gambia is extremely rich given the country's size, and considered to be of global significance.\nPlant assemblages consist of mangrove swamp along the river, wetland in lowland areas through to savanna woodland and a plateau dominated by sandhills in the upland region. There is a rich array of birdlife, with over 500 resident species. The national animal is the spotted hyena. Pygmy hippopotamuses and crocodiles may be found in the river system while common African species such as chimpanzees, baboons, antelopes, and warthogs are also present. 30 amphibian and 74 reptile species have been recorded including tortoises, snakes and various lizards; while over 500 fish species can be found in the marine and aquatic environments together with marine mammals including dolphins, whales and the rare West African manatee.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Gambia gained independence from the United Kingdom on 18 February 1965. From 1965 to 1994, the country was ostensibly a multi-party liberal democracy. It was ruled by Sir Dawda Jawara and his People's Progressive Party (PPP). However, the country never experienced political turnover during this period and its commitment to succession by the ballot box was never tested. In 1994, a military coup propelled a commission of military officers to power, known as the Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council (AFPRC). After two years of direct rule, a new constitution was written and in 1996, the leader of the AFPRC, Yahya Jammeh, was elected as president. He ruled in an authoritarian style until the 2016 election, which was won by Adama Barrow, backed by a coalition of opposition parties.\nAccording to the 2023 V-Dem Democracy Indices, the Gambia is ranked 68th of 179 nations worldwide and the 11th of 56 in Africa.\nPolitical history.\nDuring the Jawara era, there were initially four political parties, the PPP, the United Party (UP), the Democratic Party (DP), and I.M. Garba-Jahumpa's Muslim Congress Party (MCP). The 1960 constitution had established a House of Representatives, and in the 1960 election no party won a majority of seats. However, in 1961, the British Governor chose UP leader Pierre Sarr N'Jie to serve as the country's first head of government, in the form of a Chief Minister. This was an unpopular decision, and the 1962 election was notable as parties were able to appeal to ethnic and religious differences across the Gambia. The PPP won a majority, and formed a coalition with the Democratic Congress Alliance (DCA; a merger of the DP and MCP). They invited the UP to the coalition in 1963, but it left in 1965.\nThe UP was seen as the main opposition party, but it lost power from 1965 to 1970. In 1975, the National Convention Party (NCP) was formed by Sheriff Mustapha Dibba, and became the new main opposition party to the PPP's dominance. Both the PPP and NCP were ideologically similar, so in the 1980s a new opposition party emerged, in the form of the radical socialist People's Democratic Organisation for Independence and Socialism (PDOIS). However, between the 1966 and 1992 elections, the PPP was \"overwhelmingly dominant\", winning between 55% and 70% of the vote in each election and a large majority of seats continually.\nIn principle, competitive politics existed during the Jawara era, however, it was stated that there was in reality a \"one-party monopoly of state power centred around the dominant personality of Sir Dawda Jawara\". Civil society was limited post-independence, and opposition parties were weak and at the risk of being declared subversive. The opposition did not have equal access to resources, as the business class refused to finance them. The government had control over when they could make public announcements and press briefings, and there were also allegations of vote-buying and improprieties in the preparation of the electoral register. A 1991 court challenge by the PDOIS against irregularities on the electoral register in Banjul was dismissed on a technicality.\nIn July 1994, a bloodless military coup d'\u00e9tat brought an end to the Jawara era. The Armed Forces Provisional Ruling Council (AFPRC), led by Yahya Jammeh, ruled dictatorially for two years. The council suspended the constitution, banned all political parties, and imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew on the populace. A transition back to democracy occurred in 1996, and a new constitution was written, though the process was manipulated to benefit Jammeh. In a 1996 referendum, 70% of voters approved the constitution, and in December 1996, Jammeh was elected as president. All but PDOIS of the pre-coup parties were banned, and former ministers were barred from public office.\nDuring Jammeh's rule, the opposition was again fragmented. An example was the infighting between members of the National Alliance for Democracy and Development (NADD) that was formed in 2005. Jammeh used the police forces to harass opposition members and parties. Jammeh was also accused of human rights abuses, especially towards human rights activists, civil society organisations, political opponents, and the media. They faced exile, harassment, arbitrary imprisonment, murder, and forced disappearance. Particular examples include the murder of journalist Deyda Hydara in 2004, a student massacre at a protest in 2000, public threats to kill human rights defenders in 2009, and public threats towards homosexuals in 2013. Furthermore, Jammeh made threats to the religious freedom of non-Muslims, used 'mercenary judges' to weaken the judiciary, and faced numerous accusations of election rigging.\nIn the December 2016 presidential election, Jammeh was beaten by Adama Barrow, who was backed by a coalition of opposition parties. Jammeh's initial agreement to step down followed by a change of mind induced a constitutional crisis that culminated in a military intervention by ECOWAS forces in January 2017. Barrow pledged to serve at the head of a three-year transitional government. The Nigerian Centre for Democracy and Development describe the challenges facing Barrow as needing to restore \"citizen's trust and confidence in the public sector\". They describe a \"fragile peace\" with tensions in rural areas between farmers and the larger communities. They also reported on tensions between ethnic groups developing. An example is that in February 2017, 51 supporters of Jammeh were arrested for harassing supporters of Barrow. Although his election was initially met with enthusiasm, the Centre notes that this has been dampened by Barrow's initial constitutional faux pas with his vice president, the challenge of inclusion, and high expectations post-Jammeh.\nOn 5 December 2021, Incumbent President Adama Barrow was declared the winner of The Gambia's presidential election by the electoral commission. The 4 December 2021 election, the first since former dictator Yahya Jammeh fled into exile, was seen as crucial for the young democracy.\nConstitution.\nThe Gambia has had a number of constitutions in its history. The two most significant are the 1970 constitution, which established The Gambia as a presidential republic, and the 1996 constitution, which served as a basis for Jammeh's rule and was kept following Barrow's victory in 2016. Jammeh manipulated the 1996 constitutional reform process to benefit himself. No reference was made to term limits, indicating Jammeh's preference to stay in power for an extended period of time. According to the 1996 constitution, the President is the head of state, head of government, and commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Jammeh and Barrow have also both taken on the role of Minister of Defence.\nPresidency.\nThe president appoints the vice president and cabinet of ministers and also chairs the cabinet. The office of Prime Minister was abolished in 1970. Total executive power is vested in the president. He can also appoint five members of the National Assembly, the judges of the superior courts, regional governors, and district chiefs. In terms of the civil service, he can appoint the Public Service Commission, the ombudsman, and the Independent Electoral Commission. The president is directly elected for five-year terms based on a simple majority of votes. There are no term limits. The Constitution is under review as of 2018 and a two-term limit and other changes required to enhance the governance structures are expected.\nForeign relations.\nThe Gambia followed a formal policy of non-alignment throughout most of former President Jawara's tenure. It maintained close relations with the United Kingdom and with Senegal and other African countries. The July 1994 coup strained The Gambia's relationship with Western powers, particularly the United States, which until 2002 suspended most non-humanitarian assistance in accordance with Section 508 of the Foreign Assistance Act. After 1995, President Jammeh established diplomatic relations with several additional countries, including Libya (suspended in 2010), and Cuba. The People's Republic of China cut ties with The Gambia in 1995 \u2013 after the latter established diplomatic links with Taiwan \u2013 and re-established them in 2016.\nAs a member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), The Gambia has played an active role in that organisation's efforts to resolve the civil wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone and contributed troops to the community's ceasefire monitoring group (ECOMOG) in 1990 and (ECOMIL) in 2003. In November 2019, The Gambia filed a case against Myanmar in The Hague, accusing its military of genocide against Myanmar's ethnic Rohingya community.\nUnder Yahya Jammeh, The Gambia was also backing up rebels of MFDC in Casamance in southern Senegal. The subsequent worsening of the human rights situation placed increasing strains on US\u2013Gambian relations.\nThe Gambia withdrew from the Commonwealth of Nations on 3 October 2013, with Jammeh's government stating it had \"decided that The Gambia will never be a member of any neo-colonial institution and will never be a party to any institution that represents an extension of colonialism\". Under the Barrow government, The Gambia began the process of returning to its status as a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations with the support of the British government, formally presenting its application to re-join the Commonwealth to Secretary-General Patricia Scotland on 22 January 2018, returning to its status as a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations on 8 February 2018.\nMilitary.\nThe Gambia Armed Forces (GAF) was created in 1985 as a stipulation of the Senegambia Confederation, a political union between The Gambia and Senegal. It originally consisted of The Gambia National Army (GNA), trained by the British, and Gambia National Gendarmerie (GNG), trained by the Senegalese. The GNG was merged into the police in 1992, and in 1997 Jammeh created a Gambian Navy (GN). Attempts to create a Gambian Air Force in the mid-2000s ultimately fell through. In 2008, Jammeh created a National Republican Guard, composed of special forces units. The GNA has a strength of roughly 900, in two infantry battalions and an engineering company. It makes use of Ferret and M8 Greyhound armoured cars. The GN is equipped with patrol vessels, and Taiwan donated a number of new vessels to the force in 2013.\nSince the GAF was formed in 1985, it has been active in UN and African Union peacekeeping missions. It has been classed as a Tier 2 peacekeeping contributor and was described by the Center on International Cooperation as a regional leader in peacekeeping.\nIt dispatched soldiers to Liberia as part of ECOMOG from 1990 to 1991, during which two Gambian soldiers were killed. It has since contributed troops to ECOMIL, UNMIL, and UNAMID. Responsibility for the military has rested directly with the President since Jammeh seized power at the head of a bloodless military coup in 1994. Jammeh also created the role of Chief of the Defence Staff, who is the senior military officer responsible for the day-to-day operations of The Gambia Armed Forces. Between 1958 and 1985, The Gambia did not have a military, but The Gambia Field Force existed as a paramilitary wing of the police. The military tradition of The Gambia can be traced to The Gambia Regiment of the British Army, that existed from 1901 to 1958 and fought in World War I and World War II. In 2017, Gambia signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons.\nThe Gambia Armed Forces is and has been the recipient of a number of equipment and training agreements with other countries. In 1992, a contingent of Nigerian soldiers helped lead the GNA. Between 1991 and 2005, the Turkish armed forces helped train Gambian soldiers. It has also hosted British and United States training teams from the Royal Gibraltar Regiment and US AFRICOM.\nGambia is the 82nd most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index.\nHuman rights.\nAccording to the World Health Organization, an estimated 78.3% of Gambian girls and women have suffered female genital mutilation.\nLGBT activity is illegal, and punishable with life imprisonment, although the Barrow administration promised not to prosecute consenting same sex couples, it has also said it will not repeal the law.\nThe \"Daily Observer\" reporter Ebrima Manneh is believed by human rights organisations to have been arrested in July 2006 and secretly held in custody since then. Manneh was reportedly arrested by Gambia's National Intelligence Agency after attempting to republish a BBC report criticizing President Yahya Jammeh. Amnesty International considers him to be a prisoner of conscience and named him a 2011 \"priority case\". In 2019 The Gambian newspaper \"The Trumpet\" reported that Manneh had died in captivity at some point in mid-2008.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe Gambia is divided into eight local government areas, including the national capital, Banjul, which is classified as a city. The divisions of The Gambia were created by the Independent Electoral Commission in accordance to Article 192 of the National Constitution.\nThe local government areas are further subdivided (2013) into 43 districts. Of these, Kanifing and Kombo Saint Mary (which shares Brikama as a capital with the Brikama Local Government Area) are effectively part of the Greater Banjul area.\nEconomy.\nThe Gambia has a liberal, market-based economy characterised by traditional subsistence agriculture, a historic reliance on groundnuts (peanuts) for export earnings, a re-export trade built up around its ocean port, low import duties, minimal administrative procedures, a fluctuating exchange rate with no exchange controls, and a significant tourism industry.\nThe World Bank pegged Gambian gross domestic product (GDP) for 2018 at US$1,624 million; the International Monetary Fund put it at US$977 million for 2011. From 2006 to 2012, The Gambian economy grew annually at a rate of 5\u20136% of GDP.\nAgriculture accounts for roughly 30% of GDP and employs about 70% of the labour force. Within agriculture, peanut production accounts for 6.9% of GDP, other crops 8.3%, livestock 5.3%, fishing 1.8%, and forestry 0.5%. Industry accounts for about 8% of GDP and services around 58%. The limited amount of manufacturing is primarily agricultural-based (e.g., peanut processing, bakeries, a brewery, and a tannery). Other manufacturing activities involve soap, soft drinks, and clothing.\nPreviously, the United Kingdom and the European Union constituted the major Gambian export markets. However, in recent years Senegal, the United States, and Japan have become significant trade partners of The Gambia. In Africa, Senegal represented the biggest trade partner of The Gambia in 2007, which is a defining contrast to previous years that had Guinea-Bissau and Ghana as equally important trade partners. Globally, Denmark, the United States, and China have become important source countries for Gambian imports. The United Kingdom, Germany, Ivory Coast, and the Netherlands also provide a fair share of Gambian imports. The Gambian trade deficit for 2007 was $331\u00a0million.\nIn May 2009, twelve commercial banks existed in The Gambia, including one Islamic bank. The oldest of these, Standard Chartered Bank, dates its presence back to the entry in 1894 of what shortly thereafter became the Bank of British West Africa. In 2005 the Switzerland-based banking group International Commercial Bank established a subsidiary and now has four branches in the country. In 2007 Nigeria's Access Bank established a subsidiary that now has four branches in the country, in addition to its head office; the bank has pledged to open four more. 2008 saw the incorporation of Zenith Bank (Gambia) Limited, a subsidiary of Nigeria's behemoth Zenith Bank Plc, in the country. In May 2009 the Lebanese Canadian Bank opened a subsidiary called Prime Bank.\nSince 2017, China has invested in the Gambia as part of its Belt and Road Initiative. A major focus of Chinese activity in Gambia has been processing of locally caught fish for the production of fish meal for export. The economic and environmental impacts of fish meal production in Gambia are controversial.\nIn 2024, the first solar power plant was inaugurated.\nTransportation.\nThe system of transportation in The Gambia mixes both public and private operations and consists of a system of roads (both paved and unpaved), water and air transportation. The Trans-Gambia Highway runs along both sides of the river Gambia, which bisects the country. The river may be crossed by ferry or the Senegambia bridge. There are no railways in the country.\nRoadways in the country run to a length of 3,742\u00a0km of which only 723\u00a0km is paved and the remaining 3,019\u00a0km remains unpaved.\nThe country has a total of 390\u00a0km of waterways, with the Port of Banjul being the only port, which is managed by The Gambia Ports Authority.\nThe country's only international airport is the Banjul International Airport at Yundum, which is 26\u00a0km away.\nDemographics.\nThe urbanisation rate as of 2011[ [update]] was 57.3%. Provisional figures from the 2003 census show the gap between the urban and rural populations narrowing as more areas are declared urban. While urban migration, development projects, and modernisation are bringing more Gambians into contact with Western habits and values, indigenous forms of dress and celebration and the traditional emphasis on the extended family remain integral parts of everyday life.\nThe United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Human Development Report for 2010 ranks The Gambia 151st out of 169 countries on its Human Development Index, putting the country in the \"Low Human Development\" category. This index compares life-expectancy, years of schooling, gross national income (GNI) \"per capita\" and other factors.\nThe total fertility rate (TFR) was estimated at 3.98 children per woman in 2013.\nEthnic groups.\nA variety of ethnic groups live in The Gambia, each preserving its own language and traditions. The Mandinka ethnicity is the most numerous, followed by the Fula, Wolof, Jola/Karoninka, Serahule / Jahanka, Serers, Manjago, Bambara, Aku Marabou, Bainunka and others, such as Tukulor. The Krio people, locally known as Akus, constitute one of the smallest ethnic minorities in The Gambia. They descend from Sierra Leone Creole people and have traditionally concentrated in the capital.\nThe roughly 3,500 non-African residents include Europeans and families of Lebanese origin (0.23% of the total population). Most of the European minority is British, although many of the British left after independence.\nLanguages.\nEnglish is the official language of The Gambia and is thus used for official purposes and education. Other languages include Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, Serer, Soninke, Krio, Jola and other indigenous vernaculars. Owing to the country's geographical setting, knowledge of French (an official language in much of West Africa) is relatively widespread.\nMandinka is spoken as a first language by 38% of the population, Pulaar by 21%, Wolof by 18%, Soninke by 9%, Jola by 4.5%, Serer by 2.4%, Manjak and Bainouk by 1.6% each, Guinean Creole by 1%, and English by 0.5%. Several other languages are spoken by smaller numbers. Gambian Sign Language is used by the deaf.\nEducation.\nThe constitution mandates free and compulsory primary education in The Gambia. Lack of resources and of educational infrastructure has made implementation of this difficult. In 1995 the gross primary enrolment rate was 77.1% and the net primary enrolment rate was 64.7% School fees long prevented many children from attending school, but in February 1998 President Jammeh ordered the termination of fees for the first six years of schooling. Girls make up about 52% of primary-school pupils. The figure may be lower for girls in rural areas, where cultural factors and poverty prevent parents from sending girls to school. Approximately 20% of school-age children attend Quranic schools.\nHigher education.\nThere are various public and private tertiary educational institutions in the Gambia. The Gambia College, one of the oldest post-secondary education, was established in 1978. It offers certificate and diploma programmes in public health, education, nursing, and agriculture. The University of the Gambia was established by the Act of the National Assembly of the Gambia in 1999. Since its establishment the UTG offers both undergraduate, post-graduate and PhD in different faculties. The university used to be housed at the MDI in Kanifing and The Gambia Coll\u00e8ge in Brikama. The new campus in Faraba was inaugurated on 12 March 2024.\nThe International Open University (until January 2020 known as the Islamic Online University), a higher-education institution having more than 435,000 enrolled students from over 250 countries worldwide, has its global headquarters in The Gambia.\nHealth.\nIn the 2024 Global Hunger Index (GHI), the Gambia ranks 88th out of 127 countries, with a score of 19.9. This score indicates a moderate level of hunger.\nReligion.\nApproximately 96% of the population identify as Sunni Muslim, mostly Malikite Sufi. Except for a tiny fraction of one percent, the remainder of the population are Christian. Article 25 of the Constitution protects the rights of citizens to practise any religion that they choose and intermarriage between Muslims and Christians is common.\nIslam.\nVirtually all commercial life in The Gambia comes to a standstill during major Muslim holidays, which include Eid al-Adha and Eid ul-Fitr. Sunni Muslims in The Gambia mainly follow the Maliki school of jurisprudence. There is also a significant presence of the Ahmadiyya movement in the country. A Shia Muslim minority exists in The Gambia, mainly due to Lebanese and other Arab immigrants to the region. The vast majority of South-Asian immigrants are also Muslims.\nChristianity.\nThe Christian community comprises about 4% of the population. Residing in the western and southern parts of The Gambia, most members of the Christian community identify themselves as Roman Catholic. However, smaller Christian denominations are also present, including Anglicans, Methodists, Baptists, Seventh-day Adventists, Jehovah's Witnesses, and small evangelical congregations.\nTraditional religions.\nIt is unclear to what extent indigenous beliefs, such as the Serer religion, continue to be practised. Serer religion encompasses cosmology and a belief in a supreme deity called Roog. Some of its religious festivals include the \"Xooy\", \"Mbosseh\", and \"Randou Rande\". Each year, adherents of Serer religion make the annual pilgrimage to Sine in Senegal for the \"Xooy\" divination ceremony. Serer religion also has a rather significant imprint on Senegambian Muslim society in that Senegambian Muslim festivals such as \"Tobaski\", \"Gamo\", \"Koriteh\" and \"Weri Kor\" have names representing loanwords from the Serer religion \u2013 they were ancient Serer festivals. \nLike the Serers, the Jola people have their own religious customs, including a major religious ceremony, Boukout.\nOther religions.\nOwing to a small number of immigrants from South Asia, Hindus and followers of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith are also present.\nThere is also a small Jewish community in the Gambia.\nCulture.\nAlthough The Gambia is the smallest country on mainland Africa, its culture is the product of very diverse influences. The national borders outline a narrow strip on either side of the River Gambia, a body of water that has played a vital part in the nation's destiny and is known locally simply as \"the River\". Without natural barriers, The Gambia has become home to most of the ethnic groups that are present throughout western Africa, especially those in Senegal.\nEuropeans also figure prominently in Gambian history because the River Gambia is navigable deep into the continent, a geographic feature that made this area one of the most profitable sites for the slave trade from the 15th through the 17th centuries. (It also made it strategic to the halt of this trade once it was outlawed in the 19th century.) Some of this history was popularised in the Alex Haley book and TV series \"\", which was set in The Gambia.\nMusic.\nThe music of The Gambia is closely linked musically with that of its neighbour, Senegal, which surrounds its inland frontiers completely. It fuses popular Western music and dance, with \"sabar\", the traditional drumming and dance music of the Wolof and Serer people of Senegal.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of the Gambia is heavily influenced by the culinary traditions of neighbouring Senegal, reflecting a mix of local ingredients and historical influences, including French colonial cuisine. A popular dish in particular is the Senegalese domoda, a savoury peanut stew made with meat, peanut paste, and vegetables, representative of Gambian comfort food. Another dish is Gambian okra stew (\"superkanja\") which in addition to okra, has palm oil, meat and smoked fish. Senegalese yassa is also enjoyed widely; it features marinated fish or chicken seasoned with lemon, onions, and mustard, providing a sharp flavour that contrasts with the earthiness of many other dishes. Gambian cuisine usually includes peanuts, rice, fish, meat, onions, tomatoes, cassava, sweet potatoes, egg plant, cabbage, chili peppers and oysters from the River Gambia.\nLiterature.\nAs with other West African countries, The Gambia has a tradition of oral literature, including the griots, traditional storytellers and musicians. Since the 1960s, an English-language Gambian literature has emerged. Lenrie Peters is considered the founding father of this literature, whilst notable writers include Tijan Sallah, Nana Grey-Johnson and Mariama Khan.\nMedia.\nCritics have accused the government of restricting free speech. A 2002 law created a commission with the power to issue licences and imprison journalists; in 2004, additional legislation allowed prison sentences for libel and slander and cancelled all print and broadcasting licenses, forcing media groups to re-register at five times the original cost.\nThree Gambian journalists have been arrested since the coup attempt. It has been suggested that they were imprisoned for criticising the government's economic policy, or for stating that a former interior minister and security chief was among the plotters. Newspaper editor Deyda Hydara was shot to death under unexplained circumstances, days after the 2004 legislation took effect.\nLicensing fees are high for newspapers and radio stations, and the only nationwide stations are tightly controlled by the government.\nReporters Without Borders has accused \"President Yahya Jammeh's police state\" of using murder, arson, unlawful arrest and death threats against journalists.\nIn 2010, Musa Saidykhan, former editor of \"The Independent\" newspaper, was awarded US$200,000 by the ECOWAS Court in Abuja, Nigeria. The court found the Government of The Gambia guilty of torture while he was detained without trial.\nTourism.\nSports.\nAs in neighbouring Senegal, the national and most popular sport in The Gambia is wrestling. Association football and basketball are also popular. Football in The Gambia is administered by The Gambia Football Federation, who are affiliated to both FIFA and CAF. The GFA runs league football in The Gambia, including top division GFA League First Division, as well as The Gambia national football team. Nicknamed \"The Scorpions\", the national side have never qualified for the FIFA World Cup, but qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations at senior level for the first time in 2021. They also qualified for the second time in row in 2023 to participate in the AFCON in Ivory Coast. They play at Independence Stadium. The Gambia won two CAF U-17 championships one in 2005 when the country hosted, and 2009 in Algeria automatically qualifying for FIFA U-17 World Cup in Peru (2005) and Nigeria (2009) respectively. The U-20 also qualified for FIFA U-20 World Cup in 2007 and 2023 in Canada and Argentina respectively. The female U-17 also competed in FIFA U-17 World Cup 2012 in Azerbaijan.\nThe Gambia featured a national team in beach volleyball that competed at the 2018\u20132020 CAVB Beach Volleyball Continental Cup in both the women's and the men's section.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65657", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65657", "title": "Gurps", "text": ""}
{"id": "65658", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65658", "title": "East Hancock Neighborhood Historical District", "text": ""}
{"id": "65660", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65660", "title": "East Hancock, Michigan", "text": "East Hancock is a primarily residential neighbourhood in Hancock, Michigan, though it also includes the easternmost block of Quincy Street, the main street of Hancock's downtown.\nEast Hancock Neighborhood Historic District.\nThe East Hancock Neighborhood Historic District is a nationally recognized historic district which is a substantial subsection of the East Hancock neighborhood. The District is bounded by Front Street, Dunston Street, Vivian Street, Mason Avenue, and Cooper Avenue, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980.\nThere are 88 residences in the East Hancock Neighborhood Historic District, along with a synagogue called Temple Jacob, a gas station, and a WPA project. The majority of the residences were built between 1890 and 1920.\nHistory.\nThe East Hancock neighborhood was formerly characterized by a number of deep ravines originally covered with wooden sidewalks that were filled in by the Dakota Heights Land Company; the neighbourhood was then \"subdivided into residential lots\". Development in the neighborhood began in the 1890s and surged in the early 1900s, when a rush of prosperity increased the number of relatively wealthy people in Hancock. The neighborhood brought together Hancock citizens involved in the business and mining sectors of the economy. Notable early residents of the area were primarily mine employees and managers. As mining declined in importance, more Hancock businessmen moved into the neighborhood.\nDescription.\nMany of the residences in East Hancock were designed by prominent local architects. Styles represented in the neighborhood include Queen Anne, Stick, Shingle, Neo-Classical, Renaissance Revival, and Bungaloid.\nA principal feature is a WPA-project stone staircase \"[descending] from \"Cooper Avenue to Front Street\".\nHistorically, East Hancock was important as the station from which the trolley departed to the Electric Park resort.\nThe East Hancock Neighborhood Association was formed in 1981. It is noted for many large houses in the Queen Anne, Renaissance and shingle styles http://.\nThe construction of the Canal Crossings Condominium by Moyle Inc. has obstructed some of the view of the neighbourhood from the Portage Lake Lift Bridge, one of the things for which the project has been criticised.http://\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65662", "revid": "46271501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65662", "title": "Institute for Historical Review", "text": "American Holocaust denial group\nThe Institute for Historical Review (IHR) is a United States\u2013based nonprofit organization that promotes Holocaust denial. It is considered by many scholars to be central to the international Holocaust denial movement. Self-described as a \"historical revisionist\" organization, the IHR promotes antisemitic viewpoints and has links to several neo-Nazi and neo-fascist organizations.\nThe group was founded in 1978 in Torrance, California, by David McCalden and Willis Carto, and is headquartered in Fountain Valley, California. It published the \"Journal of Historical Review\" until 2002, but now disseminates its materials through its website and via email. The parent corporation of the IHR and the affiliated Noontide Press is the Legion for the Survival of Freedom.\nHistory.\nThe IHR was founded in 1978 by David McCalden, also known as Lewis Brandon, a former member of the British National Front, and Willis Carto, the head of the now-defunct Liberty Lobby. Liberty Lobby was an antisemitic organization best known for publishing \"The Spotlight\", now reorganized as the \"American Free Press\". Austin App, a La Salle University professor credited with being the first major American Holocaust denier, inspired the creation of the IHR.\nMel Mermelstein case.\nAt the IHR's first conference in 1979, IHR publicly offered a reward of $50,000 for verifiable \"proof that gas chambers for the purpose of killing human beings existed at or in Auschwitz.\" This money (and an additional $40,000) was eventually paid in 1985 to Auschwitz survivor Mel Mermelstein, who, represented by public-interest lawyer William John Cox, sued the IHR for breach of contract for initially ignoring his evidence (a signed testimony of his experiences in Auschwitz). On October 9, 1981, both parties in the Mermelstein case filed motions for summary judgment in consideration of which Judge Thomas T. Johnson of the Superior Court of Los Angeles County took \"judicial notice of the fact that Jews were gassed to death at the Auschwitz Concentration Camp in occupied Poland during the summer of 1944.\"\nOn August 5, 1985, Judge Robert A. Wenke entered a judgment based upon the Stipulation for Entry of Judgment agreed upon by the parties on July 22, 1985. The judgment required IHR and other defendants to pay $90,000 to Mermelstein and to issue a letter of apology to \"Mr. Mel Mermelstein, a survivor of Auschwitz-Birkenau and Buchenwald, and all other survivors of Auschwitz\" for \"pain, anguish and suffering\" caused to them.\nMcCalden and Carto had a falling out over the Mel Mermelstein case, and in 1981 Carto fired McCalden as IHR director. In response, McCalden attacked IHR members and associates in his \"Revisionist Newsletter\", including Carto, H. Keith Thompson, and Keith Stimely. From 1982 to 1983, Stimely was assistant director of the IHR and was the editor of their \"Journal of Historical Review\" from 1983 to 1985. \nIn February 1985, Stimely quit the IHR, claiming that Carto had, without consulting him, removed part of an article by Robert Faurisson that was critical of David Irving from the \"Journal of Historical Review\"; he was also aggrieved that Carto had refused to include a Yockey book, \"The Enemy of Europe\", in his Noontide Press catalog because he considered it too anti-American. Stimely proceeded to denounce Carto and say that he had never understood Yockey, writing that \"Yockey was, at the bottom of his heart, an artist; Carto is, at the bottom of his heart, a travelling salesman\". He wrote a resignation letter entitled \"The Problem of Willis A. Carto or Goodbye to All That!\" \nTom Marcellus became its director. in 1971, Marcellus was a field staff member for the Church of Scientology and was an editor for one of the church's publications. When Marcellus left IHR in 1995, Mark Weber, the editor of the IHR's \"Journal of Historical Review\" (JHR) since 1992, took over as its director, and has been the IHR's director and spokesman since then.\nAttacks by the JDL.\nThe IHR was the target of the far-right terrorist organization Jewish Defense League for many years. Shortly before the IHR's office got firebombed on June 25th, 1981, a man claiming to represent the \"Jewish Defenders\" called the news agency United Press International threatening to firebomb the IHR's HQ. The office only sustained minor damage, a search turned up no bombs in the building, and no one was arrested. On April 5th, 1982, the office was firebombed for a second time, this time causing damage to a copy machine, some furniture and some records. A man once again called into a news agency claiming to represent the \"Jewish Defenders\", this time to the newspaper Daily Breeze. On Sept. 5, 1982, the office was the target of a drive-by shooting, which only caused minimal damage and no injuries. \nOn July 4, 1984, a third firebombing destroyed the institute's offices and warehouse. Thousands of books, cassette tapes, pamphlets, and 90% of its inventory were lost. Carto had not insured the facilities or stock. They then moved to a new building in Costa Mesa, California. In 2002, during the trial of Earl Krugel for trying to send explosives to congressman Darrell Issa and the King Fahd Mosque in Culver City, California, it was revealed that Krugel had admitted to an FBI informant in November of 2001 that he firebombed a \"Nazi bookstore\". The FBI informant was originally trying to get information on if JDL members had ever firebombed ADL offices, and Krugel replied with \"Nobody hit the ADL although they deserve it richly.\", and then \"Uh, no it was on the uh, bookstore... that Nazi bookstore... the Holocaust deniers.\" The informant then replied with \"I remember you telling me something about that.\". Krugel then said \"That was beautiful, man. I did it. It was better than I expected.\" A law enforcement source familiar with the probe said investigators strongly believe Krugel is referring to firebombings of IHR offices and warehouses.\nThe JDL had been known to protest the IHR's conferences where a few hundred attendees come to listen or give speeches. According to JDL chairman Irv Rubin, the JDL threatened to protest inside and outside the Red Lion Inn, which was the first location for the 1989 conference. Rubin also reportedly said that several Jewish groups and newspapers agreed to call the hotel to \"apply pressure in that regard. If it worked, it worked beautifully.\u201d. However Steve Giblin, executive vice president of Red Lion Hotels &amp; Inns in Vancouver, stated it was a mutual agreement to cancel the event and change venues because of scheduling conflicts. He also stated that he did not receive an ultimatum from the JDL, and only received two or three phone calls about the IHR. Their 1989 conference had reportedly been forced to move locations twice after protests from the JDL, before finally carrying out the conference in the basement of the German Community Church in the Old World Village of Huntington Beach, California.\nOuster of Carto and later history.\nIn the 1980s, the IHR's members, principally Marcellus and Weber, seeing the IHR as a serious group, became increasingly embarrassed by how outspoken Carto was in his antisemitism. They also began to dispute over Carto's usage of funds. They alleged that Carto fled with several millions of dollars that were supposed to have gone to the IHR. This resulted in a lawsuit. in 1993, they wrote a document, published in the \"Journal\", rebuking him and calling him a liability that had contributed little to the IHR. They voted to oust him. In 1996, IHR won a $6,430,000 judgment in the lawsuit against Carto in which IHR alleged that Carto embezzled $7.5 million that had been left to Legion for the Survival of Freedom, the parent corporation of IHR, from the estate of Jean Edison Farrel.\nIn 2001, Eric Owens, a former employee, alleged that Mark Weber and Greg Raven from the IHR's staff had been planning to sell their mailing lists to either the Anti-Defamation League or the Church of Scientology.\nSince 2009, Weber has pushed to broaden the institute's mandate. In January 2009, Weber released an essay titled, \"How Relevant Is Holocaust Revisionism?\" In it, he acknowledged the death of millions of Jews but did not wholly reject Holocaust denial. He noted that Holocaust denial had attracted little support over the years: \"It's gotten some support in Iran, or places like that, but as far as I know, there is no history department supporting writing by these folks.\" Accordingly, he recommended that emphasis be placed instead on opposing \"Jewish-Zionist power\", which some commentators claim was a shift to a directly antisemitic position.\nHolocaust denial.\nAlthough the IHR comments on a variety of subjects, it is most criticized for its Holocaust denial. IHR is widely regarded as antisemitic and as having links to neo-Nazi organizations. Multiple writers have stated that its primary focus is denying key facts of Nazism and the genocide of Jews.\nWhen the IHR devoted itself to publishing Holocaust-denial material, it insisted that its work in this regard was \"revisionism\" rather than denial:\nThe Institute does not \"deny the Holocaust.\" Every responsible scholar of twentieth century history acknowledges the great catastrophe that befell European Jewry during World War II. All the same, the IHR has over the years published detailed books and numerous probing essays that call into question aspects of the orthodox, Holocaust-extermination story, and highlight specific Holocaust exaggerations and falsehoods.\nOn the IHR website, Barbara Kulaszka defends the distinction between \"denial\" and \"revisionism\" by arguing that considerable revisions to history have been made over the years by historians and concludes:\nFor purposes of their own, powerful, special-interest groups desperately seek to keep substantive discussion of the Holocaust story taboo. One of the ways they do this is by purposely mischaracterizing revisionist scholars as \"deniers.\"\nAmerican environmentalist Paul Rauber wrote:\nThe question [of whether the IHR denies the Holocaust] appears to turn on IHR's Humpty-Dumpty word game with the word Holocaust. According to Mark Weber, associate editor of the IHR's Journal of Historical Review [now Director of the IHR], \"If by the 'Holocaust' you mean the political persecution of Jews, some scattered killings, if you mean a cruel thing that happened, no one denies that. But if one says that the 'Holocaust' means the systematic extermination of six to eight million Jews in concentration camps, that's what we think there's not evidence for.\" That is, IHR doesn't deny that the Holocaust happened; they just deny that the word 'Holocaust' means what people customarily use it for.\nAccording to British historian of Germany Richard J. Evans:\nLike many individual Holocaust deniers, the Institute as a body denied that it was involved in Holocaust denial. It called this a 'smear' which was 'completely at variance with the facts' because 'revisionist scholars' such as Faurisson, Butz 'and bestselling British historian David Irving acknowledge that hundreds of thousands of Jews were killed and otherwise perished during the Second World War as a direct and indirect result of the harsh anti-Jewish policies of Germany and its allies'. But the concession that a relatively small number of Jews were killed [has been] routinely used by Holocaust deniers to distract attention from the far more important fact of their refusal to admit that the figure ran into the millions, and that a large proportion of these victims were systematically murdered by gassing as well as by shooting.\nIn 2007, the United Kingdom's Channel 4 described the IHR as a \"pseudo-academic body based in the United States which is dedicated to denying that the Holocaust happened,\" while the \"Pittsburgh Post-Gazette\" called the IHR a \"blatantly anti-Semitic assortment of pseudo-scholars\".\nThe Southern Poverty Law Center lists the IHR as a hate group. In an article for \"The Jewish Chronicle\", British writer Oliver Kamm, described the IHR as being \"a pseudo-scholarly body\". The British Holocaust denier David Irving delivered a speech to the organisation's congress in 1983. Irving returned to speak at IHR conferences on at least four more occasions, in 1989, 1990, 1992, and 1994.\nCriticism of methods.\nThe \"Holocaust revisionist\" arguments published by the IHR are not regarded as serious historical research by mainstream historians and academics; rather, they are regarded as works of pseudo-science aimed at proving that the Holocaust did not happen. The editorial board of one of the leading historical journals, \"The Journal of American History\", wrote, \"We all abhor, on both moral and scholarly grounds, the substantive arguments of the Institute for Historical Review. We reject their claims to be taken seriously as historians.\" In response, IHR printed Weber's letter disputing the claims.\nIn April 2004, following a complaint by the David S. Wyman Institute for Holocaust Studies, \"The Nation\" magazine refused to accept advertising from the IHR, stating \"[T]here is a strong presumption against censoring any advertisement, especially if we disagree with its politics. This case, however, is different. Their arguments are 'patently fraudulent.'\" Weber responded with critical commentary in a letter to Leigh Novog of the advertising department of \"The Nation\".\nConnections with Arab, Islamic opponents of Israel.\nIssa Nakhleh, an attorney who has served as U.N. Observer of the Arab Higher Committee for Palestine, who already in 1972 openly denied the Holocaust, and, \"who, during the 1960s and early 1970s, was associated with Gerald L.K. Smith (writing for Smith\u2019s publication, The Cross and the Flag), and with the racist West Coast group, Western Front, in 1981... spoke at the Third Annual Convention of the Institute for Historical Review...\" Described as the \"chairman of the Palestine-Arab Committee,\" he was a highlighted speaker and in 1982, he published an article for IHR.\nIn an article published in \"Hit List\" magazine in 2002, author Kevin Coogan claimed there had been attempts to forge ties between American and European Holocaust-denial groups such as the IHR and \"radical Middle Eastern extremists.\" According to Coogan, Ahmed Rami, a former Moroccan military officer \"founded Radio Islam to disseminate antisemitic, Holocaust denying, and often pro-Nazi propaganda,\" and tried to organize, with the IHR, a conference in a Hezbollah-controlled section of Beirut, Lebanon.\nThe \"Daily Star\", the leading English-language paper in Lebanon, in response to a planned IHR meeting in the country, called its members \"loathsome pseudo-historians\" and the institute itself an \"international hate group.\" The paper reported \"one former PLO official [stating], 'with friends like that, we don't need enemies'.\" With the help of the anti-Israeli Jordanian Writers Association, an alternative event was held with the theme \"What happened to the Revisionist Historians' Conference in Beirut?\"\n\"Journal of Historical Review\".\nThe IHR published the \"Journal of Historical Review\", which its critics \u2013 including the Anti-Defamation League, the Danish Center for Holocaust and Genocide Studies, and other scholars, such as Robert Hanyok, a National Security Agency historian \u2013 accused of being pseudo-scientific. Hanyok described IHR as \"a well-known forum for that faction of scholars and researchers associated with a movement known as 'Holocaust denial'\".\nJonathan Petropoulos wrote on \"The History Teacher\" that the \"[journal] is shockingly racist and antisemitic: articles on 'America's Failed Racial Policy' and anti-Israel pieces accompany those about gas chambers... They clearly have no business claiming to be a continuation of the revisionist tradition, and should be referred to as 'Holocaust Deniers'.\"\nWeber was the editor of JHR from 1992 to 2002, when the JHR ceased publication. Since 2002, the IHR's main method of spreading its message has been through its website \"IHR Update\" and by e-mail.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65663", "revid": "34592541", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65663", "title": "List of geological phenomena", "text": "A geological phenomenon is a phenomenon which is explained by or sheds light on the science of geology.\nExamples of geological phenomena are:"}
{"id": "65668", "revid": "50762171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65668", "title": "Mixed economy", "text": "Economic system that includes both capitalist and socialist elements\nA mixed economy is an economic system that includes both elements associated with capitalism, such as private businesses, and with socialism, such as nationalized government services.\nMore specifically, a mixed economy may be variously defined as an economic system blending elements of a market economy with elements of a planned economy, markets with state interventionism, or private enterprise with public enterprise. Common to all mixed economies is a combination of free-market principles and principles of socialism. Alternatively, a mixed economy can refer to a reformist transitionary phase to a socialist economy that allows a substantial role for private enterprise and contracting within a dominant economic framework of public ownership. This can extend to a Soviet-type planned economy that has been reformed to incorporate a greater role for markets in the allocation of factors of production.\nThe idea behind a mixed economy, as advocated by John Maynard Keynes and several others, was not to abandon the capitalist mode of production but to retain a predominance of private ownership and control of the means of production, with profit-seeking enterprise and the accumulation of capital as its fundamental driving force. The difference from a \"laissez-faire\" capitalist system is that markets are subject to varying degrees of regulatory control and governments wield indirect macroeconomic influence through fiscal and monetary policies with a view to counteracting capitalism's history of boom and bust cycles, unemployment, and economic inequality. In this framework, varying degrees of public utilities and essential services are provided by the government, with state activity providing public goods and universal civic requirements, including education, healthcare, physical infrastructure, and management of public lands. This contrasts with \"laissez-faire\" capitalism, where state activity is limited to maintaining order and security, and providing public goods and services, as well as the legal framework for the protection of property rights and enforcement of contracts.\nIn reference to Western European economic models as championed by conservatives (Christian democrats), liberals (social liberals), and socialists (social democrats \u2013 social democracy was created as a combination of socialism and liberal democracy) as part of the post-war consensus, a mixed economy is in practice a form of capitalism where most industries are privately owned but there is a number of utilities and essential services under public ownership, usually around 15 to 20 percent.\nIn the post-war era, Western European social democracy became associated with this economic model. As an economic ideal, mixed economies are supported by people of various political persuasions, in particular social democrats. The contemporary capitalist welfare state has been described as a type of mixed economy in the sense of state interventionism, as opposed to a mixture of planning and markets, since economic planning was not a key feature or component of the welfare state.\nOverview.\nWhile there is no single all-encompassing definition of a mixed economy, there are generally two major definitions, one being political and the other apolitical. The political definition of a mixed economy refers to the degree of state interventionism in a market economy, portraying the state as encroaching onto the market under the assumption that the market is the natural mechanism for allocating resources. The political definition is limited to capitalistic economies and precludes an extension to non-capitalist systems, and aims to measure the degree of state influence through public policies in the market.\nThe apolitical definition relates to patterns of ownership and management of economic enterprises in an economy, strictly referring to a mix of public and private ownership of enterprises in the economy and is unconcerned with political forms and public policy. Alternatively, it refers to a mixture of economic planning and markets for the allocation of resources.\nHistory.\nThe term \"mixed economy\" arose in the context of political debate in the United Kingdom in the postwar period, although the set of policies later associated with the term had been advocated from at least the 1930s. The oldest documented mixed economies in the historical record are found as early as the 4th millennium BC in the Ancient Mesopotamian civilization in city-states such as Uruk and Ebla. The economies of the Ancient Greek city-states can also best be characterized as mixed economies. It is also possible that the Phoenician city-states depended on mixed economies to manage trade. Before being conquered by the Roman Republic, the Etruscan civilization engaged in a \"strong mixed economy\". In general, the cities of the Ancient Mediterranean in regions such as North Africa, Iberia, and Southern France, among others, all practiced some form of a mixed economy. According to the historians Michael Rostovtzeff and Pierre L\u00e9v\u00eaque, the economies of Ancient Egypt, pre-Columbian Mesoamerican, Ancient Peru, Ancient China, and the Roman Empire after Diocletian all had the basic characteristics of mixed economies. After the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, the Byzantine Empire in its eastern part continued to have a mixed economy until its destruction by the Ottoman Empire.\nMedieval Islamic societies drew their primary material basis from the classical Mediterranean mixed economies that preceded them, and the economies of Islamic empires such as the Abbasid Caliphate dealt with their emerging, prominent capitalistic sectors or market economies through regulation via state, social, or religious institutions. Due to having low, diffuse populations, and disconnected trade, the economies of Europe could not have supported centralized states or mixed economies and instead a primarily agrarian feudalism predominated for the centuries following the collapse of Rome. With the recovery of populations and the rise of medieval communes from the 11th century onward, economic and political power once again became centralized. According to Murray Bookchin, mixed economies, which had grown out of the medieval communes, were beginning to emerge in Europe by the 15th century as feudalism declined. In 17th-century France, Jean-Baptiste Colbert acting as finance minister for Louis XIV attempted to institute a mixed economy on a national scale.\nThe American System initially proposed by the first United States Secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton, and supported by later American leaders such as Henry Clay, John C Calhoun, and Daniel Webster, exhibited the traits of a mixed economy combining protectionism, \"laissez-faire\", and infrastructure spending. After 1851, Napoleon III began the process of replacing the old agricultural economy of France with one that was mixed and focused on industrialization. By 1914 and the start of World War I, Germany had developed a mixed economy with government co-ownership of infrastructure and industry along with a comprehensive social welfare system. After the 1929 stock crash and subsequent Great Depression threw much of the global economy into a severe economic decline, British economists such as John Maynard Keynes began to advocate for economic theories that argued more government intervention in the economy. Harold Macmillan, a British politician in the Conservative Party, also began to advocate for a mixed economy in his books \"Reconstruction\" (1933) and \"The Middle Way\" (1938). Supporters of the mixed economy included R. H. Tawney, Anthony Crosland, and Andrew Shonfield, who were mostly associated with the Labour Party in the United Kingdom. During the post-war period and coinciding with the Golden Age of Capitalism, there was general worldwide rejection of \"laissez-faire\" economics as capitalist countries embraced mixed economies founded on economic planning, intervention, and welfare.\nPolitical philosophy.\nIn the apolitical sense, the term mixed economy is used to describe economic systems that combine various elements of market economies and planned economies. As most political-economic ideologies are defined in an idealized sense, what is described rarely\u2014if ever\u2014exists in practice. Most would not consider it unreasonable to label an economy that, while not being a perfect representation, very closely resembles an ideal by applying the rubric that denominates that ideal. When a system in question, diverges to a significant extent from an idealized economic model or ideology, the task of identifying it can become problematic, and the term mixed economy was coined. As it is unlikely that an economy will contain a perfectly even mix, mixed economies are usually noted as being skewed towards either private ownership or public ownership, toward capitalism or socialism, or a market economy or command economy in varying degrees.\nCatholic social teaching.\nJesuit author David Hollenbach has argued that Catholic social teaching calls for a \"new form\" of mixed economy. He refers back to Pope Pius XI's statement that government \"should supply help to the members of the social body, but may never destroy or absorb them\". Hollenbach writes that a socially just mixed economy involves labor, management, and the state working together through a pluralistic system that distributes economic power widely. Pope Francis had criticized neoliberalism throughout his papacy and encouraged state welfare programs for \"the redistribution of wealth, looking out for the dignity of the poorest who risk always ending up crushed by the powerful\". In \"Evangelii gaudium\", he stated: \"Some people continue to defend trickle-down theories which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and inclusiveness in the world. This opinion, which has never been confirmed by the facts, expresses a crude and na\u00efve trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system. Meanwhile, the excluded are still waiting.\"\nCatholic social teaching opposes both unregulated capitalism and state socialism. Subsequent scholars have noted that conceiving of subsidiarity as a \"top-down, government-driven political exercise\" requires a selective reading of 1960s encyclicals. A more comprehensive reading of Catholic social teaching suggests a conceptualization of subsidiarity as a \"bottom-up concept\" that is \"rooted in recognition of a common humanity, not in the political equivalent of \"noblese oblige\"\".\nFascism.\nAlthough fascism is primarily a political ideology that stresses the importance of cultural and social issues over economics, it is generally supportive of a broadly capitalistic mixed economy. It supports state interventionism into markets and private enterprise, alongside a fascist corporatist framework, referred to as a third position that ostensibly aims to be a middle-ground between socialism and capitalism by mediating labor and business disputes to promote national unity. 20th-century fascist regimes in Italy and Germany adopted large public works programs to stimulate their economies and state interventionism in largely private sector-dominated economies to promote re-armament and national interests. During World War II, Germany implemented a war economy that combined a free market with central planning. The Nazi government collaborated with leading German business interests, who supported the war effort in exchange for advantageous contracts, subsidies, the suppression of trade unions, and the allowance of cartels and monopolies. Scholars have drawn parallels between the American New Deal and public works programs promoted by fascism, arguing that fascism similarly arose in response to the threat of socialist revolution and aimed to \"save capitalism\" and private property.\nSocialism.\nMixed economies understood as a mixture of socially owned and private enterprises have been predicted and advocated by various socialists as a necessary transitional form between capitalism and socialism. Additionally, several proposals for socialist systems call for a mixture of different forms of enterprise ownership including a role for private enterprise. For example, Alexander Nove's conception of feasible socialism outlines an economic system based on a combination of state enterprises for large industries, worker and consumer cooperatives, private enterprises for small-scale operations, and individually owned enterprises. The social democratic theorist Eduard Bernstein advocated a form of a mixed economy, believing that a mixed system of state-owned enterprises, cooperatives, and private enterprises would be necessary for a long period before capitalism would evolve of its own accord into socialism.\nFollowing the Russian Civil War, Vladimir Lenin adopted the New Economic Policy in the Soviet Union; the introduction of a mixed economy serving as a temporary expedient for rebuilding the nation. The policy eased the restrictions of war communism and allowed a return of markets, where private individuals could administer small and medium-sized enterprises, while the state would control large industries, banks and foreign trade. The Socialist Republic of Vietnam describes its economy as a socialist-oriented market economy that consists of a mixture of public, private, and cooperative enterprise\u2014a mixed economy that is oriented toward the long-term development of a socialist economy. The People's Republic of China adopted a socialist market economy, which represents an early stage of socialist development according to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). The CCP takes the Marxist\u2013Leninist position that an economic system containing diverse forms of ownership\u2014but with the public sector playing a decisive role\u2014is a necessary characteristic of an economy in the preliminary stage of developing socialism.\nIn the early post-war era in Western Europe, social democratic parties rejected the Stalinist political and economic model then current in the Soviet Union, committing themselves either to an alternative path to socialism or to a compromise between capitalism and socialism. In this period, social democrats embraced a mixed economy based on the predominance of private property and a minority of essential utilities and public services under public ownership. As a result, social democracy became associated with Keynesian economics, state interventionism, and the welfare state. Social democratic governments in practice largely maintain the capitalist mode of production (factor markets, private property, and wage labor) under a mixed economy, and pledge to reform capitalism and make society more egalitarian and democratic.\nTypology.\nMix of free markets and state intervention.\nThis meaning of a mixed economy refers to a combination of market forces with state intervention in the form of regulations, macroeconomic policies and social welfare interventions aimed at improving market outcomes. As such, this type of mixed economy falls under the framework of a capitalistic market economy, with macroeconomic interventions aimed at promoting the stability of capitalism. Other examples of common government activity in this form of mixed economy include environmental protection, maintenance of employment standards, a standardized welfare system, and economic competition with antitrust laws. Most contemporary market-oriented economies fall under this category, including the economy of the United States. The term is also used to describe the economies of countries that feature extensive welfare states, such as the Nordic model practiced by the Nordic countries, which combine free markets with an extensive welfare state.\nThe American School is the economic philosophy that dominated United States national policies from the time of the American Civil War until the mid-20th century. It consisted of three core policy initiatives: protecting industry through high tariffs (1861\u20131932; changing to subsidies and reciprocity from 1932\u2013the 1970s), government investment in infrastructure through internal improvements, and a national bank to promote the growth of productive enterprises. During this period, the United States grew into the largest economy in the world, surpassing the United Kingdom by 1880. The social market economy is the economic policy of modern Germany that steers a middle path between the goals of social democracy and capitalism within the framework of a private market economy and aims at maintaining a balance between a high rate of economic growth, low inflation, low levels of unemployment, good working conditions, and public welfare and public services by using state intervention. Under its influence, Germany emerged from desolation and defeat to become an industrial giant within the European Union.\nMix of private and public enterprise.\nThis type of mixed economy specifically refers to a mixture of private and public ownership of industry and the means of production. As such, it is sometimes described as a \"middle path\" or transitional state between capitalism and socialism but can also refer to a mixture of state capitalism with private capitalism. Examples include the economies of China, Norway, Singapore, and Vietnam\u2014all of which feature large state-owned enterprise sectors operating alongside large private sectors. The French economy featured a large state sector from 1945 until 1986, mixing a substantial amount of state-owned enterprises and nationalized firms with private enterprises.\nIndia is typically described as a mixed economy. This is because it combines a large and growing private sector with a large and important sector that remains under government ownership. India has experienced major growth in market based industries, since the economic reforms in 1991. These industries include services, manufacturing, and technology. Private firms and foreign investment play a central part in production and employment. Simultaneously, the government operates important state owned enterprises. Such as banking, energy, and transport. India\u2019s government also operates key infrastructure and manages nationwide agricultural programs and distribution. Traditional institutions, like caste linked occupations and informal lending networks remain impactful on economic behavior in many rural areas. Long term policy and planning is also provided by NITA Aayog, replacing the Planning Commission in 2015. Due to its combination of private enterprise, public ownership, government planning, and traditional structures, India is commonly seen as a clear example of a modern mixed economy. \nFollowing the Chinese economic reforms initiated in 1978, the Chinese economy has reformed its state-owned enterprises and allowed greater scope for private enterprises to operate alongside the state and collective sectors. In the 1990s, the central government concentrated its ownership in strategic sectors of the economy, but local and provincial level state-owned enterprises continue to operate in almost every industry including information technology, automobiles, machinery, and hospitality. The latest round of state-owned enterprise reform initiated in 2013 stressed increased dividend payouts of state enterprises to the central government and mixed-ownership reform which includes partial private investment into state-owned firms. As a result, many nominally private-sector firms are partially state-owned by various levels of government and state institutional investors, and many state-owned enterprises are partially privately owned resulting in a mixed ownership economy.\nMix of markets and economic planning.\nThis type of mixed economy refers to a combination of economic planning with market forces for the guiding of production in an economy and may coincide with a mixture of private and public enterprise. It can include capitalist economies with indicative macroeconomic planning policies and socialist planned economies that introduced market forces into their economies such as in Hungary's Goulash Communism, which inaugurated the New Economic Mechanism reforms in 1968 that introduced market processes into its planned economy. Under this system, firms were still publicly owned but not subject to physical production targets and output quotas specified by a national plan. Firms were attached to state ministries that had the power to merge, dissolve and reorganize them and which established the firm's operating sector. Enterprises had to acquire their inputs and sell their outputs in markets, eventually eroding away at the Soviet-style planned economy. Dirigisme was an economic policy initiated under Charles de Gaulle in France, designating an economy where the government exerts strong directive influence through indicative planning. In the period of dirigisme, the French state used indicative economic planning to supplement market forces for guiding its market economy. It involved state control of industries such as transportation, energy and telecommunication infrastructures as well as various incentives for private corporations to merge or engage in certain projects. Under its influence, France experienced what is called Thirty Glorious Years of profound economic growth.\nGreen New Deal (GND) proposals call for social and economic reforms to address climate change and economic inequality using economic planning with market forces for the guiding of production. The reforms involve phasing out fossil fuels through the implementation of a carbon price and emission regulations, while increasing state spending on renewable energy. Additionally, it calls for greater welfare spending, public housing, and job security. GND proposals seek to maintain capitalism but involve economic planning to reduce carbon emissions and inequality through increased taxation, social spending, and state ownership of essential utilities such as the electrical grid.\nWithin political discourse, mixed economies are supported by people of various political leanings, particularly the centre-left and centre-right. Debate reigns over the appropriate levels of private and public ownership, capitalism and socialism, and government planning within an economy. The centre-left usually supports markets but argues for a higher degree of regulation, public ownership, and planning within an economy. The centre-right generally accepts some level of public ownership and government intervention but argues for lower government regulation and greater privatisation. In 2010, Australian economist John Quiggin wrote: \"The experience of the twentieth century suggests that a mixed economy will outperform both central planning and laissez-faire. The real question for policy debates is one of determining the appropriate mix and the way in which the public and private sectors should interact.\"\nCriticism.\nNumerous economists have questioned the validity of the entire concept of a mixed economy when understood to be a mixture of capitalism and socialism. Critics who argue that capitalism and socialism cannot coexist believe either market logic or economic planning must be prevalent within an economy.\nIn \"Human Action\", Ludwig von Mises argued that there can be no mixture of capitalism and socialism. Mises elaborated on this point by contending that even if a market economy contained numerous state-run or nationalized enterprises, this would not make the economy mixed because the existence of such organizations does not alter the fundamental characteristics of the market economy. These publicly owned enterprises would still be subject to market sovereignty as they would have to acquire capital goods through markets, strive to maximize profits, or at the least try to minimize costs, and utilize monetary accounting for economic calculation. Friedrich von Hayek and Mises argued that there can be no lasting middle ground between economic planning and a market economy, and any move in the direction of socialist planning is an unintentional move toward what Hilaire Belloc called \"the servile state\".\nClassical and orthodox Marxist theorists also dispute the viability of a mixed economy as a middle ground between socialism and capitalism. Irrespective of enterprise ownership, either the capitalist law of value and accumulation of capital drive the economy or conscious planning and non-monetary forms of valuation, such as calculation in kind, ultimately drive the economy. From the Great Depression onward, extant mixed economies in the Western world are still functionally capitalist because the economic system remains based on competition and profit production.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources and notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; \nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "65669", "revid": "50456176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65669", "title": "A Knight's Tale", "text": "2001 film by Brian Helgeland\nA Knight's Tale is a 2001 American medieval action comedy film written, co-produced and directed by Brian Helgeland. The film stars Heath Ledger as William Thatcher, a peasant squire who poses as a knight and competes in tournaments, winning accolades and acquiring friendships with such historical figures as Edward the Black Prince (James Purefoy) and Geoffrey Chaucer (Paul Bettany). Its 14th-century story is intentionally anachronistic, with many modern pop culture references and a soundtrack featuring 1970s music. The film takes its name from Chaucer's story \"The Knight's Tale\", part of \"The Canterbury Tales\", and also draws several plot points from Chaucer's work.\n\"A Knight's Tale\" was released by Columbia Pictures in the United States on May 11, 2001. It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $117.5\u00a0million against a budget of $65\u00a0million.\nPlot.\nAt a jousting tournament in 14th-century Europe, squires William Thatcher, Roland, and Wat discover that their master, Sir\u00a0Ector, has died. With one more pass, he could have won the tournament. Destitute, William wears Sir\u00a0Ector's armour to impersonate him, winning the tournament and taking the prize.\nAlthough only nobles are allowed in tournaments, William is inspired to compete and win more prizes. Roland and Wat would rather take their winnings and leave, but William convinces them to stay and help him train. While traveling, they encounter a young Geoffrey Chaucer, who is also destitute and agrees to forge a patent of nobility so William can enter, assuming the name of \"Sir\u00a0Ulrich von Liechtenstein\" from Gelderland. But William is brought before Simon the Summoner and Peter the Pardoner: Chaucer has a gambling problem and is in their debt. William demands Chaucer be released and promises payment.\nDuring the competition, William's armour is badly damaged; he goads Kate, a female blacksmith, into repairing it without payment. He wins the tournament's sword event, enabling him to pay Chaucer's debt. In the joust, he faces Sir\u00a0Thomas Colville, who withdraws from the tournament after being injured by William, though they exchange a ceremonial pass so that Colville can retain the honour of never having failed to complete a match.\nThe proceedings are observed by Jocelyn, a noblewoman with whom William has become infatuated, and Count Adhemar of Anjou, a rival both in the joust and for Jocelyn's heart. In the final joust, Adhemar defeats William by knocking his helmet off. William vows revenge, but Adhemar taunts him, \"You have been weighed, you have been measured, and you have been found wanting.\"\nWilliam is invited to a banquet and Kate shows him how to dance. There, he meets with Jocelyn again and, once more, Adhemar attempts to humiliate Will. The attempt backfires as Will stuns the audience with his dancing.\nKate joins William's party and forges new lightweight armour. In the following tournament, Adhemar and William are both assigned to tilt against Sir\u00a0Thomas Colville, but they learn that he is actually Prince Edward, the heir apparent to the English throne. Unwilling to risk harming him, Adhemar withdraws; but William chooses to joust against Edward anyway and then addresses him by name, further earning his respect.\nAdhemar is called away to the Battle of Poitiers, and William achieves several victories in his absence. William proves his love for Jocelyn by complying when she first asks him to deliberately lose (in contrast to knights who promise to win \"in her name\"), and then, just before he would be eliminated, to win the tournament after all.\nThe group travels to London for the World Championship. William recalls leaving his father to squire for Sir\u00a0Ector and learn to become a knight, hoping to \"change his stars\". Adhemar has also arrived in London and announces that he is in negotiations with Jocelyn's father for her hand in marriage. William dominates at the tournament, but is seen visiting his now-blind father by Adhemar. Adhemar alerts the authorities to William's true identity.\nWilliam is arrested and placed in the pillory, but is defended from the hostile crowd by his friends. Just as the mob reaches its frenzy, Prince Edward reveals himself. He acknowledges William's honour and ability to inspire his friends' dedication that is in the best traditions of knighthood. Edward then announces that William is in fact descended from an ancient noble family, and knights him \"Sir\u00a0William\". He asserts that as Prince-royal, his declaration is \"beyond contestation\".\nWilliam returns to the tournament to face Adhemar in the final match, but Adhemar cheats with an illegally sharpened lance, seriously injuring William. Entering the final pass, William is losing by two lances and must unhorse Adhemar to win. He demands to be stripped of his armour while Chaucer buys time by performing the introduction of William that he omitted earlier. William, unable to hold the lance due to his injuries, asks Wat to strap it to his arm.\nFinally, William tilts against Adhemar, with his father and Jocelyn in attendance. Bellowing his true name as he charges, Will knocks Adhemar to the ground with a crushing blow; Adhemar experiences a vision of William and his friends mockingly telling him that \"he\" has been \"weighed, measured, and found wanting\". With this final blow, William wins the world championship. In the ensuing celebration, as Jocelyn and William embrace, Chaucer remarks that he should write an account of these events.\nAfter the credits, Roland, Wat, Chaucer, and Kate are sitting in an attic having a flatulence contest.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Heath Ledger as William, a squire to the late Sir Ector, who masquerades as 'Sir Ulrich von Liechtenstein of Gelderland'\nIn addition, Nick Brimble has a cameo as Sir Ector, a noble knight whose untimely death sets the plot in motion.\nProduction.\n\"A Knight's Tale\" was filmed entirely on location in the Czech Republic at Barrandov Studios, Prague, during the summer of 2000. There, while the film was in production, Heath Ledger met Heather Graham during her simultaneous filming of \"From Hell\".\nLances were created that would convincingly explode upon impact without injuring the stunt riders. The body of each lance was scored so it would break easily, and the tips were made of balsa wood. Each was also hollowed out, with the holes filled with balsa splinters and uncooked linguine.\nDirector Brian Helgeland says in the DVD Special Edition's commentary that he had intended to show what Geoffrey Chaucer might have been doing that inspired him to write \"The Canterbury Tales\" during the six months in which Chaucer seems to have gone missing in 1372.\nHeath Ledger's principal suit of armour was made in steel by UK-based Armordillo Ltd. They also created several stunt replicas of this armour, Count Adhemar's armour, and all the jousting armours for men and horses in lightweight, flexible, and nearly unbreakable polyurethane resin.\nMusic.\nThe film, which notionally took place during the Middle Ages, is notable for its deliberate use of classic rock songs in its soundtrack. The ten that were credited in the film are listed in order of appearance:\nIn addition, the film's score makes use of the work of Estonian composer Arvo P\u00e4rt, his composition \"Fratres\" (Brothers) being heard in the scene in which William is knighted by Prince Edward.\nSoundtrack.\nTracks 5, 6, 13, and 14 do not appear in the actual film while You Shook Me All Night Long by AC/DC appears in the film but is not on the soundtrack.\nRelease.\nHome media.\n\"A Knight's Tale\" was released on DVD and VHS on September 25, 2001, with the VHS release being delayed by three days to September 28 when Sony took down a \"Spider-Man\" teaser trailer that was recalled due to the September 11 attacks.\nOn May 20, 2025, the Ultra HD Blu-ray discs were released by Sony featuring the theatrical cut and extended cut.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nReview aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 59% based on reviews from 153 critics, with an average rating of 5.90/10. The website's critical consensus says, \"Once you get past the anachronism, \"A Knight's Tale\" becomes a predictable, if spirited, \"Rocky\" on horseback.\" On Metacritic, the film holds a score of 56 out of 100, sampled from 36\u00a0reviews, indicating \"mixed or average\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \u201cB+\u201d on an A+ to F scale.\nRoger Ebert gave the film 3\u00a0stars out of 4 and argued that the anachronisms made little difference, writing that the director himself \"pointed out that an orchestral score would be equally anachronistic, since orchestras hadn't been invented in the 1400s.\" In an obituary for David Bowie, culture critic Anthony Lane referred to the film's use of the song \"Golden Years\" as \"the best and most honest use of anachronism that I know of.\"\n\"Newsweek\" revealed in June\u00a02001 that print ads contained glowing comments from a film reviewer who did not exist for at least four films released by Columbia Pictures, including \"A Knight's Tale\" and \"The Animal\" (2001). The fake critic was named David Manning and was created by a Columbia employee who worked in the advertising department. \"Manning\" was fraudulently presented as a reviewer for \"The Ridgefield Press\", a small Connecticut weekly.\nBox office.\n\"A Knight's Tale\" made $16.5 million during its opening weekend, ranking in second place behind \"The Mummy Returns\". The film earned $56.6\u00a0million at the North American box office and an additional $60.9 million internationally, for a worldwide total of $117.5\u00a0million.\nAwards.\nThe film was nominated for three awards at the 2002 MTV Movie Awards. Shannyn Sossamon was nominated for Breakthrough Female performance, losing to Mandy Moore in \"A Walk to Remember.\" The film was also nominated for Best Kiss, and Best Musical Sequence, losing to \"American Pie 2\" and \"Moulin Rouge!\", respectively.\nSequel.\nIn 2012, a TV series adaptation was reported to be in development by American Broadcasting Company, written by Ronald D. Moore.\nIn April 2024, it was revealed that director Brian Helgeland had pitched a sequel to Netflix who passed on the project.\nMusical adaptation.\nA musical adaptation of the movie had its world premiere in Manchester Opera House on 11 April 2025. The limited run ended on 10 May 2025 with an anticipated transfer to the West End at an as yet unannounced later date.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65670", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65670", "title": "Recife", "text": "Capital city of Pernambuco, Brazil\nRecife ( , ) is the state capital of Pernambuco, Brazil, on the northeastern Atlantic coast of South America. It is the largest urban area within both the North and the Northeast Region of Brazil. It is the largest city in Pernambuco state, and the fourth-largest urban area in all of Brazil; the metro population of the city of Recife was 3,726,974 in 2022. Recife was founded in 1537, serving as the main harbor of the Captaincy of Pernambuco\u2014known for its large-scale production of sugar cane. At one point, it was known as Mauritsstad, when it served as the capital city of the 17th century colony of New Holland of Dutch Brazil (founded by the Dutch West India Company). Situated at the confluence of the Beberibe and Capibaribe rivers, before they drain into the South Atlantic Ocean, Recife is a major seaport along the Brazilian Atlantic coast. Its name is an allusion to the stone reefs that are present offshore. Together with the urban presence of the Beberibe and Capibaribe rivers and their tributaries, the many additional unique, small islands\u2014and more than 50 bridges linking them throughout the city\u2014create a distinct maritime or \"riviera\" atmosphere, leading to Recife being known as the \"Venice of Brazil\".\nAs of 2010[ [update]], Recife has maintained the highest HDI of any state capital in Northeastern Brazil, and the second-highest of the entire Northern and Northeastern regions (second only to Palmas). However, the city also is known as having some of the highest rates of gun violence in the entire country, despite also being considered the \"safest state capital\" in the Northeast. Although Recife often has a consistently higher crime rate than Brazil's South Region, it typically has a much lower crime rate than other regional capitals\u2014such as Salvador or S\u00e3o Lu\u00eds. Nonetheless, crime rose nearly 440% in 2015. The waters along the coastline are also considered to be among the most dangerous \"on earth\", as there have been many recorded shark attacks on swimmers at the beaches, including fatal incidents.\nThe Metropolitan Region of Recife is the main industrial zone of the State of Pernambuco, major products are those derived from cane (sugar and ethanol), motor vehicles, ships, oil platforms, electronics, software, and others. With fiscal incentives by the government, many industrial companies were started in the 1970s and 1980s. Recife has a tradition of being the most important commercial hub of the North/Northeastern region of Brazil, with more than 52,500 business enterprises in Recife plus 32,500 in the Metro Area, totaling more than 85,000.\nA combination of a large supply of labor and significant private investments turned Recife into Brazil's second largest medical hub (the first being S\u00e3o Paulo); modern hospitals with state-of-the-art equipment receive patients from several neighbouring States.\nRecife stands out as a major tourist site within the Brazilian Northeast, known for the city itself, its beaches and for its historical sites, with many places of significance dating back to both the Portuguese and the Dutch colonies in the region. The beach of Porto de Galinhas, located south of the city, has been repeatedly awarded the title of best beach in Brazil and has drawn many tourists. The Historic Centre of Olinda, north of the city, was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982, and both cities' Brazilian Carnival are among the world's most famous. According to The Herald, Recife has the biggest consumption of whisky around the world.\nThe city is an education hub, and home to the Federal University of Pernambuco, the largest university in Pernambuco. Several Brazilian historical figures, such as the poet and abolitionist Castro Alves, moved to Recife for their studies. Recife and Natal are the only Brazilian cities with direct flights to the islands of Fernando de Noronha, a World Heritage Site.\nRecife was one of the host cities of the 2014 FIFA World Cup, and previously hosted the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup and the 1950 FIFA World Cup.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical Affiliations\n Portuguese Empire 1537\u20131630 Dutch West India Company 1630\u20131654 Portuguese Empire 1654\u20131815 United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves 1815\u20131822 Empire of Brazil 1822\u20131889 Republic of Brazil 1889\u2013present\nRecife began as a collection of fishing shacks, inns and warehouses on the delta between the Capibaribe and Beberibe Rivers in the captaincy of Pernambuco, sometime between 1535 and 1537 in the earliest days of Portuguese colonisation of \"Terra de Santa Cruz\", later called Brazil, on the northeast coast of South America. It was a settlement of colonial fishermen and way station for Portuguese sailors and passing ships.\nThe first documented reference to the settlement with its \"arrecife dos navios\" (reef of the ships) was in the royal Charter Act of March 12, 1537, establishing Olinda, to the north, as a village, with its port where the Beberibe River meets the sea. Olinda (and Igarassu before it) had been settled in 1536 by Captain General Duarte Coelho, a Portuguese nobleman, proprietor and administrator of the captaincy of Pernambuco.\nThe city is named for the long reef \"recife\" running parallel to the shoreline which encloses its harbour. The reef is not as sometimes stated, a coral reef, but a consolidated ancient beach, now as firm and hard as stone.\nIn 1541, Coelho returned from the Kingdom of Portugal with the machinery for an \"engenho\" (sugar mill), and with it, his brother-in-law established the first mill named \"Nossa Senhora da Ajuda\" (Our Lady of Help), in the floodplain of the Beberibe River at Recife. At that time the banks of the Capibaribe River were covered by sugar cane.\nRecife was capital of the 17th century New Holland (Dutch Brazil) established by the Dutch West India Company and was called Mauritsstad. The city was eventually recaptured by the Portuguese in 1654, following their victories at the first and second Battle of Guararapes.\nThe Mascate War of 1710\u20131711 pitted merchants of Recife against those of nearby Olinda.\nGeography.\nIt has often been called \"The Venice of Brazil\".\nRecife has a tropical forest. Rainforests are characterised by high rainfall, with definitions setting minimum normal annual rainfall between and . The soil can be poor because high rainfall tends to leach out soluble nutrients. There are several common characteristics of tropical rainforest trees.\nThe city of Recife is formed by three islands (Recife, Santo Ant\u00f4nio, and Boa Vista). Between the islands are the rivers Beberibe and Capibaribe. Other rivers are the Jiqui\u00e1, Tejipi\u00f3, Jord\u00e3o and Pina.\nClimate.\nRecife has a tropical monsoon climate (\"Am\") under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, with warm to hot temperatures and high relative humidity throughout the year. However, these conditions are relieved by pleasant westwardly trade winds blowing in from the ocean. January and February are the warmest months, with mean temperatures ranging from to , with sun. July is the second cloudiest month and experiences the coolest temperatures, with mean temperatures ranging from to . The wettest month is June, receiving an average of of rain. Recife features a short dry season which lasts from October to December. The driest and sunniest month is November, when maximum temperatures hover around and an average of of rain is recorded.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nThe Recife metropolitan area is the 5th most populous of Brazil, after S\u00e3o Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Belo Horizonte and Porto Alegre, and the first in the Northeast region. The most populous neighborhoods of Recife in 2008 were Boa Viagem (100,388), Casa Amarela (69,134), and V\u00e1rzea (64,512).\nAccording to the 2022 census, there were 1,488,920 people residing in the city of Recife. The census revealed the following numbers: 722,555 Pardo (Multiracial) people (48.5%), 578,413 White people (38.8%), 182,546 Black people (12.3%), 2,703 Asian people (0.2%), 2,656 Amerindian people (0.2%).\nIn 2010, the center city of Recife was the 9th most populous city in Brazil.\nIn 2010, the city had 268,160 opposite-sex couples and 1,004 same-sex couples. The gender proportion of the population of Recife was 53.8% female and 46.2% male.\nReligion.\nThe Patroness Saint of Recife is \"Our Lady of Mount Carmel\" (Nossa Senhora do Carmo), dating back one hundred and eight years ago (1909). Every July 16, her day, she is remembered by the Roman Catholics in Recife, in her church.\n\"Source: IBGE 2010. \"\nEconomy.\nAccording to 2013 IBGE statistics, the GDP was at R$46,445,339,000. And the GDP per capita was at R$29,037.\nInformation technology industry.\nRecife has an area dedicated to information technology called \"Porto Digital\" (Digital Port) with more than 90 companies and 3,000 high tech Jobs. It was founded in July 2000 and has since attracted major investments. Generating some R$10\u00a0billion (Brazilian Reais) a year, it produces technology that is exported to the United States, India, Japan, and China, among other countries. Software manufacturing is the main activity in the Porto Digital. The Porto Digital cluster comprises small and medium companies, but multinationals from across the world, like Accenture, Motorola, Samsung, Dell and Sun Microsystems also have operations there. IBM and Microsoft transferred their regional headquarters to Recife.\nPorto Digital's startups can count on a ready pool of talent, courtesy of the Federal University of Pernambuco (UFPE), which boasts one of the best computer-science departments in all of Latin America. The university began teaching programmers to use Sun Microsystems Inc.'s (SUNW) Java language in 1996, the year it was introduced. Professors at the school also teamed up to launch the Centro de Estudos e Sistemas Avan\u00e7ados do Recife (C.E.S.A.R), a business incubator that has played a vital role in the birth of some 30 companies.\nLogistics hub.\nDue to its ports, airport, and geographic location in the northeastern region of Brazil, Recife is considered one of the biggest logistics hubs in Brazil. The Logistics and Communications sector employs 4% of the people in Recife, 12.3% in Jaboat\u00e3o dos Guararapes and over 9% in the Metropolitan Area. These numbers were due to increase with the conclusion of the Transnordestina (the main NE Trainline) with a 1,800/1,118\u00a0km/mi extension, which will cross 3 and connect 7 States (34 municipalities in Pernambuco alone) products with Suape port (PE) and Pecem Port (CE)) with costs that are estimated to be around 4.5 R$.\nRecife has historically benefited from its central location in the Northeast region. In a radius from Recife are four state capitals, two international and three regional airports, five international ports, 12 million people, 51% of the research centers of the Northeast and 35% of the region's GDP. Similarly, in a radius there are seven state capitals, five international and five regional airports, nine international seaports and two fluvial ports.\nShopping centers.\nShopping Center Recife was inaugurated in 1980 and it was subsequently surpassed by Riomar Mall, which gross leasable area is 101.000 m2, compared with 91.200m\u00b2 of Shopping Recife. Other shopping centers include:\nMedical facilities.\nThe Metropolitan Region of Recife has the third largest medical pool in Brazil, after S\u00e3o Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. Together they make up 417 hospitals and clinics with 72,000 employees in the Metro Area and more than 120,000 in the State of Pernambuco. The medical pool offers a total of 8,990 beds and, according to the Union of the Hospitals of Pernambuco, recorded in the year 2000 an invoicing of R$220\u00a0million (Brazilian Reals). It is thanks to the pool that Pernambuco has access to more CT scan devices than more developed countries such as Canada or France.\nA large portion of the modern hospitals included in the pool are located between the neighbourhoods of Derby and of the Ilha do Leite. The Hospital Real Portugu\u00eas de Benefic\u00eancia Portuguesa em Pernambuco, or \"Hospital Portugu\u00eas\" (Portuguese Hospital) for short, is one of the most renowned hospitals in the country. Many people from neighbouring states go to Recife for treatment, as it has the largest and best medical facilities in the North\u2013Northeast of Brazil. Recife has three universities / medical schools for medicine, two public, Federal University of Pernambuco and University of Pernambuco; and one private, Escola Pernambucana de Medicina FBV/IMIP (Medical School of Pernambuco).\nConvention centers.\nMany events taking place during the year include:\nBecause of its geographic location, tourism and city infrastructure, Recife's convention centers are of a high standard. The two centers are:\nThe third largest convention center in Brazil.\nA modern theatre with 1,931 seats and of exposition area located on the university campus.\nGovernment and politics.\nRecife's municipal government is divided into an executive branch called the \"Prefeitura\", led by a mayor (\"/Prefeita\") and a legislative branch called the \"C\u00e2mara Municipal\", consisting of 39 councillors. Elections are held every four years, with the most recent being held in 2020. The current mayor is Jo\u00e3o Campos of the Brazilian Socialist Party (PSB), son of former governor of Pernambuco, Eduardo Campos.\nThe city is the capital of the state of Pernambuco, and hosts administrative buildings of the state governor, legislative assembly, and judiciary.\nTourism.\nCelebrations, holidays and other events are numerous throughout the year. The New Year begins at the beach, Praia de Boa Viagem and in Old Recife. The carnival of Recife and Olinda (which has its historic town centre considered a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1982) begins many weeks ahead in December with innumerable balls and parades.\nIn the city, the carnival festivities begin in January, as locals begin preparing for the official Carnival, which starts the week before Shrove Tuesday and Ash Wednesday in the Christian liturgical calendar. The pre-Carnival parties usually consist of percussion groups practising in local clubs, city streets and squares, and even Carnival balls. There is a variety of rhythms from different cultures. Carnival officially starts with the Galo da Madrugada, a party in Downtown Recife where people call old Recife, that attracts many people from several states of Brazil, and other parts of the world.\nRecife has many quality 3, 4 and 5-Star International Hotels as well as Pousadas (traditional Bed &amp; breakfast) and Apart-Hotels, totalling more than 11,500 bedrooms and this number increases to over 30,000 when the metropolitan area is considered.\nThe Mercado de S\u00e3o Jos\u00e9 (Market of Saint Joseph) is an old, iron construction with a popular market nearby. In the Fort Cinco Pontes (Fort of Five Points) is the state museum, Museu do Estado de Pernambuco. At the rectangular P\u00e1tio de S\u00e3o Pedro are the Cathedral S\u00e3o Pedro (Cathedral of Saint Peter) dating from the year 1782 and restored colonial houses, with numerous restaurants, bistros and bars. In the Bairro Santo Ant\u00f4nio (Saint Anthony neighborhood), at the meeting place of the rivers Capibaribe and Beberibe, is the Pra\u00e7a da Rep\u00fablica (Square of the Republic) with the Teatro Santa Isabel (Theatre of Saint Isabel), with its neoclassical front, the Law Courts, and the Pal\u00e1cio da Justi\u00e7a (Palace of Justice). The Casa da Cultura (House of Culture) is an old prison that has been converted into a cultural space and shopping centre.\nBuilt between 1835 and 1855, the Malakoff Tower, a monument constructed in Tunisian / Arabic style, used to be an observatory and now is a cultural centre and a place for popular gatherings. It is located at Arsenal da Marinha Square. It has been registered as an Historical Patrimony and was named after a similar monument on the Crimean peninsula, off the Black Sea, used as a defence centre for Sebastopol.\nRecife has a zoo known as the Dois Irm\u00e3os Park, consisting of 387 hectares of Atlantic Forest reserve and 14 hectares of botanical gardens. It contains 800 animals, the Natural Science Museum and various ecological trails. The metropolitan area has also a giant water park North of Recife, called Veneza water park which has nearly one million square feet of area, ten million litres of water and many water slides for the youngsters.\nAmong Recife's main tourist attractions are:\n\"Architectural Digest\" featured \"Rua do Bom Jesus\" as of the 31 most beautiful streets in the world in 2019, noting its history and the Kahal Zur Israel synagogue.\nBeaches.\nRecife beaches\nJaboat\u00e3o beaches\nOlinda beaches\nNorth beaches\nEducation.\nThere are international schools, such as the American School of Recife and the ABA Maple Bear Canadian School.\nRecife is home to several higher education institutions (83), notably several public-owned universities:\nCulture.\nRecife is home to the frevo, a regional dance and music, typical in carnival, and Mangue Beat, a type of Brazilian rock with mixture of Maracatu, Ciranda, Rap and other musical styles. The Festival de S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o, held annually in June, celebrates traditional culture and music that originated in the region.\nDuring carnival, downtown Recife holds one of the most authentic and democratic celebrations: every year more than two and a half million people open the festivities of the Brazilian Carnival at Galo da Madrugada. Recife and Olinda combined have 25 museums, 38 art galleries, 2 symphony orchestra halls, 15 theatres, 1 opera house and more than 40 movie theatres.\nCarnival.\nThe four-day period before the Christian liturgical preparatory season Lent leading up to Shrove Tuesday and Ash Wednesday is carnival time in Brazil. Rich and poor alike forget their cares as they gaily party in the streets. Pernambuco has large Carnival celebrations with more than 3000 shows in the streets of the historic centre performed by over 430 local groups, including the Frevo, typical Pernambuco music. Another famous carnival music style from Pernambuco is Maracatu. The cities of Recife and Olinda hold the most authentic and democratic Brazilian Carnival celebrations. The largest carnival in Brazil is Galo da Madrugada, which takes place in Downtown Recife on Carnival Saturday. Another famous event is the \"Noite dos Tambores Silenciosos.\" (literally, Night of the Silent Drums) Carnival. Recife's Carnival is nationally known, attracting thousands of visitors every year.\nThe party starts a week before the official date, with electric trios \"shaking\" the Boa Viagem neighborhood. On Friday, people take to the streets to dance to the sound of frevo and to dance with maracatu, ciranda, caboclinhos, afox\u00e9, reggae and manguebeat groups. There are still many other entertainment centers spread out around the city, featuring local and national artists. One of the highlights is Saturday when more than two and a half million people follow the Galo da Madrugada group. Every day, there is the Night of the Silent Drums, on the P\u00e1tio do Ter\u00e7o, where Maracatus honor slaves that died in prisons.\nMuseums.\nThe Museum of Pernambuco State is housed in a 19th-century mansion in Recife. Known locally as the \"Museu do Estado de Pernambuco (MEPE)\", it dates back to 1929. The museum comprises over 12 thousand pieces from Masters who portrayed the Colonial period and the Dutch invasion (1630), to 20th and 21st century pieces.\nKahal Zur Israel Synagogue: Sinagoga Kahal Zur Israel, the historic Recife synagogue in Recife Antigo, is the oldest in the Americas, dating to 1646. The original synagogue was destroyed, but a new one was built on site. In the early 21st century, it was restored for use as a museum. It is an important part of Pernambuco's historic patrimony. It was founded by Jews who settled in the Netherlands after expulsion from Spain and Portugal. They emigrated with the Dutch to \"New Holland\" when the Dutch invaded the northeastern portion of Brazilian lands occupied by the Portuguese. Moses Cohen Henriques led a Jewish 3000 contingent as part of the Dutch invasion. Isaac Aboab de Fonseca was brought from Amsterdam for the synagogue, serving as one of the first rabbis in the new world. When the Portuguese reconquered the land, these Sephardic Jews moved further north with the Dutch, and helped found \"New Amsterdam\" (now New York City) on Manhattan island in the United States. The first New York City synagogue was created in Lower Manhattan by the founders of the first synagogue in the New World in Recife. It later moved to the Upper West Side, where it is still called \"the Portuguese and Spanish Synagogue\".\nGilberto Freyre Foundation: This farmhouse from the 18th century was Gilberto Freyre's old residence. Artworks, arts and crafts, book collections and objects that belonged to the Pernambucan writer and sociologist are displayed here.\nRicardo Brennand Institute: Set up in a reproduction of a medieval-style castle, there is a collection of pieces from the period of Dutch rule in Recife, as well as daggers and armor from medieval Europe.\nRecife City Museum: Located in a room in Cinco Pontas Fort (the five-pointed Fort), this museum houses pictures, reproductions of old paintings, and objects that encapsulate Recife since the period of Dutch rule.\nCinema.\nAlso known as \"Recife Audiovisual Festival\" or \"Cine-PE\", Recife Cinema Festival is a competitive film and audiovisual festival. It is dedicated to the Brazilian and state production of feature &amp; short films; as well as videos and documentaries. It was founded in 1997 by Alfredo &amp; Sandra Bertini, who have been the directors since then. Between 1997 and 2008, 1806 films have been shown (through either competitive applications or National &amp; International invitations), of all types and genres, for a public of over 250,000.\n\"Recife\" and consequently Pernambuco has a tradition in the Brazilian film making history. In the pioneer times of the Brazilian cinema emerged the \"Regional movements\". One of those, was designated Ciclo de Recife (Recife cycle), between 1922 and 1931. Despite adverse conditions, during this cycle 13 feature films were produced in Recife (usually about drama &amp; romance) and 7 documentary films (usually ordered by authorities to show their public works). Despite the pervasive influence of US and European cinemas in the silent film times, the Recife cycle was one of the most important and productive regional movements. One of the most important films was Aitar\u00e9 da Praia, which is recognised for pioneering the rise of regional themes (1925). Other successful films were \"Retribui\u00e7\u00e3o\" (1923) and \"A Filha do Advogado\" (1926). Another important phase of the Pernambuco/Recife film history was in the 1970s with a movement called Super 8, often used for home videos and documentaries made by students, amateurs and aspirant film makers, due to the utilisation of 8\u00a0mm film, using the new technology released by Kodak.\nCuisine.\nThe typical regional main dishes include \"caldeirada\" (seafood stew with octopus cooked with various spices and coconut milk, which may be served with white beans or toasted cassava flour), feijoada Pernambucana (made with brown beans instead of black), sarapatel, buchada (goat stew), dobradinha (bean stew), roast goat, \"m\u00e3o de vaca\" (cow's foot stew), \"Rabada\" (ox tail stew with manioc flour), \"cozido Pernambucano\" (beef stew), \"chambaril\", \"galinha de cabidela\" (chicken in blood sauce), \"peixada Pernambucana\" (fish stew), macaxeira com charque (cassava with beef jerky), \"quiabada\" (okra with beef), feij\u00e3o com arroz (rice and beans), and \"guaiamuns\" (giant crabs). One of the most traditional dishes, is \"Carne-de-sol\" (Sun-dried beef), which consists of beef dried in the sun and usually served with green beans.\nFor dessert, Recife offers \"bolo de rolo\" (cake roll), cake Souza Le\u00e3o, and cartola (top hat cake) which consists of fried long bananas with cheese topped with cinnamon and sugar. The diversity continues for the breakfast as one can find cuscuz of sweet corn or manioc, yams and cassava with charque (corned beef or beef jerky), sweet potato, goiabada, fried long banana, mugunz\u00e1, regional fruits, bread, tapioca, rice pudding, porridge, yogurt, queijo coalho, corn bread, hominy and pamonha. Breakfast is often accompanied by coffee and/or milk and juices from regional fruits such as cashew, pineapple, mangoes, acerola, guava, passion fruit, umbu, hog plum, pitanga, jackfruit, orange, avocado and the regionally most famous caldo-de-cana and \u00e1gua-de-coco juices.\nAccording to \"Abrasel\" (Brazilian Association of Bars &amp; Restaurants), Recife has more than 1,700 bars and restaurants which serve regional (partially listed above), Brazilian (such as moqueca, bob\u00f3 de camar\u00e3o, a\u00e7a\u00ed) and International dishes from all over the world, which has made it the \"first gastronomic centre of the Northeast\" and the third one in the whole country after S\u00e3o Paulo and Rio.\nTransportation.\nInternational airport.\nGuararapes International Airport, also known as Gilberto Freyre International Airport, is the airport serving Recife. It has been open in its newest structure since July 2004 and is 52,000 square m in area.\nRecife Air Force Base - BARF, a base of the Brazilian Air Force, is located in Recife.\nPorts.\nSuape port, is located in the administrative area of the small town of Ipojuca, inside the metropolitan region. Suape serves ships 365 days a year without any restrictions with regard to tidal schedules. The port moves over 8.4\u00a0million tons of cargo a year. More than 95 companies from almost all industries are already installed in Suape which includes a Petrobras Refinery, the largest shipbuilder in South American and a large petrochemical Company as well as many others.\nPort of Recife is located in the city of Recife. Road access to Port of Recife is accomplished, mainly, through the federal highways BR-232 (linking the interior of the state) and BR-101 (linking to other States to the north and the south of the State of Pernambuco). The main producing and consuming centres of the interior of the state and of the rest of the Northeast, are linked to Port by paved highways.\nMetro.\nRecife Metro is one of the largest metro systems in Brazil. It reaches from Recife central station to Jaboat\u00e3o, Timbi (Camaragibe) and Cajueiro Seco (Jaboat\u00e3o dos Guararapes), being complemented by a light rail, with connections at Curado and Cajueiro Seco stations, which links Recife and Jaboat\u00e3o to Cabo de Santo Agostinho.\nThis system is also integrated with bus terminals such as at Barro, Joana Bezerra and Tancredo Neves stations. It is possible to ride the metro and the connected bus line by purchasing one ticket only. In March 2009, Recife Metro completed an additional phase of expansion. The system now has 29 stations (18 integrated with buses), plus 9 light rail stations, and is long.\nFleet.\nAccording to Detran-PE (Transportation State Bureau Administrator) in 2009, the city of Recife had a total fleet of over 464,000 motor vehicles on its streets. 54,335 cargo vehicles, 318,520 passenger vehicles, 72,719 motorbikes, 14,142 others and 4,855 buses (split between private and public). These buses transport almost two million passengers daily in the metropolitan area, distributed between 17 local bus companies.\nHighways.\nRecife metropolitan area is crossed by 3 main Federal highways:\nPublic transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Recife, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 96 min. 34% of public transit riders, ride for more than 2 hours every day. The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is 27 min, while 60% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 9\u00a0km, while 19% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe city has 6 Political Administrative Regions (\"RPA\"), which contains all 94 neighborhoods:\nSports.\nFootball in Pernambuco began in 1902, when English and Dutch sailors landed in Recife and played a game of football on the beach. The new game aroused the interest of the people of Pernambuco, and they soon started playing.\nRecife provides visitors and residents with various sporting activities. There are several football clubs based in Recife, such as Sport Recife the current 2023 State Champion (43 times state champion and once national champion (1987) and Brazil's Cup champion (2008)), Santa Cruz (29 times state champion) and N\u00e1utico (23 times state champion and unique 6 consecutives). The Campeonato Pernambucano (Pernambuco's State Championship) is divided into Ta\u00e7a Revolu\u00e7\u00e3o and Ta\u00e7a Confedera\u00e7\u00e3o.\nAlso, the city has traditions in another sports as:\nBasketball, Hockey, Golf, Tenis, Table tennis, Volleyball, beach volley, Handball, Surf, Skateboard, Bodysurf, Swimning pool and Futsal. Provided by clubs such as:\nNautico, Sport, Santa Cruz, Portuguese Club of Recife, Caxanga Golf &amp; Country Club, Mauricio de Nassau University, School of Tenis Recife as others.\n1950 and 2014 FIFA World Cup.\nRecife was one of the 12 cities chosen to host games for the 2014 FIFA World Cup, for which Brazil was the host nation. The Metropolitan Recife project consisted of a new Sports City constructed in S\u00e3o Louren\u00e7o da Mata in an intersection area near to Recife, Jaboat\u00e3o dos Guararapes and Camaragibe. The new Sports complex is west of Recife city centre and from the Airport.\nThe sports complex 'City' was constructed with a new stadium with 45,000 seats, 9,000 flats, 6,000 car parking spaces, 1 hospital, 1 technical school, 1 shopping centre, 1 integrated metro/bus station and improvement of federal roads, all with an estimated cost of R$1.6\u00a0billion.\nThis was the second time Recife has been chosen to be one of the host cities of the FIFA World Cup. In 1950, Recife hosted just one game, between Chile and the United States, at Ilha do Retiro Stadium. At this time, it was the only city to represent the Northeast of Brazil.\nSocial and environmental issues.\nViolence\nIn 2013, Recife had the 38th highest homicide rate in The Americas, after Detroit, New Orleans, Baltimore, San Juan and other cities.\nPESP plan\nThe State Governor Eduardo Campos introduced the PESP plan (Security state Plan \u2013 Plano Estadual de Seguran\u00e7a P\u00fablica) on May 2, 2009. This aimed to reduce homicides by 12% each year until they reached half of the previous rate. The plan was based on the fact that 60% of murders were committed by people related to criminal activities and embraces both prevention and correction.\nCarnival security plan\nIn 2007 ISS servers managed 50 Pelco Spectra PTZ cameras to capture all activity within areas of the city used for Carnival. Continued deployment of this project in Recife aimed to install over 1000 cameras in the city. Immediate statistics during the Carnival period indicated a reduction in violent crime of over 30%.\nRecuperation program.\nUNICEF is an international development agency, which supports locally initiated projects with an emphasis on children. Recife offered an environment to utilise its rich cultural heritage to develop programs aimed at its most serious issues. One of the most hands-on projects was a radio program named \"Jovens Comunicadores\" (Communicating Youth). It trained a group of eighteen adolescents to produce a weekly radio program focusing on child labour. The program is recorded and sent to community radio stations, most of which are broadcast in the sugar cane area where many children work. Jovens Comunicadores advocates and lobbies against exploitation. All programs are produced and edited by teens. As a radio program, it also plays regional music, giving a boost to local culture.\n\"Crian\u00e7a Feliz\" (Happy Child) had the same objective, eliminating child exploitation, but used a different approach. It was begun by a women's organisation and offered after-school activities with the goal of discouraging children and adolescents from working in sex tourism. Besides giving classes and training in computers, English, art, and karate, it also offered psychological services and group therapy. These combined services sought to equip children not only with skills but also a positive self-image and respect to not fall into prostitution. As all the kids came from very poor backgrounds, the financial pull of prostitution was very high. Crian\u00e7a Feliz worked at educating them about the high costs in the long term. This was a very interesting project, since it was actually a house with groups of kids divided into participating in different activities.\nShark attacks.\nShark attacks are a recurrent problem in Recife metropolitan area. They were addressed in the National Geographic Channel series \"Hunter Hunted\" in the episode \"Shark Invasion.\" Surfing has been outlawed since 1995 on the urban beaches (Pina, Boa Viagem, Piedade, and Candeias) because of the risk the sport poses to its practitioners due to shark attacks. It is strongly recommended that bathers not climb over and swim beyond the reefs because of strong, unpredictable currents and the possible presence of bull sharks. Several beaches have messages alerting people to the danger of sharks.\nBefore the 1990s there had been virtually no attacks reported here. As of June 28, 1992, Recife began officially registering shark attacks on its beaches (mainly on the beach of Boa Viagem), and between 1992 and 2021 there were 64 shark attacks along a stretch of coast, 26 of them being fatal. The last deadly attack occurred on July 10, 2021. Other facts contribute to the appearance of sharks in the area of Boa Viagem Beach: the marine currents direct the animals for that stretch of 20 kilometers. A sand bank extends into the sea about a thousand meters from Recife's beaches. Between this long strip, with depth between 1 and 3 meters, and the beach a deep channel is formed (between 5 and 8 meters), which becomes a kind of refectory for sharks, since it attracts several species of rays, one of the prey of sharks. The presence of so many prey in that area makes the sharks stay closer to the beaches for longer and when the shark enters these channels, there is a great risk of contact with people. The Council for Shark Hazard Monitoring (Cemit), recommends the following precautions to prevent the attack of sharks on beaches in Recife: Avoid bathing between sunset and sunrise. It is in this period that sharks are most active. Do not enter the sea when the tide is full. Hungry sharks get across the reef if there is enough water flowing over them. Avoid swimming alone and when the water is cloudy. Do not enter the water above the waist and do not swim in the open sea.\nIn 1995, the Pernambuco government prohibited the practice of water sports on 32\u00a0km of coastline in the Metropolitan Region of Recife. This ban resulted in the reduction of incidents with sharks thereafter.\nThe state-funded investigation has focused on the long-term ecological effects of the new port of Suape. Based on its findings, local human rights lawyers are considering a symbolic legal challenge to the State of Pernambuco, with the aim of securing compensation for the victims of attacks.\nConsular representations.\nThe following countries have consular representations in Recife:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRecife is twinned with:\nPartner cities.\nRecife cooperates with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65671", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65671", "title": "MENSA", "text": ""}
{"id": "65672", "revid": "16604677", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65672", "title": "Spinning wheel", "text": "Device for spinning thread, yarn, or silk from natural or synthetic fibers\nA spinning wheel is a device for spinning thread or yarn from fibres. It was fundamental to the textile industry prior to the Industrial Revolution. It laid the foundations for later machinery such as the spinning jenny and spinning frame, which displaced the spinning wheel during the Industrial Revolution.\nFunction.\nThe basic spinning of yarn involves taking a clump of fibres and teasing a bit of them out, then twisting it into a basic string shape. The spinner continues pulling and twisting the yarn in this manner to make it longer and longer while also controlling the thickness. Thousands of years ago, people began doing this onto a stick, called a spindle, which was a very lengthy process.\nThe actual wheel part of a spinning wheel does not take the place of the spindle; instead, it automates the twisting process, allowing one to \"twist\" the thread without having to constantly do so manually, and also the size of the wheel lets one more finely control the amount of twist. The thread still ends up on a spindle, just as it did before the invention of the wheel.\nThe wheel itself was originally free-moving, spun by a hand or foot reaching out and turning it directly. Eventually, simple mechanisms were created that let a person simply push at a pedal and keep the wheel turning at an even more constant rate. This mechanism was the main source of technological progress for the spinning wheel before the 18th century.\nHistory.\nThe history of the spinning wheel is disputed, with: \nThe spinning wheel spread from the Middle-East to Europe by the 13th century, with the earliest European illustration dated to around 1280. In France, the spindle and distaff were not displaced until the mid 18th century.\nThe spinning wheel replaced the earlier method of hand spinning with a spindle. The first stage in mechanizing the process was mounting the spindle horizontally so it could be rotated by a cord encircling a large, hand-driven wheel. The great wheel is an example of this type, where the fibre is held in the left hand and the wheel slowly turned with the right. Holding the fibre at a slight angle to the spindle produced the necessary twist. The spun yarn was then wound onto the spindle by moving it so as to form a right angle with the spindle. This type of wheel, while known in Europe by the 14th century, was not in general use until later. The construction of the Great Wheel made it very good at creating long drawn soft fuzzy wools, but very difficult to create the strong smooth yarns needed to create warp for weaving. Spinning wheels ultimately did not develop the capability to spin a variety of yarns until the beginning of the 19th century and the mechanization of spinning.\nIn general, the spinning technology was known for a long time before being adopted by the majority of people, thus making it hard to fix dates of the improvements. In 1533, a citizen of Brunswick is said to have added a treadle, by which the spinner could rotate her spindle with one foot and have both hands free to spin. Leonardo da Vinci drew a picture of the flyer, which twists the yarn before winding it onto the spindle. During the 16th century a treadle wheel with flyer was in common use, and gained such names as the Saxony wheel and the flax wheel. It sped up production, as one need not stop spinning to wind up the yarn.\nAccording to Mark Elvin, 14th-century Chinese technical manuals describe an automatic water-powered spinning wheel. Comparable devices were not developed in Europe until the 18th century. However, it fell into disuse when fibre production shifted from hemp to cotton. It was forgotten by the 17th century. The decline of the automatic spinning wheel in China is an important part of Elvin's high level equilibrium trap theory to explain why there was no indigenous Industrial Revolution in China despite its high levels of wealth and scientific knowledge.\nOn the eve of the Industrial Revolution it took at least five spinners to supply one weaver. Lewis Paul and John Wyatt first worked on the problem in 1738, patenting the Roller Spinning machine and the flyer-and-bobbin system, for drawing wool to a more even thickness. Using two sets of rollers that travelled at different speeds, yarn could be twisted and spun quickly and efficiently. However, they did not have much financial success. In 1771, Richard Arkwright used waterwheels to power looms for the production of cotton cloth, his invention becoming known as the water frame.\nMore modern spinning machines use a mechanical means to rotate the spindle, as well as an automatic method to draw out fibres, and devices to work many spindles together at speeds previously unattainable. Newer technologies that offer even faster yarn production include friction spinning, an open-end system, and air jets.\nTypes.\nNumerous types of spinning wheels exist, including:\nSpinning yarn on any spinning wheel requires prepared fibre; excepting silk, which can be spun directly from unwound cocoons, fibres must be prepared for spinning, usually by combing or carding. At the very least, foreign matter (dirt, plant stalks, or animal manure) must be removed before spinning. Most handspinners spin from 'a fluffy mass of aligned fibers' to more easily produce a consistent yarn.\nCharkha.\nThe tabletop or floor charkha is one of the oldest known forms of the spinning wheel. The charkha works similarly to the great wheel, with a drive wheel being turned by one hand, while the yarn is spun off the tip of the spindle with the other. The floor charkha and the great wheel closely resemble each other. With both, yarn must be held off the end of the spindle in order to twist it, and off-axis to wind the yarn onto the spindle.\nThe word \"charkha\", which has links with Persian (Romanized: ), wheel, is related to the Sanskrit word for \"circle\" (). The charkha was both a tool and a symbol of the Indian independence movement. The charkha, a small, portable, hand-cranked wheel, is ideal for spinning cotton and other fine, short-staple fibres, though it can be used to spin other fibres as well. The size varies, from that of a hardbound novel to the size of a briefcase, to a floor charkha. Leaders of the India's Freedom Struggle brought the charkha into wider use with their teachings. They hoped the charkha would assist the people of India achieve self-sufficiency and independence, and therefore used the charkha as a symbol of the Indian independence movement and included it on earlier versions of the Flag of India.\nGreat wheel.\nThe great wheel was one of the earlier types of spinning wheel. The fibre is held in the left hand and the wheel slowly turned with the right. Yarn is spun on a great wheel with the long-draw spinning technique, which requires only one active hand most of the time, thus freeing a hand to turn the wheel. The great wheel is usually used to spin short-staple fibres (this includes both cotton and wool), and can only be used with fibre preparations that are suited to long-draw spinning.\nThe great wheel is usually over in height. The large drive wheel turns the much smaller spindle assembly, with the spindle revolving many times for each turn of the drive wheel. The yarn is spun at an angle off the tip of the spindle, and is then stored on the spindle. To begin spinning on a great wheel, first a leader (a length of waste yarn) is tied onto the base of the spindle and spiraled up to the tip. Then the spinner overlaps a handful of fibre with the leader, holding both gently together with the left hand, and begins to slowly turn the drive wheel clockwise with the right hand, while simultaneously walking backward and drawing the fibre in the left hand away from the spindle at an angle. The left hand must control the tension on the wool to produce an even result. Once a sufficient amount of yarn has been made, the spinner turns the wheel backward a short distance to unwind the spiral on the spindle, then turns it clockwise again, and winds the newly made yarn onto the spindle, finishing the wind-on by spiralling back out to the tip again to make another draw.\nTreadle wheel.\nThis type of wheel is powered by the spinner's foot rather than their hand or a motor. The spinner sits and pumps a foot treadle that turns the drive wheel via a crankshaft and a connecting rod. This leaves both hands free for drafting the fibres, which is necessary in the short draw spinning technique, which is often used on this type of wheel. The old-fashioned pointed driven spindle is not a common feature of the treadle wheel. Instead, most modern wheels employ a flyer-and-bobbin system which twists the yarn and winds it onto a spool simultaneously. These wheels can be single- or double-treadle; which is a matter of personal preference and ergonomics and does not materially affect the operation of the wheel.\nDouble drive.\nThe double drive wheel is named after its drive band, which goes around the spinning wheel twice. The drive band turns the flyer, which is the horse-shoe shaped piece of wood surrounding the bobbin, as well as the bobbin. Due to a difference in the size of the whorls (the round pieces or pulleys around which the drive band runs) the bobbin whorl, which has a smaller radius than the flyer whorl, turns slightly faster. Thus both the flyer and bobbin rotate to twist the yarn, and the difference in speed winds the yarn onto the bobbin when the spinner lets up tension on the newly spun yarn, and spins the bobbin and flyer together to add spin to the yarn when the spinner keeps the new yarn under tension (in this case, the drive band will slip slightly in the groove in the bobbin, flyer whorl, or both). Generally the speed difference or \"ratio\" is adjusted by the size of the whorls and the tension of the drive band.\nThe drive band on the double drive wheel is generally made from a non-stretch cotton or hemp yarn or twine.\nSingle drive.\nA single drive wheel set up in Scotch tension has one drive band connecting the drive wheel to the flyer. The spinning drive wheel turns the flyer and, via friction with the flyer shaft, the bobbin. A short tension band, or brake band, adds drag to the bobbin such that when the spinner loosens their tension on the newly spun yarn, the bobbin and flyer spin relative to each other and the yarn is wound onto the bobbin. A tighter tension band increases relative torque and 'pulls' the yarn onto the bobbin more forcefully; a looser tension band 'pulls' the yarn more gently. Generally, the tension band is tighter for spinning thicker yarn or yarn with less twist, and looser for spinning thinner yarn or yarn with more twist.\nFor a single drive wheel set up in Irish tension, or 'bobbin lead', the drive band drives the bobbin and the tension band brakes the flyer. Some wheels can be set up in either single drive configuration, others only one. Additionally some wheels can be set up either in double drive or single drive.\nUpright style.\nWhen the spindle or flyer is located above the wheel, rather than off to one side, the wheel is called an upright wheel or castle wheel. This type of wheel is often more compact, thus easier to store and transport. Some upright wheels are even made to fold up small enough that they fit in carry-on luggage at the airport. An Irish castle wheel is a type of upright in which the flyer is located below the drive wheel.\nElectric spinning wheel.\nAn electric spinning wheels, or e-spinner, is powered by an electric motor rather than via a treadle. Some require mains power while others may be powered by a low-voltage source, such as a rechargeable battery. Most e-spinners are smaller, more portable, and quieter than treadle wheels. One of the attractions of an e-spinner is that it is not necessary to coordinate treadling with handling the fibre (drafting), so it can be easier to learn to spin on an e-spinner than a traditional treadle-style spinning wheel. E-spinners are also suitable for spinners who have trouble treadling or keeping their treadling speed consistent.\nFriction drive.\nThis type of treadle-driven wheel does not use a drive band; instead the flyer is directly friction-driven via a rubber ring in contact at a right angle to the flat surface of a solid drive wheel. One example from New Zealand dates to 1918, and a very few other models using this drive method have been manufactured since 1970. These wheels are extremely compact and less fouled by outdoor dirt than drive-band wheels, but they are quite uncommon.\nImportance.\nThe spinning wheel increased the productivity of thread making by a factor of greater than 10. Medieval historian Lynn Townsend White Jr. credited the spinning wheel with increasing the supply of rags, which led to cheap paper, which in turn was a factor in the development of printing.\nIt was fundamental to the cotton textile industry prior to the Industrial Revolution. It laid the foundations for later machinery such as the spinning jenny and spinning frame, which displaced the spinning wheel during the Industrial Revolution.\nThe spinning wheel was a precursor to the spinning jenny, which was widely used during the Industrial Revolution. The spinning jenny was essentially an adaptation of the spinning wheel.\nCulture.\nThe ubiquity of the spinning wheel has led to its inclusion in the art, literature and other expressions of numerous cultures around the world, and in the case of South Asia it has become a powerful political symbol.\nPolitical symbolism.\nStarting in 1931, the traditional spinning wheel became the primary symbol on the flag of the Provisional Government of Free India.\nMahatma Gandhi\u2019s manner of dress and commitment to hand spinning were essential elements of his philosophy and politics. He chose the traditional loincloth as a rejection of Western culture and a symbolic identification with the poor of India. His personal choice became a powerful political gesture as he urged his more privileged followers to copy his example and discard\u2014or even burn\u2014their European-style clothing and return with pride to their ancient, pre-colonial culture. Gandhi claimed that spinning thread in the traditional manner also had material advantages, as it would create the basis for economic independence and the possibility of survival for India\u2019s impoverished rural areas. This commitment to traditional cloth making was also part of a larger swadeshi movement, which aimed for the boycott of all British goods. As Gandhi explained to Charlie Chaplin in 1931, the return to spinning did not mean a rejection of all modern technology but of the exploitative and controlling economic and political system in which textile manufacture had become entangled. Gandhi said, \u201cMachinery in the past has made us dependent on England, and the only way we can rid ourselves of the dependence is to boycott all goods made by machinery. This is why we have made it the patriotic duty of every Indian to spin his own cotton and weave his own cloth.\"\nLiterature and folk tales.\n\"The Golden Spinning Wheel\" (Zlat\u00fd kolovrat) is a Czech poem by Karel Jarom\u00edr Erben that was included in his classic collection of folk ballads, Kytice.\n\"Rumpelstiltskin\", one of the tales collected by the Brothers Grimm, revolves around a woman who is imprisoned under threat of execution unless she can spin straw into gold. Rumpelstiltskin helps her with this task, ultimately at the cost of her first-born child; however, she makes a new bargain with him and is able to keep her child after successfully guessing his name.\nSpinning wheels are also integral to the plot or characterization in the Scottish folk tale \"Habitrot\" and the German tales \"The Three Spinners\" and \"The Twelve Huntsmen\".\nLouisa May Alcott, most famous as the author of \"Little Women\", wrote a collection of short stories called \"Spinning-Wheel Stories\", which were not about spinning wheels but instead meant to be read while engaging in the rather tedious act of using a spinning wheel.\nSleeping Beauty.\nAnother folk tale that incorporates spinning wheels is the classic fairy tale \"Sleeping Beauty\", in which the main character pricks her hand or finger on the magic spindle of a spinning wheel and falls into a deep sleep following a wicked fairy or witch's curse.\nNumerous variations of the tale exist (the Brothers Grimm had one in their collection entitled Little Briar Rose), and in only some of them is the spindle actually attached to/associated with a spinning wheel. A traditional spindle does not have a sharp end that could prick a person's finger (unlike the walking wheel, often used for wool spinning). Despite this, the narrative idea persists that Sleeping Beauty or Briar Rose or Dornrosen pricks her finger on the spindle \u2013 a device which she has never seen before, as they have been banned from the kingdom in a forlorn attempt to prevent the curse of the wicked godmother-fairy.\nWalt Disney included the Saxony or flax wheel in their animated film version of Perrault's tale and Rose pricks her finger on the distaff (which holds the plant fibre waiting to be spun), whereas only a spindle is used in Tchaikovsky's ballet \"The Sleeping Beauty\" which is closer to the direct translation of the French \"un fuseau\".\nMusic.\nClassical and symphonic.\nIn 1814, Franz Schubert composed \"Gretchen am Spinnrade\", a lied for piano and voice based on a poem from Goethe's \"Faust\". the piano part depicts Gretchen's restlessness as she spins on a spinning wheel while waiting by a window for her love to return.\nAnton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k composed \"The Golden Spinning Wheel\", a symphonic poem based on the folk ballad from \"Kytice\" by Karel Jarom\u00edr Erben.\nCamille Saint-Sa\u00ebns wrote \"Le Rouet d'Omphale (Omphale's Spinning Wheel)\", symphonic poem in A major, Op. 31, a musical treatment of the classical story of Omphale and Heracles.\nA favorite piano work for students is Albert Ellmenreich's \"Spinnleidchen (Spinning Song)\", from his 1863 \"Musikalische Genrebilder\", Op. 14. An ostinato of repeating melodic fifths represents the spinning wheel.\nFolk and ballad.\n\"The Spinning Wheel\" is also the title/subject of a classic Irish folk song by John Francis Waller.\nA traditional Irish folk song, \"T\u00fairne Mh\u00e1ire\", is generally sung in praise of the spinning wheel, but was regarded by Mrs Costelloe, who collected it, as \"much corrupted\", and may have had a darker narrative. It is widely taught in junior schools in Ireland.\n\"Sun Charkhe Di Mithi Mithi Kook\" is a Sufi song in the Punjabi language inspired by the traditional spinning wheel. It is an ode by a lover as she remembers her beloved with the sound of every spin of her Charkha. \nOpera.\nSpinning wheels also feature prominently in the Wagner opera \"The Flying Dutchman\"; the second act begins with local girls sitting at their wheels and singing about the act of spinning.\nGilbert and Sullivan's \"The Yeomen of the Guard\" begins with a solitary character singing while spinning at her wheel, the first of their operettas not to open with a chorus.\nArt.\nSpinning wheels may be found as motifs in art around the world, ranging from their status as domestic/utilitarian items to their more symbolic role (such as in India, where they may have political implications).\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65673", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65673", "title": "Herbivorous", "text": ""}
{"id": "65674", "revid": "49371113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65674", "title": "Joseph Luns", "text": "Dutch politician and diplomat (1911\u20132002)\nJoseph Marie Antoine Hubert Luns (; 28 August 1911\u00a0\u2013 17 July 2002) was a Dutch politician of the defunct Catholic People's Party (KVP), now merged into the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), diplomat, and jurist. He was the longest serving Secretary General of NATO, having served in the position from 1 October 1971 until 25 June 1984.\nLuns attended Saint Ignatius Gymnasium in Amsterdam from April 1924 until June 1930. He was conscripted in the Coastguard of the Royal Netherlands Navy serving as a warrant officer from June 1930 until July 1931. He applied at the University of Amsterdam in July 1931 majoring in law before transferring to the Leiden University in November 1932, obtaining a Bachelor of Laws degree in June 1933 and graduating with a Master of Laws degree in July 1937. He applied at the London School of Economics of the University of London in January 1938 for a postgraduate education in economics, obtaining a Bachelor of Economics degree in June 1938. \nIn September 1971 Luns was nominated as the next Secretary General of NATO. He resigned as a Member of the House of Representatives the same day he was installed as secretary general, serving from 1 October 1971 to 25 June 1984. He retired after 31 years in national politics and became active in the public sector, where he was a diplomat and lobbyist for several economic delegations on behalf of the government and as an advocate for United States\u2013European Union relations and European integration.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nLuns was born in a Roman Catholic, Francophile and artistic family. His mother's family originated from Alsace-Lorraine but had moved to Belgium after the annexation of the region by the German Empire in 1871. His father, Huib Luns, was a versatile artist and a gifted educationalist who ended his career as professor of architectural drawing at the Delft University of Technology. Luns received his secondary education in Amsterdam and Brussels. He opted to become a commissioned officer of the Dutch Royal Navy but registered too late to be selected. Therefore, Luns decided to study law at Amsterdam University from 1932 to 1937.\nLike his father, Luns demonstrated a preference for conservative and authoritarian political parties and an interest in international politics. As a young student he positioned himself on the political right, favouring a strong authority for the state and being of the opinion that socialism, because of its idealistic ideology, had fostered the rise of fascism and nazism. Luns joined the National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands (NSB) in 1933 and left three years later but when questioned about it in later years, never admitted that it might have been \"a youthful misjudgment\".\nHis choice for a diplomatic career was inspired by his father. He joined the Dutch Diplomatic Service in 1938 and, after a two-year assignment at the Private Office of the Foreign Minister, was appointed as attach\u00e9 in Bern (Switzerland) in 1940. In late 1941, he moved to Lisbon, Portugal. In both countries, he was involved in assistance to Dutch refugees, political espionage and counterintelligence. In 1943, he was transferred to the Dutch embassy in London. Ambassador Edgar Michiels van Verduynen discovered Luns's great affinity for the political element in international affairs and entrusted him with important files on Germany, which Luns handled with great skill.\nIn 1949, Luns was appointed as deputy Dutch permanent representative to the United Nations. He worked closely with his new chief, Von Balluseck, a political appointee without diplomatic experience. After the Netherlands became a member of the Security Council, he temporarily chaired the Disarmament Commission. Luns was sceptical of the importance of the United Nations for international peace, believing it at times to be more like a forum for propaganda than a centre for solving international conflicts. Still, he thought that it was worthwhile to keep the UN in shape because it was the sole international organisation which offered opportunities for discussions between all states.\nMinister of Foreign Affairs (1952\u20131971).\nBecause of the tenacity of the Dutch Catholic People's Party to occupy the Foreign Ministry after the 1952 elections, Luns entered Dutch politics as the favourite of its political leader Carl Romme. His co-minister was Johan Beyen, an international banker not affiliated to any political party but the prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Queen Juliana. The two ministers had a completely different style of operating and clashed repeatedly on policy even before the end of 1952. However, they accommodated and avoided future conflicts by a very strict division of labour. Luns was responsible for bilateral relations, Benelux and international organisations. After the 1956 elections, Beyen left office and Luns stayed as Foreign Minister until 1971 in both centre-left and centre-right governments. Bilateral relations with Indonesia and the Federal Republic of Germany, security policy and European integration were the most important issues during his tenure.\nAtlantic co-operation was a fundamental aspect of Luns's foreign policy, and Dutch foreign policy in general. Luns believed that Western Europe could not survive the Cold War without American nuclear security and so he promoted strong and intensified political and military co-operation in NATO. Luns accepted American leadership of NATO as such but expected better co-operation between the United States States and its allies since, he thought that the United States too often acted independently of its allies, particularly in decolonisation issues. Luns could also be critical of US foreign policy, and, in bilateral relations, he defended Dutch national interests strongly and expected American support in the bilateral difficulties with Indonesia.\nIn 1952 Luns expected to improve relations with Indonesia without transferring the disputed area of West New Guinea to the former colony. By 1956, however, this policy had proved ineffectual, but Luns and the Dutch government were still determined not to transfer West New Guinea to the Republic of Indonesia. When, in 1960, it became obvious that allied support for this policy, particularly from the United States, was waning, Luns tried to find an intermediate solution by transferring the administration of the territory to the United Nations, but that attempt to keep West New Guinea out of Indonesian hands failed as well. After difficult negotiations, the area was finally transferred to the Republic of Indonesia in 1963 after a short interim administration of the UN. Despite his personal anger over this outcome, which was considered a personal defeat by Luns, the foreign minister still worked to restore relations with Indonesia in the aftermath of the West New Guinea problem.\nLuns was more successful in the normalisation of the bilateral relations with West Germany. Luns shared Dutch public opinion in demanding that Germany recognise the damage it had caused during the Second World War, and so a \"mea culpa\" required. He demanded that before any negotiations on other bilateral disputes could start, the amount of damages to be paid to Dutch war victims had to be agreed upon. During the final stages of the negotiations on bilateral disputes between the two countries, Luns decided to come to an arrangement with his German colleague on his own accord. He made concessions and so the Dutch parliament threatened not to ratify the agreement. With the full support of the government however, Luns was able to overcome the crisis.\nEuropean integration was permanently on Luns's political agenda. Beyen had introduced the concept of the European Economic Community. In March 1957, Luns signed the Treaties of Rome establishing the EEC and Euratom. Although he preferred integration of a wider group of European states he accepted the treaty and defended the supranational structure it was based on. The endeavours of French president Charles de Gaulle to subordinate the institutions of the Six to an intergovernmental political structure, could count on strong opposition from Luns: such plans would, in his view, serve only French ambitions of a Europe independent of the United States.\nInitially, Luns stood alone and was afraid that Franco-German co-operation would result in anti-Atlantic and anti-American policies that harmed the interests of the West. He made British membership of the European institutions conditional for his political co-operation. Gradually his views on Gaullist foreign policies were shared by the other EEC members and they joined Luns in his objections. Two of De Gaulle's decisions stiffened the opposition: his denial of EEC membership to the United Kingdom in January 1963 and France's retreat from the integrated military structure of NATO in 1966. Luns played a vital role in the negotiations unwinding French participation and continuing its political membership of the Alliance. By then, Luns had internationally established his reputation as an able and reliable negotiator and was seen as an important asset in London and Washington. After the retreat of De Gaulle in 1968, the EEC Summit of The Hague, in December 1969, ended the long crisis of the EEC integration process, opened the way to British membership and agreed on new venues for political co-operation, a common market and monetary union.\nThroughout his years as Dutch foreign minister, Luns had gained an international status uncommon for a foreign minister of a small country. He owed this to his personal style in which duress, a high level of information, political leniency and diplomatic skills were combined with wit, gallant conversation and the understanding that diplomacy was a permanent process of negotiations in which a victory should never be celebrated too exuberantly at the cost of the loser.\nNATO Secretary-General (1971\u20131984).\nIn 1971, Luns was appointed as NATO secretary-general. At the time of his appointment, public protests against American policies in Vietnam were vehement throughout Western Europe and among European politicians the credibility of the American nuclear protection was in doubt. Though there were initial doubts about his skills for the job he soon proved that he was capable of managing the alliance in crisis. He regarded himself as the spokesman of the alliance and he aimed at balancing the security and political interests of the alliance as a whole.\nLuns was in favour of negotiating with the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact members on the reduction of armaments if the Western defence was kept in shape during such negotiations. European members of NATO, according to Luns, should understand that the United States carried international responsibilities while the latter should understand that in-depth consultation with the European governments was conditional to forging a united front on the international stage, which could be accepted and endorsed by all members of NATO.\nUS-Soviet negotiations on mutual troop reductions and the strategic nuclear arsenal caused severe tensions. Luns convinced American leaders that it undermined the credibility in Western Europe of their nuclear strategy by neglecting European fears of a change of strategy which would leave Europe unprotected in case of a Soviet nuclear attack. The modernisation of the tactical nuclear forces by the introduction of the neutron bomb and cruise missiles caused deep divisions. In the end, Luns succeeded in keeping NATO together in the so-called Double-Track Decision of December 1979. The deployment of these new weapon systems was linked to success in American-Soviet arms reduction talks.\nIt was also the duty of the secretary-general to mediate in cause of conflicts within the alliance. He was successful in the conflict between Great Britain and Iceland, the so-called Second Cod War not by pressuring the Icelandic government to end its aggressive behaviour against British trawlers but by convincing the British government that it had to take the first step by calling back its destroyers to open the way to negotiations. Luns failed however in the conflict between Greece and Turkey over the territorial boundaries and Cyprus. Lack of co-operation on both sides made Luns unable to mediate or advise on procedures to find a way out.\nBetween 1964 and 1984 he participated in every annual conference of the Bilderberg Group.\nLate life.\nLuns retired as secretary-general in 1984, staying in office for almost 13 years, more than anyone else. Because of the changes the 1960s and 1970s had brought to Dutch society and culture, the strongly conservative Luns decided not to return to his home country but instead settled in Brussels to spend his remaining years in retirement. Luns died at 90.\nHonours and awards.\nLuns was awarded many high-ranking awards during his lifetime, among them the Grand Cross of the L\u00e9gion d'Honneur in 1954, Member of Order of the Companions of Honour by Queen Elizabeth II in 1971 and the Presidential Medal of Freedom by then President Ronald Reagan in 1984. In his home country, he was awarded the Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, the highest civil decoration of the Netherlands, in 1953. In 1986, he was awarded the Atat\u00fcrk International Peace Prize.\nPersonal life.\nLuns married Baroness Lia van Heemstra, from the Van Heemstra family. The Lunses had two children \u2212 a son and a daughter.\nHe remained a practising Catholic throughout his life and was generally sympathetic to the traditionalist Catholic position but never affiliated himself with dissident groups. Luns visited the Tridentine Mass held by the Assumptionist priest Winand Kotte, who opposed the modernising policies of the Second Vatican Council, in St. Willibrord's Church, Utrecht in August 1971. This seems to have been something of a misunderstanding on Luns' part however, since he had never heard of Kotte's anti-Council movement and did not wish to be affiliated with it.\nAn avid stamp collector, his favourite reading material included classical literature, history books (Luns was an expert on the history of the Napoleonic era) and detective novels. Because of his interests in international navies, the latest edition of \"Jane's Fighting Ships\" was always within his reach in his office.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65676", "revid": "23646674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65676", "title": "Anton Webern", "text": "Austrian composer and conductor (1883\u20131945)\nAnton Webern (; 3 December 1883 \u2013 15 September 1945) was an Austrian composer, conductor, and musicologist. His music was among the most radical of its milieu in its lyrical, poetic concision and use of then novel atonal and twelve-tone techniques. His approach was typically rigorous, inspired by his studies of the Franco-Flemish School under Guido Adler and by Arnold Schoenberg's emphasis on structure in teaching composition from the music of Johann Sebastian Bach, the First Viennese School, and Johannes Brahms. Webern, Schoenberg, and their colleague Alban Berg were at the core of what became known as the Second Viennese School.\nWebern was arguably the first and certainly the last of the three to write music in an aphoristic and expressionist style, reflecting his instincts and the idiosyncrasy of his compositional process. He treated themes of loss, love, nature, and spirituality, working from personal experiences. Unhappily peripatetic and often assigned light music or operetta in his early conducting career, he aspired to conduct what was seen as more respectable, serious music at home in Vienna. Following Schoenberg's guidance, Webern attempted to write music of greater length during and after their World War I service, relying on the structural support of texts in many .\nHe rose as a choirmaster and conductor, championing Gustav Mahler's music in Red Vienna and abroad. With Schoenberg based in Berlin, Webern began writing music of increasing confidence, independence, and scale using twelve-tone technique. Marginalized as a \"cultural Bolshevist\" in Fascist Austria and Nazi Germany, he maintained \"the path to the new music\", enjoyed international recognition, and relied more on teaching for income. He opposed fascist cultural positions but always espoused pan-Germanism and was torn, like divided friends and family, among uncertainties. His hope for moderate, stable, and successful governance of Austria within Nazi Germany proved misplaced, and he helped Jewish friends emigrate and hide while repeatedly considering emigrating himself.\nA soldier accidentally killed Webern after World War II. In a phenomenon known as post-Webernism, his music was celebrated by composers, musicians, and scholars. Ren\u00e9 Leibowitz, Pierre Boulez, Robert Craft, and Hans and Rosaleen Moldenhauer established it as an important part of modernism through performance, study, and advocacy. Igor Stravinsky assimilated it. To many, it represented a path to serialism. Broader understanding of Webern's expressive agenda, performance practice, and complex sociocultural and political context lagged. An historical edition of his music is underway.\nBiography.\n1883\u20131908: Upbringing between late Imperial Vienna and countryside.\nBucolic.\nWebern, of the minor noble family, was born 3 December 1883 in Vienna, Austria-Hungary, the only surviving son of Carl von Webern, a decorated army veteran, high-ranking civil servant, and mining engineer who owned the Lamprechtsberg copper mine. He grew up mainly in Graz (1890\u20131894) and Klagenfurt (1894\u20131902), with one stay in Olomouc and more in Vienna for his father's work. He excelled only in the humanities and likely sang in choir at school.\nHe began piano and sang opera with his mother Amalie (n\u00e9e Geer), a trained pianist and accomplished singer, danced with his sisters Rosa and Maria, and received drums, then a trumpet, and later a violin as Christmas gifts. Local musician Edwin Komauer also taught him piano, cello, and likely counterpoint from Bach's music and cello suites. The family played chamber music, including Mozart, Schubert, and Beethoven, and Webern played in local orchestras.\nThe children spent Easter holidays () and summer vacations () at the Preglhof, the extended family's country estate near Schwabegg in Carinthia. They played in forests under the Koralpe and on a high meadow by the parish church, where cattle grazed pasture under the care of herders. Webern drove horses to a fair in Bleiburg, fought a wildfire, and saved Rosa from drowning in the bathing pond. In winter, they ice-skated the Lendkanal to the W\u00f6rthersee. These experiences, and reading Peter Rosegger, an Austrian contributor to the broader (lit.\u2009'homeland art') movement, shaped his distinct and lasting sense of (lit.\u2009'homeland').\nUniversity.\nBefore studying at the University of Vienna (1902\u20131906), Webern immersed himself in concerts, operas, plays, galleries, and cultural history, visiting the Bayreuth Festival, Musikverein, Neue Pinakothek, Prinzregententheater, and Wahnfried. He took counterpoint with Karel Navr\u00e1til, harmony with Hermann Graedener, cello with Josef H\u00e1\u0161a, and piano, in which he was less proficient, with an unidentified Theodor Leschetizky pupil.\nWhile enrolled, he kept attending many performances to learn the standard and emerging repertoire at the Burgtheater, Vienna Court Opera, and other venues, listening to many works by Brahms, Mahler, Schumann, Strauss, Wagner, and Wolf. He encountered singers like Theodor Bertram, Marie Gutheil-Schoder, and Hermann Winkelmann and conductors like Mahler, Strauss, Arthur Nikisch, and Felix Weingartner. He sang under Siegfried Wagner in Bruckner's Te Deum as a Wagner Society member and visited the Munich Kammerspiele for Frank Wedekind's \"Hidalla\".\nAt school, he analyzed Beethoven's late quartets at the piano with classmate Egon Wellesz, took a Wagner seminar, and learned the historical development of musical styles and techniques mainly from Guido Adler, an acquaintance of Wagner and Liszt, pupil of Bruckner, and friend of Mahler. For his musicology doctorate under Adler, he edited the \"Choralis Constantinus II\". As a composer, he would emulate its \"subtle organization in the interplay of parts\", which he described at length:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The voices proceed ... in [much] equality[, each with] its own development [as] a completely self-contained, separately comprehensible, wonderfully animated structural unit [...]. ... [C]anonic devices [are used] in the greatest profusion [with] the keenest observation of tone colourings in the various registers of the human voice [and] frequent ... interlacing of voices ... by leaps.\nHe also studied art history and philosophy with Max Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, Laurenz M\u00fcllner, and Franz Wickhoff, and joined the Albrecht D\u00fcrer Gesellschaft (lit.\u2009'Albrecht D\u00fcrer Society') in 1903, later serving on its board. His cousin Ernst Diez, then a University of Graz art history student, may have introduced him to the work of Arnold B\u00f6cklin and Giovanni Segantini, which he admired along with that of Ferdinand Hodler and Moritz von Schwind. He prized Segantini's landscapes as highly as Beethoven's music, diarying in 1904:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I long for an artist in music such as Segantini was in painting ... far away from all turmoil of the world, in contemplation of the glaciers, of eternal ice and snow, of the sombre mountain giants. ... [A]n alpine storm, ... the radiance of the summer sun on flower-covered meadows\u2014all these would have to be in the music, born ... of alpine solitude. That man would then be the Beethoven of our day.\nFinally, Webern studied Catholic liturgy and nationalism, shaped by his upbringing. He first found those in his new milieu smug, alien, and distinctly Jewish amid antisemitic reaction to the December Constitution's 1867 Jewish emancipation. By 1902, he had close Jewish friends like fellow student Heinrich Jalowetz, likely altering his views.\nSchoenberg and his circle.\nAdler pupil Karl Weigl brought Schoenberg's \"Pelleas und Melisande\" to class in 1903, riveting Webern, who attended performances of his songs and \"Verkl\u00e4rte Nacht\" in 1903\u201304. In 1904, Webern tried Hans Pfitzner's composition lessons in Berlin but left over attacks on Mahler and R. Strauss. Adler admired and may have recommended Schoenberg, or Webern may have seen his Schwarzwald School newspaper ads before starting lessons in fall 1904, perhaps as his first Vienna pupil.\nThus Webern met Berg as another Schoenberg pupil, and Schoenberg's brother-in-law Alexander Zemlinsky, through whom he may have worked as an assistant coach at the in Vienna (1906\u20131909). Schoenberg, Berg, and Webern became lifelong friends following similar musical paths. Adler, Jalowetz, and Webern played Schoenberg's quartets under the composer, accompanying Gutheil-Schoder in rehearsals for Op. 10.\nAlso through Schoenberg, who painted and had a 1910 solo exhibition at Hugo Heller's bookstore, Webern met Gustav Klimt, Oskar Kokoschka, Max Oppenheimer (with whom he corresponded on terms), Egon Schiele, and Emil Stumpp. In 1920, Webern wrote Berg about the \"indescribable impression\" Klimt's work made on him, \"that of a luminous, tender, heavenly realm\". He also met Karl Kraus, whose lyrics he later set, but only to completion in Op. 13/i.\n1908\u20131918: Early adulthood in Austria-Hungary and German Empire.\nMarriage.\nWebern married Wilhelmine \"Minna\" M\u00f6rtl in a 1911 civil ceremony in Danzig. She had become pregnant in 1910 and feared disapproval, as they were cousins. Thus the Catholic Church only solemnized their lasting union in 1915, after three children.\nThey met in 1902, later hiking along the Kamp from Rosenburg-Mold to Allentsteig in 1905. He wooed her with John Ruskin essays (in German translation), dedicating his Langsamer Satz to her. Webern diaried about their time together \"with obvious literary aspirations\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We wandered [...]. The forest symphony resounded. ... A walk in the moonlight on flowery meadows\u2014Then the night\u2014\"what the night gave to me, will long make me tremble.\"\u2014Two souls had wed.\nEarly conducting career.\nWebern conducted and coached singers and choirs mostly in operetta, musical theater, light music, and some opera in his early career. Operetta was in its Viennese Silver Age. Much of it was regarded as \"low-\" or \"middlebrow\"; Kraus, Theodor Adorno, and Ernst Krenek found it \"uppity\" in its pretensions. In 1924 Ernst D\u00e9csey recalled he once found operetta, with its \"old laziness and unbearable musical blandness\", beneath him. J. P. Hodin contextualized the opposition of the \"youthful intelligentsia\" to operetta with a quote from Hermann Bahr's 1907 essay \"Wien\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[E]veryone knows ... it is always Sunday in Vienna ... one lives in a world of half-poetry which is very dangerous for the real thing. They can recognize a few waltzes by Lanner and Strauss ... a few Viennese songs ... It is a well-known fact that Vienna has the finest cakes ... and the most cheerful, friendly people. ... But those who are condemned to live here cannot understand all this.\n\"What benefit ... if all operettas ... were destroyed\", Webern told Diez in 1908. But by 1912, he told Berg that Zeller's \"Vogelh\u00e4ndler\" was \"quite nice\" and Schoenberg that J. Strauss II's \"Nacht in Venedig\" was \"such fine, delicate music. I now believe ... Strauss is a master.\" A summer 1908 engagement with Bad Ischl's Kurorchester was \"hell\". Webern walked out on an engagement in Innsbruck (1909), writing in distress to Schoenberg:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[A] young good-for-nothing ... my 'superior!' ... what do I have to do with such a theatre? ... do I have to perform all this filth? Webern wrote Zemlinsky seeking work at the Berlin or Vienna Volksoper instead. He started at Bad Teplitz's Civic Theater in early 1910, where the local news reported his \"sensitive, devoted guidance\" as conductor of Fall's \"Geschiedene Frau\", but he quit within months due to disagreements. His repertoire likely included Fall's \"Dollarprinzessin\", Leh\u00e1r's \"Graf von Luxemburg\", O. Straus's \"Walzertraum\", J. Strauss II's \"Fledermaus\", and Schumann's \"Manfred\". There were only 22 musicians in the orchestra, too few to perform Puccini's operas, he noted.\nWebern then summered at the Preglhof, composing his Op. 7 and planning an opera. In September, he attended the Munich premiere of Mahler's \"Symphony of a Thousand\" and visited with his idol, who gave Webern a sketch of \"\". Webern then worked with Jalowetz as assistant conductor in Danzig (1910\u20131911), where he first saw the \"almost frightening\" ocean. He conducted von Flotow's \"Winterm\u00e4rchen\", George's \"F\u00f6rsterchristl\", Jones' \"Geisha\", Leh\u00e1r's \"Lustige Witwe\", Lortzing's \"Waffenschmied\", Offenbach's \"Belle H\u00e9l\u00e8ne\", and J. Strauss II's \"Zigeunerbaron\". He particularly enjoyed Offenbach's \"Contes d'Hoffmann\" and Rossini's \"Barbiere di Siviglia\", but only Jalowetz was allowed to conduct this more established repertoire.\nWebern soon expressed homesickness to Berg; he could not bear the separation from Schoenberg and their world in Vienna. He returned after resigning in spring 1911, and the three were pallbearers at Mahler's funeral in May 1911. Then in summer 1911, a neighbor's antisemitic abuse and aggression caused Schoenberg to quit work, abandon Vienna, and go with his family to stay with Zemlinsky on the . Webern and others fundraised for Schoenberg's return, circulating more than one hundred leaflets with forty-eight signatories, including G. Adler, H. Bahr, Klimt, Kraus, and R. Strauss, among others. But Schoenberg was resolved to move to Berlin, and not for the first or last time, convinced of Vienna's fundamental hostility.\nWebern soon joined him (1910\u20131912), finishing no new music in his devoted work on Schoenberg's behalf, which entailed many editing and writing projects. He gradually became tired, unhappy, and homesick. He tried to persuade Schoenberg to return home to Vienna, continuing the fundraising campaign and lobbying for a position there for Schoenberg, but Schoenberg could not bear to return to the due to his prior experiences in Vienna. At the same time, Webern began a cycle of repeatedly quitting and being rehired by Zemlinsky at the (1911\u20131918).\nHe had a short-lived conducting post in Stettin (1912\u20131913), which, as all the others, kept him from composing and alienated him. On the verge of a breakdown, he wrote Berg shortly after arriving (Jul. 1912):&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I find myself under the dregs of mankind ... with ... absurd music; I'm ... seriously ill. My nerves torture me [...]. I want to be far away [...]. In the mountains. There everything is clear, the water, the air, the earth. Here everything is dismal. I'm poisoned by drinking the water.\n\"Old song\" of \"lost paradise\".\nWebern's father sold the Preglhof in 1912, and Webern mourned it as a \"lost paradise\". He revisited it and the family grave in nearby Schwabegg his entire life, associating these places with the memory of his mother, whose 1906 loss profoundly affected him. In July 1912, he confided in Schoenberg: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am overwhelmed with emotion when I imagine everything [...]. My daily way to the grave of my mother. The infinite mildness of the entire countryside, all the thousand things there. Now everything is over. ... If only you could ... have seen [...]. The seclusion, the quiet, the house, the forests, the garden, and the cemetery. About this time, I had always composed diligently.\nShortly after the anniversary of his mother's death, he wrote Schoenberg in September 1912:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I read letters from my mother, I could die of longing for the places where all these things have occurred. How far back and ... beautiful. ... Often a ... soft ... radiance, a supernatural warmth falls upon me\u2014 ... from my mother.\nFor Christmas in 1912, Webern gifted Schoenberg Rosegger's \"Waldheimat\" (\"Forest Homeland\"), from which Julian Johnson highlighted:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Childhood days and childhood home!&lt;br&gt;It is that old song of Paradise. There are people for whom ... Paradise is never lost ... in them God's kingdom ... rises ... more ... in ... memory than ... ever ... in reality; ... children are poets and retrace their steps. Rosegger's account of his mother's death at the book's end (\"An meine Mutter\") resonated with Webern, who connected it to his Op. 6 orchestral pieces. In a January 1913 letter to Schoenberg, Webern revealed that these pieces were a kind of program music, each reflecting details and emotions tied to his mother's death. He had written Berg in July 1912, \"my compositions ... relate to the death of my mother\", specifying in addition the \"Passacaglia, [String] Quartet, most [early] songs, ... second Quartet, ... second [orchestral pieces, Op. 10] (with some exceptions)\". \nJohnson contended that Webern understood his cultural origins with a maternal view of nature and , which became central themes in his music and thought. He noted that Webern's deeply personal idea of a maternal homeland\u2014built from memories of pilgrimages to his mother's grave, the \"mild\", \"lost paradise\" of home, and the \"warmth\" of her memory\u2014reflected his sense of loss and his yearning for return. Drawing loosely on V. Kofi Agawu's semiotic approach to classical music, specifically his idea of musical topics, Johnson held that all of Webern's music, though rarely directly representational, was enriched by its associative references and more specific musical and extra-musical meanings. In this he claimed to echo Craft, Jalowetz, Krenek, the Moldenhauers, and Webern himself.\nIn particular, Webern associated nature with his personal (often youthful and spiritual) experiences, forming a topical nexus that recurred in his diaries, letters, and music, sometimes explicitly in sketches and set texts. He frequented the surrounding mountains, summering in resort towns like M\u00fcrzzuschlag and backpacking (sometimes summiting) the Gaisstein, Grossglockner, Hochschober, Hochschwab, and Schneealpe (among others) throughout his life. The alpine climate and f\u00f6hn, glaciers, pine trees, and springs \"crystal clear down to the bottom\" fascinated him. He treasured this time \"up there, in the heights\", where \"one should stay\".\nHe collected and organized \"mysterious\" alpine herbs and cemetery flowers in pressed albums, and he tended gardens at his father's home in Klagenfurt and later at his own homes in the M\u00f6dling District (first in M\u00f6dling, then in Maria Enzersdorf). Karl Amadeus Hartmann remembered that Webern gardened \"as a devotion\" to Goethe's \"Metamorphosis of Plants\", and Johnson drew a parallel between Webern's gardening and composing, emphasizing his connection to nature and his structured, methodical approach in both pursuits. Johnson noted that gardens and cemeteries are alike in being cultivated, closed spaces of rebirth and quiet reflection.\nThese habits and preoccupations endured in Webern's life and . In 1933, Joseph Hueber recalled Webern stopped in a fragrant meadow, dug his hands into the soil, and breathed in the flowers and grass before rising to ask: \"Do you sense 'Him' ... as strongly as I, 'Him, Pan'?\" In 1934, Webern's lyricist and collaborator Hildegard Jone described his work as \"filled ... with the endless love and delicacy of the memory of ... childhood\". Webern told her, \"through my work, all that is past becomes like a childhood\".\nPsychotherapy.\nIn 1912\u20131913, Webern had a breakdown and saw Alfred Adler, who noted his idealism and perfectionism. There were many factors involved. Webern had little time (mostly summers) to compose. There were conflicts at work (e.g., he emphasized that a director called him a \"little man\"). His ambivalence toward sales-oriented popular music theater contributed (\"I ... stir the sauce\", he wrote). \"It appears ... improbable that I should remain with the theatre. It is ... terrible. ... I can hardly ... adjust to being away from home\", he had written Schoenberg in 1910. Miserably ill and alienated, he first had sought medical advice and taken rest at a sanatorium in Semmering. Adler later evaluated his symptoms as psychogenic responses to unmet expectations. Webern wrote Schoenberg that Adler's psychoanalysis was helpful and insightful.\nWorld War I.\nAs World War I broke out and nationalist fervor swept Europe, Webern found it \"inconceivable\", he wrote Schoenberg in August 1914, \"that the German Reich, and we along with it, should perish.\" Yielding in his distrust of Protestant Germany, he compared Catholic France to \"cannibals\" and expressed pan-German patriotism amid wartime propaganda. He cited his \"faith in the German spirit\" as having \"created, almost exclusively, the culture of mankind\". Despite his high regard of French classical music, especially Debussy's, Webern revered the tradition as centered on counterpoint and form, and as mainly German since Bach.\nWebern served intermittently for nearly two years. The war cost him professional opportunities, much of his social life, and the necessary leisure time to compose (he completed only nine ). Moving frequently and tiring, he began to despair, explaining to Schoenberg in November 1916 that the reality of war was \"Old Testament\" and \"'Eye for eye'\", \"as if Christ had never existed\". Webern was discharged in December 1916 for myopia, which had disqualified him from frontline service.\nHis 1917 show that he reflected on his patriotism and processed his sorrow. He treated the loss of life and, with the 1916 death of Franz Joseph I of Austria, the end of an era. In \"Fahr hin, o Seel'\", he selected a lament sung at a funeral in a Rosegger novel. In \"Wiese im Park\", he selected a text from Kraus recognizing that the day was \"dead\", (\"and everything ... so old\"). Webern also set several disturbing poems of Georg Trakl, not all of which he could finish. With uninterrupted contrapuntal density, by turns muscular and murmured, he word painted Trakl's \"great cities\" and \"dying peoples\", \"leafless trees\", \"violent alarm\", and \"falling stars\" in \"Abendland III\".\nAustrian defeat and socioeconomic strain.\nDuring and after the end of the war, Webern, like other Austrians, contended with food shortages, insufficient heating, socioeconomic volatility, and geopolitical disaster in defeat. He had considered retreating to the countryside and purchasing a farm since 1917, specifically as an asset better than war bonds at shielding his family's wealth from inflation. (In the end, he lost all that remained of his family's wealth to hyperinflation by 1924.) He proposed to Schoenberg that they might be smallholders together.\nDespite Schoenberg's and his father's advice that he not quit conducting, Webern followed to Schoenberg to M\u00f6dling in early 1918, hoping to be reunited with his mentor and to compose more. But Webern's finances were so poor that he soon explored a \"voluntary exile\" to Prague again. Nonetheless, he continued to raise funds, including his own, for Schoenberg, with whom he spent every day.\nYet soon after he arrived, Webern broke his friendship with Schoenberg. The break was multifactorial but involved Webern's dissatisfaction with his career and financial turmoil. Berg learned of the Weberns' ill temperaments and \"latent antisemitism\" from Schoenberg, and noted that Schoenberg \"wouldn't explain\" further than \"'Webern wants to go to Prague again'\". Bailey Puffett argued that Webern's actions in and after the 1930s suggested that he was not antisemitic, at least in his maturity. She noted that Webern later wrote Schoenberg that he felt \"a sense of the most vehement aversion\" against German-speaking people who were.\nAfter meeting with Webern, Berg saw \"the matter in a different light\", considering Webern \"by and large innocent\" in light of what Webern said was Schoenberg's \"kick in the teeth\": after laying plans for a New Music society, Schoenberg angrily called Webern \"secretive and deceitful\" upon learning that Webern was instead considering Prague again. They reconciled in October 1918, not long before Webern's father died in 1919. Webern was changed by these events; he slowly began to grow more independent of Schoenberg, who was like a father to him. For his part, Schoenberg was not infrequently dubious of Webern, who he still considered his closest friend.\n1918\u20131933: Rise in (Interwar Vienna).\nSociety for Private Musical Performances.\nWebern stayed in Vienna and worked with Berg, Schoenberg, and Erwin Stein at the Society for Private Musical Performances (1918\u20131921), promoting new music through performances and contests. Music included that of Bart\u00f3k, Berg, Busoni, Debussy, Korngold, Mahler, Nov\u00e1k, Ravel, Reger, Satie, Strauss, Stravinsky, and Webern himself. Webern wrote Berg about Stravinsky's \"indescribably touching\" \"Berceuses du chat\" and \"glorious\" \"Pribaoutki\", which Schoenberg conducted at a sold-out 1919 Society concert. There was perhaps some shared influence among Schoenberg, Stravinsky, and Webern at this time. The Society dissolved amid hyperinflation in 1921, having boasted some 320 members and sponsored more than a hundred concerts.\nMature conducting career.\nWebern obtained work as music director of the 1921, having made an excellent impression as the vocal coach Schoenberg recommended for their 1920 performance of \"Gurre-Lieder\". They nearly abandoned this project before Webern stepped in. He led them in performances of Brahms, Mahler, Reger, and Schumann, among others. But low salary, mandatory touring, and challenges to Webern's thorough rehearsals prompted him to resign in 1922. He was also chorusmaster of the M\u00f6dling (1922\u20131926) until he resigned in controversy over hiring a Jewish soprano, Greta Wilheim, as a stand-in soloist for Schubert's \"Mirjams Siegesgesang\".\nFrom 1922, Webern led the mixed-voice amateur and through David Josef Bach, Director of the . Webern won DJ Bach's confidence with a 1922 performance of Mahler's Symphony No. 3 that established his reputation, prompting Berg to praise him as \"the greatest conductor since Mahler himself\". Webern's Mahler interpretations continued to be widely celebrated. From 1927, RAVAG aired twenty-two of Webern's performances.\nHe premiered Berg's Chamber Concerto with soloists Rudolf Kolisch and Eduard Steuermann in 1927 and led Stravinsky's \"Les Noces\" with Erich Leinsdorf among the pianists in 1933. Armand Machabey noted Webern's regional reputation as a conductor of for his meticulous approach to then contemporary music, comparing him to Willem Mengelberg in \"Le M\u00e9nestrel\" (1930). Some on the left, notably Oscar Pollak in \"Der Kampf\" (1929), criticized Webern's programming as more ambitious and bourgeois than popular and proletarian. Webern seemed uneasy in his dependence on the Social Democrats for conducting work, perhaps on religious grounds, Krenek speculated. But \"[a]rtistic work for and with workers was [from] a ... Christian standpoint which Webern took very seriously\", Walter Kolneder wrote.\nRelative success in a destabilizing society.\nWebern's finances were often precarious, even in his years of relative success. Relief came from family, friends, patrons, and prizes. He twice received the Preis der Stadt Wien f\u00fcr Musik. To compose more, he sought income while trying not to overcommit himself as a conductor. He contracted with Universal Edition only after 1919, reaching better terms in 1927, and he was not very ambitious or astute in business. Even with a doctorate and Guido Adler's respect, he never secured a remunerative university position, whereas in 1925 Schoenberg was invited to the Prussian Academy of Arts, ending their seven years together in M\u00f6dling.\nSocial Democrat\u2013Christian Social relations polarized and radicalized amid the Schattendorfer Urteil. Webern and others signed an \"Announcement of Intellectual Vienna\" published on the front page of the Social Democrats' daily \"Arbeiter-Zeitung\" days before the 1927 Austrian legislative election. On Election Day in \"Die Reichspost\", Ignaz Seipel of the Einheitsliste officially applied the term \"Red Vienna\" pejoratively, attacking Vienna's educational and cultural institutions. Social unrest escalated to the July Revolt of 1927 and beyond. Webern's nostalgia for social order intensified with increasing civil disorder. In 1928 friends fundraised for him, partly to fund a rest cure at the for his exhaustion and (possibly psychosomatic) gastrointestinal complaints.\nIn 1928, Berg celebrated the \"lasting works\" and successes of composers \"whose point of departure was ... late Mahler, Reger, and Debussy and whose temporary end point is in ... Schoenberg\" in their rise from \"pitiful 'cliques'\" to a large, diverse, international, and \"irresistible movement\". But they were soon marginalized and ostracized in Central Europe with few exceptions, and in 1929 Webern wrote Schoenberg that \"it is getting worse and worse here\". He declined a RAVAG executive role, citing time constraints and fearing further affiliation with the Social Democrats.\nWebern's music was performed and publicized more widely starting in the latter half of the 1920s. Yet he found no great success as Berg enjoyed with \"Wozzeck\" nor as Schoenberg did, to a lesser extent, with \"Pierrot lunaire\" or in time with \"Verkl\u00e4rte Nacht\". His Symphony, Op. 21, was performed as a chamber piece in New York by the League of Composers (1929) and separately in London at the 1931 International Society for Contemporary Music (ISCM) Festival. Louis Krasner sensed some resentment, noting that Webern had \"very little\". Krenek's impression was that Webern resented his financial hardships and lack of wider recognition.\n1933\u20131938: Perseverance in (Austrofascist Vienna).\nMarginalization at home.\nFinancial crises, complex social and political movements, pervasive antisemitism, culture wars, and renewed military conflicts continued to shape Webern's world, profoundly circumscribing his life. Shortly after Webern conducted the Brecht\u2013Eisler \"Solidarit\u00e4tslied\" in 1933, Engelbert Dollfuss saw the Kriegswirtschaftliches Erm\u00e4chtigungsgesetz passed, and choir singers' homes were raided. In the 1934 Austrian Civil War, Austrofascists executed, exiled, and imprisoned Social Democrats, outlawed their party, and abolished cultural institutions.\nStigmatized by his decade-long association with Social Democrats, Webern lost a promising domestic conducting career, which might have been better recorded. He eventually abandoned efforts with what remained of the workers' choir in the form of the much constrained in 1935, instead working as a UE editor and IGNM-Sektion \u00d6sterreich board member and president (1933\u20131938, 1945).\nBy the late 1920s, antisemitism had become epidemic, and the socioculturally mixed milieu of Vienna's modern arts and entertainment, including the music of Webern, Schoenberg, Berg, and Mahler, was mocked as foreign and Jewish in a racialized sense, contrasting with what was touted as truly German (and typically conservative, traditional, or rural). Webern's admission to the Prussian Academy of Arts was withdrawn as Adolf Hitler rose in Germany, and an Austrian labeled Berg and Webern \"Jewish\" on in 1933. In the late 1930s, theirs was exhibited as in Nazi Germany and later at the Vienna K\u00fcnstlerhaus in Nazi Austria.\nWebern delivered an eight-lecture series \"\" at Rita Kurzmann-Leuchter's and her physician husband Rudolf Kurzman's home (Feb.\u2013Apr. 1933). He attacked fascist cultural policy, asking \"What will come of our struggle?\" He observed that \"'cultural Bolshevism' is the name given to everything that is going on around Schoenberg, Berg, and myself (Krenek too)\" and warned, \"Imagine what will be destroyed, wiped out, by this hate of culture!\" He lectured more at the Kurzmann-Leuchter home, privately in 1934\u20131935 on Beethoven's piano sonatas to about 40 attendees and later in 1937\u20131938.\nPersevering, Webern wrote Krenek that \"art has its own laws ... if one wants to achieve something in it, only these laws and nothing else can have validity\"; upon completing Op. 26 (1935), he wrote DJ Bach, \"I hope it is so good that (if people ever get to know it) they will declare me ready for a concentration camp or an insane asylum!\" The Vienna Philharmonic nearly refused to play Berg's Violin Concerto in 1936. Peter Stadlen's 1937 Op. 27 premieres were the last Viennese Webern performances until after World War II. The critical success of Hermann Scherchen's 1938 ISCM London Op. 26 premiere encouraged Webern to write more cantatas and reassured him after a cellist quit Op. 20 mid-performance, declaring it unplayable.\nBesieged milieu and political uncertainty.\nWebern's milieu comprised increasingly vast differences. Like most Austrians, he and his family were Catholic, though not church regulars; Webern was perhaps devout if unorthodox. They became politically divided. His friends (e.g., then Zionist Schoenberg, left-leaning Berg) were of a mostly Jewish milieu from late Imperial to \"red\" (Social Democratic) Vienna. Alma Mahler, Krenek, Willi Reich, and Stein preferred or supported the \"lesser evil\" of the Austrofascists (or aligned Italian fascists) the Nazis. Presuming power would moderate Hitler, Webern mediated among friends with an optimistic or self-soothing complacency, exasperating those who were at risk.\nWebern found himself surrounded mostly by one side as Schoenberg immigrated to the US (1933), Rudolf Ploderer died by suicide (1933), Berg died (1935), and DJ Bach, among others (e.g., Greissle, Jalowetz, Krenek, Reich, Steuermann, Wellesz), fled or worse. Webern immediately considered following Schoenberg to the US, which Schoenberg discouraged despite seeking opportunities there for Webern. Schoenberg knew that Webern was deeply attached to home, and he told Webern that conditions in the US were poor, mentioning the ongoing Great Depression.\nWebern's views of National Socialism have been variously described. His published items reflected his audience or context. Secondary literature reflected limited evidence or ideological orientations and admitted uncertainty. Julie Brown noted hesitancy to approach the topic and echoed the Moldenhauers, considering the issue \"vexed\" and Webern a \"political enigma\". Bailey Puffett considered Webern's politics \"somewhat vague\" and his situation \"complex\", noting that he seemed to avoid definitive political association as a practical strategy. Webern's apparent sympathies with some of the Nazis' program later became a sensation in his reception, but the matter was often oversimplified or decontextualized and rested on limited evidence (mostly letters), Johnson wrote, sometimes with the larger aim of politicizing Webern's music and his musical language.\nKrasner and the Moldenhauers surmised Webern's cognitive dissonance, finding him \"idealistic and rather naive\". In 1943 Kurt List described Webern as \"utterly ignorant\" and \"perpetual[ly] confus[ed]\" about politics, \"a ready prey to the personal influence of family and friends\". Johnson described him as \"personally shy, a man of private feeling and essentially apolitical\", and as \"prone to identify with Nazi politics as ... other ... Austrians\". Webern may have believed that the Nazis shared his own ideals, Johnson wrote, explaining that \"it is possible that ... naivet\u00e9, ... ignorance and ... adherence to his own beliefs allowed Webern to see in Nazi ideology only ... elements ... he wanted to find\".\nVisiting conducting career.\nWebern conducted nine concerts as a BBC Symphony visiting conductor (1929\u20131936). A talkie on his first London visit inspired him to ask Steuermann about writing film music, and Steuermann wrote his relatives in the film industry, Salka Viertel and Berthold Viertel, for their suggestions. For the BBC, Webern selected then little-known Mahler (including both nocturnes from the Symphony No. 7 in 1934). He insisted on rehearsing at the piano with vocalists and was criticized for coaching musical phrasing.\nIn Barcelona, he withdrew from the 1936 world premiere of Berg's Violin Concerto, grief-stricken after Berg's death and overwhelmed by difficulties. There Krasner recalled, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Webern] pleaded and exhorted the players to feel the inner expressive content of one, two, or three notes at a time\u2014rehearsing repeatedly a single motif, one bar of music and only finally, a two- or four-bar phrase. The two then played the concerto in London with BBC musicians, who rehearsed before Webern conducted. Kenneth Anthony Wright noted Webern's \"funny little explanations of the varying dynamics and flexibility of tempo\", but \"every syllable and every gesture of Webern was understood and lovingly heeded\", Krasner recalled. The musicians \"all admired and respected Webern\", according to Sidonie Goossens. But Felix Aprahamian, Benjamin Britten, and Berthold Goldschmidt criticized Webern's conducting, and BBC management did not invite him back after 1936.\n1938\u20131939: Inner emigration in Nazi Germany.\nAnschluss.\nKrasner's last visit with Webern was interrupted by Kurt Schuschnigg's broadcast speech that the Anschluss was imminent. Krasner had been playing some of Schoenberg's Violin Concerto for Webern and trying to convince him to write a sonata for solo violin. When Webern turned on the radio and heard this speech, he urged Krasner to flee. Because Webern's family included Nazis, Krasner wondered whether Webern had already known that the Anschluss was planned for that day. He also wondered whether Webern's warning had been solely for his safety or whether it had also been to save Webern the embarrassment of the violinist's presence in the event of celebration at the Webern home.\nMuch of Austria did celebrate. But Webern made only a terse note of the Anschluss in his notebook without registering any clear emotion. In fact, he wrote Jone and her husband Josef Humplik asking not to be disturbed as he was \"totally immersed\" in work on Op. 28. Thus, Bailey Puffett suggested that Webern may have received Krasner's visit as a distraction.\nBy now, Hartmut Krones wrote, Webern likely realized his error in anticipating the Nazis' self-moderation. Bailey Puffett proposed that Krasner, with the benefit of hindsight from the perspective of his 1987 account, may have resented Webern for \"refusing to see the reality of Hitler's antisemitism\", at least until after 1936. That year, Webern had insisted that Krasner and he travel through Nazi Germany to stop at a Munich train station caf\u00e9, where Krasner said \"anything untoward was the least likely to happen\", in an attempt to demonstrate the lack of danger.\nSupport for the Anschluss rested on antisemitism, economic prospects, and the idea of a Greater Germany. Under some duress, Theodor Innitzer ushered in Catholic support. The Austrian Nazis and Social Democrats, both outlawed, were linked in opposition to the Austrofascists. Karl Renner supported unification as a matter of self-determination before the years (1933\u20131938) of and Nazi soft power, and he and others now supported (or accepted as inevitable) the 1938 Anschluss. Otto Bauer, in exile, expressed some acceptance with profound resignation and misgivings, having worked toward Austria's German incorporation since Provisional National Assembly's 1918 vote. Webern had long shared in common pan-German sentiments, especially during wartime. He also likely hoped to conduct again, securing a firmer future for his family under a new regime proclaiming itself \"socialist\" no less than nationalist. According to what Josef Polnauer, a fellow early Schoenberg pupil, historian, and librarian, told the Moldenhauers, Webern's optimism was not dispelled until 1941.\nKrasner emphasized Webern's \"naivet\u00e9\" but acknowledged that he himself had been \"foolhardy\" as to the danger of antisemitism, recalling \"read[ing] in the papers ... denials\" and \"want[ing] to see for myself\" in 1938. Consensus had emerged on the center, left, and in some mainstream Jewish organizations that antisemitism was only a means to political power since its 1890s definition as the \"socialism of fools\". The Frankfurt School first treated it within the rubric of class conflict (Adorno began to consider it otherwise in his 1939 \"Fragments on Wagner\"), and Franz Neumann briefly contended that the Nazis would \"never allow a complete extermination of the Jews\" in his 1942 \"\" (before revisions in 1944).\nKristallnacht and recoil.\n shocked Webern, who thought that reports of Nazi atrocities were politicized, unreliable propaganda. He visited and aided Jewish colleagues DJ Bach, Otto Jokl, Polnauer, and Hugo Winter. For Jokl, a former Berg pupil, Webern wrote a recommendation letter to facilitate emigration. When that failed, Webern served as his godfather in a 1939 baptism. Polnauer, whose emigration Mark Brunswick, Schoenberg, and Webern were unable to secure, managed to survive the Holocaust as an albino; he later edited a 1959 UE publication of Webern's correspondence from this time with Humplik and Jone. Webern moved Humplik's 1929 gift of a Mahler bust to his bedroom, having told Felix Greissle in 1936 or 1937 that Mahler's time would come within a German and DJ Bach that \"not all Germans are Nazis\".\nWith \"almost all his friends and old pupils ... gone\", Webern found himself increasingly alone, and his financial situation was poor. He talked to Polnauer about emigrating but was reluctant to leave home and family. He entered a period of \"inward emigration\" and focused on composition, writing to artist Franz Rederer in 1939, \"We live completely withdrawn. I work a lot.\" He corresponded extensively to maintain relationships, imploring his student George Robert to play Schoenberg in New York and expressing his loneliness and isolation to Schoenberg. Then war limited postal service, disrupting their direct correspondence completely by 1941.\n1939\u20131945: Hope and disillusionment during World War II.\nSwiss and \"Reich\" prospects.\nWebern's mature music was performed mostly outside the , where only his tonal music and arrangements were allowed as works not in the style of a . His arrangement of two of Schubert's \"German Dances\" was performed in Leipzig and broadcast in the and Fascist Italy (1941). His Passacaglia was considered for a Viennese contemporary music festival in 1942, Karl B\u00f6hm or Wilhelm Furtw\u00e4ngler conducting, but this did not happen. Hans Rosbaud likely performed it in occupied Strasbourg that year, and Luigi Dallapiccola sought to have it performed in Venice in 1943. Hans Schmidt-Isserstedt planned Webern's arrangement of the six-voice ricercar from Bach's \"Musical Offering\" at the in 1943, but war intervened.\nSupported by IGNM-Sektion Basel, the Orchester Musikkollegium Winterthur, and Werner Reinhart, Webern attended three Swiss concerts, his last trips outside the . In 1940, Erich Schmid conducted Op. 1 in Winterthur; soprano Marguerite Gradmann-L\u00fcscher sang Op. 4 and most of Op. 12 (not No. 3) at the Musik-Akademie der Stadt Basel, Schmid accompanying. In Feb. 1943, Scherchen gave the world premiere of Op. 30 at the Winterthur Stadthaus. Webern intimated to Willi Reich that he might immigrate there, joking (Oct. 1939) \"Anything of the sort did seem quite out of the question for me!\" But Webern failed to find employment, even as a formality, likely due to anti-German sentiment in the context of Swiss neutrality and refugee laws.\nIn the \"Reich\", he met with former Society violist Othmar Steinbauer about a formal teaching role in Vienna in early 1940, but nothing materialized. He lectured at the homes of Erwin Ratz and Carl Prohaska's widow Margaret (1940\u20131942). Many private pupils came to him between 1940 and 1943, even from afar, among them briefly Hartmann. Hartmann, who opposed the Nazis, remembered that Webern counseled him to respect authority, at least publicly, for the sake of order.\nWartime hopes and reality.\nSharing in wartime public sentiment at the height of Hitler's popularity (spring 1940), Webern expressed high hopes, crediting him as \"unique\" and \"singular\" for \"the new state for which the seed was laid twenty years ago\". These were patriotic letters to Joseph Hueber, an active soldier, baritone, close friend, and mountaineering companion who often sent Webern gifts. Indeed, Hueber had just sent Webern \"Mein Kampf\".\nUnaware of Stefan George's aversion to the Nazis, Webern reread \"Das neue Reich\" and marveled suggestively at the wartime leader envisioned therein, but \"I am not taking a position!\" he wrote active soldier, singer, and onetime Social Democrat, Hans Humpelstetter. For Johnson, \"Webern's own image of a was never of this world; if his politics were ultimately complicitous it was largely because his utopian apoliticism played so easily into ... the status quo.\"\nBy Aug. 1940, Webern depended financially on his children. He sought wartime emergency relief funds from and the K\u00fcnstlerdank (1940\u20131944), which he received despite indicating non-membership in the Nazi Party on an application. Whether Webern ever joined the party was unknown. This represented his only income after 1942. He nearly exhausted his savings by 1944.\nHis 1943\u20131945 letters were strewn with references to bombings, death, destruction, privation, and the disintegration of local order, but several grandchildren were born. In Dec. 1943, aged 60, he wrote from a barrack that he was working 6\u00a0am\u20135\u00a0pm as an air-raid protection police officer, conscripted into the war effort. He corresponded with Willi Reich about IGNM-Sektion Basel's concert marking his sixtieth, in which Paul Baumgartner played Op. 27, Walter K\u00e4gi Op. 7, and August Wenzinger Op. 11. Gradmann-L\u00fcscher sang both Opp. 3 and the world premiere of 23. For Schoenberg's 70th birthday (1944), Webern asked Reich to convey \"my most heartfelt remembrances, ... longing! ... hopes for a happy future!\" In Feb. 1945, Webern's only son Peter, intermittently conscripted since 1940, was killed in an air attack; airstrike sirens interrupted the family's mourning at the funeral.\nRefuge and death in Mittersill.\nThe Weberns assisted Schoenberg's eldest son, Georg, during the war; with the Red Army's April 1945 arrival imminent, they gave him their M\u00f6dling apartment, the property and childhood home of Webern's son-in-law Benno Mattl. Georg later told Krasner that Webern \"felt he'd betrayed his best friends.\" The Weberns fled west, resorting to traveling partly on foot to Mittersill to rejoin their family of \"17 persons pressed together in the smallest possible space\".\nOn the night of 15 Sept. 1945, Webern was outside smoking when he was shot and killed by a US soldier in an apparent accident. He had been following Thomas Mann's work, which the Nazis had burned, noting in 1944 that Mann had finished \"Joseph and His Brothers\". In his last notebook entry, Webern quoted Rainer Maria Rilke: \"Who speaks of victory? To endure is everything.\"\nWebern's wife Minna suffered final years of grief, poverty, and loneliness as friends and family continued emigrating. She wished Webern had lived to see more success. With the abolition of policies, Alfred Schlee solicited her for hidden manuscripts; thus Opp. 17, 24\u201325, and 29\u201331 were published. She worked to get Webern's 1907 Piano Quintet published via Kurt List.\nIn 1947 she wrote Diez, now in the US, that by 1945 Webern was \"firmly resolved to go to England\". Likewise, in 1946 she wrote DJ Bach in London: \"How difficult the last eight years had been for him. ... [H]e had only the one wish: to flee from this country. But one was caught, without a will of one's own. ... It was close to the limit of endurance what we had to suffer.\" Minna died in 1949.\nMusic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTell me, can one at all denote thinking and feeling as things entirely separable? I cannot imagine a sublime intellect without the ardor of emotion.\n Webern wrote to Schoenberg (June 1910). Theodor Adorno described Webern as \"propound[ing] musical expressionism in its strictest sense, ... to such a point that it reverts of its own weight to a new objectivity\".\nWebern's music was generally concise, organic, and parsimonious, with very small motifs, palindromes, and parameterization on both the micro- and macro-scale. His idiosyncratic approach reflected affinities with Schoenberg, Mahler, Guido Adler and early music; interest in esotericism and ; and thorough perfectionism. He engaged with the work of Goethe, Bach, and the Franco-Flemish School in addition to that of Wolf, Brahms, Wagner, Liszt, Schumann, Beethoven, Schubert (\"so genuinely Viennese\"), and Mozart. Stylistic shifts were not neatly coterminous with gradually developed technical devices, particularly in the case of his mid-period .\nHis music was also characteristically linear and song-like. Much of it (and Berg's and Schoenberg's) was for singing. Johnson described the song-like gestures of Op. 11/i. In Webern's mid-period , some heard instrumentalizing of the voice (often in relation to the clarinet) representing yet some continuity with . Lukas N\u00e4f described one of Webern's signature hairpins (on the Op. 21/i mm. 8\u20139 bass clarinet note) as a \"messa di voce\" requiring some \"rubato\" to execute faithfully. Adventurous textures and timbres, and melodies of wide leaps and sometimes extreme ranges and registers were typical.\nFor Johnson, Webern's \"rubato\" compressed Mahler's \"'surging and ebbing'\" tempi; this and Webern's dynamics indicated a \"vestigial lyrical subjectivity.\" Webern often set carefully chosen lyric poetry. He related his music not only to nostalgia for the lost family and home of his youth, but also to his Alpinism and fascination with plant aromatics and morphology. He was compared to Mahler in his orchestration and semantic preoccupations (e.g., memory, landscapes, nature, loss, often Catholic mysticism). In Jone, who he met with her husband Humplik via the , Webern found a lyricist who shared his esoteric, natural, and spiritual interests. She provided texts for his late vocal works.\nWebern's and Schoenberg's music distinctively prioritized minor seconds, major sevenths, and minor ninths as noted in 1934 by microtonalist Alois H\u00e1ba. The Kholopov siblings noted the semitone's unifying role by axial inversional symmetry and octave equivalence as interval class 1 (ic1), approaching Allen Forte's generalized pitch-class set analysis. Webern's consistent use of ic1 in cells and sets, often expressed as a wide interval musically, was well noted. Symmetric pitch-interval practices varied in rigor and use by others (e.g., Berg, Schoenberg, Bart\u00f3k, Debussy, Stravinsky; more nascently Mahler, Brahms, Bruckner, Liszt, Wagner). Berg and Webern took symmetric approaches to elements of music beyond pitch. Webern later linked pitches and other parameters in schemes (e.g., fixed or \"frozen\" register).\nRelatively few of Webern's works were published in his lifetime. Amid fascism and Emil Hertzka's passing, this included late as well as early works (in addition to others without opus numbers). His rediscovery prompted many publications, but some early works were unknown until after the work of the Moldenhauers well into the 1980s, obscuring formative facets of his musical identity. Thus when Boulez first oversaw a project to record Webern's music, the results fit on three CDs and the second time, six. An historical edition of his music has remained in progress.\n1899\u20131908: Formative juvenilia and emergence from study.\nWebern published little juvenilia; like Brahms, he was meticulous and self-conscious, revising extensively. His earliest works were mostly \"Lieder\" on works of Richard Dehmel, Gustav Falke, and Theodor Storm. He set seven Ferdinand Avenarius poems on the \"changing moods\" of life and nature (1899\u20131904). Schubert, Schumann, and Wolf were important models. With its brief, potent expressivity and utopianization of the natural world, the (German) Romantic \"Lied\" had a lasting influence on Webern's musical aesthetic. He never abandoned its lyricism, intimacy, and wistful or nostalgic topics, though his music became more abstract, idealized, and introverted.\nWebern memorialized the Preglhof in a diary poem \"An der Preglhof\" and in the tone poem \"Im Sommerwind\" (1904), both after Bruno Wille's idyll. In Webern's \"Sommerwind\", Derrick Puffett found affinities with Strauss's \"Alpensinfonie\", Charpentier's \"Louise\", and Delius's \".\nAt the Preglhof in summer 1905, Webern wrote his tripartite, single-movement string quartet in a highly modified sonata form, likely responding to Schoenberg's Op. 7. He quoted Jakob B\u00f6hme in the preface and mentioned the panels of Segantini's as \" in sketches. Sebastian Wedler argued that this quartet bore the influence of Richard Strauss's \"Also Sprach Zarathustra\" in its germinal three-note motive, opening fugato of its third (development) section, and Nietzschean reading (via eternal recurrence) of Segantini's triptych. In its opening harmonies, Allen Forte and Heinz-Klaus Metzger noted Webern's anticipation of Schoenberg's atonality in Op. 10.\nIn 1906, Schoenberg assigned Webern Bach chorales to harmonize and figure; Webern completed eighteen in a highly chromatic idiom. Then the Passacaglia, Op. 1 (1908) was his graduation piece, and the Op. 2 choral canons soon followed. The passacaglia's chromatic harmonic language and less conventional orchestration distinguished it from prior works; its form foreshadowed those of his later works. Conducting the 1911 Danzig premiere of Op. 1 at the Friedrich-Wilhelm-Sch\u00fctzenhaus, he paired it with Debussy's 1894 \"Pr\u00e9lude \u00e0 l'apr\u00e8s-midi d'un faune\", Ludwig Thuille's 1896 \"Romantische Ouvert\u00fcre\", and Mahler's 1901\u20131904 \"Kindertotenlieder\" in a poorly attended concert. The \"Danziger Zeitung\" critic derided Op. 1 as an \"insane experiment\".\nIn 1908 Webern also began an opera on Maeterlinck's \"Alladine et Palomides\", of which only unfinished sketches remained, and in 1912 he wrote Berg that he had finished one or more scenes for another planned but unrealized opera, \"Die sieben Prinzessinnen\", on Maeterlinck's \"Les Sept Princesses\". He had been an opera enthusiast from his student days. Debussy's \"Pell\u00e9as et M\u00e9lisande\" enraptured him twice in Dec. 1908 Berlin and again in 1911 Vienna. As a vocal coach and opera conductor, he knew the repertoire \"perfectly ... every cut, ... unmarked cadenza, and in the comic operas every theatrical joke\". He \"adored\" Mozart's \"Il Seraglio\" and revered Strauss, predicting \"Salome\" would last. When in high spirits, Webern would sing bits of Lortzing's \"Zar und Zimmermann\", a personal favorite. He expressed interest (to Max Deutsch) in writing an opera pending a good text and adequate time; in 1930, he asked Jone for \"opera texts, or rather dramatic texts\", planning cantatas instead.\n1908\u20131914: Atonality and aphorisms.\nWebern's music, like Schoenberg's, was freely atonal after Op. 2. Some of their and Berg's music from this time was published in \"Der Blaue Reiter\". Schoenberg and Webern were so mutually influential, the former later joked, \"I haven't the slightest idea who I am\". In Op. 5/iii, Webern borrowed from Schoenberg's Op. 10/ii. In Op. 5/iv, he borrowed from Schoenberg's Op. 10/iv setting of \"Ich f\u00fchle luft von anderen planeten\".\nThe first of Webern's innovative and increasingly extremely aphoristic Opp. 5\u201311 (1909\u20131914) radically influenced Schoenberg's Opp. 11/iii and 16\u201317 (and Berg's Opp. 4\u20135). Here, Martin Zenck considered, Webern did not seek \"the new ... in [music of] the past but in the future\". In writing the Op. 9 bagatelles, Webern reflected in 1932, \"I had the feeling that when the twelve notes had all been played the piece was over.\" \"[H]aving freed music from the shackles of tonality,\" Schoenberg wrote, he and his pupils believed \"music could renounce motivic features\". This \"intuitive aesthetic\" arguably proved to be aspirational insofar as motives persisted in their music.\nTwo enduring topics emerged in Webern's work: familial (especially maternal) loss and memory, often involving some religious experience; and abstracted landscapes idealized as spiritual, even pantheistic, (e.g., the Preglhof, the Eastern Alps). Webern explored these ideas explicitly in his Symbolist stage play \"Tot: Sechs Bilder f\u00fcr die B\u00fchne\" (\"Dead: Six Scenes for the Stage\", Oct. 1913). The play comprises six tableaux vivants set in the Alps, over the course of which a mother and father reflect on and come to terms with the loss of their son. The script specifies exact lighting, sounds, delivery, and gestures to match mood, time, and place, with birds, bells, and flowers as important elements of a still, holy world. Webern drew so heavily from Swedenborg's theological doctrine of correspondences, quoting from \"Vera Christiana Religio\" at length, that Schoenberg considered the play unoriginal.\nIt is known that Webern sublimated these concerns into his music, particularly in the case of his Op. 6. Confiding in Berg and Schoenberg, Webern told the latter some about the programmatic narrative for that music in Jan. 1913, as Schoenberg prepared to premiere it at what would become the that March:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first piece is to express my frame of mind ... already sensing the disaster, yet ... maintaining the hope that I would find my mother still alive. It was a beautiful day\u2014for a minute I believed ... nothing had happened. Only during the train ride to Carinthia ... did I learn the truth. The third piece conveys ... the fragrance of the , which I gathered ... in the forest ... and ... laid on the bier. The fourth piece I later entitled . Even today I do not understand my feelings as I walked behind the coffin to the cemetery. ... The evening ... was miraculous. With my wife I went ... again to the cemetery ... . I had the feeling of my mother's ... presence.\nAs Webern's music took on the character of such static dramaticovisual scenes, his pieces frequently culminated in the accumulation and amalgamation (often the developing variation) of compositional material. Fragmented melodies frequently began and ended on weak beats, settled into or emerged from ostinati, and were dynamically and texturally faded, mixed, or contrasted. Tonality became less directional, functional, or narrative than tenuous, spatial, or symbolic as fit Webern's topics and literary settings. Stein thought that \"his compositions should be understood as musical visions\". Oliver Korte traced Webern's to Mahler's \"suspensions\".\nExpanding on Mahler's orchestration, Webern linked colorful, novel, fragile, and intimate sounds, often nearly silent at ppp, to lyrical topics: solo violin to female voice; closed or open voicings, sometimes , to dark or light respectively; compressed range to absence, emptiness, or loneliness; registral expansion to fulfillment, (spiritual) presence, or transcendence; celesta, harp, and glockenspiel to the celestial or ethereal; and trumpet, harp, and string harmonics to angels or heaven.\nWith elements of , neoclassicism, and ironic Romanticism in \"Pierrot lunaire\", Op. 21 (1912), Schoenberg began to distance himself from Webern's and latterly Berg's aphoristic expressionism, which provoked the . Alma recalled Schoenberg telling her and Franz Werfel \"how much he was suffering under the dangerous influence of Webern\", drawing on \"all his strength to extricate himself from it\".\n1914\u20131924: Mid-period \"Lieder\".\nDuring and after World War I (1914\u20131926) Webern worked on some fifty-six songs. He finished thirty-two, ordered into sets (in ways that do not always align with their chronology) as Opp. 12\u201319. Schoenberg's recent vocal music had been motivated by the idea that \"absolute purity\" in composition couldn't be sustained, and Webern took Schoenberg's advice to write songs as a means of composing something more substantial than aphorisms, often making earnest settings of folk, lyric, or spiritual texts. The first of these mid-period was an unfinished setting of a passage (\"In einer lichten Rose ...\") from Dante's \"Paradiso\", Canto XXXI.\nBy comparison to melodic \"atomization\" in Op. 11, Walter Kolneder noted relatively \"long arcs\" melodic writing in Op. 12 and polyphonic part writing to \"control the ... expression\" in Opp. 12\u201316 more generally. \"How much I owe to your \"Pierrot\"\", Webern told Schoenberg after setting Trakl's \"Abendland III\" (Op. 14/iv), in which, distinctly, there was no silence until a pause at the concluding gesture. The contrapuntal procedures and nonstandard ensemble of \"Pierrot\" are both evident in Webern's Opp. 14\u201316.\nSchoenberg \"yearn[ed] for a style for large forms ... to give personal things an objective, general form.\" Berg, Webern, and he had indulged their shared interest in Swedenborgian mysticism and Theosophy since 1906, reading Balzac's \"Louis Lambert\" and \"S\u00e9raph\u00eeta\" and Strindberg's \"Till Damaskus\" and \"Jacob lutte\". Gabriel, protagonist of Schoenberg's semi-autobiographical \"Die Jakobsleiter\" (1914\u20131922, rev. 1944) described a journey: \"whether right, whether left, forwards or backwards, uphill or down \u2013 one must keep on going without asking what lies ahead or behind\", which Webern interpreted as a conceptual metaphor for (twelve-tone) pitch space. Schoenberg later reflected on \"how enthusiastic we were about this.\"\nOn the journey to composition with twelve tones, Webern revised many of his mid-period in the years after their apparent composition but before publication, increasingly prioritizing clarity of pitch relations, even against timbral effects, as Anne C. Shreffler and Felix Meyer described. His and Schoenberg's music had long been marked by its contrapuntal rigor, formal schemes, systematic pitch organization, and rich motivic design, all of which they found in the music of Brahms before them. Webern had written music preoccupied with the idea of dodecaphony since at least the total chromaticism of his Op. 9 bagatelles (1911). and Op. 11 cello pieces (1914). He began preparing these aphoristic works for publication while composing most of his mid-period , which may have reoriented him to his own lyricism.\nThere are twelve-tone sets with repeated notes at the start of Op. 12/i and in some bars of Op. 12/iv, in addition to many ten- and eleven-tone sets throughout Op. 12. Webern wrote to Jalowetz in 1922 about Schoenberg's lectures on \"a new type of motivic work\", one that \"unfolds the entire development of, if I may say so, our technique (harmony, etc.)\". It was \"almost everything that has occupied me for about ten years\", Webern continued. He regarded Schoenberg's transformation of twelve-tone rows as the \"solution\" to their compositional concerns. In Op. 15/iv (1922), Webern first used a tone row (in the voice's opening twelve notes), charted the four basic row forms, and integrated tri- and tetrachords into the harmonic and melodic texture. He systematically used twelve-tone technique for the first time in Op. 16/iv\u2013v (1924).\n1924\u20131945: Formal coherence and expansion.\nWith Schoenberg leaving M\u00f6dling in 1925 and this compositional approach at his disposal, Webern obtained more artistic autonomy and aspired to write in larger forms, expanding on the extreme concentration of expression and material in his earlier music. Until the \"Kinderst\u00fcck\" for piano (1924, intended as one of a set), \"Klavierst\u00fcck\" (1925), and \"Satz\" for string trio (1925), Webern had finished nothing but since a 1914 cello sonata. The 1926\u20131927 String Trio, Op. 20, was his first large-scale non-vocal work in more than a decade. For its 1927 publication, Webern helped Stein write an introduction emphasizing continuity with tradition:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The principle of developing a movement by variation of motives and themes is the same as with the classical masters ... [only] varied more radically here ... . One 'tone series' furnishes the basic material ... . The parts are composed in a mosaic-like manner ...\nSchoenberg exploited combinatorial properties of particular tone rows, but Webern focused on prior aspects of a row's internal organization. He exploited small, invariant pitch subsets (or partitions) symmetrically derived via inversion, retrograde, or both (retrograde inversion). He understood his compositional (and precompositional) work with reference to ideas about growth, morphology, and unity that he found represented in Goethe's \"Urpflanze\" and in Goethean science more generally.\nWebern's large-scale, non-vocal music in more traditional genres, written from 1926 to 1940, has been celebrated as his most rigorous and abstract music. Yet he always wrote his music and tried his new compositional procedures with concern for (or at least some latent reference to) expressivity and representation. In sketches for his Op. 22 quartet, Webern conceived of his themes in programmatic association with his experiences\u2014as an \"outlook into the highest region\" or a \"coolness of early spring (Anninger, first flora, primroses, anemones, pasqueflowers)\", for example. Studying his compositional materials and sketches, Bailey Puffett wrote,&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... [Webern] seems perhaps not ... a prodigy whose music was the result of reasoned calculations [but a composer] who used his row tables as Stravinsky used his piano, to reveal wonderful surprises ... [like] he found on his walks in the Alps. While writing the Concerto for Nine Instruments, Op. 24, Webern was inspired by the Sator square, which is like a twelve-tone matrix. He concluded his \"\" with this magic square.\nIn Webern's late cantatas and songs, George Rochberg observed, \"the principles of 'the structural spatial dimension' ... join[ed] forces with lyrico-dramatic demands\". Specifically in his cantatas, Bailey Puffett wrote, Webern synthesized the rigorous style of his mature instrumental works with the word painting of his \"Lieder\" on an orchestral scale. Webern qualified the apparent connection between his cantatas and Bach's as general and referred to connections between the second cantata and the music of the Franco-Flemish School. His textures became somewhat denser yet more homophonic at the surface through nonetheless contrapuntal polyphonic means. In Op. 31/i he alternated lines and points, culminating twice in twelve-note simultaneities.\nAt his death he left sketches for the movement of an apparent third cantata (1944\u20131945), first planned as a concerto, setting \"Das Sonnenlicht spricht\" from Jone's \"Lumen\" cycle.\nArrangements and orchestrations.\nIn his youth (1903), Webern orchestrated five or more Schubert for an appropriately Schubertian orchestra (strings and pairs of flutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons, and horns). Among these were \"Der Vollmond Strahlt auf Bergesh\u00f6hn\" (the Romanze from \"Rosamunde\"), \"Tr\u00e4nenregen\" (from \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\"), \"Der Wegweiser\" (from \"Winterreise\"), \"Du bist die Ruh\", and \"Ihr Bild\".\nAfter attending Hugo Wolf's funeral and memorial concert (1903), he arranged three for a larger orchestra, adding brass, harp, and percussion to the Schubertian orchestra. He chose \"Lebe wohl\", \"Der Knabe und das Immlein\", and \"Denk es, o Seele\", of which only the latter was finished or wholly survived.\nFor Schoenberg's Society for Private Musical Performances in 1921, Webern arranged, among other music, the 1888 \"Schatz-Walzer\" (\"Treasure Waltz\") of Johann Strauss II's \"Der Zigeunerbaron\" (\"The Gypsy Baron\") for string quartet, harmonium, and piano.\nIn 1924 Webern arranged Liszt's \"Arbeiterchor\" (\"Workers' Chorus\", c. 1847\u20131848) for bass solo, mixed chorus, and large orchestra; thus Liszt's work was finally premi\u00e8red when Webern conducted the first full-length concert of the Austrian Association of Workers Choir (13 and 14 March 1925). A review in the \"Wiener Zeitung\" (28 March 1925) read \"neu in jedem Sinne, frisch, unverbraucht, durch ihn zieht die Jugend, die Freude\" (\"new in every respect, fresh, vital, pervaded by youth and joy\"). The text (in English translation) read in part: \"Let us have the adorned spades and scoops,/Come along all, who wield a sword or pen,/Come here ye, industrious, brave and strong/All who create things great or small.\"\nIn orchestrating the six-voice ricercar from Bach's \"Musical Offering\", Webern timbrally defined the internal organization (or latent subsets) of the Bach's subject. Joseph N. Straus argued that Webern (and other modernists) effectively recomposed earlier music, \"projecting motivic density\" onto tradition. After more conservatively orchestrating two of Schubert's 1824 \"Six German Dances\" on UE commission in 1931, he wrote Schoenberg:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I took pains to remain on the solid ground of classical ideas of instrumentation, yet to place them into the service of \"our\" idea, i.e., as a means toward the greatest possible clarification of thought and context.\nReception, influence, and legacy.\nWebern's music was generally considered difficult by performers and inaccessible by listeners alike. \"To the limited extent that it was regarded\", Milton Babbitt observed, it represented \"the ultimate in hermetic, specialized, and idiosyncratic composition\".\nComposers and performers first tended to take Webern's work, with its residual post-Romanticism and initial expressionism, in mostly formalist directions with a certain literalism, departing from Webern's own practices and preferences in extrapolating from elements of his late style. This became known as post-Webernism. A richer, more historically informed understanding of Webern's music and his performance practice began to emerge in the latter half of the 20th century as scholars, especially the Moldenhauers, sought and archived sketches, letters, lectures, recordings, and other articles of Webern's (and others') estates.\nIn the immediate aftermath of World War II, Webern's marginalization under \"Gleichschaltung\" was appreciated, but his pan-Germanism, politics, and social attitudes (especially regarding antisemitism) were not as known or often mooted. For many, like Stravinsky, Webern never compromised his artistic identity and values, but for others the matter was less simple.\nPerformance practice.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEric Simon ... related ... : 'Webern was obviously upset by Klemperer's sober time-beating. ... [T]o the concert master [he] said: \"... the phrase there ... must be played \"Tiiiiiiiiiii-aaaaaaaaa\".\" Klemperer, overhearing ... said sarcastically: \"... [N]ow you probably know exactly how you have to play the passage!\"' Peter Stadlen ... [described Webern]'s reaction after the performance: ... '\"A high note, a low note, a note in the middle\u2014like the music of a madman!\"'\nThe Moldenhauers detailed Webern's reaction to Otto Klemperer's 1936 Vienna performance of his Symphony (1928), Op. 21, which Webern played on piano for Klemperer \"with ... intensity and fanaticism ... passionately\".\nWebern notated articulations, dynamics, , and other musical expressions, coaching performers to adhere to these instructions but urging them to maximize expressivity through musical phrasing. This was supported by personal accounts, letters, and extant recordings of Schubert's \"Deutsche T\u00e4nze\" (arr. Webern) and Berg's Violin Concerto under Webern's direction. Ian Pace considered Peter Stadlen's account of Webern's coaching for Op. 27 as indicating Webern's \"desire for an extremely flexible, highly diaphanous, and almost expressively overloaded approach\".\nThis aspect of Webern's work was often overlooked in his immediate post-war reception, which was roughly coterminous with the early music revival. Stravinsky engaged with Webern and Renaissance music in his later music; his amanuensis Craft performed Webern as well as Monteverdi, Sch\u00fctz, Gabrieli, and Tallis. Many musicians performed \"music that is at the same time old and new\", as Nicholas Cook and Anthony Pople glossed it and as Richard Taruskin addressed. J. Peter Burkholder noted early and new music audience overlap.\nFelix Galimir of the Galimir Quartet told \"The New York Times\" (1981): \"Berg asked for enormous correctness in the performance of his music. But the moment this was achieved, he asked for a very Romanticized treatment. Webern, you know, was also terribly Romantic\u2014as a person, and when he conducted. Everything was almost over-sentimentalized. It was entirely different from what we have been led to believe today. His music should be played very freely, very emotionally.\"\nContemporaries.\nArtists.\nMany artists portrayed Webern (often from life) in their work. Kokoschka (1912), Schiele (1917 and 1918), B. F. Dolbin (1920 and 1924), and Rederer (1934) made drawings of him. Oppenheimer (1908), Kokoschka (1914), and Tom von Dreger (1934) painted him. Stumpp made two lithographs of him (1927). Humplik twice sculpted him (1927 and 1928). Jone variously portrayed him (1943 lithograph, several posthumous drawings, 1945 oil painting). Rederer made a large woodcut of him (1964).\nMusicians.\nSchoenberg admired Webern's concision, writing in the foreword to Op. 9 upon its 1924 publication: \"to express a novel in a single gesture, joy in a single breath\u2014such concentration can only be present in proportion to the absence of self-indulgence\". But Berg joked about Webern's brevity. Hendrik Andriessen found Webern's music \"pitiful\" in this regard. In their second (1925) \"Abbruch\" self-parody, \"Anbruch\" editors jested that \"Webern's\" (Mahler's) \"extensive\" \"Symphony of a Thousand\" had to be abbreviated.\nFelix Khuner remembered Webern was \"just as revolutionary\" as Schoenberg. In 1927, Hans Mersmann wrote that \"Webern's music shows the frontiers and ... limits of a development which tried to outgrow Schoenberg's work.\"\nIdentifying with Webern as a \"solitary soul\" amid 1940s wartime fascism, Dallapiccola independently and somewhat singularly found inspiration especially in Webern's lesser-known mid-period \"Lieder\", blending its ethereal qualities and Viennese expressionism with . Stunned by Webern's Op. 24 at its 1935 ISCM festival world premi\u00e8re under Jalowetz in Prague, Dallapiccola's impression was of unsurpassable \"aesthetic and stylistic unity\". He dedicated \"Sex carmina alcaei\" \"with humility and devotion\" to Webern, who he met in 1942 through Schlee, coming away surprised at Webern's emphasis on \"our great Central European tradition.\" Dallapiccola's 1953 \"Goethe-lieder\" especially recall Webern's Op. 16 in style.\nIn 1947, Schoenberg remembered and stood firm with Berg and Webern despite rumors of the latter's having \"fallen into the Nazi trap\": \"... [F]orget all that might have ... divided us. For there remains for our future what could only have begun to be realized posthumously: One will have to consider us three\u2014Berg, Schoenberg, and Webern\u2014as a unity, a oneness, because we believed in ideals ... with intensity and selfless devotion; nor would we ever have been deterred from them, even if those who tried might have succeeded in confounding us.\" For Krasner this put \"'Vienna's Three Modern Classicists' into historical perspective\". He summarized it as \"what bound us together was our idealism.\"\n1947\u20131950s: (Re)discovery and post-Webernism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebern's death should be a day of mourning for any receptive musician. We must hail ... this great ... a real hero. Doomed to ... failure in a deaf world of ignorance and indifference he ... kept on cutting ... dazzling diamonds, the mines of which he had ... perfect knowledge.\nStravinsky lauded Webern in \"die Reihe\"\nAfter World War II, there was unprecedented engagement with Webern's music. It came to represent a universally or generally valid, systematic, and compellingly logical model of new composition, especially at the . Ren\u00e9 Leibowitz performed, promulgated, and published \"Schoenberg et son \u00e9cole\"; Adorno, Herbert Eimert, Scherchen, and others contributed. Composers and students listened in a quasi-religious trance to Peter Stadlen's 1948 Op. 27 performance.\nWebern's gradual innovations in schematic organization of pitch, rhythm, register, timbre, dynamics, articulation, and melodic contour; his generalization of imitative techniques such as canon and fugue; and his inclination toward athematicism, abstraction, and lyricism variously informed and oriented European and Canadian, typically serial or avant-garde composers (e.g., Messiaen, Boulez, Stockhausen, Luigi Nono, Pousseur, Ligeti, Sylvano Bussotti, Bruno Maderna, Bernd Alois Zimmermann, Barbara Pentland). Eimert and Stockhausen devoted a special issue of \"die Reihe\" to Webern's in 1955. UE published his lectures in 1960.\nIn the US, Babbitt and initially Rochberg found more in Schoenberg's twelve-tone practice. Elliott Carter's and Aaron Copland's critical ambivalence was marked by a certain enthusiasm and fascination nonetheless. Craft fruitfully reintroduced Stravinsky to Webern's music, without which Stravinsky's late works would have taken different shape. Stravinsky staked his contract with Columbia Records to see Webern's then known music first both recorded and widely distributed. Stravinsky lauded Webern's \"not yet canonized art\" in 1959.\nAmong the New York School, John Cage and Morton Feldman first met in Carnegie Hall's lobby, ecstatic after a performance of Op. 21 by Dimitri Mitropoulos and the New York Philharmonic. They cited the effect of its \"sound\" on their music. They later sung the praises of Christian Wolff as \"our Webern\".\nGottfried Michael Koenig suggested some early interest in Webern's music may have been that its concision and apparent simplicity facilitated didactic musical analysis. Robert Beyer criticized serial approaches to Webern's music as reductive, narrowly focused more on Webern's procedures than his music while neglecting timbre in their typical selection of Opp. 27\u201328. Webern's music sounded like \"a Mondrian canvas\", \"crude and unfinished\", to Karel Goeyvaerts. Wolf-Eberhard von Lewinski criticized some Darmstadt music as \"acoustically absurd [if] visually amusing\" (\"Darmst\u00e4dter Tagblatt\", 1959); a \"Der Kurier\" article of his was headlined \"Meager modern music\u2014only interesting to look at\".\n1950s onward: Beyond (late) Webern.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[H]ermetic constructivism seems infused with intense emotion, ... diffused across the ... surface of the music. Gone is the mono-directional thrust of Classical and Romantic music; in its place a world of rotations and reflections, opening myriad paths for the listener to trace through textures of luminous clarity yet beguiling ambiguity.\nGeorge Benjamin described Webern's Op. 21. Many noted floating, spatial, static, or suspended qualities in some of Webern's music. Johnson noted spatial metaphors.\nThrough late 1950s onward, Webern's work reached musicians as far removed as Frank Zappa, yet many post-war European musicians and scholars had already begun to look beyond as much as \"back\" at Webern in his context. Nono advocated for a more humanistic understanding of Webern's music.\nAdorno lectured that in the prevailing climate \"artists like Berg or Webern would hardly be able to make it\" (\"The Aging of the New Music\", 1954). Against the \"static idea of music\" and \"total rationalization\" of the \"pointillist constructivists,\" he advocated for more subjectivity, citing \"\u00dcber das Geistige in der Kunst\" (1911), in which Wassily Kandinsky wrote: \"Schoenberg's [expressionist] music leads us to where musical experience is a matter not of the ear, but of the soul\u2014and from this point begins the music of the future.\"\nIn the 1960s, many began to describe Webern and his like as a \"dead end\". Rochberg felt \"Webern's music leaves his followers no new, unexplored territory.\" Stravinsky judged Webern \"too original ... too purely himself. ... [T]he entire world had to imitate him [and] fail; of course it will blame Webern\"; he blamed post-Webernism: \"[T]he music now being charged to his name can neither diminish his strength nor stale his perfection.\"\nIn \"Votre Faust\" (1960\u20131968), Pousseur quoted and his protagonist Henri analyzed Webern's Op. 31. Yet there were already several elements of late or postmodernism (e.g., eclecticism of historical styles, mobile form, polyvalent roles). This coincided with a wider rapprochement with Berg, whose example Pousseur cited, from whose music he also quoted, and whose writings he translated into French in the 1950s. Boulez was \"thrilled\" by Berg's \"universe ... never completed, always in expansion\u2014a world so ... inexhaustible,\" referring to the rigorously organized, only partly twelve-tone Chamber Concerto.\nEngaging with Webern's atonal works by some contrast to earlier post-Webernism, both Ferneyhough and Lachenmann expanded upon and went further than Webern in attention to the smallest of details and the use of ever more radically extended techniques. Ferneyhough's 1967 Sonatas for string quartet included atonal sections much in the style of Webern's Op. 9, yet more intensely sustained. In a comparison to his own 1969 \"Air\", Lachenmann wrote of \"a melody made of a \"single\" note ... in the viola part\" of Webern's Op. 10/iv (mm. 2\u20134) amid \"the mere ruins of the traditional linguistic context,\" observing that \"the pure tone, now living in tonal exile, has in this new context no aesthetic advantage over pure noise\" (\"Hearing [H\u00f6ren] is Defenseless\u2014without Listening [H\u00f6ren]\", 1985).\nEastern Europe.\nIn Eastern Europe, the Second Viennese School's music represented a professionally dangerous but sometimes exciting or inspiring alternative to socialist realism. Their influence on composers behind the Iron Curtain was mediated by anti-fascist and -German sentiment as well as anti-formalist cultural policies and Cold War separation. Ligeti lamented the separation and left in 1956, noting that \"after Bart\u00f3k hardly any grass could grow\".\nEastern Bloc.\nWebern's influence predominated after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, bearing on P\u00e1l Kadosa, Endre Szerv\u00e1nszky, and Gy\u00f6rgy Kurt\u00e1g. Among Czechs, Pavel Blatn\u00fd attended the and wrote music with serial techniques in the late 1960s. He returned to tonality in Brno and was rewarded. Marek Kopelent discovered the Second Viennese as an editor and was particularly taken by Webern. Kopelent was blacklisted for his music and despaired, unable to attend international performances of his work.\nSoviet Russia.\nOfficial Soviet Russian condemnation eased in the post-Stalinist Khrushchev Thaw with the rehabilitation of some affected by the Zhdanov Doctrine. Sheet music and recordings entered via journalists, friends, family (e.g., from Nicolas to Sergei Slonimsky), and especially composers and musicians (e.g., Igor Blazhkov, G\u00e9rard Fr\u00e9my, Alexei Lubimov, Maria Yudina), who traveled more. Stationed in Zossen as a military band arranger (1955\u20131958), Yuri Kholopov risked arrest for obtaining scores in West Berlin and from the Leipzig office of Schott Music.\nPhilip Herschkowitz, poverty-stricken, taught privately in Moscow with cautious emphasis on Beethoven and the tradition from which Webern emerged. His pupil Nikolai Karetnikov taped Glenn Gould's 1957 Moscow Conservatory performance of Webern's Op. 27. In practice like that of Webern, Karetnikov derived the tone row of his Symphony No. 4 from motives as small as two notes related by semitone.\nIn \"Soviet Music\", Marcel Rubin criticized \"Webern and His Followers\" (1959), by contrast to Berg and Schoenberg, for going too far. Alfred Schnittke complained in an open letter (1961) of composers' restricted education. Through Grigory Shneyerson's anti-formalist \"On Music Living and Dead\" (1960) and Johannes Paul Thilman's anti-modernist \"On the Dodecaphonic Method of Composition\" (1958), many (e.g., Eduard Artemyev, Victor Ekimovsky, Vladimir Martynov, Boris Tischenko) ironically learned more about what had been and even was still forbidden. Kruschchev warned, \"dodecaphonic music, music of noises ... this cacophonic music we totally reject. Our people cannot include such trash\".\nThrough Andrei Volkonsky, Lydia Davydova recalled, Schoenberg's and Webern's music came to Russia alongside Renaissance and early Baroque music. Tischenko remembered that in the 1960s, Volkonsky \"was the first swallow of the avant-garde. [T]hose who came after him ... already followed in his tracks. I consider [him] the discoverer.\" Edison Denisov described the 1960s as his \"second conservatory\", crediting Volkonsky not only for introducing Webern, but also Gesualdo.\nThis tolerance did not survive the Brezhnev Stagnation. Volkonsky emigrated in 1973, Herschkowitz in 1987, and of Khrennikov's Seven (1979), Denisov, Elena Firsova, Sofia Gubaidulina, Dmitri Smirnov, and Viktor Suslin eventually emigrated.\nDance.\nMany choreographers set Webern's music to dance. Martha Graham and George Balanchine choreographed several works in \"Episodes I\" and \"II\" respectively (1959) as a New York City Ballet \"novelty\". John Cranko set \"Opus 1\" (1965) to Webern's Passacaglia, Op. 1. Rudi van Dantzig choreographed Webern's music in \"Ogenblikken\" (1968) and \"Antwoord gevend\" (1980); Glen Tetley in \"Praeludium\" (1978) and \"Contredanses\" (1979); Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker alongside that of Beethoven and Schnittke in \"Erts\" (1992); and Trisha Brown in \"Twelve Ton Rose\" (1996). Ji\u0159\u00ed Kyli\u00e1n set only Webern's music in \"No More Play\" (1988) and \"Sweet Dreams\" (1990), more often pairing it with that of other composers in several ballets (1984\u20131995).\nSince the 1980s: Reappraisals and historiography.\nContested canonization.\nWebern's legacy, contested in the \"serial wars\", remained subject to polemic vicissitudes. Musicologists quarreled amid the \"Restoration of the 1980s\", as Martin Kaltenecker termed a paradigm shift from structure to perception within musicological discourse. Charles Rosen scorned \"historical criticism ... avoiding any serious engagement with a work or style ... one happens not to like\". Andreas Holzer warned of \"post-factual tendencies\". Pamela M. Potter advised considering \"the complexity of ... day-to-day existence\" under Nazism, partly in considering the relevance of composers' politics to their canonic status. Meanwhile Allen Forte and Bailey Puffett formally analyzed Webern's atonal and twelve-tone respectively.\nTim Page noted less formalist readings of Webern's work at his 1983 birth centenary. The occasion \"went almost unmarked\", Glenn Watkins observed in the United States, \"a fate hardly imaginable for Berg [on his] 1985 [centenary]\". After Webern's mid-century \"meteoric ascension and ultimate canonization\", Watkins described \"quick shifts of interest\" tapering to neglect. Webern's music was established but infrequent in standard (repeating) orchestral repertoire. His was played at the Venice Festival of Contemporary Music (1983), Juilliard (1995), and the Vienna Festival (2004), echoing six international festivals in his name (1962\u20131978). In some obscurity (1941 or 1942), Webern had been quietly sure that \"in the future even the postman will whistle my melodies!\" But many did not acquire such an aesthetic taste. He remained polarizing and provocative.\nNoting this aspect of his reception, Johnson described Webern's \"almost unique position in the canon of Western composers\". Christian Thorau argued Webern's innovations impeded his \"\". By contrast to the \"concert canon\", Shreffler considered Webern's better standing in a \"separate canon\" of technical and formal innovation. Burkholder argued that music of the \"historicist tradition\", including Webern's, was secure in \"a musical museum\", \"for that is what the concert hall has become\". Mark Berry described Webern, already among Boulez's \"big five\", as one of five \"canonical pillars of classic historical early twentieth-century modernism\". David H. Miller suggested Webern \"achieved a certain kind of acceptance and canonization\".\nTaruskin prioritized audience reception, not \"musical utopianism\". He excoriated the Second Viennese School's \"idiosyncratic view of the past\", linking Webern and Adler to Eduard Hanslick and \"neo-Hegelian\" Franz Brendel; he criticized historical determinism, \"the natural ally of totalitarian politics.\" Martin Scherzinger noted that Taruskin's criticisms sought \"active complicity with undesirable politics\". Noted for his polemicism and revisionism, Taruskin described his \"dubious reputation\" on Webern and New Music and was praised and criticized by many. For Franklin Cox, Taruskin was an unreliable historian who opposed the Second Viennese School's \"progressivist historicist\" emancipation of the dissonance with a \"reactionary historicist\" ideology of \"tonal restoration\".\nHistorical\u2013conceptual continuities.\nPascal Decroupet observed an unquestioned \"canon of polarizations\" in prior histories. Johnson noted the \"co-existence and interaction of diverse stylistic practices\" with \"remarkable similarities\", challenging \"conservative and progressive\" campism and decentering musicology's technical periodizations via the of global modernity. Thus he ventured continuity between the \"broken homeland\" of Webern's Opp. 12\u201318 and the \"broken pastoral\" of Monteverdi's \"L'Orfeo\" and Vaughan Williams' \"Pastoral\" Symphony; between Webern's \"evanescent images of musical fullness\" and the brief, fragmentary nature of Chopin's Op. 28, which Schumann likened to \"ruins\".\nBuilding on Shreffler's and Felix Meyer's work, including sketch studies, as institutions like the Paul-Sacher-Stiftung acquired and made the Moldenhauers' estate accessible, Johnson noted Webern's concern for the relation between form and content, and pursued a hermeneutics of Webern's (and Mahler's) music. (He argued that Webern, following Mahler, fundamentally treated nature not merely as something to express or to represent musically, but as a deeper formal principle or structural model, yielding inseparably richer musical expression.)\nWedler argued by antinomy and demythologization that the complex, seemingly contradictory reception of Webern and his music stemmed from this unity of opposites imaginatively mediated within Webern's underlying aesthetic of musical lyricism (or musical poetry, as Schoenberg called it). Adorno termed it \"absolute lyricism\", perhaps (Wedler suggested) after Hegel, who saw concentration as the lyric's essence, permitting \"the greatest wealth of steps and nuances\" to dialectically resolve the dilemma between \"almost dumb conciseness\" and \"the eloquent clarity of a [fully developed] idea\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65677", "revid": "41475455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65677", "title": "Sumerian language", "text": "Language of ancient Sumer and Babylon\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nSumerian () was the language of ancient Sumer. It is one of the oldest attested languages, dating back to at least 2900 BC. It is a local language isolate that was spoken in ancient Mesopotamia, in the area that is now modern-day Iraq.\nSumerian is read from left to right, from the top, however early inscriptions were read top to bottom from the right. \nAkkadian, a Semitic language, gradually replaced Sumerian as the primary spoken language in the area c.\u20092000\u00a0BC (the exact date is debated), but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Akkadian-speaking Mesopotamian states, such as Assyria and Babylonia, until the 1st century AD. Thereafter, it seems to have fallen into obscurity until the 19th century, when Assyriologists began deciphering the cuneiform inscriptions and excavated tablets that had been left by its speakers.\nIn spite of its extinction, Sumerian exerted a significant influence on the languages of the area. The cuneiform script, originally used for Sumerian, was widely adopted by numerous regional languages such as Akkadian, Elamite, Eblaite, Hittite, Hurrian, Luwian and Urartian; it similarly inspired the Old Persian alphabet which was used to write the eponymous language. The influence was perhaps the greatest on Akkadian, whose grammar and vocabulary were significantly influenced by Sumerian.\nStages.\nThe history of written Sumerian can be divided into several periods:\nThe pictographic writing system used during the \"Proto-literate period\" (3200 BC \u2013 3000 BC), corresponding to the Uruk III and Uruk IV periods in archeology, was still so rudimentary that there remains some scholarly disagreement about whether the language written with it is Sumerian at all, although it has been argued that there are some, albeit still very rare, cases of phonetic indicators and spelling that show this to be the case. The texts from this period are mostly administrative; there are also a number of sign lists, which were apparently used for the training of scribes.\nThe next period, \"Archaic Sumerian\" (3000 BC \u2013 2500 BC), is the first stage of inscriptions that indicate grammatical elements, so the identification of the language is certain. It includes some administrative texts and sign lists from Ur (c. 2800 BC). Texts from Shuruppak and Abu Salabikh from 2600 to 2500 BC (the so-called Fara period or Early Dynastic Period IIIa) are the first to span a greater variety of genres, including not only administrative texts and sign lists, but also incantations, legal and literary texts (including proverbs and early versions of the famous works \"The Instructions of Shuruppak\" and \"The Kesh temple hymn\"). However, the spelling of grammatical elements remains optional, making the interpretation and linguistic analysis of these texts difficult.\nThe \"Old Sumerian period\" (2500\u20132350 BC) is the first one from which well-understood texts survive. It corresponds mostly to the last part of the Early Dynastic period (ED IIIb) and specifically to the First Dynasty of Lagash, from where the overwhelming majority of surviving texts come. The sources include important royal inscriptions with historical content as well as extensive administrative records. Sometimes included in the Old Sumerian stage is also the \"Old Akkadian\" period (c. 2350 BC \u2013 c. 2200 BC), during which Mesopotamia, including Sumer, was united under the rule of the Akkadian Empire. At this time Akkadian functioned as the primary official language, but texts in Sumerian (primarily administrative) did continue to be produced as well.\nThe first phase of the \"Neo-Sumerian period\" corresponds to the time of Gutian rule in Mesopotamia; the most important sources come from the autonomous Second Dynasty of Lagash, especially from the rule of Gudea, which has produced extensive royal inscriptions. The second phase corresponds to the unification of Mesopotamia under the Third Dynasty of Ur, which oversaw a \"renaissance\" in the use of Sumerian throughout Mesopotamia, using it as its sole official written language. There is a wealth of texts greater than from any preceding time \u2013 besides the extremely detailed and meticulous administrative records, there are numerous royal inscriptions, legal documents, letters and incantations. In spite of the dominant position of written Sumerian during the Ur III dynasty, it is controversial to what extent it was actually spoken or had already gone extinct in most parts of its empire. Some facts have been interpreted as suggesting that many scribes and even the royal court actually used Akkadian as their main spoken and native language. On the other hand, evidence has been adduced to the effect that Sumerian continued to be spoken natively and even remained dominant as an everyday language in Southern Babylonia, including Nippur and the area to its south.\nBy the \"Old Babylonian period\" (c. 2000 \u2013 c. 1600 BC), Akkadian had clearly supplanted Sumerian as a spoken language in nearly all of its original territory, whereas Sumerian continued its existence as a liturgical and classical language for religious, artistic and scholarly purposes. In addition, it has been argued that Sumerian persisted as a spoken language at least in a small part of Southern Mesopotamia (Nippur and its surroundings) at least until about 1900 BC and possibly until as late as 1700 BC. Nonetheless, it seems clear that by far the majority of scribes writing in Sumerian in this point were not native speakers and errors resulting from their Akkadian mother tongue become apparent. For this reason, this period as well as the remaining time during which Sumerian was written are sometimes referred to as the \"Post-Sumerian\" period. The written language of administration, law and royal inscriptions continued to be Sumerian in the undoubtedly Semitic-speaking successor states of Ur III during the so-called Isin-Larsa period (c. 2000 BC \u2013 c. 1750 BC). The Old Babylonian Empire, however, mostly used Akkadian in inscriptions, sometimes adding Sumerian versions.\nThe Old Babylonian period, especially its early part, has produced extremely numerous and varied Sumerian literary texts: myths, epics, hymns, prayers, wisdom literature and letters. In fact, nearly all preserved Sumerian religious and wisdom literature and the overwhelming majority of surviving manuscripts of Sumerian literary texts in general can be dated to that time, and it is often seen as the \"classical age\" of Sumerian literature. Conversely, far more literary texts on tablets surviving from the Old Babylonian period are in Sumerian than in Akkadian, even though that time is viewed as the classical period of Babylonian culture and language. However, it has sometimes been suggested that many or most of these \"Old Babylonian Sumerian\" texts may be copies of works that were originally composed in the preceding Ur III period or earlier, and some copies or fragments of known compositions or literary genres have indeed been found in tablets of Neo-Sumerian and Old Sumerian provenance. In addition, some of the first bilingual Sumerian\u2013Akkadian lexical lists are preserved from that time (although the lists were still usually monolingual and Akkadian translations did not become common until the late Middle Babylonian period) and there are also grammatical texts\u00a0\u2013 essentially bilingual paradigms listing Sumerian grammatical forms and their postulated Akkadian equivalents.\nAfter the Old Babylonian period or, according to some, as early as 1700 BC, the active use of Sumerian declined. Scribes did continue to produce texts in Sumerian at a more modest scale, but generally with interlinear Akkadian translations and only part of the literature known in the Old Babylonian period continued to be copied after its end around 1600 BC. During the Middle Babylonian period, approximately from 1600 to 1000 BC, the Kassite rulers continued to use Sumerian in many of their inscriptions, but Akkadian seems to have taken the place of Sumerian as the primary language of texts used for the training of scribes and their Sumerian itself acquires an increasingly artificial and Akkadian-influenced form. In some cases a text may not even have been meant to be read in Sumerian; instead, it may have functioned as a prestigious way of \"encoding\" Akkadian via Sumerograms (cf. Japanese kanbun). Nonetheless, the study of Sumerian and copying of Sumerian texts remained an integral part of scribal education and literary culture of Mesopotamia and surrounding societies influenced by it and it retained that role until the eclipse of the tradition of cuneiform literacy itself in the beginning of the Common Era. The most popular genres for Sumerian texts after the Old Babylonian period were incantations, liturgical texts and proverbs; among longer texts, the classics \"Lugal-e\" and \"An-gim\" were most commonly copied.\nOf the 29 royal inscriptions of the late second millennium BC Second Dynasty of Isin about half were in Sumerian, described as \"hypersophisticated classroom Sumerian\".\nClassification.\nSumerian is a language isolate. At one time it was widely held to be an Indo-European language, but that view has been almost universally rejected. Since decipherment began in the early 20th century, scholars have tried to relate Sumerian to a wide variety of languages. Because of its prestige as the first attested written language, proposals for linguistic affinity often have a nationalistic flavour. Attempts have been made without success to link Sumerian with a range of widely disparate groups such as Indo-European, Austroasiatic, Dravidian, Uralic, Sino-Tibetan, Bolgar and Turkic (the last being promoted by Turkish nationalists as part of the Sun language theory). Additionally, long-range proposals have attempted to include Sumerian in broad macrofamilies, often including other notable isolates like Basque or small families like Koreanic. Such proposals enjoy virtually no support among modern linguists, Sumerologists, or Assyriologists, and are typically seen as fringe theories due to their unverifiability.\nIt has also been suggested that the Sumerian language descended from a late prehistoric creole language. However, no conclusive evidence beyond a handful of typological features can be found to support this view. A more widespread hypothesis posits a Proto-Euphratean language family that preceded Sumerian in Mesopotamia and exerted an areal influence on it, especially in the form of polysyllabic words that appear \"un-Sumerian\"\u2014making them suspect of being loanwords\u2014and are not traceable to any other known language family. There is little speculation as to the affinities of this hypothetical substratum language, or these languages, and it is thus best treated as unclassified. Other researchers disagree with the assumption of a single substratum language and argue that several languages are involved. A related proposal by Gordon Whittaker is that the language of the proto-literary texts from the Late Uruk period (c. 3350\u20133100 BC) is really an early extinct branch of Indo-European language which he terms \"Euphratic\" which somehow emerged long before the accepted timeline for the spread of Indo-European into West Asia, though this is rejected by mainstream opinion which accepts Sumerian as a language isolate.\nWriting system.\nDevelopment.\nPictographic proto-writing was used starting in c. 3300 BC. It is unclear what underlying language it encoded, if any. By c. 2800 BC, some tablets began using syllabic elements that clearly indicated a relation to the Sumerian language. Around 2600 BC, cuneiform symbols were developed using a wedge-shaped stylus to impress the shapes into wet clay. This \"cuneiform\" (\"wedge-shaped\") mode of writing co-existed with the proto-cuneiform archaic mode. Deimel (1922) lists 870 signs used in the Early Dynastic IIIa period (26th century). In the same period the large set of logographic signs had been simplified into a logosyllabic script comprising several hundred signs. Rosengarten (1967) lists 468 signs used in Sumerian (pre-Sargonian) Lagash.\nThe cuneiform script was adapted to Akkadian writing beginning in the mid-third millennium. Over the long period of bi-lingual overlap of active Sumerian and Akkadian usage the two languages influenced each other, as reflected in numerous loanwords and even word order changes.\nTransliteration.\nDepending on the context, a cuneiform sign can be read either as one of several possible logograms (each of which corresponds to a word in the Sumerian spoken language), as a phonetic syllable (V, VC, CV, or CVC), or as a determinative (a marker of semantic category, such as occupation or place). (See the article Cuneiform.) Some Sumerian logograms were written with multiple cuneiform signs. These logograms are called \"diri\"-spellings, after the logogram \ud808\udedb\ud808\udc00 \"DIRI\" which is written with the signs \ud808\udedb \"SI\" and \ud808\udc00 \"A\". The text transliteration of a tablet will show just the logogram, such as the word \"dirig\", not the separate component signs.\nNot all epigraphists are equally reliable, and before publication of an important treatment of a text, scholars will often arrange to collate the published transliteration against the actual tablet, to see if any signs, especially broken or damaged signs, should be represented differently.\nOur knowledge of the readings of Sumerian signs is based, to a great extent, on lexical lists made for Akkadian speakers, where they are expressed by means of syllabic signs. The established readings were originally based on lexical lists from the Neo-Babylonian Period, which were found in the 19th century; in the 20th century, earlier lists from the Old Babylonian Period were published and some researchers in the 21st century have switched to using readings from them. There is also variation in the degree to which so-called \"Auslauts\" or \"amissable consonants\" (morpheme-final consonants that stopped being pronounced at one point or another in the history of Sumerian) are reflected in the transliterations. This article generally used the versions with expressed Auslauts.\nHistoriography.\nThe key to reading logosyllabic cuneiform came from the Behistun inscription, a trilingual cuneiform inscription written in Old Persian, Elamite and Akkadian. (In a similar manner, the key to understanding Egyptian hieroglyphs was the bilingual [Greek and Egyptian with the Egyptian text in two scripts] Rosetta stone and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion's transcription in 1822.)\nIn 1838 Henry Rawlinson, building on the 1802 work of Georg Friedrich Grotefend, was able to decipher the Old Persian section of the Behistun inscriptions, using his knowledge of modern Persian. When he recovered the rest of the text in 1843, he and others were gradually able to translate the Elamite and Akkadian sections of it, starting with the 37 signs he had deciphered for the Old Persian. Meanwhile, many more cuneiform texts were coming to light from archaeological excavations, mostly in the Semitic Akkadian language, which were duly deciphered.\nBy 1850, however, Edward Hincks came to suspect a non-Semitic origin for cuneiform. Semitic languages are structured according to consonantal forms, whereas cuneiform, when functioning phonetically, was a syllabary, binding consonants to particular vowels. Furthermore, no Semitic words could be found to explain the syllabic values given to particular signs. Julius Oppert suggested that a non-Semitic language had preceded Akkadian in Mesopotamia, and that speakers of this language had developed the cuneiform script.\nIn 1855 Rawlinson announced the discovery of non-Semitic inscriptions at the southern Babylonian sites of Nippur, Larsa, and Uruk.\nIn 1856, Hincks argued that the untranslated language was agglutinative in character. The language was called \"Scythic\" by some, and, confusingly, \"Akkadian\" by others. In 1869, Oppert proposed the name \"Sumerian\", based on the known title \"King of Sumer and Akkad\", reasoning that if Akkad signified the Semitic portion of the kingdom, Sumer might describe the non-Semitic annex.\nCredit for being first to scientifically treat a bilingual Sumerian\u2013Akkadian text belongs to Paul Haupt, who published \"Die sumerischen Familiengesetze\" (The Sumerian family laws) in 1879.\nErnest de Sarzec began excavating the Sumerian site of Tello (ancient Girsu, capital of the state of Lagash) in 1877, and published the first part of \"D\u00e9couvertes en Chald\u00e9e\" with transcriptions of Sumerian tablets in 1884. The University of Pennsylvania began excavating Sumerian Nippur in 1888.\n\"A Classified List of Sumerian Ideographs\" by R. Br\u00fcnnow appeared in 1889.\nThe bewildering number and variety of phonetic values that signs could have in Sumerian led to a detour in understanding the language \u2013 a Paris-based orientalist, Joseph Hal\u00e9vy, argued from 1874 onward that Sumerian was not a natural language, but rather a secret code (a cryptolect), and for over a decade the leading Assyriologists battled over this issue. For a dozen years, starting in 1885, Friedrich Delitzsch accepted Hal\u00e9vy's arguments, not renouncing Hal\u00e9vy until 1897.\nFran\u00e7ois Thureau-Dangin working at the Louvre in Paris also made significant contributions to deciphering Sumerian with publications from 1898 to 1938, such as his 1905 publication of \"Les inscriptions de Sumer et d'Akkad\". Charles Fossey at the Coll\u00e8ge de France in Paris was another prolific and reliable scholar. His pioneering \"Contribution au Dictionnaire sum\u00e9rien\u2013assyrien\", Paris 1905\u20131907, turns out to provide the foundation for P. Anton Deimel's 1934 \"Sumerisch-Akkadisches Glossar\" (vol. III of Deimel's 4-volume \"Sumerisches Lexikon\").\nIn 1908, Stephen Herbert Langdon summarized the rapid expansion in knowledge of Sumerian and Akkadian vocabulary in the pages of \"Babyloniaca\", a journal edited by Charles Virolleaud, in an article \"Sumerian-Assyrian Vocabularies\", which reviewed a valuable new book on rare logograms by Bruno Meissner. Subsequent scholars have found Langdon's work, including his tablet transcriptions, to be not entirely reliable.\nIn 1944, the Sumerologist Samuel Noah Kramer provided a detailed and readable summary of the decipherment of Sumerian in his \"Sumerian Mythology\".\nFriedrich Delitzsch published a learned Sumerian dictionary and grammar in the form of his \"Sumerisches Glossar\" and \"Grundz\u00fcge der sumerischen Grammatik\", both appearing in 1914. Delitzsch's student, Arno Poebel, published a grammar with the same title, \"Grundz\u00fcge der sumerischen Grammatik\", in 1923, and for 50 years it would be the standard for students studying Sumerian. Another highly influential figure in Sumerology during much of the 20th century was Adam Falkenstein, who produced a grammar of the language of Gudea's inscriptions. Poebel's grammar was finally superseded in 1984 on the publication of \"The Sumerian Language: An Introduction to its History and Grammatical Structure\", by Marie-Louise Thomsen. While there are various points in Sumerian grammar on which Thomsen's views are not shared by most Sumerologists today, Thomsen's grammar (often with express mention of the critiques put forward by Pascal Attinger in his 1993 \"El\u00e9ments de linguistique sum\u00e9rienne: La construction de du11/e/di 'dire'\") is the starting point of most recent academic discussions of Sumerian grammar.\nMore recent monograph-length grammars of Sumerian include Dietz Otto Edzard's 2003 \"Sumerian Grammar\" and Bram Jagersma's 2010 \"A Descriptive Grammar of Sumerian\". Piotr Michalowski's essay (entitled, simply, \"Sumerian\") in the 2004 \"The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the World's Ancient Languages\" has also been recognized as a good modern grammatical sketch.\nThere is relatively little consensus, even among reasonable Sumerologists, in comparison to the state of most modern or classical languages. Verbal morphology, in particular, is hotly disputed. In addition to the general grammars, there are many monographs and articles about particular areas of Sumerian grammar, without which a survey of the field could not be considered complete.\nThe primary institutional lexical effort in Sumerian is the Pennsylvania Sumerian Dictionary project, begun in 1974. In 2004, the PSD was released on the Web as the ePSD. The project is currently supervised by Steve Tinney. It has not been updated online since 2006, but Tinney and colleagues are working on a new edition of the ePSD, a working draft of which is available online.\nPhonology.\nAssumed phonological and morphological forms will be between slashes // and curly brackets {}, respectively, with plain text used for the standard Assyriological transcription of Sumerian. Most of the following examples are unattested. Note also that, not unlike most other pre-modern orthographies, Sumerian cuneiform spelling is highly variable, so the transcriptions and the cuneiform examples will generally show only one or at most a few common graphic forms out of many that may occur. Spelling practices have also changed significantly in the course of the history of Sumerian: the examples in the article will use the most phonetically explicit spellings attested, which usually means Old Babylonian or Ur III period spellings. except where an authentic example from another period is used.\nModern knowledge of Sumerian phonology is flawed and incomplete because of the lack of speakers, the transmission through the filter of Akkadian phonology and the difficulties posed by the cuneiform script. As I. M. Diakonoff observes, \"when we try to find out the morphophonological structure of the Sumerian language, we must constantly bear in mind that we are not dealing with a language directly but are reconstructing it from a very imperfect mnemonic writing system which had not been basically aimed at the rendering of morphophonemics\".\nConsonants.\nEarly Sumerian is conjectured to have had at least the consonants listed in the table below. The consonants in parentheses are reconstructed by some scholars based on indirect evidence; if they existed, they were lost around the Ur III period in the late 3rd millennium BC.\nThe existence of various other consonants has been hypothesized based on graphic alternations and loans, though none have found wide acceptance. For example, Diakonoff lists evidence for two lateral phonemes, two rhotics, two back fricatives, and two g-sounds (excluding the velar nasal), and assumes a phonemic difference between consonants that are dropped word-finally (such as the \"g\" in \ud808\udf60 \"zag\" &gt; \"za3\") and consonants that remain (such as the \"g\" in \ud808\uddb7\ud808\udc1d \"lag\"). Other \"hidden\" consonant phonemes that have been suggested include semivowels such as and , and a glottal fricative or a glottal stop that could explain the absence of vowel contraction in some words\u2014though objections have been raised against that as well. A recent descriptive grammar by Bram Jagersma includes , , and as unwritten consonants, with the glottal stop even serving as the first-person pronominal prefix. However, these unwritten consonants had been lost by the Ur III period according to Jagersma.\nVery often, a word-final consonant was not expressed in writing\u2014and was possibly omitted in pronunciation\u2014so it surfaced only when followed by a vowel: for example the of the genitive case ending \"-ak\" does not appear in \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude17\ud808\uddb7 \"e2 lugal-la\" \"the king's house\", but it becomes obvious in \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude17\ud808\uddb7\ud808\udd30 \"e2 lugal-la-kam\" \"(it) is the king's house\" (compare liaison in French). Jagersma believes that the lack of expression of word-final consonants was originally mostly a graphic convention, but that in the late 3rd millennium voiceless aspirated stops and affricates (, , and ) were, indeed, gradually lost in syllable-final position, as were the unaspirated stops and .\nVowels.\nThe vowels that are clearly distinguished by the cuneiform script are , , , and . Various researchers have posited the existence of more vowel phonemes such as and even and , which would have been concealed by the transmission through Akkadian, as that language does not distinguish them. That would explain the seeming existence of numerous homophones in transliterated Sumerian, as well as some details of the phenomena mentioned in the next paragraph. These hypotheses are not yet generally accepted. Phonemic vowel length has also been posited by many scholars based on vowel length in Sumerian loanwords in Akkadian, occasional so-called \"plene\" spellings with extra vowel signs, and some internal evidence from alternations. However, scholars who believe in the existence of phonemic vowel length do not consider it possible to reconstruct the length of the vowels in most Sumerian words.\nDuring the Old Sumerian period, the southern dialects (those used in the cities of Lagash, Umma, Ur and Uruk), which also provide the overwhelming majority of material from that stage, exhibited a vowel harmony rule based on vowel height or advanced tongue root. Essentially, prefixes containing /e/ or /i/ appear to alternate between /e/ in front of syllables containing open vowels and /i/ in front of syllables containing close vowels; e.g. \ud808\udc8a\ud808\udc7d \"e-ka\u01614\" \"he runs\", but \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc7a \"i3-gub\" \"he stands\". Certain verbs with stem vowels spelt with /u/ and /e/, however, seem to take prefixes with a vowel quality opposite to the one that would have been expected according to this rule, which has been variously interpreted as an indication either of the existence of additional vowel phonemes in Sumerian or simply of incorrectly reconstructed readings of individual lexemes. The 3rd person plural dimensional prefix \ud808\ude48 \"-ne-\" is also unaffected, which Jagersma believes to be caused by the length of its vowel. In addition, some have argued for a second vowel harmony rule.\nThere also appear to be many cases of partial or complete assimilation of the vowel of certain prefixes and suffixes to one in the adjacent syllable reflected in writing in some of the later periods, and there is a noticeable, albeit not absolute, tendency for disyllabic stems to have the same vowel in both syllables. These patterns, too, are interpreted as evidence for a richer vowel inventory by some researchers. For example, we find forms like \ud808\udcb5\ud808\udc7d \"ga-ka\u01614\" \"let me run\", but, from the Neo-Sumerian period onwards, occasional spellings like \ud808\udd18\ud808\ude2c\ud808\ude8f\ud808\udc0a\ud808\udee7 \"gu2-mu-ra-ab-\u0161um2\" \"let me give it to you\". According to Jagersma, these assimilations are limited to open syllables and, as with vowel harmony, Jagersma interprets their absence as the result of vowel length or of stress in at least some cases. There is evidence of various cases of elision of vowels, apparently in unstressed syllables; in particular an initial vowel in a word of more than two syllables seems to have been elided in many cases. What appears to be vowel contraction in hiatus (*/aa/, */ia/, */ua/ &gt; \"a\", */ae/ &gt; \"a\", */ie/ &gt; \"i\" or \"e\", */ue/ &gt; \"u\" or \"e\", etc.) is also very common. There is some uncertainty and variance of opinion as to whether the result in each specific case is a long vowel or whether a vowel is simply replaced/deleted.\nSyllables could have any of the following structures: V, CV, VC, CVC. More complex syllables, if Sumerian had them, are not expressed as such by the cuneiform script.\nStress.\nSumerian stress is usually presumed to have been dynamic, since it seems to have caused vowel elisions on many occasions. Opinions vary on its placement. As argued by Bram Jagersma and confirmed by other scholars, the adaptation of Akkadian words of Sumerian origin seems to suggest that Sumerian stress tended to be on the last syllable of the word, at least in its citation form. The treatment of forms with grammatical morphemes is less clear. Many cases of apheresis in forms with enclitics have been interpreted as entailing that the same rule was true of the phonological word on many occasions, i.e. that the stress could be shifted onto the enclitics; however, the fact that many of these same enclitics have allomorphs with apocopated final vowels (e.g. /\u2011\u0161e/ ~ /-\u0161/) suggests that they were, on the contrary, unstressed when these allomorphs arose. It has also been conjectured that the frequent assimilation of the vowels of non-final syllables to the vowel of the final syllable of the word may be due to stress on it. However, a number of \"suffixes\" and \"enclitics\" consisting of /e/ or beginning in /e/ are also assimilated and reduced.\nIn earlier scholarship, somewhat different views were expressed and attempts were made to formulate detailed rules for the effect of grammatical morphemes and compounding on stress, but with inconclusive results. Based predominantly on patterns of vowel elision, Adam Falkenstein argued that stress in monomorphemic words tended to be on the first syllable, and that the same applied without exception to reduplicated stems, but that the stress shifted onto the last syllable in a first member of a compound or idiomatic phrase, onto the syllable preceding a (final) suffix/enclitic, and onto the first syllable of the possessive enclitic /-ani/. In his view, single verbal prefixes were unstressed, but longer sequences of verbal prefixes attracted the stress to their first syllable. Jagersma has objected that many of Falkenstein's examples of elision are medial and so, while the stress was obviously not on the medial syllable in question, the examples do not show where it \"was\".\nJoachim Krecher attempted to find more clues in texts written phonetically by assuming that geminations, plene spellings and unexpected \"stronger\" consonant qualities were clues to stress placement. Using this method, he confirmed Falkenstein's views that reduplicated forms were stressed on the first syllable and that there was generally stress on the syllable preceding a (final) suffix/enclitic, on the penultimate syllable of a polysyllabic enclitic such as -/ani/, -/zunene/ etc., on the last syllable of the first member of a compound, and on the first syllable in a sequence of verbal prefixes. However, he found that single verbal prefixes received the stress just as prefix sequences did, and that in most of the above cases, another stress often seemed to be present as well: on the stem to which the suffixes/enclitics were added, on the second compound member in compounds, and possibly on the verbal stem that prefixes were added to or on following syllables. He also did not agree that the stress of monomorphemic words was typically initial and believed to have found evidence of words with initial as well as with final stress; in fact, he did not even exclude the possibility that stress was normally stem-final.\nPascal Attinger has partly concurred with Krecher, but doubts that the stress was \"always\" on the syllable preceding a suffix/enclitic and argues that in a prefix sequence, the stressed syllable wasn't the first one, but rather the last one if heavy and the next-to-the-last one in other cases. Attinger has also remarked that the patterns observed may be the result of Akkadian influence\u00a0\u2013 either due to linguistic convergence while Sumerian was still a living language or, since the data comes from the Old Babylonian period, a feature of Sumerian as pronounced by native speakers of Akkadian. The latter has also been pointed out by Jagersma, who is, in addition, sceptical about the very assumptions underlying the method used by Krecher to establish the place of stress.\nOrthography.\nSumerian writing expressed pronunciation only roughly. It was often morphophonemic, so much of the allomorphic variation could be ignored. Especially in earlier Sumerian, coda consonants were also often ignored in spelling; e.g. /mung\u0303are\u0161/ 'they put it here' could be written \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udcfb\ud808\udf37 \"mu-g\u0303ar-re2\". The use of VC signs for that purpose, producing more elaborate spellings such as \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf26\ud808\udcfb\ud808\udf37\ud808\udf0d \"mu-un-g\u0303ar-re2-e\u01613\", became more common only in the Neo-Sumerian and especially in the Old Babylonian period.\nConversely, an intervocalic consonant, especially at the end of a morpheme followed by a vowel-initial morpheme, was usually \"repeated\" by the use of a CV sign for the same consonant; e.g. \ud808\udeac \"sar\" \"write\"\u00a0\u2013 \ud808\udeac\ud808\ude8f \"sar-ra\" \"written\". This results in orthographic gemination that is usually reflected in Sumerological transliteration, but does not actually designate any phonological phenomenon such as length. It is also relevant in this context that, as explained above, many morpheme-final consonants seem to have been elided unless followed by a vowel at various stages in the history of Sumerian. These are traditionally termed Auslauts in Sumerology and may or may not be expressed in transliteration: e.g. the logogram \ud808\udeae for /\u0161ag/ &gt; /\u0161a(g)/ \"heart\" may be transliterated as \"\u0161ag4\" or as \"\u0161a3\". Thus, when the following consonant appears in front of a vowel, it can be said to be expressed \"only\" by the next sign: for example, \ud808\udeae\ud808\udcb5 \"\u0161ag4-ga\" \"in the heart\" can also be interpreted as \"\u0161a3-ga\".\nOf course, when a CVC sound sequence is expressed by a sequence of signs with the sound values CV-VC, that does not necessarily indicate a long vowel or a sequence of identical vowels either. To mark such a thing, so-called \"plene\" writings with an \"additional\" vowel sign repeating the preceding vowel were used, although that never came to be done systematically. A typical plene writing involved a sequence such as (C)V-V(-VC/CV), e.g. \ud808\udcbc\ud808\udc00 \"ama-a\" for /amaa/ &lt; {ama-e} \"the mother (ergative case)\").\nSumerian texts vary in the degree to which they use logograms or opt for syllabic (phonetic) spellings instead: e.g. the word \ud808\udcfb g\u0303ar \"put\" may also be written phonetically as \ud808\udcb7\ud808\udd48 \"g\u0303a2-ar\". They also vary in the degree to which allomorphic variation was expressed, e.g. \ud808\udc40\ud808\udd04\ud808\udf0d \"ba-gi4-e\u0161 or \ud808\udc40\ud808\udd04\ud808\udd56 \"ba-gi4-i\u0161 for \"they returned\". While early Sumerian writing was highly logographic, there was a tendency towards more phonetic spelling in the Neo-Sumerian period. Consistent syllabic spelling was employed when writing down the Emesal dialect (since the usual logograms would have been read in Emegir by default), for the purpose of teaching the language and often in recording incantations.\nAs already mentioned, texts written in the Archaic Sumerian period are difficult to interpret, because they often omit grammatical elements and determinatives. In addition, many literary-mythological texts from that period use a special orthographic style called UD.GAL.NUN, which seems to be based on substitution of certain signs or groups of signs for others. For example, the three signs \ud808\udf13 UD, \ud808\udcf2 GAL and \ud808\ude63 NUN, which the system is named for, are substituted for \ud808\udc2d AN, \ud808\udc97 EN, and \ud808\udda4 LIL2 respectively, producing the name of the god \"den-lil2\". The motivation for this practice is mysterious; it has been suggested that it was a kind of cryptography. Texts written in UD.GAL.NUN are still understood very poorly and only partially.\nGrammar.\nEver since its decipherment, research of Sumerian has been made difficult by the relative sparseness of linguistic data, the apparent lack of a closely related language, and the features of the writing system. A further oft-mentioned and paradoxical problem for the study of Sumerian is that the most numerous and varied texts written in the most phonetically explicit and precise orthography are only dated to periods when the scribes themselves were no longer native speakers and often demonstrably had less-than-perfect command of the language they were writing in; conversely, for much of the time during which Sumerian was still a living language, the surviving sources are few, unvaried and/or written in an orthography that is more difficult to interpret.\nTypologically, Sumerian is classified as an agglutinative, ergative (consistently so in its nominal morphology and split ergative in its verbal morphology), and subject\u2013object\u2013verb language.\nNominal morphology.\nNoun phrases.\nThe Sumerian noun is typically a one or two-syllable root ( \"eye\", \"house, household\", \ud808\udf8f \"lady\"), although there are also some roots with three syllables like \"market\". There are two semantically predictable grammatical genders, which have traditionally been called animate and inanimate, although these names do not express their membership exactly, as explained below.\nThe adjectives and other modifiers follow the noun ( \"great king\"). The noun itself is not inflected; rather, grammatical markers attach to the noun phrase as a whole, in a certain order. Typically, that order would be:\nAn example may be: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe possessive, plural and case markers are traditionally referred to as \"suffixes\", but have recently also been described as enclitics or postpositions.\nGender.\nThe two genders have been variously called animate and inanimate, human and non-human, or personal/person and impersonal/non-person. Their assignment is semantically predictable: the first gender includes humans and gods, while the second one includes animals, plants, non-living objects, abstract concepts, and groups of humans. Since the second gender includes animals, the use of the terms animate and inanimate is somewhat misleading and conventional, but it is most common in the literature, so it will be maintained in this article.\nThere are some minor deviations from the gender assignment rules, for example:\nNumber.\nThe plural marker proper is (\ud808\udc8a)\ud808\ude48 /-(e)ne/. It is used only with nouns of the animate gender and its use is optional. It is often omitted when other parts of the clause indicate the plurality of the referent. Thus, it is not used if the noun is modified by a numeral (\"\ud808\uddfd\"\ud808\udc79\ud808\udc79\ud808\udc79 \"lu2 e\u01615\" \"three men\"). It has also been observed that until the Ur III period, the marker generally isn't used in a noun phrase in the absolutive case, unless this is necessary for disambiguation. Instead, the plurality of the absolutive participant is commonly expressed only by the form of the verb in the clause: e.g. \"\ud808\uddfd\ud808\udc40\ud808\udc04\ud808\udc04\ud808\udf0d lu2 ba-za\u1e2b3-za\u1e2b3-e\u0161 \"the men ran away\", \ud808\uddfd\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udd47\ud808\uddaa\ud808\udc49\ud808\udf0d \"lu2 mu-u3-dab5-be2-e\u0161 \"I caught the men\". The plural marker is not used when referring to a group of people, because a group of people is treated as inanimate; e.g. \ud808\udc33 \"engar\" \"farmer\" with no plural marker may refer to \"(the group of) farmers\".\nAs the following example shows, the marker is appended to the end of the phrase, even after a relative clause:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLikewise, the plural marker is usually (albeit not always) added only once when a whole series of coordinated nouns have plural reference:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnother way in which a kind of plurality is expressed is by means of reduplication of the noun: \ud808\udc2d\ud808\udc2d \"dig\u0303ir-dig\u0303ir\" \"gods\", \ud808\udf08\ud808\udf08 \"ib2-ib2\" \"hips\". However, this construction is usually considered to have a more specialized meaning, variously interpreted as totality (\"all the gods\", \"both of my hips\") or distribution/separateness (\"each of the gods taken separately\"). An especially frequently occurring reduplicated word, \ud808\uddb3\ud808\uddb3 \"kur-kur\" \"foreign lands\", may have simply plural meaning, and in very late usage, the meaning of the reduplication in general might be simple plurality.\nAt least a few adjectives (notably \ud808\udcf2 \"gal\" \"great\" and \ud808\udf09 \"tur\" \"small\") are also reduplicated when the noun they modify has plural reference: \ud808\udc00\ud808\udcf2\ud808\udcf2 \"a gal-gal\" \"the great waters\". In that case, the noun itself is not reduplicated. This is sometimes interpreted as an expression of simple plurality, while a minority view is that the meaning of these forms is not purely plural, but rather the same as that of noun reduplication.\nTwo other ways of expressing plurality are characteristic only of very late Sumerian usage and have made their way into Sumerograms used in writing Akkadian and other languages. One is used with inanimate nouns and consists of the modification of the noun with the adjective \ud808\udd2d\ud808\udc00 \"\u1e2bi-a\" \"various\" (lit.\u2009'mixed'), e.g. \ud808\uddfb\ud808\udd2d\ud808\udc00 \"udu \u1e2bi-a\" \"sheep\". The other is adding the 3rd person plural form of the enclitic copula \ud808\ude28\ud808\udf0d \"-me-e\u0161\" to a noun (\ud808\ude17\ud808\ude28\ud808\udf0d \"lugal-me-e\u0161\" \"kings\", originally \"they (who) are kings\").\nCase.\nCase markers.\nThe generally recognized case markers are:\nThe final vowels of most of the above markers are subject to loss if they are attached to vowel-final words.\nIn addition, there are the enclitic particles \ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc2d\ud808\ude3e \"na-an-na\" meaning \"without\" and (\ud808\udc00)\ud808\udd57\ud808\ude46 \"(-a)-ka-nam\" -/akanam/ (in earlier Sumerian) or (\ud808\udc00)\ud808\udda4\ud808\udf0d \"(-a)-ke4-e\u01612\" -/ake\u0161/ \"because of\" (in later Sumerian).\nNote that these nominal cases enter interact with the so-called \"dimensional prefixes\" of the verb that the noun modifies, producing additional meanings. While the dative and directive are in complementary distribution in the noun, they can nevertheless be distinguished when the verbal prefixes are taken into account. Likewise, whereas the meanings \"in(to)\" and \"on(to)\" are expressed by the same nominal case, they can be disambiguated by the verbal prefixes. This is explained in more detail in the section on \"Dimensional prefixes.\"\nAdditional spatial or temporal meanings can be expressed by genitive phrases like \"at the head of\" = \"above\", \"at the face of\" = \"in front of\", \"at the outer side of\" = \"because of\", etc.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe embedded structure of the noun phrase can be further illustrated with the following phrase:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere, the first genitive morpheme (\"-a(k)\") subordinates \ud808\udee0 \"siki\" \"wool\" to \ud808\uddfb \"udu\" \"sheep\", and the second subordinates \ud808\uddfb\ud808\udee0 \"udu siki-(a)k\" \"sheep of wool\" (or \"woolly sheep\") to \ud808\ude7a\ud808\uddfb \"sipad\" \"shepherd\".\nCase usage.\nThe uses of the ergative and absolutive case are those typical of ergative languages. The subject of an intransitive verb such as \"come\" is in the same case as the object of a transitive verb such as \"build\": the \"absolutive\" case. In contrast, the subject of a transitive verb has a different case, the \"ergative\". This can be illustrated with the following examples:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn contrast with the verbal morphology, Sumerian nominal morphology consistently follows this ergative principle regardless of tense/aspect, person and mood.\nBesides the general meanings of the case forms outlined above, there are many lexically determined and more or less unpredictable uses of specific cases, often governed by a certain verb in a certain sense:\nFor the government of phrasal verbs, see the relevant section.\nPronouns.\nThe attested personal pronouns are:\nThe stem vowels of \"\ud808\udcb7\"(\"\ud808\udc8a\") \"g\u0303e26(-e)\" and \"\ud808\udc8a ze2\" are assimilated to a following case suffix containing /a/ and then have the forms \"\ud808\udcb7 g\u0303a-\" and \ud808\udf5d \"za-;\" e.g. \ud808\udf5d\ud808\ude8f \"za-ra\" 'to you (sg.)'.\nAs far as demonstrative pronouns are concerned, Sumerian most commonly uses the enclitic \"\ud808\udc49 -bi\" to express the meaning \"this\". There are rare instances of other demonstrative enclitics such as \ud808\udc8a \"-e\" \"this\", \ud808\udeba \"-\u0161e\" \"that\" and \ud808\ude91 \"-re\" \"that\". The difference between the three has been explained in terms of increasing distance from the speaker or as a difference between proximity to the speaker, proximity to the listener and distance from both, akin to the Japanese or Latin three-term demonstrative system. The independent demonstrative pronouns are \ud808\ude48\ud808\udc97/\ud808\ude48\ud808\udc8a \"ne-e\"(\"n\") \"this (thing)\" and \ud808\udd2f \"ur5\" \"that (thing)\"; \"-ne(n)\" might also be used as another enclitic. \"Now\" is \ud808\ude4c\ud808\ude48\ud808\udca0 \"i3-ne-e\u01612\" or \ud808\udc00\ud808\udc55\ud808\udc20 \"a-da-al\". For \"then\" and \"there\", the declined noun phrases \ud808\udf13\ud808\udc40 \"ud-ba\" \"at that time\" and \ud808\udda0\ud808\udc40 \"ki-ba\" \"at that place\" are used; \"so\" is \ud808\udd2f\ud808\udc76 \"ur5\"-\"gen7\", lit. \"like that\".\nThe interrogative pronouns are \ud808\udc00\ud808\udc40 \"a-ba\" \"who\" and \ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e \"a-na\" \"what\" (also used as \"whoever\" and \"whatever\" when introducing dependent clauses). The stem for \"where\" is \ud808\ude28 \"me-\" (used in the locative, terminative and ablative to express \"where\", \"whither\" and \"whence\", respectively) . \"When\" is \ud808\uddf7/\ud808\udc97 \"en3\"/\"en\", but also the stem \ud808\ude28(\ud808\udc8a)\ud808\ude3e \"me-(e)-na\" is attested for \"when\" (in the emphatic form \"me-na-am3\" and in the terminative \"me-na-\u0161e3\" \"until when?\", \"how long?\"). \"How\" and \"why\" are expressed by \ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc38 \"a-na-a\u0161\" (lit.\u2009'what for?') and \ud808\udc00\ud808\udc76 \"a\"-\"gen7\" \"how\" (an equative case form, perhaps \"like what?\"). The expected form \ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc76 \"a-na-gen7\" is used in Old Babylonian.\nAn indefinite pronoun is \ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude28 \"na-me\" \"any\", which is only attested in attributive function until the Old Babylonian period, but may also stand alone in the sense \"anyone, anything\" in late texts. It can be added to nouns to produce further expressions with pronominal meaning such as \ud808\uddfd\ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude28 \"lu2 na-me\" \"anyone\", \ud808\udcfb\ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude28 \"nig\u03032 na-me\" \"anything\", \ud808\udda0\ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude28 \"ki na-me\" \"anywhere\", \ud808\udf13\ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude28 \"ud4 na-me\" \"ever, any time\". The nouns \ud808\uddfd \"lu2\" \"man\" and \ud808\udcfb \"nig\u03032\" \"thing\" are also used for \"someone, anyone\" and \"something, anything\". With negation, all of these expressions naturally acquire the meanings \"nobody\", \"nothing\", \"nowhere\" and \"never\".\nThe reflexive pronoun is \ud808\udd4e(\ud808\udefc) \"ni2\"(\"-te\") \"self\", which generally occurs with possessive pronouns attached: \ud808\udd4e\"\ud808\ude2c ni2-g\u0303u10\" \"my-self\", etc. The longer form appears in the third person animate (\ud808\udd4e\ud808\udefc\ud808\ude4c \"ni2-te-ni\" \"him/herself\", \ud808\udd4e\ud808\udefc\ud808\ude48\ud808\ude48 \"ni2-te-ne-ne\" \"themselves\")\".\"\nAdjectives.\nIt is controversial whether Sumerian has adjectives at all, since nearly all stems with adjectival meaning are also attested as verb stems and may be conjugated as verbs: \ud808\ude24 \"ma\u1e2b\" \"great\" &gt; \ud808\udf8f\ud808\udc20\ud808\ude24 \"nin al-ma\u1e2b\" \"the lady is great\". Jagersma believes that there is a distinction in that the few true adjectives cannot be negated, and a few stems are different depending on the part of speech: \ud808\udcf2 \"gal\" \"big\", but \ud808\udd16\ud808\udf0c \"gu-ul\" \"be big\". Furthermore, stems with adjective-like meaning sometimes occur with the nominalizing suffix /-a/, but their behaviour varies in this respect. Some stems appear to require the suffix always: e.g. \ud808\udd97\ud808\udcb5 \"kalag-ga\" \"mighty\", \ud808\udeb7\ud808\udcb5 \"sag9-ga\" \"beautiful\", \ud808\udc4d\ud808\udc55 \"gid2-da\" \"long\" (these are verbs with adjectival meaning according to Jagersma). Some never take the suffix: e.g. \ud808\udcf2 \"gal\" \"big\", \ud808\udf09 \"tur\" \"small\" and \ud808\ude24 \"ma\u1e2b\" \"great\" (these are genuine adjectives according to Jagersma). Finally, some alternate: \ud808\udf63 \"zid\" \"right\" often occurs as \ud808\udf63\ud808\udc55 \"zid-da\" (these are pairs of adjectives and verbs derived from them, respectively, according to Jagersma). In the latter case, attempts have been made to find a difference of meaning between the forms with and without \"-a\"; it has been suggested that the form with \"-a\" expresses a kind of determination, e.g. \"zid\" \"righteous, true\" vs \"zid-da\" \"right (not left)\", or restrictiveness, e.g. \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude4b \"e2 gibil\" \"a new house\" vs \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude4b\ud808\uddb7 \"e2 gibil-la\" \"the new house (as contrasted with the old one)\", \"a/the newer (kind of) house\" or \"the newest house\", as well as nominalization, e.g. \"tur-ra\" \"a/the small one\" or \"a small thing\". Other scholars have remained sceptical about the posited contrasts.\nA few adjectives, like \ud808\udcf2 \"gal\" \"big\" and \ud808\udf09 \"tur\" \"small\" appear to \"agree in number\" with a preceding noun in the plural by reduplication; with some other adjectives, the meaning seems to be \"each of them ADJ\". The colour term \ud808\udf13(\ud808\udf13) \"bar6\"-\"bar6\" / \"babbar\" \"white\" appears to have always been reduplicated, and the same may be true of \ud808\ude2a \"gig2\" (actually \"giggig\") \"black\".\nTo express the comparative or superlative degree, various constructions with the word \ud808\udedb\ud808\udc00 \"dirig\" \"exceed\"/\"excess\" are used: X + locative + \"dirig-ga\" \"which exceeds (all) X\", \"dirig\" + X + genitive + terminative \"exceeding X\", lit. \"to the excess of X\".\nAdverbs and adverbial expressions.\nMost commonly, adverbial meanings are expressed by noun phrases in a certain case, e.g. \ud808\udf13 \"ud-ba\" \"then\", lit. \"at that time\".\nThere are two main ways to form an adverb of manner:\nFor pronominal adverbs, see the section on Pronouns.\nNumerals.\nSumerian has a combination decimal and sexagesimal system (for example, 600 is 'ten sixties'), so that the Sumerian lexical numeral system is sexagesimal with 10 as a subbase. The cardinal numerals and ways of forming composite numbers are as follows:\nOrdinal numerals are formed with the suffix \ud808\udd30\ud808\ude20 \"-kam-ma\" in Old Sumerian and \ud808\udd30(\ud808\ude20) \"-kam(-ma)\" (with the final vowel still surfacing in front of enclitics) in subsequent periods. However, a cardinal numeral may also have ordinal meaning sometimes.\nThe syntax of numerals has some peculiarities. Besides just being placed after a noun like other modifiers (\ud808\udf09\ud809\udc08 \"dumu e\u01615\" \"three children\"\u00a0\u2013 which may, however, also be written \ud809\udc08\ud808\udf09 \"3 dumu\"), the numeral may be reinforced by the copula (\ud808\udf09\ud809\udc08\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d \"dumu e\u01615\"-\"am3\", lit. \"the children, being three\". Finally, there is a third construction in which the possessive pronoun \ud808\udc49 -\"bi\" is added after the numeral, which gives the whole phrase a definite meaning: \ud808\udf09\ud809\udc08\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc49 \"dumu e\u01615\"-\"a-bi\": \"\"the\" three children\" (lit.\u2009'children\u00a0\u2013 the three of them'). The numerals \ud808\ude2b \"min\" \"two\" and \ud809\udc08 \"e\u01615\" \"three\" are also supplied with the nominalizing marker \"-a\" before the pronoun, as the above example shows.\nFractions are formed with the phrase \ud808\udd46...N...\ud808\udd45 \"igi-\"N-\"g\u0303al2\" : \"one-Nth\"; where \ud808\udd45 \"g\u0303al2\" may be omitted. \"One-half\", however, is \ud808\uded7\ud808\ude92\ud808\udc00 \"\u0161u-ru-a\", later \ud808\uded7\ud808\ude91\ud808\udc00 \"\u0161u-ri-a.\" Another way of expressing fractions was originally limited to weight measures, specifically fractions of the mina (\ud808\ude20\ud808\ude3e \"ma-na\"): \ud809\udc5a \"\u0161u\u0161\u0161ana\" \"one-third\" (literarlly \"two-sixths\"), \ud809\udc5b \"\u0161anabi\" \"two-thirds\" (the former two words are of Akkadian origins), \ud809\udc5c \"gig\u0303usila\" or \ud808\uddf2\ud808\udf0b\ud808\udc86 \"la2 gig\u03034 u\" \"five-sixths\" (literally \"ten shekels split off (from the mina)\" or \"(a mina) minus ten shekels\", respectively), \ud808\udc86 \"gig\u03034\" \"one-sixtieth\", lit. \"a shekel\" (since a shekel is one-sixtieth of a mina). Smaller fractions are formed by combining these: e.g. one-fifth is \"\ud808\udf0b\ud808\udc79\ud808\udc79\ud808\udc86\" \"12\u00d71/60 = 1/5\", and two-fifths are \ud809\udc5a\ud808\uddf9\ud808\udc86 \"1/3 + (4 \u00d7 1/60) = 5/15 + 1/15 = 6/15 = 2/5\".\nVerbal morphology.\nGeneral.\nThe Sumerian finite verb distinguishes a number of moods and agrees (more or less consistently) with the subject and the object in person, number and gender. The verb chain may also incorporate pronominal references to the verb's other modifiers, which has also traditionally been described as \"agreement\", although, in fact, such a reference \"and\" the presence of an actual modifier in the clause need not co-occur: not only \ud808\udc8d\ud808\udca0\ud808\udf08\ud808\udf08\ud808\udd46\ud808\udc7a\ud808\udf26 e2-\u0161e3 ib2-\u0161i-du-un\" \"I'm going to the house\", but also \ud808\udc8d\ud808\udca0\ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc7a\ud808\udf26 e2-\u0161e3 i3-du-un\" \"I'm going to the house\" and simply \ud808\udf08\ud808\udd46\ud808\udc7a\ud808\udf26 \"ib2-\u0161i-du-un\" \"I'm going to it\" are possible. Hence, the term \"cross-reference\" instead of \"agreement\" has been proposed. This article will predominantly use the term \"agreement\".\nThe Sumerian verb also makes a binary distinction according to a category that some regard as tense (past vs present-future), others as aspect (perfective vs imperfective), and that will be designated as TA (tense/aspect) in the following. The two members of the opposition entail different conjugation patterns and, at least for many verbs, different stems; they are theory-neutrally referred to with the Akkadian grammatical terms for the two respective forms \u2013 \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" \"quick\" and \"mar\u00fb\" \"slow, fat\". Finally, opinions differ on whether the verb has a passive or a middle voice and how it is expressed.\nIt is often pointed out that a Sumerian verb does not seem to be strictly limited to only transitive or only intransitive usage: e.g. the verb \ud808\uddad \"kur9\" can mean both \"enter\" and \"insert / bring in\", and the verb \ud808\udf23 \"de2\" can mean both \"flow out\" and \"pour out\". This depends simply on whether an ergative participant causing the event is explicitly mentioned (in the clause and in the agreement markers on the verb). Some have even concluded that instead of speaking about intransitive and transitive \"verbs\", it may be better to speak only of intransitive and transitive \"constructions\" in Sumerian.\nThe verbal root is almost always a monosyllable and, together with various affixes, forms a so-called verbal chain which is described as a sequence of about 15 slots, though the precise models differ. The finite verb has both prefixes and suffixes, while the non-finite verb may only have suffixes. Broadly, the prefixes have been divided in three groups that occur in the following order: \"modal prefixes\", \"conjugation prefixes\", and \"pronominal and dimensional\" prefixes. The suffixes are a future or imperfective marker /-ed-/, pronominal suffixes, and an /-a/ ending that nominalizes the whole verb chain. The overall structure can be summarized as follows:\nExamples using most of the above slots may be:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMore than one dimensional prefix may occur within the verb chain. If so, the prefixes are placed in a specific order, which is shown the section \"Dimensional prefixes\" below. The \"conjugation prefixes\" appear to be mutually exclusive to a great extent, since the \"finite\" prefixes /i/~/e/- and /a/- do not appear before [mu]-, /ba/- and the sequence -/b/-+-/i/-, nor does the realization [mu] appear before /ba-/ or /b-i/. However, it is commonly assumed that the spellings \"im-, im-ma-\" and \"im-mi-\" are equivalent to {i-} + {-mu-}, {i-} + {-mu-} + {-ba-} and {i-} + {-mu-} + {-bi-}, respectively. According to Jagersma, the reason for the restrictions is that the \"finite\" prefixes /i/~/e/- and /a/- have been elided prehistorically in open syllables, in front of prefixes of the shape CV (consonant-vowel). The exception is the position in front of the locative prefix -/ni/-, the second person dative \ud808\ude8f /-r-a/ and the second person directive \ud808\ude91 /-r-i/, where the dominant dialect of the Old Babylonian period retains them.\nModal prefixes.\nThe modal prefixes express modality. Some of them are generally combined with certain TAs; in other cases, the meaning of a modal prefix can depend on the TA.\nE.g.: \ud808\udd54\ud808\udd65 \"in-gu7\" {\u00d8-i-n-gu} \"He ate it.\"\nE.g.: \ud808\ude61\ud808\udf26\ud808\udd65 nu(-\"u3\")\"-un-gu7\" {nu-i-n-gu} \"He didn't eat it.\"\nE.g.: \ud808\udcf6\ud808\udd41\ud808\udd65\ud808\udc8a \u1e2be2-eb-gu7-e\" {\u1e2ba-ib-gu7-e} \"let him eat it!\"; \ud808\udd29\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udd65 \u1e2ba-an-gu7\" \"He ate it indeed.\"\nE.g.: \ud808\udcb5\ud808\udc0a\ud808\udd65 \"ga-ab-gu7\" \"Let me eat it!\"\nE.g.: \ud808\udf26\ud808\udd65 \"un-gu\"\"7\" \"If/when he eats it...\"\nE.g.: \ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc0a\ud808\udd65\ud808\udc8a na-ab-gu7-e\" \"He must not eat it!\"; \ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udd65 na-an-gu7\" \"He ate it indeed.\"\nE.g.: \ud808\udc40\ud808\ude8f\ud808\udc0a\ud808\udd65\ud808\udc97 ba-ra-ab-gu7-en\" \"I certainly will not eat it!\"; \ud808\udc40\ud808\ude8f\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udd65 ba-ra-an-gu7\" \"He certainly didn't eat it.\"\nE.g.: \ud808\ude61\ud808\udf51\ud808\udf08\ud808\udd65\ud808\udc8a nu\"-\"u\u0161-\"ib2-gu7-e \"\"If only he would eat it!\"\nE.g.: \ud808\udd46\ud808\udd54\ud808\udd65 \"\u0161i-in-gu7\" \"So/correspondingly/accordingly(?), he ate it.\"\nAlthough the modal prefixes are traditionally grouped together in one slot in the verbal chain, their behaviour suggests a certain difference in status: only \"nu-\" and \"\u1e2ba-\" exhibit morphophonemic evidence of co-occurring with a following finite \"conjugation prefix\", while the others do not and hence seem to be mutually exclusive with it. For this reason, Jagersma separates the first two as \"proclitics\" and groups the others together with the finite prefix as (non-proclitic) \"preformatives\".\n\"Conjugation prefixes\".\nThe meaning, structure, identity and even the number of the various \"conjugation prefixes\" have always been a subject of disagreements. The term \"conjugation prefix\" simply alludes to the fact that a Sumerian finite verb in the indicative mood must (nearly) always contain one of them. \"Which\" of these prefixes is used seems to have, more often than not, no effect on its translation into European languages. Proposed explanations of the choice of conjugation prefix usually revolve around the subtleties of spatial grammar, information structure (focus), verb valency, and, most recently, voice.\"\" The following description primarily follows the analysis of Jagersma (2010), largely seconded by Z\u00f3lyomi (2017) and Sallaberger (2023), in its specifics; nonetheless, most of the interpretations in it are held widely, if not universally.\nE.g.: \ud808\udd54\ud808\udc7a \"in-\u0159e6\" {\u00d8-i-n-\u0159e} \"He brought (it).\"\nE.g.: \ud808\udc20\ud808\udc7a \"al-\u0159e6\" \"It is/was brought.\"\nE.g. \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf26\ud808\udc7a \"mu-un-\u0159e6\" \"He brought it here.\" \nE.g. \ud808\udd4e\ud808\udc7a\ud808\ude2c \"im-tum3-mu\" {i-mu-b-tum-e} \"He will bring it here.\"\nE.g. \ud808\ude2a\ud808\ude4c\ud808\udd54\ud808\udc7a \"mi-ni-in-\u0159e6\" \"He brought it in here.\"\nE.g. \ud808\ude20\ud808\ude8f\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udc7a \"ma-ra-an-\u0159e6\" \"He brought (it) here to you.\"\nE.g. \ud808\ude48\ud808\udd54\ud808\udc7a \"bi2-in-\u0159e6\" \"He made it (the ox, the group of workers) bring (it).\"\nE.g. \ud808\udc40\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udc7a ba-an-\u0159e6\" \"He brought it to it\" / \"He took it for himself\" / \"He took it away\"; \ud808\udc40\ud808\udc7a ba-\u0159e6\" \"It was brought.\" \nE.g. \ud808\udd4e\ud808\ude2a\ud808\udd54\ud808\udc7a im-mi-in-\u0159e6\" \"He made it (the ox, the group of workers) bring it here\"; \ud808\udd4e\ud808\ude20\ud808\udc7a im-ma\"-\"\u0159e6\" \"It was brought here.\" \nThe rare prefix -/nga/- means 'also', 'equally' (often written without the initial /n/, especially in earlier periods). It is of crucial importance for the ordering of the \"conjugation prefixes\", because it is usually placed between the conjugation prefix /i/- and the pronominal prefix, e.g. \ud808\udd54\ud808\udcb5\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udf6a \"in-ga-an-zu\" 'he, too, knows it', but it precedes the conjugation prefix /mu/-: \ud808\ude3e\ud808\udcb5\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf6a \"na-ga-mu-zu\" 'he also understood it'. This suggests that these two conjugation prefixes must belong to different slots.\nAlthough a conjugation prefix is almost always present, Sumerian until the Old Babylonian period allows a finite verb to begin directly with the locative prefix -/ni/-, the second person singular dative -/r-a/-, or the second person directive -/r-i/- (see below), because the prefixes \"i3-\"/\"e-\" and \"a-\" are apparently elided in front of them.\nPronominal and dimensional prefixes.\nThe \"dimensional prefixes\" of the verb chain basically correspond to, and often repeat, the case markers of the noun phrase. Like the case markers of the noun phrase, the first dimensional prefix is normally attached to a preceding \"head\" \u2013 a \"pronominal prefix\", which expresses the person, gender and number of its referent. The first dimensional prefix may be followed by up to two other dimensional prefixes, but unlike the first one, these prefixes never have an explicit \"head\" and cannot refer to animate nouns. The other slot where a pronominal prefix can occur is immediately before the stem, where it can have a different allomorph and expresses the person, gender and absolutive or the ergative participant (the transitive subject, the intransitive subject or the direct object), depending on the TA and other factors, as explained below.\nThere is some variation in the extent to which the verb of a clause that contains a noun in a given case also contains the corresponding pronominal and dimensional prefixes in the verb. The ergative participant is always expressed in the verb, as is, generally, the absolutive one (with some vacillation for the third person singular inanimate in transitive forms, as explained below); the dative, comitative, the locative and directive participant (used in a local meaning) also tend to be expressed relatively consistently; with the ablative and terminative, on the other hand, there is considerable variability. There are some cases, specified below, where the meanings of the cases in the noun phrase and in the verb diverge, so a noun case enclitic may not be reflected in the verb or, conversely, a verb may have a prefix that has no specific reference in the clause or in reality.\nPronominal prefixes.\nThe forms of the pronominal prefixes are the following:\nConfusingly, the subject and object prefixes (/-n-/, /-b-/, /-e-/, /-V-/) are not commonly spelled out in early texts, as both coda consonants and vowel length are often ignored in them. The \"full\" spellings do become more usual during the Third Dynasty of Ur (in the Neo-Sumerian period) and especially during the Old Babylonian period. Thus, in earlier texts, one finds \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udc1d \"mu-ak\" and \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc1d \"i3-ak\" (\ud808\udc8a\ud808\udc1d \"e-ak\" in Southern Sumerian) instead of \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf26\ud808\udc1d \"mu-un-ak\" and \ud808\udd54\ud808\udc1d \"in-ak\" for {mu-n-ak} and {i-n-ak} \"he/she made\", and also \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udc1d \"mu-ak\" instead of Neo-Sumerian \ud808\ude2c(\ud808\udd47)\ud808\udc1d \"mu(\"-\"u3)-ak\" or Old Babylonian \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udc8a\ud808\udc1d \"mu-e-ak\" \"you made\". Vowel length never came to be expressed systematically, so the 1st person prefix was often graphically -\u2205- during the entire existence of Sumerian.\nDimensional prefixes.\nThe generally recognized dimensional prefixes are shown in the table below; if several occur within the same verb complex, they are placed in the order they are listed in.\nThe ablative does not co-occur with the terminative, and the directive does not co-occur with the locative, so these pairs may be argued to share the same slot. Accordingly, the template can be said to include the following dimensional slots: dative, comitative, ablative/terminative, directive/locative.\nA major exception from the general system of personal and dimensional prefixes is the very frequent prefix \ud808\ude4c \"-ni-\" \"(in) there\", which corresponds to a noun phrase in the locative, but doesn't seem to be preceded by any pronominal prefix and has demonstrative meaning by itself. This prefix is not to be confused with the homographic sequence \ud808\ude4c \"-ni-\" which corresponds to an animate noun phrase in the directive. In the latter case, \"ni\" is analysed as a combination of pronominal /-nn-/ and directive /-i-/ (roughly: \"at him/her\", \"on him/her\", etc.), whereas in the former, \"ni\" is unanalysable.\nAn example of a verb chain where several dimensional slots are occupied can be:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe comitative prefix \"-da-\" can, in addition, express the meaning \"to be able to\". In that case, there is a preceding pronominal prefix agreeing with the subject of the action: e.g. {nu-mu-e-da-n-dab-en} \"you cannot catch him\" (lit.\u2009'you won't catch him with yourself'). The directive has the meaning \"on(to)\" when the verb is combined with a noun in the locative case: e.g. {ban\u0161ur-a ninda b-i-b-g\u0303a-g\u0303a-en} \"I will put bread on the table\".\nDifferences and combinations between dimensional prefixes and noun case markers.\nWhile the meanings of the prefixes are generally the same as those of the corresponding nominal case markers, there are some differences:\nAt the systemic level, there are some asymmetries between the nominal case markers and the verbal dimensional prefixes: they partly make different distinctions, and the nominal case marking is influenced by animacy. Because of these mismatches, different meanings are expressed by combinations of matching or non-matching noun cases and verb prefixes. The combinations may be summarized as follows:\nIn some cases, there are also mismatches between nominal and verbal markers when exact correspondences would have been possible; these may serve to express additional shades of meaning. A dative noun case marker and terminative dimensional prefix may co-occur in the Ur III period. In general, from that time on, the choice of noun cases begins to be influenced by the government of corresponding Akkadian verbs, while the verbs themselves retain their older prefixes. According to Foxvog, /-ni-/ can resume non-locative cases such as the terminative and the dative.\nA peculiar pattern of agreement occurs in what has been referred to as an \"external possession construction\", in which a modifier of the verb refers to a certain object, almost always a body part, but it is emphasised that the action affects the \"possessor\" of that object (cf. English \"he hit \"me\" on the head\"). In that case, the verb may agree with the possessor with the directive prefix, while not agreeing with the object itself: thus, \"he put barley in your hand\" may be expressed by {\u0161u-z(u).a \u0161e i-r-i-n-g\u0303ar}, lit. \"he put barley at you, in your hand\". Alternatively, it may agree with both the possessor and the object: the possessor is then referred to by the dative prefix: {\u0161u-z(u)-a \u0161e (i-)r-a-ni-n-g\u0303ar}, lit. \"he put barley to you, in there, in your hand\".\nUse of the ventive as a 1st person marker.\nWhen the dimensional prefix is dative -/a/-, the personal prefix of the 1st person appears to be absent, but the 1st person reference is expressed by the choice of the ventive conjugation prefix /mu/-\".\" The sequence that expresses the 1st person dative is then: /mu-/ + /-a-/ \u2192 \ud808\ude20 \"ma-\". When the intended meaning is that of the directive -/i/~/e/- (\"on me\", \"in contact with me\", etc.), it seems that the ventive conjugation prefix \ud808\ude2c \"mu-\" alone serves to express it.\nSyncope of /i/ in -/ni/- and -/bi/-.\nTwo special phenomena occur if there is no absolutive\u2013ergative pronominal prefix in the pre-stem position.\n1. The sequences \ud808\ude4c -/ni/- (locative {-ni-} and personal + directive {-nn-i-}) and \ud808\ude48 /bi/- (personal + directive {b-i-}) acquire the forms -/n/- and -/b/- (coinciding with the \"absolutive\u2013ergative\" pronominal prefixes) before the stem if there isn't already an absolutive\u2013ergative pronominal prefix in pre-stem position. This is typically the case when the verb is used intransitively. For example, the normal appearance of \"-ni-\" is seen in:\nIn contrast, in an intransitive form, we find a syncopated realization:\nThe preceding vowel undergoes compensatory lengthening, which is sometimes indicated by its doubling in the spelling:\nLikewise, the normal realisation of \"bi-\" is seen in:\nThis is to be contrasted with the syncopated version in an intransitive form:\nThe same phonological pattern is claimed to account for the alternation between the forms of the ventive prefix. The standard appearance is seen in:\nIn an intransitive form, however, we find:\nExpression of the directive by a pre-stem personal prefix.\nA superficially very similar, but distinct phenomenon is that if there isn't already an absolutive\u2013ergative pronominal prefix in pre-stem position, the personal prefix of the directive participant does not receive the dimensional prefix -/i/~/e/- at all and is moved to the pre-stem position. For example, the normal position of the directive participant is seen in:\nIn contrast, in an intransitive form, we find:\nIn the same way, the normal position is seen in:\nThis can be contrasted with an intransitive form:\nAbsence of {-b-}.\nIn some cases, the 3rd person inanimate prefix \"-b-\" appears to be unexpectedly absent.\nPronominal suffixes.\nThe pronominal suffixes are as follows:\nThe initial vowel in all of the above suffixes can be assimilated to the vowel of the verb root; more specifically, it can become /u/ or /i/ if the vowel of the verb root is /u/ or /i/, respectively. It can also undergo contraction with an immediately preceding vowel. Pre-Ur III texts also spell the first- and second-person suffix -/en/ as -/e/, making it coincide with the third person in the \"mar\u00fb\" form.\nPronominal agreement with subjects and direct objects.\nSumerian verbal agreement follows a nominative\u2013accusative pattern in the 1st and 2nd persons of the \"mar\u00fb\" tense-aspect, but an ergative\u2013absolutive pattern in most other forms of the indicative mood. Because of this presence of both patterns, Sumerian is considered a language with split ergativity. The general principle is that in the \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" TA, the transitive subject is expressed by the prefix, and the direct object by the suffix, and in the \"mar\u00fb\" TA it is the other way round. For example, {i-b-dab-en} can be a \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" form meaning \"it caught me\", where {-b-} expresses the subject \"it\" and {-en} expresses the object \"I\". However, it can also be a \"mar\u00fb\" form meaning \"I will catch it\", where {-en} expresses the subject \"I\" and {-b-} expresses the object \"it\". As for the intransitive subject, it is expressed, in both TAs, by the suffixes. For example, {i-ka\u0161-en} is \"I ran\", and {i-ka\u0161-ed-en} can be \"I will run\". This means that the intransitive subject is treated like the object in \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" (which makes the \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" pattern ergative) and like the subject in \"mar\u00fb\" (which makes the \"mar\u00fb\" pattern nominative-accusative).\nThere are two exceptions from the above generalization:\n1. A transitive subject of the \"third\" person in \"mar\u00fb\" uses unique suffixes that are \"not\" the same as those of the intransitive subject and the \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" direct object. For example, while \"they ran\" can be {i-ka\u0161-e\u0161}, just as \"it caught them\" can be {i-b-dab-e\u0161}, the corresponding form for \"they will catch it\" would be {i-b-dab-ene}. This pattern can be described as a case of tripartite alignment.\n2. A plural transitive subject in the \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" TA is expressed not only by the prefix, but also by the suffix: e.g. {i-n-dab-e\u0161} can mean \"they caught (it)\". Specifically, the prefix expresses only the person, while the suffix expresses both the person and the number of the subject.\nNote that the prefixes of the plural transitive subject are identical to those of the singular \u2013 -/V/-, -/e/-, -/n/- \u2013 as opposed to the special plural forms \"-me-\", \"-e-ne-\", \"-ne-\" found in non-pre-stem position.\nThe use of the personal affixes for subjects and direct objects can be summarized as follows:\nExamples for TA and pronominal agreement: (\"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" is rendered with past tense, \"mar\u00fb\" with present):\nStem.\nThe verbal stem itself can also express grammatical distinctions within the categories number and tense-aspect. In a number of verbs, this involves suppletion or morphonological alternations that are not fully predictable.\n1. With respect to number, plurality can be expressed by \"complete\" reduplication of the \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" stem (e.g. \ud808\uddad\ud808\uddad \"kur9-kur9\" \"enter (pl.)\" or by a suppletive stem (e.g. \ud808\udc7a \"gub\" \"stand (sing.)\"\u00a0\u2013 \ud808\udc7b \"sug2\" \"stand (pl.)\". The traditional view is that both of these morphological means express plurality of the absolutive participant in Sumerian. However, it has often been pointed out that complete reduplication of the verb in Sumerian can also express \"plurality of the action itself\" intensity or iterativity, and that it is not obligatory in the presence of plural participants, but rather seems to expressly emphasize the plurality. According to some researchers, the predominant meaning of the suppletive plural stem is, indeed, plurality of the most affected participants, whereas the predominant meaning of complete reduplication is plurality of events (because they occur at multiple times or locations). However, even with suppletive plural stems, the singular may occur with a plural participant, presumably because the event is perceived as a single one.\n2. With respect to tense-aspect marking, verbs are divided in four types; \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" is always the unmarked TA.\nThe following tables show some of the most frequent stem alternations.\nThe modal or imperfective suffix -/ed/.\nBefore the pronominal suffixes, a suffix -/ed/ or -/d/ can be inserted (the /d/ is only realized if other vowels follow, in which case the /e/ in turn may be elided): e.g. \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc04(\ud808\udc8a)\ud808\ude48\ud808\udc97 \"i3-za\u1e2b3(-e)-de3-en\" {i-za\u1e2b-ed-en} \"I will/must escape\", \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc04\ud808\udc8a \"i3-za\u1e2b3-e\" {i-za\u1e2b-ed} \"he will/must escape\". This suffix is considered to account for occurrences of \"-e\" in the third-person singular \"mar\u00fb\" of intransitive forms by those who do not accept the theory that \"-e\" itself is a \"mar\u00fb\" stem formant.\nThe function of the suffix is somewhat controversial. Some view it as having a primarily modal meaning of \"must\" or \"can\" or future meaning. Others believe that it primarily signals simply the imperfective status of a verb form, i.e. a \"mar\u00fb\" form, although its presence is obligatory only in intransitive \"mar\u00fb\" forms and in non-finite forms. In intransitive forms, it thus helps to distinguish \"mar\u00fb\" from \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\"; for instance, in the above example, \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc04\ud808\udc97 \"i3-za\u1e2b3-en\" alone, without -/ed/-, could have been interpreted as a \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" form \"I escaped\". In contrast, in the analysis of scholars who do not believe that -/ed/- is obligatory in \"mar\u00fb\", many intransitive forms like \"i3-za\u1e2b3-en\" can be both \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" and \"mar\u00fb\".\nThe vowel /e/ of this suffix undergoes the same allophonic changes as the initial /e/ of the person suffixes. It is regularly assimilated to /u/ in front of stems containing the vowel /u/ and a following labial consonant, /r/ or /l/, e.g. \ud808\udee7\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udc55 \"\u0161um2-mu(-d)\" (&lt; {\u0161um-ed}). It is also assimilated and contracted with immediately preceding vowels, e.g. \ud808\udd04 \"gi4-gi4\" /gi-gi-i(d)/ &lt; {gi-gi-ed} \"which will/should return\". The verb \ud808\udc7a \"du\" \"go\" never takes the suffix.\nUse of the tense-aspect forms.\nJagersma systematizes the use of the tense-aspect forms in the following patterns:\nIn addition, different moods often require either a \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" or a \"mar\u00fb\" stem and either a \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" or a \"mar\u00fb\" agreement pattern depending on various conditions, as specified in the relevant sections above and below.\nIn more general terms, modern scholars usually state that the difference between the two forms is primarily one of aspect: \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" expresses perfective aspect, i.e. a completed action, or sometimes possibly punctual aspect, whereas \"mar\u00fb\" expresses imperfective aspect, i.e. a non-completed action, or sometimes possibly durative aspect. In contrast, the \"time\" at which the action takes place or at which it is completed or non-completed is not specified and may be either past, present or future. This contrasts with the earlier view, prevalent in the first half of the 20th century, according to which the difference was one of tense: \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" was thought to express the past (preterite) tense, and \"mar\u00fb\" was considered to express present-future tense, while the use of \"mar\u00fb\" with past-tense reference was viewed as a stylistic device (cf. the so-called historical present use in other languages). Indeed, it has been pointed out that a translation of \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" with past tense and \"mar\u00fb\" with present or future tense does work well most of the time; this may correspond to the cases in which the action was viewed by Sumerian speakers as completed or non-completed \"with respect to the present moment\".\nThe imperative mood.\nThe imperative mood construction is produced with a \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\" stem, but using the \"mar\u00fb\" agreement pattern, by turning all prefixes into suffixes. In the plural, the second person plural ending is attached in a form that differs slightly from the indicative: it is /-(n)zen/, with the -/n/- appearing only after vowels. The stem is singular even in the plural imperative. Compare the following indicative-imperative pairs: \nThis may be compared with the French pair \"vous le lui donnez\", but \"donnez-le-lui!\"\nIn addition, the prefix \ud808\ude4c \"i3-\" is replaced by /-a/: \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc7a i3-g\u0303en\" \"he went\", but \ud808\udc7a\ud808\ude3e \"g\u0303en-na \"go!\", \ud808\udd54\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc0a\ud808\udc49 \"in-na-ab-be2\" \"he will say it to him\", but \ud808\udd57\ud808\udcb5\ud808\udc2d\ud808\ude3e(\ud808\udc0a) \"dug4-ga-an-na(-ab)\" 'say it to him!'. However, the vowel /e/ and possibly /i/ occasionally also occur if no further prefixes follow, perhaps as a characteristic of southern dialects. The ventive prefix \"mu-\", if not followed by others, has the form \ud808\udf1d \"-um\" in the imperative: \ud808\udc7a\ud808\udf1d \"\u0159e6-um\" 'bring it here!' In Old Babylonian texts, the reduced form -/u/ and the more regular -/am/ {-a-m} are also found: \ud808\udcb7\ud808\ude61 \"g\u0303e26-nu\", \ud808\udc7a\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d \"g\u0303en-am3\", both \"come here!\"\nParticiples.\nSumerian participles can function both as verbal adjectives and as verbal nouns. As verbal adjectives, they can describe any participant involved in the action or state expressed by the verb: for instance, \ud808\udee7\ud808\ude20 \"\u0161um2-ma\" may mean either \"(which was) given (to someone)\", \"who was given (something)\" or \"who gave\". As verbal nouns, they denote the action or state itself, so \ud808\udee7\ud808\ude20 \"\u0161um2-ma\" may also mean '(the act of) giving' or 'the fact that X gave Y'. Participles are formed in the following ways:\nCopula verb.\nThe copula verb /me/ \"to be\" is mostly used in an enclitic form. Its conjugation is as follows: \nIn addition, the initial vowel of the form \"-am3\" is reduced to -/m/ after enclitics ending in a vowel: \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf1d \"e2\"-\"g\u0303u10\"-\"um\" \"it is my house\". Like other final consonants, the \"-m\" may not be expressed in early spelling.\nThese enclitic forms are used instead of a simple sequence of finite prefix, root and personal suffix \"*i3-me-en\", \"*i-me\" etc. For more complex forms, the independent copula form is used: \ud808\ude4c\ud808\ude28\ud808\udc00 \"i3-me-a\" \"that he is\", \ud808\ude61\ud808\udd47\ud808\ude28\ud808\udc97 \"nu-u3-me-en\" \"I am not\". Unlike the enclitic, it typically uses the normal stem \ud808\ude28 -\"me\"- in the 3rd person singular (\ud808\udc40\ud808\ude8f\ud808\ude28 \"ba-ra-me\" \"should not be\"), except for the form prefixed with \"\u1e2ba-\", which is \ud808\udcf6\ud808\udd4e \"\u1e2be2-em\" or \ud808\udcf6\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d \"\u1e2be2-am3\".\nFor a negative equivalent of the copula in the 3rd person, it seems that the word \ud808\ude61 \"nu\" \"not\" alone instead of \"*nu-um\" is used predicatively (e.g. \ud808\udf4f\ud808\ude61 \"urud nu\" \"it is not copper\") although the form \ud808\ude61(\ud808\udf26)\ud808\udcb5\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d \"nu-(un)-ga-am3\" \"it is also not ...\" is attested. A different word is used to express existence or being present/located somewhere: \"\ud808\udd45 g\u0303al2\".\nA peculiar feature of the copula is that it seems to form a relative clause without the nominalizing suffix /-a/ and thus uses the finite form: thus, instead of \ud808\ude4c\ud808\ude28\ud808\udc00 \"i3-me-a\", simply \ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d -\"am3\" is used: \ud808\uddac\ud808\udcfb\ud808\udcb5\ud808\ude8f\ud808\ude4c\ud808\udd4e\ud808\ude20\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udee7 \"kug nig\u03032-gur11-ra-ni-im ma-an-\u0161um2\" \"he gave me silver (which) was his property\", which appears to say \"The silver was his property, he gave it to me\". In the negative, the full form \ud808\ude61\ud808\ude28\ud808\udc00 \"nu-me-a\" \"which is not\" is used, and likewise in non-relative functions.\nPassive voice.\nSome scholars believe that it is possible to speak of a passive voice in Sumerian. Jagersma (2010) distinguishes three attested passive constructions. In each case, the ergative participant and the corresponding agreement marker on the verb are removed, so that the verb is inflected intransitively, but there may also be some additional cues to ensure a passive interpretation. The passive may be formed:\nThe agent is never expressed in the passive clause in Sumerian.\nWhile the existence of such intransitive constructions of normally transitive verbs is widely recognized, some other scholars have disputed the view that these constructions should be called \"passives\". They prefer to speak of one-participant or agentless constructions and to limit themselves to the observation that the prefixes \"ba-\" and \"a-\" tend to be preferred with such constructions, apparently as a secondary effect of another, more subtle feature of their meaning. Concerning the history of the constructions, it has been claimed that the passive(-like) use of \"ba-\" does not appear before the Ur III period; Jagersma, on the contrary, states that it is attested already in the Old Sumerian period, although it becomes especially frequent in Ur III times.\nA different construction has been posited and labelled \"Sumerian passive voice\" by a significant number of scholars. According to them, too, a passive is formed by removing the ergative participant and the verbal marker that agrees with it, but the verb is \"not\" inflected as an intransitive one: instead, it has a personal prefix, which refers to the \"logical object\": {e i-b-\u0159u} or {e ba-b-\u0159u} \"the house is being built\". The stem is always \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\". Some consider this construction to have only the function and meaning of a \"mar\u00fb\" form\"\", while others consider the tense-aspect opposition to be neutralized in it. The personal prefix is nearly always -\"b\"- in identified cases; views differ on whether it agrees in gender with an animate logical object, appearing as \"-n-\", or whether it remains \"-b-\". Critics have argued that most alleged examples of the construction are actually instances of the pre-stem personal prefix referring to the directive participant in an intransitive verb, at least before the Old Babylonian period. Pascal Attinger considers it plausible that the original construction was indeed a directive one, whereas its new passive function as described by him arose via a reinterpretation in the Old Babylonian period; Walther Sallaberger, on the contrary, believes this kind of passive to be characteristic of Neo-Sumerian and to have been lost in Old Babylonian. A further possibility is that at least some of these cases actually have an impersonal 3rd person inanimate subject: \"'it' has / they have built the house\".\nCausative construction.\nSumerian doesn't have dedicated causative morphology. Causativity is expressed syntactically in two ways, depending on the transitivity of the verb.\nIn Old Babylonian Sumerian, new causative markers have been claimed to have arisen under the influence of Akkadian; this is explained in the section on Interference from Akkadian and other late phenomena.\nPhrasal verbs.\nA specific problem of Sumerian syntax is posed by the numerous phrasal verbs (traditionally called \"compound verbs\" in Sumerology in spite of the fact that they are not compounds, but idiomatic combinations). They usually involve a noun immediately before the verb, forming a lexical/idiomatic unit: e.g. \ud808\udd46...\ud808\udc83 \"igi ...du8\", lit. \"open the eye\" = \"see, look\". Their case government and agreement patterns vary depending on the specific verb. The component noun is usually in the absolutive case, but may be in the directive. If the phrasal verb takes another noun as a \"logical object\", the verbal infix is typically the directive, while the noun case is most commonly either the directive (dative if animate), which otherwise has the meaning \"at / with respect to\", or the locative (dative if animate), which otherwise has the meaning \"on\":\nLess commonly, the case of the logical object and the pronominal infix may be:\nAnother possibility is for the component noun to be in the dative (directive if inanimate), while the object is in the absolutive:\nSyntax.\nGeneral features.\nThe basic word order is subject\u2013object\u2013verb; verb finality is only violated in rare instances, in poetry. The moving of a constituent towards the beginning of the phrase may be a way to highlight it, as may the addition of the copula to it. Modifiers (adjectives, genitive phrases etc.) are normally placed after the noun: \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude4b \"e2 gibil\" \"a new house\" \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude17\ud808\uddb7 \"e2 lugal-la\" \"the house of the owner\". However, the so-called anticipatory genitive (\ud808\udc8d\ud808\udc00\ud808\ude17\ud808\ude48 \"e2-a lugal-bi\" \"the owner of the house\", lit. \"of the house, its owner\") is common and may signal the possessor's topicality. There are no adpositions, but noun phrases in a certain case may resemble prepositions and have a similar function:\nSubordinate clauses.\nThere are various ways to express subordination. Many of them include the nominalization of a finite verb with the suffix -/a/, which is also used to form participles, as shown above. Like the participles, this nominalized clause can either modify a noun, as adjectives do, or refer to the event itself, as nouns do. It usually functions as a relative clause, corresponding to an English clause with \"which ...\" or \"who ...\", as in the following example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLike the participles, the relative clauses can describe any participant involved in the action or state expressed by the verb, and the specific participant is determined by context: e.g. \ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf26\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udee7\ud808\ude20 {mu-nna-n-\u0161um-a} can be \"which he gave to him\", \"who gave (something) to him\", etc. The nominalized clause can also be a complement clause, corresponding to an English clause with \"that ...\", e.g. \"e2 in-\u0159u2-a\" (\"in-zu\") \"(he knows) that he built the house\". Like a noun, it can be followed by case morphemes:\nThe nominalized clause can directly modify a noun expressing time such as \ud808\udf13 \"ud\" \"day, time\", \ud808\ude2c \"mu\" \"year\" and \ud808\udf17 \"itid\" \"month\", and this in turn can then stand in the locative and ablative in the same meanings as the clauses themselves: \"ud e2 in-\u0159u2-a-a/ta\" \"when/after he built the house\". In this case, the particle \"-bi\" sometimes precedes the case morpheme: \"ud e2 in-\u0159u2-a-ba\"; the basic meaning is still of \"when\".\nThe nominalized clause can also be included in the various \"prepositional constructions\" mentioned above:\nThe structure is shown more clearly in the following example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSeveral clauses can be nominalized by a single {-a} enclitic: {ka\u02bea ba-za\u1e2b engar-e nu-i-b-dab-a b-i-n-dug} \"he said that the fox had escaped and the farmer had not caught it\".\nParticiples can function in a very similar way to the nominalized clauses and be combined with the same kinds of adjuncts. One peculiarity is that, unlike nominalized clauses, they may also express the agent as a possessor, in the genitive case: \ud808\udc8d\ud808\udd95\ud808\udc00\ud808\ude17\ud808\uddb7 \"e2 \u0159u2-a lugal-la\" \"the house built by the king\". However, when the head noun (\"e2\") is specified as here, a more common construction uses the ergative: \ud808\udc8d\ud808\ude17\ud808\udc8a\ud808\udd95\ud808\udc00 \"e2 lugal-e \u0159u2-a.\"\nA special subordinating construction with the temporal meaning of an English \"when\"-clause is the so-called \"pronominal conjugation\", which contains a verb nominalized with -/a/ and following possessive pronominal markers referring to the subject (transitive or intransitive). In the 3rd person, the form appears to end in the possessive pronominal marker alone: \ud808\uddad\ud808\ude8f\ud808\ude4c \"kur9-ra-ni \"when he entered\", lit. \"his entering\", etc. It has been suggested that these forms actually also contain a final directive marker \"-e\"; in this example, the analysis would be {kur-a-ni-e}, \"at his entering\". Similarly, in Old Babylonian Sumerian, one sometimes finds the locative or ablative markers after the possessive (\"kur9-ra-na, kur9-ra-ni-ta). In contrast, in the 1st and 2nd persons, the 1st and 2nd person pronouns are followed by the syllable \ud808\ude48 \"-ne\": \ud808\udf63\ud808\udcb5\ud808\ude2c\ud808\ude48 \"zig3-ga-g\u0303u10-ne\" \"as I rose\"). The verb itself may be in \"\u1e2bam\u1e6du\", as in the above examples, or in \"mar\u00fb\" followed by the modal/imperfective suffix -/ed/-: \ud808\udf63\ud808\udf63\ud808\udc55\ud808\ude2c\ud808\ude48 \"zi-zi-da\"-\"g\u0303u10-ne\" \"when I rise\". The same construction is used with the word \ud808\udc38 \"dili\" \"alone\": \ud808\udc38\ud808\ude2c\ud808\ude48 \"dili-g\u0303u10-ne\" \"I alone\", etc.\nSubordinating conjunctions such as \ud808\udf13\ud808\udc55 \"ud-da\" \"when, if\", \ud808\uded7\ud808\udcfb\ud808\udf09\ud808\uddf2\ud808\udc49 \"tukum-bi\" \"if\" and \ud808\udc97\ud808\ude3e \"en-na\" \"until\" also exist.\nCoordination.\nCoordinating conjunctions are rarely used. The most common way to express the sense of \"and\" is by simple juxtaposition. Nominal phrases may be conjoined, perhaps emphatically, by adding \ud808\udc49 -\"bi\" to the second one: \ud808\udc2d\ud808\udc97\ud808\udda4\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udf8f\ud808\udda4\ud808\ude4c \"en-lil2 nin-lil2-bi\" \"both Enlil and Ninlil\"; sometimes the enclitic is further reinforced by \ud808\udc55 \"-da\" \"with\". More surprisingly, \ud808\udeeb \"-ta\" \"from\" is also sometimes used in the sense of \"and\". The word \ud808\udd47 \"u3\" \"and\" was borrowed from Akkadian in the Old Akkadian period and occurs mostly in relatively colloquial texts; Old Babylonian Sumerian also borrowed from Akkadian the enclitic \ud808\ude20 \"-ma\" \"and\". There is no conjunction \"or\" and its sense can also be expressed by simple juxtaposition; a more explicit and emphatic alternative is the repetition of \ud808\udcf6\ud808\udd4e \"\u1e2be2-em\", \"let it be\": \ud808\uddfb\ud808\udcf6\ud808\udd4e\ud808\ude27\ud808\udcf6\ud808\udd4e \"udu \u1e2be2-em ma\u0161 \u1e2be2-em\" \"(be it) a sheep or a goat\"\".\"\nOther issues.\nA quotative particle -/(e)\u0161e/ or -/\u0161i/ \"saying\", variously spelt \ud808\udca0 -\"e\u0161e2\", \ud808\udd46 -\"\u0161i\" or \ud808\udc2a\ud808\udeba -\"e-\u0161e\", has been identified. Its use is not obligatory and it is attested only or almost only in texts from the Old Babylonian period or later. Another, rarely attested, particle, \ud808\udd11(\ud808\udeba)\ud808\udc97 -\"g\u0303e\u0161(-\u0161e)-en\", apparently expresses irrealis modality: \"were it that ...\".\nHighlighting uses of the copula somewhat similar to English cleft constructions are present: \ud808\ude17\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d\ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc7a \"lugal-am3 i3-g\u0303en\" \"It is the king who came\", \ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc38\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d\ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc7a \"a-na-a\u0161\"-\"am3 i3-g\u0303en\" \"Why is it that he came?\", \ud808\ude4c\ud808\udc7a\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d \"i3-g\u0303en\" \"It is the case that he came\".\nSumerian generally links a nominal predicate to the subject using the copula verb, like English. However, it does use zero-copula constructions in some contexts. In interrogative sentences, the 3rd person copula is omitted: \ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf6a \"a-na mu-zu\" \"What is your name?\", \ud808\ude48\ud808\udc97\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf6a \"ne-en mu-zu\" \"Is this your name?\". Sumerian proper names that consist of entire sentences normally lack a copula as well, e.g. \ud808\udc00\ud808\udc40\ud808\udc2d\ud808\udf13\ud808\udc76 \"a-ba dutu-gen7\" \"Who is like Utu?\" As explained above, negative sentences also omit the copula in *\"nu-am3\"/\"nu-um \"\"isn't\" and use simply \ud808\ude61 \"nu\" instead.\n\"Yes/no\"-interrogative sentences appear to have been marked only by intonation and possibly by resulting lengthening of final vowels. There is no wh-movement to the beginning of the clause, but the interrogative words are placed immediately before the verb: e.g. \ud808\ude17\ud808\udc8a\ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e\ud808\ude2c\ud808\udf26\ud808\udc1d \"lugal-e a-na mu-un-ak\" \"What did the king do?\", \ud808\udc8d\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc40\ud808\udc00\ud808\udd54\ud808\udd95 \"e2 a-ba-a in-\u0159u3\" \"Who built the temple?\" Two exceptions from this are that the constituent noun of a phrasal verb is normally closer to the verb, and that an interrogative word emphasized with a copula such as \ud808\udc00\ud808\ude3e\ud808\udc38\ud808\udc00\ud808\udc2d \"a-na-a\u0161-am3\" \"why is it that ...?\" is placed at the beginning of the clause. In addition, as already mentioned, interrogative sentences omit the copula where a declarative would have used it.\nWord formation.\nDerivation by affixation is largely non-existent. An exception may be a few nouns ending in -/u/ denoting the object of a corresponding verb: \ud808\udeac\ud808\ude92 \"sar-ru\" \"document\" &lt; \ud808\udeac \"sar\" \"write\". Compounding, on the other hand, is common in nouns. Compounds are normally left-headed. The dependent may be:\nAn older obsolete pattern was right-headed instead:\nA participle may be the head of the compound, preceded by a dependent:\nThere are a few cases of nominalized finite verbs, too: \ud808\udc40\ud808\udf57 \"ba-u\u01614\" \"(who) has died\" &gt; \"dead\"\nAbstract nouns are formed as compounds headed by the word \ud808\ude46 \"nam-\" \"fate, status\": \ud808\udf09 \"dumu\" \"child\" &gt; \ud808\ude46\ud808\udf09 \"nam-dumu\" \"childhood\", \ud808\udefb \"tar\" \"cut, decide\" &gt; \ud808\ude46\ud808\udefb \"nam-tar\" \"fate\". Nouns that express the object of an action or an object possessing a characteristic are formed as compounds headed by the word \ud808\udcfb \"nig\u03032\" \"thing\": \ud808\udd65 \"gu4\" \"eat\" &gt; \ud808\udcfb\ud808\udd65 \"nig\u03032\"-\"gu7\" \"food\", \ud808\udd2d \"good, sweet\" &gt; \ud808\udcfb\ud808\udd2d \"nig\u03032-dug\" \"something sweet\". The meaning may also be abstract: \ud808\udedb...\ud808\udc72 \"si...sa2\" \"straighten, put in order\" &gt; \"nig\u03032-si-sa2\" \"justice\". A small number of terms of professions are derived with the preposed element \ud808\ude61 \"nu-\": \ud808\udd11\ud808\udeac \"g\u0303e\u0161kiri6\" \"garden\" \"&gt; \ud808\ude61\ud808\udd11\ud808\udeac nu-g\u0303e\u0161kiri6-(k)\" \"gardener\".\nApparent coordinative compounds also exist, e.g. \ud808\udc2d\ud808\udda0 \"an-ki\" \"the universe\", lit. \"heaven and earth\".\nA noun can be formed from an adjective by conversion: for example, \ud808\udcbc \"dag\u0303al\" \"wide\" also means \"width\".\nOn verbs acquiring the properties of adjectives and nouns (agent nouns and action nouns), see the section on \"Participles\".\nWhile new verbs cannot be derived, verbal meanings may be expressed by phrasal verbs (see above); in particular, new phrasal verbs are often formed on the basis of nouns by making them the object of the verbs \ud808\udd57 \"dug4\" \"do\" or \ud808\udc1d \"ak\" \"make\": \ud808\udc00...\ud808\udd57 \"a ...dug4\", lit. \"to do water\" &gt; \"to irrigate\", \ud808\udd11\ud808\udcb5...\ud808\udf6e \"g\u0303e\u0161ga-rig2 ...ak\", lit. \"to do the comb\" &gt; \"to comb\".\nDialects.\nThe standard variety of Sumerian was (: ). A notable variety or sociolect was (: ), possibly to be interpreted as \"fine tongue\" or \"high-pitched voice\". Other apparent terms for registers or dialects were \"eme-galam\" \"high tongue\", \"eme-si-sa2\" \"straight tongue\", \"eme-te-na2\" \"oblique[?] tongue\", \"emesukudda\", \"emesuha\", \"emesidi\" and \"emeku\". Recently, a regional differentiation into a Northern and a Southern Sumerian dialect area has been posited.\nEmesal.\n\"Emesal\" is used exclusively by female characters in some literary texts. In addition, it is dominant in certain genres of cult songs such as the hymns sung by Gala priests. It has been argued that it might have been a female language variety of the kind that exists or has existed in some cultures, such as among the Chukchis and the Garifuna. Alternatively, it has been contended that it must have been originally a regional dialect, since instances of apparent Emesal-like forms are attested in the area of late 3rd millennium Lagash, and some loanwords into Akkadian appear to come from Emesal rather than Emegir. Apart from such isolated glosses, Emesal is first attested in writing in the early Old Babylonian period. It is typically written with syllable signs rather than logograms. A text is often not written consistently in Emesal, but contains apparent Emegir forms as well.\nThe special features of \"Emesal\" are mostly phonological and lexical. In terms of phonology, the following are some of the most common sound correspondences:\nThere are also specifically Emesal lexemes that do not seem to be cognate with their Emegir counterparts, for example:\nIn grammar, both the cohortative prefix \ud808\udcb5 \"ga-\" and the precative prefix \ud808\udd29 \"\u1e2ba-\" are replaced by the morpheme \ud808\udc55 \"da-\" (with the allomorphs \ud808\ude48 \"de3\"- and \ud808\udc85 \"du5\"- conditioned by context in the same way as that of the corresponding Emegir prefixes).\nSouthern and Northern Sumerian.\nBram Jagersma and G\u00e1bor Z\u00f3lyomi distinguish two regional dialects of Sumerian: the Southern Sumerian dialect of Lagash, Umma, Ur and Uruk, which eventually formed the basis for the common standard of the Neo-Sumerian (Ur III) period, and the Northern Sumerian dialect as seen in texts from Nippur, Adab, Isin and Shuruppak (although eventually texts in the standard variety begin to be produced in that area as well). The differences that he finds between the two varieties are:\nOld Babylonian Sumerian.\nThe dominant Sumerian variety of the Old Babylonian period, in turn, reflected a different regional dialect from the standard Neo-Sumerian of the Ur III period:\nInterference from Akkadian and other late phenomena.\nIn the Old Babylonian period and after it, the Sumerian used by scribes was influenced by their mother tongue, Akkadian, and sometimes more generally by imperfect acquisition of the language. As a result, various deviations from its original structure occur in texts or copies of texts from these times. The following effects have been found in the Old Babylonian period:\nFor Middle Babylonian and later texts, additional deviations have been noted:\nSyllabary.\nThe table below shows signs used for simple syllables of the form CV or VC. As used for the Sumerian language, the cuneiform script was in principle capable of distinguishing at least 16 consonants, transliterated as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\"b, d, g, g\u0303, \u1e2b, k, l, m, n, p, r, \u0159, s, \u0161, t, z\"\nas well as four vowel qualities, \"a, e, i, u\".\nSample text.\nInscription by Entemena of Laga\u0161.\nThis text was inscribed on a small clay cone c.\u20092400\u00a0BC. It recounts the beginning of a war between the city-states of Laga\u0161 and Umma during the Early Dynastic III period, one of the earliest border conflicts recorded. (RIME 1.09.05.01)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65679", "revid": "861759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65679", "title": "Car Wars", "text": "Tabletop combat simulation game\nCar Wars is a vehicle combat simulation game developed by Steve Jackson Games, first published in 1980. Players control armed vehicles in a post-apocalyptic future.\nGame play.\nIn \"Car Wars\", players assume control of one or more cars or other powered vehicles, from motorcycles to semi trucks. Optional rules include piloting helicopters, ultralights, balloons, boats, submarines, and tanks. The vehicles are typically outfitted with weapons (such as missiles and machine guns), components (like heavy-duty fire-proof wheels, and nitro injectors), and defensive elements (armor plating and radar tracking systems). Within any number of settings, the players then direct their vehicles in combat.\nThe published games use cardstock counters to represent vehicles in a simulated battle upon printed battlemaps. While the game rules allow for any scale, most editions of the game were published to use a 1-inch = 15-feet scale (1:180 scale), although the Fifth Edition switched to 1-inch = 5-feet (1:60 scale). At this larger scale, players can use miniature toy vehicles such as Hot Wheels or Matchbox cars, S gauge model railroading scenery, or 28mm-30mm scale wargaming miniatures.\n\"Car Wars\" had many scenarios available and the system allowed players to make their own. Common scenarios include a harrowing gauntlet and competition in an arena to win a virtual cash prize with which to upgrade their cars. Many game sessions consist of players taking their cars through many successive arena-style scenarios, upgrading their cars between each round. At the height of the game's popularity, many gaming conventions and gaming clubs sponsored \"Car Wars\" tournaments where finalist players could win real world prizes.\n\"Car Wars\" uses standard dice to determine the outcomes of weapon fire, damage and vehicle control during the game. It is played in turns, each turn representing one second of real time. Each turn was initially divided into ten phases (first edition) then five (revised edition) and in the last edition three. All action in \"Car Wars\" is simultaneous. Players do not roll for initiative as is common in other combat games, instead each phase a vehicle moves a distance determined by the vehicle's speed. Players may fire weapons on any phase as long as they have line-of-sight with a target of their choosing. As part of movement players may attempt turns and other maneuvers of increasing difficulty. The more maneuvers one attempts in a turn and the more difficult they are, the more likely it is that a player's car will skid or crash. After all phases of movement and combat are resolved, a new turn begins. Typically, a game is over after a few turns, which represents a combat of a few seconds, but because every action in the game must be resolved a typical game takes a few hours to play.\nWhile the core of the original \"Car Wars\" was a boardgame, the supplements allowed it to be extended into a larger game with light role-playing elements. Other expansions such as rule-additions, mini-scenarios and dual-statted products like \"Autoduel Champions\" (for use with \"Car Wars\" or \"Champions\") published in game magazines expanded the game even further.\nPublication history.\n\"Car Wars\" was first published in a small ziplock-bag format in 1980, and cited Alan Dean Foster's short story, \"Why Johnny Can't Speed\", as a primary inspiration. (Later editions also cited Harlan Ellison's short story \"Along the Scenic Route\" and the film \"Death Race 2000\".) The game won the Charles S. Roberts Award (Origins Award) for \"Best Science Fiction Boardgame of 1981\" and was named to the \"Games\" magazine Games 100 list in 1985.\nAs the game became more popular, there were a series of increasingly more expensive and elaborate editions. \"Car Wars\" also served as the inspiration for the 1985 video game \"Autoduel\", published by Origin Systems.\nSteve Jackson continues to express an interest in developing video games based on the \"Car Wars\" concept.\nThe game's popularity waned during the 1990s, and in response to slipping sales, Steve Jackson Games ceased support for \"Car Wars\". The last official \"Cars Wars\" material for the original game appeared in \"Pyramid\" magazine (an article introducing High Torque Motors, by Robert Deis).\nAutoduel America, the setting for \"Car Wars\", was developed for role-playing games (RPGs) using Steve Jackson Games' \"GURPS\" system (called \"GURPS Autoduel\"). That \"GURPS\" worldbook has seen two editions. A series of expansions for both the \"GURPS\" version and boardgame, \"The AADA Road Atlas and Survival Guide\", were published in the late 1980s and early 1990s.\nIn 2002, Steve Jackson Games released an entirely new version of \"Car Wars\". Redesigned for a new audience, it was called version 5.0. The new game's unusual marketing, scattering the game across several redundant products, met with mixed responses and the game's popularity has continued to wane. The 2002 products are still in print.\nIn October 2009, Steve Jackson Games made the \"Car Wars Compendium: Second Edition (Fifth Printing)\" available as a PDF from the e23 online store.\n\"Car Wars\" (both boardgame and RPG version) was translated into French by Croc.\n\"Car Wars: The Card Game\" was released in 1991 (with a second edition in 2001), designed by Creede and Sharleen Lambard, and published by Steve Jackson Games.\nMain editions.\nThe first four editions use a ground scale of 1-inch = 15-feet. \"Aeroduel\" introduced an air-to-air scale of \u00bc-inch = 15-feet. The \"Fifth Edition\" uses a revised scale of 3-inches = 15-feet.\nThe fourth edition has been re-released, and includes the auto creation rules and simplified rules for Role Playing.\nOn November 29, 2019, a Kickstarter was started to create a sixth edition, similar to the popular OGRE kickstarter. It was funded as of January 6, 2020, with 3,936 backers pledging $652,995.\nBackground story.\n\"Car Wars\" is set 50 years after the publication dates of the various books. In this alternative future, natural resources are severely depleted and the United States government nationalized oil production. This eventually led to a second American civil war, ending with the secession of the \"Free Oil States\", Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana. Following famine in various parts of the world, there are limited nuclear exchanges between the USSR and the US, but anti-missile systems limit the resulting damage. After these wars, there are years of worldwide economic crisis, and related global unrest, during which \"death sports\" become a popular form of entertainment. This post-apocalyptic setting has drawn comparisons between \"Car Wars\" and the \"Mad Max\" movies.\nAs things began to recover, the organized sport of \"autodueling\" was born as a form of armed demolition derbies. The American Autoduel Association (AADA) was formed, to sponsor sporting events and up-and-coming autoduelists. In this future, technology has allowed for new vehicle designs, miniaturized weapon systems, and replacements for internal combustion engines. Furthermore, human cloning (together with techniques for storing memories), has made death only a minor setback for autoduelists who can afford the procedure. \"Car Wars\" is a game designed for simulating these autoduels between competing players.\nClubs and organizations.\nThe American Autoduel Association (AADA) was a worldwide group of players. It was started by Steve Jackson Games who supported the club with a quarterly magazine called \"Autoduel Quarterly\". This contained campaign ideas, vehicles, \"mock\" advertisements, and new weapons and accessories, as well as questions and answers. Subscribers would receive a bonus in the form of an extra cutout or cartoon on the protective mailing cover. Local clubs could also pay a yearly membership fee to be considered \"official.\"\nThe AADA served as a structured clearinghouse for common rules and guidelines to be followed during 'official' events. World Championships were held each year at the Origins Game Fair.\nThe AADA is no longer an official club as recognized by Steve Jackson Games. There are still several local clubs that claim to be AADA affiliated, and there are even web sites where interested parties can enjoy PBEM games. One site has a \"Car Wars\" podcast.\nThe official \"Car Wars\" site notes plans to relaunch the AADA and start a new periodical called \"Autoduel Times\". No date is given for this project.\nSupplements.\nhttps://\nUncle Albert's Auto Stop &amp; Gunnery Shop 2035 Catalog.\nUncle Albert's Auto Stop &amp; Gunnery Shop 2035 Catalog is a supplement published by Steve Jackson Games in 1985 for the vehicle combat simulation game \"Car Wars\".\n\"Uncle Albert's Auto Stop &amp; Gunnery Shop 2035 Catalog\" was the first of six \"Car Wars\" expansions published by Steve Jackson Games between 1985 and 1992. Each supplement featured new cars and armament compiled from past issues of \"Autoduel Quarterly\". This book is written in the style of a catalog that includes over 120 items, complete with prices, sizes, descriptions, and everything else needed to use these items during a game of \"Car Wars\".\nCraig Sheeley reviewed \"Uncle Albert's Auto Stop &amp; Gunnery Shop 2035 Catalog\" in \"The Space Gamer\" No. 76. Sheeley commented that \"Some of us like complexity. Some of us like to build our own vehicles, and outfit them with dozens of options. Some of us like the monster that \"Car Wars\" has become [...] If you are one of these \"Car Wars\" players, this supplement will prove to be invaluable, as it is an almost complete listing of the options in \"Car Wars\".\"\nMike Eckenfels recalled this supplement with fondness, saying, \"If the \u2018basic\u2019 Car Wars rules just didn\u2019t have enough creative ways to destroy, maim, and otherwise disassemble, the \"Uncle Albert\" catalogs certainly helped pad those needs, and then some [...] There\u2019s a lot of \"Car Wars\" goodness in the pages of this one catalog, alone, to really get you going.\" Eckenfels noted that \"Some accessories actually have in-game use while others have more of an RPG element to it (or are just nice to have to brag about around the table, because apparently wasting pretend money in a fictional game on things that don\u2019t actually have a practical use in-game are... bragable, I guess).\" He concluded, \"this was a nice little addition to the Car Wars universe back in the day.\"\nOther products.\nIn addition to the spin-off video game, \"Autoduel\", Marvel Comics published \"Car Warriors\", a 1991 four-issue comic book miniseries set in the \"Car Wars\" world.\nThere were also a series of six gamebooks based in the \"Car Wars\" universe, where a player could make choices for the protagonist to affect the outcome of the story. The Car Wars Adventure Gamebooks were titled: \"Battle Road\", \"Fuel's Gold\", \"Dueltrack\", \"Badlands Run\", \"Green Circle Blues\", and \"Mean Streets\".\nA trilogy of novels was published by Tor Books: \"The Square Deal\" by David Drake in 1992, \"Double Jeopardy: Car Warriors 2\" by Aaron Alston in 1994, and \"Back from Hell\" by Mick Farren in 1999.\nIn 1995 VictorMaxx technologies announced plans for a series of gaming centers based on \"Car Wars\", with a prototype site to debut in Chicago in 1996.\nReception.\nIn Issue 36 of \"Phoenix\" (March\u2013April 1982), John Lambshead reviewed the first edition of \"Car Wars\" and thought it was \"quite decently presented.\" However, Lambshead found the simultaneous move system \"excruciatingly tedious\", and the combat system complex. He wondered who the audience for this game was, since it was too complex to be a \"fun\" game, but \"On the other hand, who wants to expend so much effort simply to drive an armoured beach buggy around.\" He concluded that \"a combination of intelligence and immaturity is required for a full appreciation of \"Car Wars\".\"\nThe \"Chicago Tribune\" described the game as \"vicious combat takes place on the highways and waters of a future that is not a kinder, gentler America\".\nIn a retrospective review of \"Car Wars\" in \"Black Gate\", Ty Johnston said \"If you ever wanted to take part in the fast-driving, hard-hitting action of the \"Mad Max\" universe where guns and cars ruled the roads, and the plains and the deserts and the ... etc., then you would do well to buckle in and pick up one of the versions of \"Car Wars\" which has been made available over the years.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65681", "revid": "7083768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65681", "title": "Polytonality", "text": "Simultaneous use of multiple musical keys\nPolytonality (also polyharmony) is the musical use of more than one key simultaneously. Bitonality is the use of only two different keys at the same time. Polyvalence or polyvalency is the use of more than one harmonic function, from the same key, at the same time.\nSome examples of bitonality superimpose fully harmonized sections of music in different keys.\nHistory.\nIn traditional music.\nLithuanian traditional singing style sutartines is based on polytonality. A typical sutartines song is based on a six-bar melody, where the first three bars contain melody based on the notes of the triad of a major key (for example, in G major), and the next three bars is based on another key, always a major second higher or lower (for example, in A major). This six-bar melody is performed as a canon, and repetition starts from the fourth bar. As a result, parts are constantly singing in different tonality (key) simultaneously (in G and in A). As a traditional style, sutartines disappeared in Lithuanian villages by the first decades of the 20th century, but later became a national musical symbol of Lithuanian music.\nTribes throughout India\u2014including the Kuravan of Kerala, the Jaunsari of Uttar Pradesh, the Gond, the Santal, and the Munda\u2014also use bitonality, in responsorial song.\nIn classical music.\nIn J. S. Bach's \"Clavier-\u00dcbung III\", there is a two-part passage where, according to Scholes: \"It will be seen that this is a canon at the fourth below; as it is a strict canon, all the intervals of the leading 'voice' are exactly imitated by the following 'voice', and since the key of the leading part is D minor modulating to G minor, that of the following part is necessarily A minor modulating to D minor. Here, then, we have a case of polytonality, but Bach has so adjusted his progressions (by the choice at the critical moment of notes common to two keys) that while the right hand is doubtless quite under the impression that the piece is in D minor, etc., and the left hand that it is in A minor, etc., the listener feels that the whole thing is homogeneous in key, though rather fluctuating from moment to moment. In other words, Bach is trying to make the best of both worlds\u2014the homotonal one of his own day and (prophetically) the polytonal one of a couple of centuries later.\"\nThere is an early example of polytonality in Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber's short composition \"Battalia\", written in 1673, intended to represent drunken soldiers.\nAnother early use of polytonality occurs in the classical period in the finale of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart's composition \"A Musical Joke\", which he deliberately ends with the violins, violas and horns playing in four discordant keys simultaneously.\nIn the 20th century.\nPolytonality was not featured prominently in non-programmatic contexts until the 20th century, particularly in the work of Charles Ives (\"Psalm 67\", c. 1898\u20131902), B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k (\"Fourteen Bagatelles,\" Op. 6, 1908), and Stravinsky (\"Petrushka\", 1911). Ives claimed that he learned the technique of polytonality from his father, who taught him to sing popular songs in one key while harmonizing them in another.\nStravinsky's \"The Rite of Spring\" is widely credited with popularizing bitonality, and contemporary writers such as Casella (1924) describe him as the progenitor of the technique: \"the first work presenting polytonality in typical completeness\u2014not merely in the guise of a more or less happy 'experiment', but responding throughout to the demands of expression\u2014is beyond all question the grandiose \"Le Sacre du Printemps\" of Stravinsky (1913)\".\nBart\u00f3k's \"Playsong\" demonstrates easily perceivable bitonality through \"the harmonic motion of each key ... [being] relatively uncomplicated and very diatonic\". Here, the \"duality of key\" featured is A minor and C\u266f minor.\nOther polytonal composers influenced by Stravinsky include those in the French group, Les Six, particularly Darius Milhaud, as well as Americans such as Aaron Copland.\nBenjamin Britten used bi- and polytonality in his operas, as well as enharmonic relationships, for example to signify the conflict between Claggart (F minor) and Billy (E major) in \"Billy Budd\" (note the shared enharmonically equivalent G\u266f/A\u266d) or to express the main character's \"maladjustment\" in \"Peter Grimes\".\nPolytonality and polychords.\nPolytonality requires the presentation of simultaneous key-centers. The term \"polychord\" describes chords that can be constructed by superimposing multiple familiar tonal sonorities. For example, familiar ninth, eleventh, and thirteenth chords can be built from or decomposed into separate chords:\nThus polychords do not necessarily suggest polytonality, but they may not be explained as a single tertian chord. The Petrushka chord is an example of a polychord. This is the norm in jazz, for example, which makes frequent use of \"extended\" and polychordal harmonies without any intended suggestion of \"multiple keys.\"\nPolyvalency.\nThe following passage, taken from Beethoven's Piano Sonata in E\u266d, Op.\u00a081a (\"Les Adieux\"), suggests clashes between tonic and dominant harmonies in the same key.\nLeeuw points to Beethoven's use of the clash between tonic and dominant, such as in his Third Symphony, as polyvalency rather than bitonality, with polyvalency being, \"the telescoping of diverse functions that should really occur \"in succession\" to one another\".\nPolymodality.\nPassages of music, such as Poulenc's \"Trois mouvements perp\u00e9tuels\", I., may be misinterpreted as polytonal rather than polymodal. In this case, two scales are recognizable but are assimilated through the common tonic (B\u266d).\nPolyscalarity.\nPolyscalarity is defined as \"the simultaneous use of musical objects \"which clearly suggest different source-collections\". Specifically about Stravinsky's music, Tymoczko uses the term polyscalarity out of deference to terminological sensibilities. In other words, the term is meant to avoid any implication that the listener can perceive two keys at once. Though Tymoczko believes that polytonality is perceivable, he believes polyscalarity is better suited to describe Stravinsky's music. This term is also used as a response to Van den Toorn's analysis against polytonality. Van den Toorn, in an attempt to dismiss polytonal analysis used a monoscalar approach to analyze the music with the octatonic scale. However, Tymoczko states that this was problematic in that it does not resolve all instances of multiple interactions between scales and chords. Moreover, Tymoczko quotes Stravinsky's claim that the music of \"Petrouchka\"'s second tableau was conceived \"in two keys\". Polyscalarity is then a term encompassing multiscalar superimpositions and cases which give a different explanation than the octatonic scale.\nChallenges.\nSome music theorists, including Milton Babbitt and Paul Hindemith, have questioned whether polytonality is a useful or meaningful notion or \"viable auditory possibility\". Babbitt called polytonality a \"self-contradictory expression which, if it is to possess any meaning at all, can only be used as a label to designate a certain degree of expansion of the individual elements of a well-defined harmonic or voice-leading unit\". Other theorists to question or reject polytonality include Allen Forte and Benjamin Boretz, who hold that the notion involves logical incoherence.\nOther theorists, such as Dmitri Tymoczko, respond that the notion of \"tonality\" is a psychological, not a logical notion. Furthermore, Tymoczko argues that two separate key-areas can, at least at a rudimentary level, be heard at the same time: for example, when listening to two different pieces played by two different instruments in two areas of a room.\nOctatonicism.\nSome critics of the notion of polytonality, such as Pieter van den Toorn, argue that the octatonic scale accounts in concrete pitch-relational terms for the qualities of \"clashing\", \"opposition\", \"stasis\", \"polarity\", and \"superimposition\" found in Stravinsky's music and, far from negating them, explains these qualities on a deeper level. For example, the passage from \"Petrushka\", cited above, uses only notes drawn from the C octatonic collection C\u2013C\u266f\u2013D\u266f\u2013E\u2013F\u266f\u2013G\u2013A\u2013A\u266f.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "65683", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65683", "title": "Drive-by shooting", "text": "Type of assault or murder\nA drive-by shooting is a type of assault that usually involves the perpetrator(s) firing a weapon from within a motor vehicle and then fleeing. Drive-by shootings allow the perpetrators to quickly strike their targets and flee the scene before law enforcement is able to respond. A drive-by shooting's prerequisites include access to a vehicle and a gun. The protection, anonymity, sense of power, and ease of escape provided by the getaway vehicle lead some perpetrators to feel safe expressing their hostility toward others.\nHistorical conception.\nThe invention of the drive-by shooting is attributed to Nestor Makhno, commander of the Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine at the beginning of the 20th century. He combined horse and carriage with a machine gun in order to quickly assault targets then flee before they could properly react. It was called a tachanka.\nMotor vehicles offer similar concealment for transport of weapons to crime scenes in situations like the 2015 San Bernardino attack, and can simultaneously serve as getaway vehicles. Using a vehicle allows the shooter to approach the intended target without being noticed and then to speed away before anyone reacts. Besides gang-related attacks, drive-by shootings may result from road rage or personal disputes between neighbors, acquaintances, or strangers unrelated to gang membership.\nUnited States.\nThere is no national data on the volume of drive-by shootings. National statistical databases such as the Uniform Crime Reports record the shooting outcome rather than the method. Non-gang-related drive-by shootings are not well researched, but journalistic accounts and police reports suggest that these constitute a significant proportion of the drive-by shootings to which police respond. Drive-by shootings that occur as an extreme form of road rage appear to be rather unpredictable in terms of the times and locations, but often occur in reaction to seemingly trivial events, although the underlying motivation usually appears to be a series of unrelated stressors in the perpetrator's life. A drive-by shooting's prerequisites include access to a vehicle and a gun. Recent legislation has focused on transfer of guns rather than vehicles, so those who carry out drive-by shootings may use their own vehicle or one that has been borrowed, rented, or stolen.\nThe primary motivations for a gang-involved drive-by include intimidation, terrorisation, and assassination of rival street gang members. Such shootings are associated with gang violence in urban areas of the United States but also occur in other contexts. The tactic is also called simply a \"drive-by\".\nHistory.\nMotorcycle ride-by killings were a common form of murder used by drug lord Griselda Blanco during her years controlling the Miami cocaine trade routes in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Blanco herself died by this method after having been shot twice in the head by a motorcyclist in a drive-by shooting in Medell\u00edn, Colombia. Drive-by shootings are also included in the Ku Klux Klan's \"modus operandi\".\nChicago Prohibition-era gangster and North Side Gang boss Bugs Moran was considered a \"pioneer\" of the drive-by shooting, with the Tommy gun being the weapon of choice. The notoriously vicious gang performed multiple shootings against their rivals, including the South Side gang led by Al Capone and the Genna brothers. Other Irish American gangs, such as the Saltis-McErlane Gang, the Sheldon Gang, and the Southside O'Donnell's, also executed drive-bys on one another in the Chicago area. Al Capone also had a Cadillac painted in Chicago police colors (police lights included) with armored rear windshield and a small hatch to fire machine guns with the car moving. \nDuring the Second Philadelphia Mafia War, two warring factions fought for control of the family; one led by former alleged boss, John Stanfa; and the \"Young Turks\", led by future Philadelphia crime family boss Joey Merlino. On 5 August 1993, Merlino survived a drive-by shooting assassination attempt by two Stanfa gunmen, taking four bullets in the leg and buttocks, while his friend and associate Michael Ciancaglini was shot in the chest and killed. On 31 August 1993, a drive by shooting was performed on Stanfa and his son while they were driving on the Schuylkill Expressway. Stanfa escaped uninjured and his son survived being shot in the jaw.\nIn 1992, the Mexican Mafia prison gang announced an edict prohibiting Sureno gangs from committing drive-by shootings, in order to avoid police crackdowns throughout neighborhoods in southern California. Those who broke the edict were to be greenlighted for assault or even death in the California prison system.\nNumerous hip hop artists have been targeted in drive-bys; prominent rappers who were killed in such incidents include Tupac Shakur, The Notorious B.I.G., Big L, and Mac Dre. Other rappers, such as Obie Trice and 50 Cent have survived being assaulted in drive-by shootings.\nIn 2015, Jorja Leap, an UCLA anthropologist studying gang culture, pointed out how drive-by shooting tactics are being replaced by the \"walk-up shooting\" method, because murders have become more targeted and while driving, there is low accuracy in aiming.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, the circulation of firearms is low compared to that in the United States, and just over a million civilians own a firearm license, so face-to-face shooting or threats with firearms are rare. Drive-by shootings, on the other hand, are common, especially in professional criminal contexts, as the statistical incidence says that almost all assaults with firearms are carried out from cars, motorcycles, or scooters. These kinds of vehicles are used since they provide better mobility in the narrow city districts. From the 1970s into the 21st century, Cosa Nostra and the Camorra have both been known to perform drive-by shootings during clan or mafia wars, or to assassinate targets. One notable example of such, is Carabiniere general Carlo Alberto dalla Chiesa, who was killed with an AK-47 in a drive by shooting in September 1982 in Palermo.\nOne of the most striking episodes of a drive-by shooting in Italy was the Macerata shooting, conducted against six Africans by a far-right extremist, Luca Traini, using an Alfa Romeo 147. However, the attack caused no deaths.\nIraqi civil wars.\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, drive-by shootings were also used for assassinations by militants in Iraq, including that of Waldemar Milewicz and Hatem Kamil.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "65684", "revid": "47540358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65684", "title": "Mini", "text": "British car model from 1959 to 2000\nThe Mini is a two-door, four-seat small car produced for four decades over a single generation, with many names and variants, by the British Motor Corporation (BMC) and its successors British Leyland and the Rover Group, and finally (briefly) under BMW ownership. Minis were built as fastbacks, estates, convertibles, and various other body styles. Minus a brief 1990s hiatus, from 1959 into 2000, an estimated 5.38 million of all variations combined were built, and the Mini's engines also powered another 2\u00a0million Mini Metros, though the Mini eventually outlasted its successor.\nInitially, the Mini was marketed under the Austin and Morris names, as the Austin Seven and Morris Mini-Minor; the Austin Seven was renamed Austin Mini in 1962 and Mini became a marque in its own right in 1969. Retrospectively, the car is known as the \"Classic Mini\" to distinguish it from the modern MINI family of vehicles produced since 2001 by German carmaker BMW, who took ownership of the Mini name following the sale of Rover Group in 2000.\nThis distinctive two-door car was designed for BMC by Sir Alec Issigonis. Its space-saving transverse engine and front-wheel drive layout\u00a0\u2013 allowing 80% of the area of the car's floorpan to be used for passengers and luggage\u00a0\u2013 influenced a generation of car makers. The front-wheel-drive, transverse-engine layout were used in many other \"supermini\" style car designs such as Honda N360 (1967), Nissan Cherry (1970), and Fiat 127 (1971). The layout was also adapted for larger subcompact designs. In 1999, the Mini was voted the second-most influential car of the 20th century, behind the Ford Model T, and ahead of the Citro\u00ebn DS and Volkswagen Beetle. It is also considered an icon of 1960s British popular culture.\nThe Mini Mark I had three major UK updates: the Mark II, the Clubman, and the Mark III. Within these was a series of variations, including an estate car, a pick-up, a van, and the Mini Moke, a jeep-like buggy. The performance versions, the Mini Cooper and Cooper \"S\", were successful as both race and rally cars, winning the Monte Carlo Rally in 1964, 1965, and 1967. The Mini was manufactured in England at the Longbridge plant in Birmingham located next to BMC's headquarters and at the former Morris Motors plant at Cowley, as well as in Australia (Victoria Park/Zetland BMC Australia factory) and later also in Spain (Authi), Belgium, Italy (Innocenti, as the Innocenti Mini), Chile, Malta, Portugal, South Africa, Uruguay, Venezuela, and Yugoslavia (IMV). In 1980, British Leyland launched the Mini's follow-up, the Austin Metro, however the Mini outlasted it and continued to be produced at Longbridge until October 2000.\nDesign and development.\nThe Mini came about because of a fuel shortage caused by the 1956 Suez Crisis. Petrol was once again rationed in the UK, sales of large cars slumped, and the market for German bubble cars boomed, even in countries such as the United Kingdom, where imported cars were still a rarity.\nLeonard Lord, the head of BMC, reportedly detested these cars so much that he vowed to rid the streets of them and design a 'proper miniature car'. He laid down some basic design requirements \u2013 the car should be contained within a box that measured ; and the passenger accommodation should occupy of the length; and the engine, for reasons of cost, should be an existing unit.\nAlec Issigonis, who had been working for Alvis, had been recruited back to BMC in 1955 with a brief from Lord to design a range of technically advanced family cars in the same innovative spirit as his earlier Morris Minor to complement BMC's existing conventional models. Issigonis had set out design projects for three cars \u2013 large and small family cars and a very small economy car. His initial work was on the largest car, designated XC9001, with the smallest car, XC9003, having the lowest priority despite it being Issigonis' greatest personal interest. With Lord's dictum to produce a bubble car competitor and his revised design requirements being laid down in October 1956, work on XC9001 stopped and XC9003 became the priority. In addition to Issigonis, the team that developed the Mini included John Sheppard (who had worked with Issigonis at Alvis), Jack Daniels (who had worked with Issigonis on the Morris Minor), Chris Kingham (also from Alvis), Charles Griffin (from Cowley), Vic Everton (from the body\u2014jig shop), Ron Dovey (who built the bodies), Dick Gallimore (who laid out the experimental bodies), and George Cooper (whose job was to check the layouts). Together, by July 1957, they had designed and built the original XC9003 prototype, which was affectionately named the \"Orange Box\" because of its colour. Leonard Lord approved the car for production on 19 July and XC9003 became project ADO15.\nThe ADO15 used a conventional BMC A-Series four-cylinder, water-cooled engine, but departed from tradition by mounting it transversely, with the engine-oil lubricated, four-speed transmission in the sump, and by employing front-wheel drive. Drive was taken down to the transmission via a conventional clutch coupled to a set of primary gears on the end of the crankshaft which gave rise to the characteristic transmission \"whine\" for which the Mini became famous. Almost all small front-wheel drive cars developed since have used a similar configuration, except with the transmission separately enclosed rather than using the engine oil and mounted directly onto the end of the crankshaft, but with unequal length driveshafts. The radiator was mounted at the left side of the car so that the engine-mounted fan could be retained, but with reversed pitch so that it blew air into the natural low pressure area under the front wing. This location saved vehicle length, but had the disadvantage of feeding the radiator with air that had been heated by passing over the engine. It also exposed the entire ignition system to the direct entry of rainwater through the grille. Early prototypes used the existing 948\u00a0cc A-Series unit, but this provided the ADO15 with performance far greater than its price and purpose required \u2013 a top speed of about . The engine was reduced to a new 848\u00a0cc capacity with a shorter stroke. This reduced power from 37 to 33\u00a0bhp and caused a significant drop in torque, so provided more realistic performance, especially when the ADO15 body was widened by 2 inches (5.08\u00a0cm) over the XC9003 prototype, which blunted the car's top speed while improving its stability and roadholding. Even so, the ADO15 had a top speed of , which was better than many other economy cars of the time.\nThe suspension system, designed by Issigonis's friend Alex Moulton at Moulton Developments Limited, used compact rubber cones instead of conventional springs. This space-saving design also featured rising progressive-rate springing of the cones, and provided some natural damping, in addition to the normal dampers. Built into the subframes, the rubber cone system gave a raw and bumpy ride accentuated by the woven-webbing seats, but the rigidity of the rubber cones, together with the wheels' positioning at the corners of the car, gave the Mini go kart-like handling.\nInitially, an interconnected fluid system was planned, similar to the one that Alec Issigonis and Alex Moulton were working on in the mid-1950s at Alvis. They had assessed the mechanically interconnected Citro\u00ebn 2CV suspension at that time (according to an interview by Moulton with \"Car Magazine\" in the late 1990s), which inspired the design of the Hydrolastic suspension system for the Mini and Morris/Austin 1100, to try to keep the benefits of the 2CV system (ride comfort, body levelling, keeping the roadwheel under good control and the tyres in contact with the road), but with added roll stiffness that the 2CV lacked. The short development time of the car meant this was not ready in time for the Mini's launch. The system intended for the Mini was further developed and the Hydrolastic system was first used on the Morris 1100, launched in 1962; the Mini gained the system later in 1964. As launched, the Mini had simpler suspension made from conical springs of solid rubber. These were compact, saving on intrusion into the cabin space, and required no maintenance. The conical shape gave the springs a progressive action, becoming stiffer at greater degrees of compression. This gave the ADO15 a smooth ride over small bumps, but minimised roll and pitch on more uneven surfaces. It also allowed the springs to cope with the huge variance in load between an unladen car (about 600\u00a0kg or 1300\u00a0lb) and a fully laden one (just over 1000\u00a0kg or 2240\u00a0lb, or a 70% increase).\nTen-inch (254\u00a0mm) wheels were specified, so new tyres had to be developed, the initial contract going to Dunlop. Issigonis went to Dunlop stating that he wanted even smaller, wheels (even though he had already settled on 10-inch). An agreement was made on the 10-inch size, after Dunlop rejected the eight-inch proposition.\nMany features were designed into the ADO15's interior to maximise its passenger and luggage space on top of the major savings allowed by the transverse engine and 10-inch wheels. Sliding windows allowed single-skin doors to be fitted, improving elbow room and reducing costs. A bracing bar was fitted across the door frame to brace the single skin and this was later adapted into a large storage bin on each door. Issigonis later said that he had sized the bins to carry the ingredients of his favourite drink, a dry martini in the correct proportions (one bottle of vermouth and 2 of Gordon's Gin). Similar bins were provided outboard of the rear seats, also serving a dual function of bracing the single-skin body panel. Small items could also be stowed under the rear seats, and early Minis were sold with optional wicker baskets specially shaped to slot under the seats. The fixed rear parcel shelf contributed to the rigidity of the body shell, although it did preclude fitting the ADO15 with a hatchback. The boot lid was hinged at the bottom so that the car could be driven with it open to increase luggage space. On early cars, the number plate, together with its light, was hinged at the top so that it could swing down to remain visible when the boot lid was open. This feature was later discontinued after it was discovered that exhaust gases could leak into the cockpit when the boot was open.\nThe Mini was designed as a monocoque shell with welded seams visible on the outside of the car running down the A and C pillars, and between the body and the floor pan. Those that ran from the base of the A-pillar to the wheel well were described as 'everted' (lit., 'turned outward') to provide more room for the front seat occupants. To further simplify construction, the hinges for the doors and boot lid were mounted externally. This also saved a small amount of cabin space. It also made the ADO15 very easy to assemble from complete knock-down kits in overseas markets with only basic industry. Cars could be assembled with minimal use of jigs as the external seams made the panels largely 'self-aligning'. They also allowed panels to be stacked flat on top of one other for easy shipping. As originally built, all the structural body panels were welded to the top of the single floor pressing, but this caused major problems with water entering the cabin and was quickly changed in the first months of production.\nEarly prototypes were fully unitary in construction, but the cars broke apart under the high loads from the large lever ratios used with the rubber cone suspension. The design was changed to use steel subframes to carry the drivetrain and suspension for the front and rear. This also simplified production, as both subframes could be built up independently and then mated to the already-completed bodyshell. It also opened up the possibility of easily producing variants on the ADO15 as a body of any shape or design could be used provided it could accommodate the subframes.\nIn 1959, BMC and Alec Issigonis won the Dewar Trophy, for the design and production of the Mini.\nThe Mini shape had become so well known that by the 1990s, Rover Group\u00a0\u2013 the heirs to BMC\u00a0\u2013 were able to register its design as a trademark in its own right.\nMark I: 1959\u20131967.\nThe production version of the Mini was demonstrated to the press in April 1959, and by August, several thousand cars had been produced ready for the first sales. The Mini was officially announced to the public on 26 August 1959. Some 2,000 cars had already been sent abroad and were displayed that day in almost 100 countries. The key dimensions were:\nThe first example, a Morris Mini-Minor with the registration 621 AOK, is on display at the Heritage Motor Centre in Warwickshire. Another early example from 1959 is on display at the National Motor Museum in Hampshire.\nThe Mini was marketed under BMC's two main brand names, Austin and Morris, until 1969, when it became a marque in its own right. The Morris version was known to all as \"the Mini\" or the \"Morris Mini-Minor\". This seems to have been a play on words: the Morris Minor was a larger, well known, and successful car that continued in production, and \"minor\" is Latin for \"lesser\", so an abbreviation of the Latin word for \"least\"\u00a0\u2013 \"minimus\"\u00a0\u2013 was used for the new even smaller car. One name proposed for the almost identical Austin version was Austin Newmarket, but it was sold as the Austin Seven (sometimes written as \"SE7EN\" in early publicity material\u00a0\u2013 with the '7' using the letter V rotated anticlockwise so it approximated the number 7), which recalled the popular small Austin 7 of the 1920s and 1930s.\nUntil 1962, the cars appeared in North America and France as the Austin 850 and Morris 850, and in Denmark as the Austin Partner (until 1964) and Morris Mascot (until 1981). It was introduced in Australia as Morris 850 only (not \"Austin\"), and then later as Morris Cooper and Morris Cooper S versions, as well. The Morris name Mini (Mini-Minor) was first used for Austin's version by BMC in 1961 when the Austin Seven was rebranded as the Austin Mini, somewhat to the surprise of the Sharp's Commercials car company (later known as Bond Cars), who had been using the name Minicar for their three-wheeled vehicles since 1949. However, legal action was somehow averted, and BMC used the name \"Mini\" thereafter.\nIn 1964, the suspension of the cars was replaced by another Moulton design, the Hydrolastic system. The new suspension gave a softer ride, but it also increased weight and production cost. In 1971, the original rubber suspension reappeared and was retained for the remaining life of the Mini.\nFrom October 1965, the option of the unique Automotive Products designed four-speed automatic transmission became available. Cars fitted with this became the Mini-Matic.\nSlow at the outset, Mark I sales strengthened across most of the model lines in the 1960s, and production totalled 1,190,000. Ford purchased a Mini and dismantled it to see if they could offer an alternative. Ford determined that the BMC must have been losing around \u00a330 per car, so decided to produce a larger car\u00a0\u2013 the Cortina, launched in 1962\u00a0\u2013 as its competitor in the budget market. BMC insisted that the way company overheads were shared out, the Mini always made money. Larger profits came from the popular De Luxe models and from optional extras such as seat belts, door mirrors, a heater, and a radio, which would be considered necessities on modern cars, as well as the various Cooper and Cooper S models.\nThe Mini entered into popular culture in the 1960s with well-publicised purchases by film and music stars.\nThe Cooper S version was also used by some British police forces as both a uniform and plainclothes car.\nMark II: 1967\u20131970.\nThe Mark II Mini was launched at the 1967 British Motor Show, and featured a redesigned grille, a larger rear window and numerous cosmetic changes. A total of 429,000 Mk II Minis were produced.\nA variety of Mini types were made in Pamplona, Spain, by the Authi company from 1968 onwards, mostly under the Morris name. In 1969, a fibreglass version of the Mini Mark II was developed for British Leyland's Chilean subsidiary (British Leyland Automotores de Chile, S.A., originally the independent assembler EMSSA). The bodyshell mould was created by the Peel Engineering Company. Production began in 1970 and continued for a few years; these fibreglass Minis can be recognised by the missing body seams and by larger panel gaps. The Chilean market was never very large and the Arica plant was closed in 1974. The reason for the fibreglass body was to enable Leyland to meet very strict requirements for local sourcing, increasing to 70.22% in 1971.\nMark III: 1969\u20131976.\nThe Mark III Mini had a modified bodyshell with enough alterations to see the factory code change from ADO15 to ADO20 (which it shared with the Clubman). The most obvious changes were larger doors with concealed hinges. Customer demand led to the sliding windows being replaced with winding windows, although all Australian-manufactured Mark I Minis had adopted this feature in 1965 (with opening quarterlight windows). The suspension reverted from Hydrolastic to rubber cones as a cost-saving measure. (The 1275 GT and Clubman retained the Hydrolastic system until June 1971, when they, too, switched to the rubber cone suspension of the original Minis.)\nIn 1969, the simple name Mini completely replaced the separate Austin and Morris brands. In April 1974, a heater became standard equipment on the entry-level Mini 850, as well, having by then already been included in the standard specification of the other models for some time.\nIn the late 1970s, Innocenti introduced the Innocenti 90 and 120, Bertone-designed hatchbacks based on the Mini platform. Bertone also created a Mini Cooper equivalent, christened the Innocenti De Tomaso, that sported a 1275\u00a0cc engine similar to the MG Metro engine, but with an 11-stud head, a special inlet manifold, and used the \"A\" clutch instead of the \"Verto\" type. It also used homokinetic shafts instead of rubber couplings.\nThe Mini was still popular in the UK, but appeared increasingly outdated in the face of newer and more practical rivals. Since the late 1960s, plans had been in place for a newer and more practical supermini to replace it, though the Mini was still the only car of this size built by British Leyland for the home market.\nMark IV: 1976\u20131983.\nThe Mark IV was introduced in 1976, though by this stage British Leyland was working on a new small car which was widely expected to replace the Mini before much longer. It had a front rubber-mounted subframe with single tower bolts and the rear frame had some larger bushings introduced, all intended to improve the car's mechanical refinement and to reduce noise levels. Twin column stalks for indicators and wipers were introduced, as were larger foot pedals. From 1977 onwards, the rear light clusters included reversing lights.\nIn July 1979 the lower end of the Mini range was altered. The basic Mini 850 (which had featured in various forms since the original launch 20 years before) was withdrawn. Its place was taken by two models at slightly lower and slightly higher price points. The new base model was the Mini City, with black-painted bumpers, an untrimmed lower facia rail, part-fabric seats and wing mirror and sun visor only on the driver's side, plus unique 'City' body graphics and boot badge. Above the City was the new 850 SDL (Super Deluxe), which had the same specification as the standard Mini 1000 but with the smaller engine.\nIn August 1979 the Mini's 20th anniversary was marked by the introduction of the first true limited-edition Mini, which was the Mini 1100 Special. This was a 5,000-car run with the 1098\u00a0cc engine, broadly to the specification already in production for the European market as a standard model with the same name. However this was the first time a UK-market 'round-nose' (i.e. non-Clubman) Mini had been available with the 1098\u00a0cc engine, and the UK limited edition was also fitted with unique Exacton alloy wheels \u2013 the first time these were fitted to a factory-produced Mini \u2013 and plastic wheelarch extensions. Inside was the 1275GT's three-dial instrument cluster and a leather-rimmed wheel with a rectangular centre from the Innocenti Mini hatchback.\nThe 1100 Special and 850 City models were phased out by 1980, and during the same year the engine was upgraded to the improved A-Plus unit from the new Metro in 998\u00a0cc form, which was now the only engine available in the Mini. This was then followed by a number of incremental developments.\nIn 1978, the Mini was one of the key cars made available to disabled motorists under the new Motability scheme.\nReports of the Mini's imminent demise surfaced again in 1980 with the launch of the Austin Mini-Metro (badging with the word \"mini\" in all lowercase). Faced with competition from a new wave of modern superminis like the Ford Fiesta, Renault 5, and Volkswagen Polo, the Mini was beginning to fall out of favour in many export markets, with the South African, Australian, and New Zealand markets all stopping production around this time. Buyers of small cars now wanted modern and practical designs, usually with a hatchback. The Metro was therefore in essence, the Mini mechanicals repackaged into a larger hatchback bodyshell.\nAlthough the Mini continued to be produced after the Metro's launch, production volumes were reduced as British Leyland and its successor Rover Group concentrated on the Metro as its key supermini. The original Mini's last year in the top ten of the UK's top selling cars was 1981, as it came ninth and the Metro was fifth. The arrival of the Metro also had production of the larger Allegro pruned back before it was finally discontinued in 1982. In 1982, BL made 56,297 Minis and over 175,000 Metros. Due to their common powertrain package, the Mini received many mechanical upgrades in the early 1980s which were shared with the Metro, such as the A-Plus engine, 12-inch wheels with front disc brakes, improved soundproofing and quieter, stronger transmissions. This not only modernised the Mini but, because many of its major subassemblies were now shared with the Metro, made it very cost-effective to produce despite falling sales volumes.\nMark V: 1984\u20131990.\nAll cars had brake discs and plastic wheel arches (Mini Special arches), but retained the same Mark IV body shell shape.\nThe Mini's 25th anniversary fell in 1984 and British Leyland produced a 'Mini 25' limited-edition model, both to mark the occasion and to publicise the recent upgrades to the model. This marked the start of a turnaround in the Mini's fortunes. Basic models such as the City and the City E (using the economy-tuned drivetrain from the Metro HLE) filled in the bottom of the Austin-Rover range and still found buyers who wanted a compact city car that was easy to park and cheap to run. Low purchase and running costs also made the Mini continually popular as a first car for younger drivers, and Austin-Rover introduced a steady stream of limited editions with bright paint colours, body graphics, and trim to appeal to this market. The Mini was also becoming prized as a characterful and nostalgic car in its own right, and the London Collection of limited-edition models was more upmarket and luxurious and named after affluent or fashionable parts of London.\nThese marketing strategies proved very successful; Mini production actually had modest increases through the mid-1980s, from 34,974 Minis in 1984 to 35,280 in 1985 and 39,800 in 1986. In 1990, the was relaunched - 20 years after the demise of the original model \u2013 which saw Mini production pass 40,000. Once again, it featured the long-running 1275\u00a0cc engine which had featured on the original Mini Cooper S.\nIn 1988, Austin Rover decided to keep the Mini in production for as long as it was viable to do so, putting an end to reports that it would be discontinued by 1991, by which time the original Metro would also be replaced.\nMark VI: 1990\u20131996.\nWith the larger Metro being redesigned in 1990 to take the new K-Series engine, the Mini became the sole recipient of the classic A-Series engine with transmission-in-sump layout. The engine mounting points were moved forward to take 1275\u00a0cc power units, and includes the later Horizontal Integral Float version of the SU carb, and also the single-point fuel-injection version, which came out in November 1991. The 998\u00a0cc power units were discontinued. Early, carburetted Coopers had a catalytic converter and produce at 5500\u00a0rpm. Power crept up to at 5700\u00a0rpm for the fuel injected model. An internal bonnet release was fitted from 1992. By 1991, the Cooper represented forty percent of Mini sales in the home market; the main export market was Japan. Production ended in August 1996 as the Mark VII replaced it.\nIn the summer of 1991, 21 years after the fibreglass Mini built in Chile was produced, another fibreglass bodied Mini again entered production. This time, it was built in Venezuela and sold as the Mini Cord. The producer, Facorca, intended to sell the car in the Caribbean and Central America, and also had plans for Brazilian assembly.\nMark VII: 1996\u20132000.\nThis was the final version, twin point injection with front-mounted radiator. Full-width dashboard replaces the original shelf, internal bonnet release. Introduction of airbag on driver's side. The basic Mini was the 1.3i, the other model in the range being the Mini Cooper. The end of production in October 2000 not only signalled the end of original Mini production after 41 years, but also brought about the demise of the 1275\u00a0cc engine which had powered the Mini and numerous other BL/BMC/ARG cars for more than 35 years. The Metro had ceased production two and a half years earlier, meaning the Mini outlived the car that was supposed to replace it.\nVariants.\nThe popularity of the original Mini spawned many models that targeted different markets.\nWolseley Hornet and Riley Elf (1961\u20131969).\nReleased in 1961 as more luxurious versions of the Mini, both the Wolseley Hornet and the Riley Elf had longer, slightly finned rear wings and larger boots that gave the cars a more conventional three-box design.\nThe wheelbase of the Elf and Hornet remained at , whereas the overall length was increased to . This resulted in a dry weight of / (rubber/Hydrolastic suspension) for the Elf and / for the Hornet.\nFront-end treatment, which incorporated each marque's traditional upright grille design (the Hornet's grille with a lit \"Wolseley\" badge), also contributed to a less utilitarian appearance. The cars had larger-diameter chrome hubcaps than the Austin and Morris Minis, and additional chrome accents, bumper overriders and wood-veneer dashboards. The Riley was the more expensive of the two cars. The name \"Wolseley Hornet\" was first used on 1930s saloon, coup\u00e9, sports and racing cars, while the name \"Elf\" recalled the Riley Sprite and Imp sports cars, also of the 1930s (Riley's first choice of name \"Imp\" could not be used as Hillman had registered it). The full-width dashboard was a differentiator between the Elf and Hornet. This dashboard was the idea of Christopher Milner the Sales Manager for Riley.\nBoth the Riley Elf's and Wolseley Hornet's bodies were built at Fisher &amp; Ludlow under their \"Fisholow\" brandname. Plates in the engine compartment on the right side fitch plate bear evidence of this speciality.\nVery early Mark I versions of both cars (e.g. press photo of 445MWL) had no overriders on the bumpers and a single piece front wing (A-panel and wing in one piece, no outside seam below scuttle panel) that was soon given up again, allegedly due to cost. The Elf's and Hornet's special bumper overriders first appeared in 1962.\nEarly production Mark I's also had a combination of leather and cloth seats (Elf R-A2S1-101 to FR2333, Hornet W-A2S1-101 to FW2105) whereas all later models had full leather seats. Mark I models were equipped with single leading shoe brakes on the front.\nIn 1966 the Heinz food company commissioned, from Crayford Convertibles (Crayford Engineering), 57 convertible Hornets to be given as prizes in a UK competition. Many are still on the road as of 2020.\nBoth the Elf and the Hornet went through three engine versions. Initially, they used the engine (engine type 8WR) with a single HS2 carburettor, changing to a single HS2 carburettor version of the Cooper's power unit (engine type 9WR) in the Mark II in 1963. This increased the car's top speed from . Therefore, Mark II cars also came with increased braking power in the form of front drum brakes with twin leading shoes to cope with the increased power output. Both Mark I and Mark II featured four-speed gearboxes (three synchromesh gears) with the original, long gear lever, a.k.a. \"magic wand\" type. Automatic gearboxes became available on the Mark II in 1965 as an option. The Mark III facelift of 1966 brought wind-up windows and fresh-air fascia vents. Concealed door hinges were introduced two years before these were seen on the mainstream Mini. The gear selecting mechanism was updated to the \"Cooper\" type, (which also gave a welcome increase in engine location due to the remote housing extension being directly bolted onto the back of the differential housing) as seen on Mini 1000 cars of the time. The 850s retained the \"magic wand\". Automatic gearboxes were available to the Mark III in 1967 again. Full-four synchromesh gearing was eventually introduced during 1968. 30,912 Riley Elfs and 28,455 Wolseley Hornets were built. Production of both models ceased in late 1969.\nVehicle identification\u00a0\u2013 serial number prefix letter code:\nCode example: R-A2S1-154321 (Riley, A type engine, 2 door saloon, 1st series, serial number \"154321\")\nMorris Mini Traveller and Austin Mini Countryman (1960\u20131969).\nThese models were two-door estate cars with double \"barn-style\" rear doors. Both were built on a slightly longer chassis of compared to for the saloon.\nThe early Morris Mini Traveller and Austin Mini Countryman cars had an internal fuel tank located on the left hand side of the rear load area. This is identifiable by the fuel filler cap being on the left hand side of the car just below the rear window.\nIn October 1961 the fuel tank was relocated to the underneath of the car and the filler cap was moved to low down on the right hand side of the car \u2013 the same configuration that was already in use on the Mini Van.\nFrom the start of production both models had a decorative, non-structural, ash wood trim on the rear body, in the style of a pre-war shooting-brake. This gave the car a similar appearance to the larger Morris Minor Traveller and gave rise to these cars simply being called a woodie. It is a popular misconception that the difference between the Traveller and the Countryman is the wood trim, or that only wood-fitted models in the Austin and Morris ranges were respectively called Countryman and Traveller, with the plain versions simply being Estates, but neither of these is the case. An all steel version of both the Traveller and the Countryman without the wood trim was launched for export markets in April 1961 and for the home market in October 1962 at a lower cost than the versions with the wood trim. Estate versions of the Mini were then produced in both Austin Countryman and Morris Traveller variants, both available with or without the wooden framing. Some of these models also had front and rear folding seats that folded out flat in order to make a sleeping platform.\nIn October 1967 the Mk2 version was launched with the same changes as the saloon.\nApproximately 108,000 Austin Mini Countrymans and 99,000 Morris Mini Travellers were built. Variations of this model were also built in South Africa, by Innocenti in Italy and by Industria de Montagem de Automoveis in Portugal.\nThe Mini Traveller and Countryman Register was created in 2009 to help locate and preserve the remaining Mini Traveller and Countryman cars.\nMini Van (1960\u20131983).\nThe Mini Van was a commercial panel van (in US English, a sedan delivery) rated at \u00bc-ton load capacity. Built on the longer Traveller chassis but without side windows, it proved popular in the 1960s UK as a cheaper alternative to the car: it was classed as a commercial vehicle and as such carried no sales tax. A set of simple stamped steel slots served in place of a more costly chrome grille. The Mini Van was renamed as the Mini 95 in 1978, the number representing the gross vehicle weight of 0.95\u00a0tons. 521,494 were built.\nAn Estate Van version with rear side windows was built in the late 1970s by IMA, the British Leyland factory in Portugal. It comes with a single rear window and single rear door, hinged at the top, that opens upwards for rear access.\nMini Moke (1964\u20131989).\nA utility vehicle intended for the British Army was built with a twin-engined 4-wheel-drive. Although the 4WD Moke could climb a 1:2 gradient, it lacked enough ground clearance for military use. The single-engined front-wheel-drive Moke enjoyed some popularity in civilian production. About 50,000 were made in total, from 1964 to 1968 in the UK, 1966 to 1982 in Australia and 1983 to 1989 in Portugal. The Moke was marketed in holiday locations such as Barbados and Macau, where they were also used as police cars. \"Moke\" is archaic British slang for a donkey.\nMini Pick-up (1961\u20131983).\nA pick-up truck in total length was built on the longer Mini Van platform, with an open-top rear cargo area and a tailgate. The factory specified the weight of the pick-up as less than with a full tank of fuel.\nAs with the van, the pick-up also had a stamped metal grille for airflow into the engine compartment. The Pickup was basic, although the factory brochure described a \"fully equipped Mini Pick-up is also available which includes a recirculatory heater\". Passenger-side sun visor, seat belts, laminated windscreen, tilt tubes and cover were also available at extra cost.\nLike the van, the pick-up was renamed as the Mini 95 in 1978.\nA total of 58,179 Mini pick-up models were built.\nMorris Mini K (March 1969 \u2013 August 1971, Australia only).\nBuilt in the Australian British Motor Corporation factory at Zetland, New South Wales, using 80% local content, the Morris Mini K was advertised as the \"great leap forward\". The Mini K ('K' standing for Kangaroo) had a 1098\u00a0cc engine and was the last round-nosed model to be produced in Australia, originally priced at A$1780. The Mini K was offered in 2-door saloon and 2-door van body styles. It was distinctive in having wind-up windows and a swivelling quarterlight in Mk.I-style externally hinged doors. A small round sticker with a kangaroo logo was placed on the triangular panel between the door and the front body seam. The \"Kangaroo\" name was supposedly coined because it is claimed that a kangaroo can go all day without drinking which the advertisers used to emphasise the frugal fuel consumption and, possibly, larger fuel tank.\nMini Beach (1961\u20131962).\nThe Mini Beach cars were built by the British Motor Corporation for hotels and high end customers as a promotional tool from 1961 to 1962. Approximately 15 Beach Minis were built out of 20 planned by BMC back in the day, making it among the rarest factory Minis and wildly valuable today. One sold through Bonhams for $181,500 in 2014, and another changed hands on Bring a Trailer in 2019 for the remarkable sum of $230,000. Original Beach Minis were powered by the early Mini's 848\u00a0cc A-series motor. The Mini Beach cars were built by hand in house at Longbridge's Experimental Department. They had no doors, no B-pillars, and a spot-welded roof. The seats were similar to a Fiat 500 Jolly and originally made of wicker. An extremely rare booted concept version was made to look more balanced, but few survive today.\nMini Cooper and Cooper S: 1961\u20131971; 1990\u20132000.\nIssigonis' friend John Cooper, owner of the Cooper Car Company and designer and builder of Formula One cars, saw the potential of the Mini for competition. Issigonis was initially reluctant to see the Mini in the role of a performance car, but after John Cooper appealed to BMC management, the two men collaborated to create the Mini Cooper. The Austin Mini Cooper and Morris Mini Cooper debuted in September 1961.\nThe engine from the Morris Mini-Minor was given a longer stroke to increase capacity to increasing power from . The car featured a race-tuned engine, twin SU carburettors, a closer-ratio gearbox and front disc brakes, uncommon at the time in a small car. One thousand units of this version were commissioned by management, intended for and designed to meet the homologation rules of Group 2 rally racing. The 997\u00a0cc engine was replaced by a shorter stroke 998\u00a0cc unit in 1964. In 1962, Rhodesian John Love became the first non-British racing driver to win the British Saloon Car Championship driving a Mini Cooper.\nA more powerful Mini Cooper, dubbed the \"S\", was developed in tandem and released in 1963. Featuring a 1071\u00a0cc engine with a 70.61\u00a0mm bore and nitrided steel crankshaft and strengthened bottom end to allow further tuning; and larger servo-assisted disc brakes, 4,030 Cooper S cars were produced and sold until the model was updated in August 1964. Cooper also produced two S models specifically for circuit racing in the under 1,000\u00a0cc and under 1,300\u00a0cc classes respectively, rated at and a , both had a bore and both were also offered to the public. From 1966 onwards Cooper S models featured twin fuel tanks as standard. The smaller-engine model was not well received, and only 963 had been built when the model was discontinued in 1965. The 1,275\u00a0cc Cooper S models continued in production until 1971.\nSales of the Mini Cooper were: 64,000 Mark I Coopers with 997\u00a0cc or 998\u00a0cc engines; 19,000 Mark I Cooper S with 970\u00a0cc, 1,071\u00a0cc or 1,275\u00a0cc engines; 16,000 Mark II Coopers with 998\u00a0cc engines; 6,300 Mark II Cooper S with 1,275\u00a0cc engines. There were no Mark III Coopers and 1,570 Mark III Cooper S.\nAn agreement between BMC and Innocenti was announced in 1959 to assemble BMC-manufactured cars for the Italian market. The first Mini Coopers assembled in Milan from imported knock-down kits with sales of the Innocenti Mini Cooper 1300 beginning in March 1966. It was licensed in 1973 to Spain's Authi (Automoviles de Turismo Hispano-Ingleses), which began to produce the Authi Mini Cooper 1300. The Cooper name was discontinued from the UK Mini range at this time.\nA new Mini Cooper named the RSP (Rover Special Products) was briefly relaunched in 1990\u201391, with slightly lower performance than the 1960s Cooper. It proved popular and a new Cooper-marked Mini went into full production in late 1991. To meet emission standards, Coopers from 1992 on were fitted with a fuel-injected version of the 1,275\u00a0cc engine, and in 1997 a multi-point fuel-injected engine was introduced, along with a front-mounted radiator and various safety improvements. \"I love my Mini Cooper,\" remarked Madonna in 2003. \"I was too scared to drive a big car in London.\"\nMini Clubman and 1275 GT: 1969\u20131980.\nIn 1969, under the ownership of British Leyland, the Mini was given a facelift by stylist Roy Haynes, who had previously worked for Ford. The restyled version was called the Mini Clubman, and has a squarer front, protruding some 10\u00a0cm / 4in further forward, using the same indicator/sidelight assembly as the Austin Maxi. The Mini Clubman was intended to replace the upmarket Riley and Wolseley versions. At launch all Clubmans were powered by the 998\u00a0cc engine as already used in the Mini 1000, with 38\u00a0bhp. A more sporting model with the 1275\u00a0cc single-carburettor 59\u00a0bhp engine, dubbed the 1275 GT, was slated as the replacement for the 998\u00a0cc Mini Cooper (the 1,275\u00a0cc Mini Cooper S continued alongside the 1275 GT for two years until 1971). The Clubman Estate replaced the Countryman and Traveller. The original \"round-front\" design Mini remained in production alongside the Clubman and 1275 GT in 850 and 1000 forms as lower-priced models in the new Mini range.\nProduction of the Clubman and 1275 GT got off to a slow start because the cars incorporated \"lots of production changes\" including the relocation of tooling from the manufacturer's Cowley plant to the Longbridge plant: very few cars were handed over to customers before the early months of 1970.\nEarly domestic market Clubmans were still delivered on cross-ply tyres despite the fact that by 1970 radials had become the norm for the car's mainstream competitors. By 1973 new Minis were, by default, being shipped with radial tyres, though cross-plies could be specified by special order, giving British buyers a price saving of \u00a38.\nThe 1275 GT is often incorrectly described as the \"Mini Clubman 1275 GT\". The official name was always just the \"Mini 1275 GT\", and it was a separate, distinct model from the Clubman (although it shared the same frontal treatment as the Mini Clubman, and was launched at the same time).\nIn 1971, the 1,275\u00a0cc Mini Cooper S was discontinued in the UK, leaving the Mini 1275 GT as the only sporting Mini on sale for the rest of the decade. Innocenti in Italy, however, continued making their own version of the Mini Cooper for some time. While the UK-built 1275 GT was not nearly as quick as a 1275 Mini Cooper S, it was cheaper to buy, run, and insure. It was the first Mini to be equipped with a tachometer. It also featured a standard-fit close-ratio gearbox, and initially had 10-inch (25.4\u00a0cm) Rostyle wheels covering the 7.5-inch (19.05\u00a0cm) Cooper S type disc brakes, and a boot board; both were dropped in 1974. Performance of the 1275GT was lively for the time, achieving in 12.9\u00a0seconds, and the excellent mid-range torque offered a time in top gear of only nine seconds. The bluff front, however, meant that the model struggled to reach .\nFrom 1975 the standard Clubman and Clubman Estate received the 1098\u00a0cc engine (as also fitted to the Austin Allegro) with 45\u00a0bhp, although Clubmans with the AP automatic transmission retained the less powerful 998\u00a0cc power unit.\nThroughout the 1970s, British Leyland continued to produce the classic 1959 \"round-front\" design, alongside the newer Clubman and 1275 GT models. The long-nose Clubman and 1275 GT offered better crash safety, were better equipped, and had better under-bonnet access, but they were more expensive and aerodynamically inferior to the original 1959 design. The Mini Clubman and 1275 GT were replaced in 1980 by the new hatchback Austin Metro, while production of the original \"round-front\" Mini design continued for another 20 years. At the end of Clubman and 1275 GT production, 275,583 Clubman saloons, 197,606 Clubman Estates and 110,673 1275 GTs had been made.\nAustralia.\nFor the Australian market, all Minis including the Van gained the Clubman front in 1971 although the car was still basically a Mk I behind the A-Pillar. The Australian van thus became the only Clubman Van produced anywhere in the world. From mid-1971 to the end of 1972, a Clubman GT version of the saloon was produced. This was essentially a Cooper S in Clubman body, equipped with the same disc brakes, twin fuel tanks, and twin-carburettor Cooper S 1,275\u00a0cc engine. Australian Clubman saloons were marketed under the Morris Mini Clubman name when introduced in August 1971, and as the Leyland Mini, without the Clubman name, from February 1973.\nTo end Mini production in Australia, a limited-edition runout model was produced \u2013 the 1275LS. Fitted with a pollution control 1,275\u00a0cc engine sourced from Europe, the LS had a single carburettor and disc brakes. Production of this model commenced in July 1978 and concluded in October 1978 with an approximate total of 810 vehicles produced.\nEnd of production.\nThroughout the 1980s and 1990s the British market received numerous \"special editions\" of the Mini, which shifted the car from a mass-market item into a fashionable icon. It was this image that perhaps helped the Mini become such an asset for BMW, which later bought the remnants of BMC as the Rover Group. It was even more popular in Japan, which took the lion's share of the circa 40,000 Minis produced annually in the early 1990s. It was seen there as a retro-cool icon, and inspired many imitators. The ERA Mini Turbo was particularly popular with Japanese buyers.\nIn 1994, under Bernd Pischetsrieder, a first cousin once removed of Issigonis, BMW took control of the Rover Group, owner of the Rover, MG, Mini and Land Rover brands. At this time, Mini models fitting an airbag to comply with European legislation.\nBy March 2000, Rover was still suffering massive losses, and BMW decided to dispose of most of the companies. The sell-off was completed in May that year. MG and Rover went to Phoenix, a new British consortium; and Land Rover was sold to US Carmaker Ford Motor Company. BMW retained the Mini name and planned a new model, granting Rover temporary rights to the brand and allowing it to manufacture and sell the run-out model of the old Mini. By April 2000, the range consisted of four versions: the Mini Classic Seven, the Mini Classic Cooper, the Mini Classic Cooper Sport and\u2014for overseas European markets\u2014the Mini Knightsbridge. The last Mini (a red Cooper Sport) was built on 4 October 2000 and presented to the British Motor Industry Heritage Trust in December of that year. A total of 5,387,862 cars had been manufactured, nearly 1.6 million of which were sold in the UK, although the majority of these were sold at least 20 years before the Mini's demise, meaning that the majority of those sold had been scrapped before the end of the original Mini's production life.\nAfter the last of the Mini production had been sold, the 'Mini' name passed to BMW ownership in October 2000. Mini Hatch, the new model made by BMW, is technically unrelated to the old car but retains the classic transverse four-cylinder, front-wheel-drive configuration and \"bulldog\" stance of the original.\nThe last Mini to leave the Longbridge plant did so in 2012, when a 1970s 1275GT which was used by staff to travel around the car plant was recovered from the disused tunnels under the plant. The car was damaged by a storage container falling on it and had been left without an engine or gearbox for around 30 years before being recovered during work to infill the tunnels. This car was sold at auction in July 2013 for \u00a31400.\nLimited editions.\nFrom the Mark IV onward, many special limited-production editions of the Mini were offered. These included models that were created to commemorate racing victories or to celebrate an anniversary of the Mini marque. Limited editions generally came equipped with a unique combination of interior and exterior trim and special decals. Examples include Mini 1100 Special, Mini 1000 Special HL (only available in silver colour with black vinyl roof, black cloth upholstery seats with head restraints and walnut interior trim, for Portugal market only), Mini Rio, Mini Mayfair, Mini Park Lane, Mini Cooper RSP, Mini Flame, Mini Red Hot, Mini Jet Black, Mini Racing, Mini Thirty (30) which 3000 examples were produced, 2000 in Red and 1000 in Black and the Mini Monza. There was also a version inspired by \"The Italian Job\", a 1969 film famous for having a trio of Minis in its epic closing car chase.\nConcepts and unproduced prototypes.\nFrom 1967 to 1979, Issigonis had been designing a replacement for the Mini in the form of an experimental model called the 9X. It was even shorter () and yet still a bit roomier. Designed as a hatchback, and Issigonis designed an all new engine, 50% more powerful than the Mini's, but due to politicking inside British Leyland (which had now been formed by the merger of BMC's parent company British Motor Holdings and the Leyland Motor Corporation), the car always fell victim to other priorities.\nA number of prototypes produced for vehicles based on the Mini but which never saw production are held and sometimes displayed at the British Heritage Motor Centre museum at Gaydon, Warwickshire. These included the Twini, a re-engineered four-wheel-drive Moke with two engines\u2014one at the front and another at the back; the Austin Ant, a second attempt to produce a four-wheel-drive vehicle, this time using a transfer case; and a two-seater convertible MG edition of the Mini known as ADO34, cancelled due to it being perceived as competition for the MG Midget.\nIn 1992, a project considering possible improvements to the Mini was started. Codenamed \"Minki\" (\"Mini\" plus K-Series engine), it included a redesigned dashboard, a two-piece rear door or tailgate instead of a boot, fold down rear seats, Hydragas suspension and a 3-cylinder version of the K-Series engine with a 5-speed gearbox. However, the project was cancelled by management within Rover, who decided that the cost of engineering the changes, and achieving compliance with modern crash testing standards, was too great for the production volumes that could be expected of an updated Mini.\nIn 1995 the idea to update the Mini again surfaced but this time with BMW management. As part of the process of deciding how to replace the Mini, a vehicle representing what the current Mini could have become, if it had been developed further over its production history, was commissioned. This resulted in the \"Minki-II\", designed to house the 1.4L MPI K-Series engine with an extensive redesign inside, but without the original Minki's tailgate. The car had to be widened by 50mm and lengthened by 50mm to accommodate the new engine and gearbox, with Hydragas suspension and dashboard from a Rover 100. The Minki-II was used for Hydragas development work, this suspension being considered at the time for the R59 project, later to become the Mini Hatch.\nKit cars and customisation.\nThe cheapness and availability of used Minis make it a candidate for body replacement. There are over 120 Mini-based kit cars from various small companies and individual enthusiasts.\nThe Outspan Orange is probably one of the most unusual. It was designed and built by Brian Waite Enterprises of Bodiam, East Sussex in 1972 to promote fruit. Several still survive.\nMotorsport.\nBMC operated a Competition Department at Abingdon, Oxfordshire, under the control of Stuart Turner, which built specially prepared Minis (mostly based on Cooper and Cooper S versions) to compete in international rallies and other motorsport. This department played a key role in ensuring the Mini's huge success in motorsport throughout the 1960s, in particular, winning the Monte Carlo Rally in 1964, 1965 and 1967, the 1000 Lakes Rally in 1965, 1966 and 1967, and dominating all of the first 9 positions in the 1966 Gallaher 500 at Bathurst.\nThe car also won the 1961, 1962, 1969, 1978 and 1979 British Saloon Car Championship season, as well as the British Rally Championship in 1962, 1963 and 1970, the European Rally Championship in 1965 and 1966, and won the Finnish Rally Championship in 1965 and 1966. Minis also won the 1965 Lowood 4 Hour endurance race, and the final Finnish Grand Prix in 1963. The Cooper S also had some success in the European Touring Car Championship, winning in 1964 and 1968, the Guia Race of Macau (a 1-2-3 finish in 1965, a 1\u20132 finish in 1970 and a win in 1972), and the Australian Touring Car Championship, winning its class in 1962, 1963, 1964, 1966, 1967 and 1968. A further title was the 1971 Sun-7 Chesterfield Series. The Mini also achieved class wins at the 1963 Armstrong 500, repeating this feat every year until 1969, and having class wins at the 1964, 1965 and 1971 Sandown 250, and Six Hour Le Mans in 1963, 1964, 1965, 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970 and 1972, as well as the 1971 Phillip Island 500K. The car also won the Welsh Sports and Saloon Car Championship in 1998. Mini Leyland came 4th place in the under-2-litre category in the 1966, 1967 and 1969 Trans-Am seasons, improving to 3rd in 1970.\nThe Mini Cooper S won the Monte Carlo Rally in 1964, 1965 and 1967. Minis initially placed first, second and third in the 1966 rally as well, but were disqualified after a controversial decision by the judges. The disqualification related to the use of a variable resistance headlamp dimming circuit in place of a dual-filament lamp. Fourth placed Roger Clark's Ford Cortina was disqualified for the same reason, along with six other cars. The fifth car past the finishing line, a Citro\u00ebn DS, a model that had won the race previously, was awarded first place \u2013 the DS had similar headlamps, but these were standard production equipment on the car \u2013 in line with the letter of the rules. The driver of the Citro\u00ebn, Pauli Toivonen, felt that he had not really \"won\" the rally. BMC probably received more publicity from the disqualification than they would have gained from a victory.\nIn rallycross, the Mini finished on the podium in the first ever race, at Lydden Hill Race Circuit in February 1967, winning races in the FIA European Rallycross Championship in 1974 and 1975. The car competed as late as the 1979 Australian Rallycross Championship.\n\"The Se7ens\" is the UK's longest running one make motor racing championship, having been introduced in 1966. As of 2014, classic Minis are still raced, with other one make races in the UK, Europe and Asia, and in classic events such as the Goodwood Members Meeting. In 2012 a Mini broke the land speed record. A Mini was used to set a record at the Chateau Impney Hill Climb.\nAwards.\nBMC and Issigonis were awarded the Dewar Trophy by the Royal Automobile Club (RAC) for the innovative design and production of the Mini.\nThe Mini has won many other awards over the years, including second place in 1999's \"Global\" Car of the Century award, behind only the Model T Ford. In the same competition, run by the prestigious Global Automotive Elections Foundation, the Mini was selected \"European Car of the Century\". \"Grassroots Motorsports\" awarded Mini with the Editors' Choice award in 2002. The Mini also received awards for \"Car of the Century\" (\"Autocar\" magazine 1995) and \"Number One Classic Car of All Time\" (\"Classic &amp; Sports Car\" magazine 1996).\nIn the end 5.3\u00a0million Minis were sold, making it the most popular British car ever made.\nSales.\nAt its peak, the Mini was a strong seller in most of the countries where it was sold, with the United Kingdom inevitably receiving the highest volumes. The 1,000,000th Mini came off the production line in 1965, with the 2,000,000th in 1969. The 3,000,000th Mini came off the production line in 1972, with the 4,000,000th in 1976.\nThe Mini dominated the mini-car market until the arrival of the Hillman Imp in 1963. It outsold the Imp. Competition arrived with the more modern and practical Vauxhall Chevette of 1975, but the Mini continued to sell well until its \"replacement\"\u2014the Metro\u2014arrived in 1980. By this time, the Mini's design had been overtaken by numerous more modern and practical vehicles.\nAlthough the Metro did not replace the Mini, production figures for the Mini dipped during the 1980s, and interest in the design was not revived until the reintroduction of the Mini Cooper in 1990. This helped sales of the Mini through the 1990s, to the end of production on 4 October 2000.\nA total of 1,581,887 Minis were sold in the UK after its launch in 1959. The last new one to be registered was sold in 2004, some four years after the end of production.\nThe highest price ever paid for a Mini was at a Bonhams auction in 2007, when a works rally-prepared Mini (DJB 93B) sold for \u00a3100,500 ($196,980).\nUnited States and Canada.\nBetween 1960 and 1967, BMC exported approximately 10,000 left-hand drive BMC Minis to the United States. Sales were discontinued when stricter federal safety standards were imposed in 1968 and the arrival of the larger and more profitable Austin America. Mini sales fell in the 1967 calendar year and the US importer was expecting the forthcoming Austin America to find a larger market. The America was also withdrawn in 1972 due to slow sales and the introduction of bumper-height standards. Mini sales continued in Canada until 1980. MkIII variants, as with their UK counterparts remained badged as a \"Mini\" (no distinction between Austin or Morris), and in 1976 with the takeover of British Leyland, became British Leyland Minis (MkIV). Leyland Minis also were subject to stricter government regulation with high bumpers, large turn indicators, warning buzzers and lights for seat belts and also a fitting of air pollution pumps which required a specially designed radiator.\nToday the US government exempts cars older than 25 years from all import laws, so older Minis can be freely imported. The Canadian government applies a similar rule after 15 years. In the state of California, the (California Smog Check is mandated for automobiles 1976 and newer.)\nSafety record.\nIssigonis designed the Mini with an emphasis on active safety. Asked about the crashworthiness of the Mini, he said: \"I make my cars with such good brakes, such good steering, that if people get into a crash it's their own fault\" and \"I don't design my cars to have accidents\".\nIn July 1965 BMC announced that following \"comments by safety experts\" about the Mini's external door handles, these would be modified on new cars so that the gap between the handle and the door panel would be effectively closed.\nNicholas Faith states in his book that Murray Mackay, one of the UK's leading motor vehicle crash and safety researchers, was critical of the pre-1967 Mini's passive safety features, including the protruding filler cap, the door latch, and the vulnerability of the passenger space to engine intrusion.\nThe Mini was withdrawn from the American market because it could not meet the 1968 US safety regulations and emission standards, and although often updated, not sufficiently to comply with US regulations. It continued to be sold in Canada until 1980.\nThe Mini was modified during its production to improve its safety. In 1974 a prototype Mini experimental safety vehicle was built, the Mini Clubman SRV4. It featured a longer crumple zone, a \"pedestrian friendly\" front-end, run-flat tyres, strengthened door sills, extra internal padding and recessed door handles, the latter having been used earlier on Australian-built Minis owing to local laws. Jack Daniels, one of the original Issigonis team, is stated to have been working on further safety improvements for the Mini when he retired in 1977. Several times it was thought that safety regulations would stop Mini production. Safety improved in 1996, with the introduction of airbags and side-impact bars. The Mini, challenged by increasingly demanding European safety and pollution standards, was planned by British Aerospace to be taken out of production in 1996, but BMW chose to invest to keep the Mini legal until the launch of a new model.\nIn January 2007 \"Which?\" magazine listed the Mini City in its \"Ten worst cars for safety (since 1983)\" list, alongside other economical, lightweight, fuel-efficient cars like the Hyundai Pony 1.2L, Fiat Panda 900 Super, Suzuki Alto GL, Daihatsu Domino, Citro\u00ebn AX 11 RE, Yugo 45 and 55, Peugeot 205 GL, and the Citro\u00ebn 2CV6.\nA UK Department for Transport statistics publication, presenting estimates of the risk of driver injury in two-car injury collisions, based on reported road accident data, estimated that the 1990\u20132000 Mini was one of two small cars (the other being the Hyundai Atoz), which, with an estimated 84% of drivers likely to be injured, presented the greatest risk of driver injury; the average risk for the small car category was 76%.\n50th anniversary.\nSeveral key events marked the 50th anniversary of the Mini in 2009. On 13 January 2009, the Royal Mail released a limited edition of stamps entitled \"British Design Classics\", featuring an original, egg-shell blue, MK1 Mini, registration XAA 274. On 17 May, a world record parade of 1,450 Minis congregated at Crystal Palace as part of a London to Brighton run. The following week, 10,000 Minis and 25,000 people attended an anniversary party at Silverstone Circuit on the border of Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire.\nBetween 7 and 10 August 2009 approximately 4000 minis from around the world congregated at Longbridge Birmingham to celebrate the 50th anniversary. On 26 August 2009, smallcarBIGCITY launched in London to provide sightseeing tours of the capital in a fleet of restored Mini Coopers.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the British sitcom \"Mr. Bean\", the eponymous title character drives a citron green 1977 British Leyland Mini 1000 Mark 4 with a matte black bonnet. In the pilot episode, he drives an orange 1969 BMC Morris Mini 1000 Mark 2.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65685", "revid": "50889545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65685", "title": "Volkswagen Beetle", "text": "Small family car (1938\u20132003)\nThe Volkswagen Beetle, officially the Volkswagen Type 1, is a small family car produced by the German company Volkswagen from 1938 to 2003. A global cultural icon known for its bug-like design, the Beetle is widely regarded as one of the most influential cars of the 20th century. Its production period of 65 years is the longest for any single generation of automobile, and its total production of 21.5 million units makes it the most produced car of a single platform in history and the second-highest of all nameplates manufactured in the 20th century.\nThe Beetle was conceived in the early 1930s. The leader of Nazi Germany, Adolf Hitler, decided there was a need for a \"people's car\"\u2014an inexpensive, simple, mass-produced car\u2014to serve Germany's new road network, the \"Reichsautobahn\". The German engineer Ferdinand Porsche and his design team began developing and designing the car in the early 1930s, but the fundamental design concept can be attributed to B\u00e9la Bar\u00e9nyi in 1925, predating Porsche's claims by almost ten years. The result was the Volkswagen Type 1 and the introduction of the Volkswagen brand. Volkswagen initially slated production for the late 1930s, but the outbreak of war in 1939 meant that production was delayed until the war had ended. The car was originally called the Volkswagen Type 1 and marketed simply as the Volkswagen. It was not until 1968 that it was officially named the \"Beetle\".\nVolkswagen implemented designations for the Beetle in the 1960s, including 1200, 1300, 1500, 1600, 1302, and 1303. Volkswagen introduced a series of large luxury models throughout the 1960s and 1970s\u2014comprising the Type 3, Type 4 and K70\u2014to supplement the Beetle, but none of these models achieved the level of success that it did. In 1972, it became the best-selling car of all time, a position it retained for nearly three decades. Rapidly changing consumer preferences toward front-wheel drive compact hatchbacks in Europe prompted Volkswagen's gradual shift away from rear-wheel drive, starting with the Golf in 1974. In the late 1970s and '80s, Japanese automakers dominated some markets around the world, which contributed to the Beetle's declining popularity.\nThe Beetle remains one of the best-selling cars of all time and is the first to sell over 20million units. Over its lifespan, its design remained consistent, yet Volkswagen implemented over 78,000 incremental updates. These modifications were often subtle, involving minor alterations to its exterior, interior, colours, and lighting. Some more noteworthy changes included the introduction of new engines, models and systems, such as improved technology or comfort. The Beetle maintains a substantial cultural influence and is regarded as one of the most iconic vehicles in automotive history; its success largely influenced the way automobiles are designed and marketed, and propelled Volkswagen's introduction of a Golf-based series of vehicles.\nHistory.\nKdF-Wagen.\nIn May 1934, at a meeting at Berlin's Kaiserhof Hotel, chancellor of Nazi Germany, Adolf Hitler, insisted on the development of a vehicle that could accommodate two adults and three children while not using more than sevenlitres of fuel per 100\u00a0km (33.6 mpg US/40.4 mpg UK). All components were designed for a quick and inexpensive part exchange. As Hitler explained, the reason for choosing an air-cooled engine was the lack of a garage for every country doctor. On 22 June 1934, Ferdinand Porsche received a development contract from the \"Verband der Automobilindustrie\" (German Association of the Automotive Industry) for the prototype of an inexpensive and economical passenger car after Hitler decided there was a need for a \"people's car\" (in German, \"volkswagen\")\u2014a car affordable and practical enough for lower-class people to own\u2014to serve the country's new road network, the \"Reichsautobahn\". Although the Volkswagen Beetle was primarily the conception of Porsche and Hitler, the idea of a \"people's car\" is much older than Nazism and has existed since the introduction of automotive mass-production.\nOriginally designated as the Type 60 by Porsche, the Beetle project involved a team of designers and engineers comprising Erwin Komenda, who specialised in the bodywork; Josef Kales, responsible for the engine design; Karl Rabe, serving as the chief engineer; and Josef Mickl and Franz Xaver Reimspiess, the latter credited for devising the iconic Volkswagen badge. The project saw significant milestones in October 1935 with the completion of the first two Type-60 prototypes, identified as cars V1 (sedan) and V2 (convertible), denoted with a \"V\" (for \"Versuchs\" \u2013 \"prototype\") signifying their status as a test car. The testing of three additional V3 prototypes began on 11 July 1936, the first of which was driven to Obersalzberg and inspected by Hitler. Two V3s were delivered to Berlin in August for examination by other Nazi Party officials, who showed great interest in them. By June 1936, the V3s underwent over of testing across various terrains. A series of thirty W30 development models, commissioned by Porsche and manufactured by Daimler-Benz, underwent testing in early April 1937, covering a total distance of over . All vehicles featured the characteristic rounded design and included air-cooled, rear-mounted engines. A further batch of 44 \"VW38\" pre-production cars produced in 1938 introduced split rear windows, and subsequently, Volkswagen introduced fifty \"VW39\" cars, completed in July 1939.\n\"Kraft durch Freude\" (Strength Through Joy, a political organisation aimed at providing the populace with leisure activities) was in charge of this project. Robert Ley, the Nazi official heading \"Kraft durch Freude\" (KdF), announced in 1938 that every German would own a Volkswagen within ten years. However, there were challenges. Gasoline prices in Germany were high due to taxes, making it expensive for private car ownership. Gasoline was also primarily used for the military in the Nazi regime. Despite that, the Nazi leaders saw the mass-produced car as a way to promote their system. It symbolised a shift from cars being a privilege for the wealthy to a dream that lower-class Germans could now fulfil. Hitler was particularly enthusiastic about it because the car could easily be adapted for military use.\nThe \"KdF-Wagen\" was not series-produced before the Second World War because the Volkswagen plant at Fallersleben (now Wolfsburg), founded in May 1938, was not yet finished. During the war, other German manufacturers were concurrently producing military vehicles and armaments, so the series production of the then-called Volkswagen car could not begin until peacetime; nevertheless, 210 \"KdF-Wagens\" were manufactured by the end of the war in May 1945. Following the cessation of hostilities the British occupying forces brought the factory into operation and by the close of 1945, 1,785 Volkswagens had been built, delivered to the occupying powers and the postal service.\nDesign.\nThe Beetle featured a rear-located, air-cooled four-cylinder, boxer engine and rear-wheel drive in a two-door bodywork. It features a flat front windscreen, accommodating four passengers and providing luggage storage under the front bonnet and behind the rear seat, reaching a drag coefficient of\u00a0\"C\"=0.48. The bodywork attached with eighteen bolts to the Beetle's nearly flat platform chassis featured a central structural tunnel. The front and rear suspension incorporated torsion bars and a front stabiliser bar, providing independent suspension at all wheels, albeit the front axle was designed with double longitudinal trailing arms, whereas the rear axle was a swing axle. Light alloy forms the Beetle's engine, transmission, and cylinder heads.\nDesign controversies.\nGerman-Bohemian Ferdinand Porsche (1875\u20131951) and his team were generally known as the original designers of the Volkswagen. However, there has been debate over whether he was the original designer. Rumours circulated, suggesting that other designers, such as B\u00e9la Bar\u00e9nyi, Paul Jaray, Josef Ganz and Hans Ledwinka, may have influenced its design.\nIn 1925, Austro-Hungarian automotive engineer B\u00e9la Bar\u00e9nyi designed a car similarly shaped to the Beetle, more than five years before Porsche unveiled his initial \"People's Car\" design. Through a court ruling in 1953, Bar\u00e9nyi successfully asserted his authorship and associated claims. He explained that he had previously elucidated the concept of the Beetle, which was already formulated in the 1920s, to Porsche in great detail. However, this concept was not protected sufficiently by patents. Key elements of this concept included the air-cooled four-cylinder boxer engine at the rear, the transmission positioned in front of the rear axle, and the distinctive roundish shape. Dieter Landenberger, the head of Porsche's historical archive, later affirmed that Bar\u00e9nyi played a \"decisive role in the authorship of the later VW Beetle\". Since then, he has been known for conceiving the original car design.\nMany assume that Paul Jaray shaped the car's body design through his aerodynamics calculations. According to a November 2021 update of research mentioned in the fifteenth report by the German newspaper \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\", Jaray's findings influenced the design of \"Hitler's streamlined KdF car\", later known as the 'beetle', which became the best-selling car globally post-war. Jaray's research results in fluid mechanics for ground-bound vehicles extended beyond the VW Beetle, impacting the Tatra 77 and other vehicles. His initial patents and publications date back to the early 1920s. The engineer Christian Binnebesel scientifically presented Jaray's significant contribution to streamline form in his 2008 dissertation.\nJosef Ganz's potential early contributions to the original Beetle's development remained controversial for years and lacked clear clarification. Research suggests that his idea and the concept of a compact car played a significant role in the VW Beetle's development and its prototypes. Ganz personally drove a Hanomag Kommissbrot and a swing-axle Tatra\u2014both featuring elements such as a central tubular frame, independent wheel suspension, and a rear/mid-engine design. Ganz incorporated these technical features into his proposed vehicle designs. Hitler reportedly saw cars designed by Josef Ganz at the 1933 Berlin Auto Show. The Standard Superior, designed by Ganz for the Standard vehicle factory, featured an implied teardrop-shaped body on a central tubular frame with a rear swing axle, yet the engine was transversely installed in front of the axle, not longitudinally as a rear engine.\nThe Austrian automobile designer Hans Ledwinka, whom Porsche was a contemporary, worked at the Czechoslovakian company Tatra. In 1931, Tatra built the V570 prototype, which featured an air-cooled flat-twin engine mounted at the rear. Hitler and Porsche both were influenced by the Tatras. Hitler, an avid automotive enthusiast, rode in Tatras multiple times during political tours of Czechoslovakia and had frequent dinners with Ledwinka. Following one such tour, Hitler remarked to Porsche, \"This is the car for my roads\". From 1933 onwards, Ledwinka and Porsche met regularly to discuss their designs, and Porsche admitted, \"Well, sometimes I looked over his shoulder, and sometimes he looked over mine\" while designing the Volkswagen. The Tatra 97 of 1936 had a 1,749\u00a0cc, rear-located, rear-wheel drive, air-cooled four-cylinder boxer engine. It accommodated five passengers in its compact four-door body, which provided luggage storage under the front bonnet and behind the rear seats.\nJust before the outbreak of World War II, Tatra filed numerous legal claims against VW for patent infringement. Tatra launched a lawsuit, halted only by Germany's invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1938, leading to the Nazi administration of the Tatra factory in October. Hitler instructed Tatra to focus exclusively on heavy trucks and diesel engines, discontinuing all car models except the V8-engined Tatra 87. The issue resurfaced post-World War II, and in 1965, Volkswagen paid Ringhoffer-Tatra 1,000,000 Deutsche Marks in an out-of-court settlement.\nTenure.\nWorld War II and military production: 1938\u20131945.\nThe name \"Volkswagen\" was officially substituted by the term KdF (\"Kraft durch Freude\"; German for 'Strength Through Joy') derived from the Nazi organisation once Hitler ceremoniously laid the foundation stone for the Volkswagen factory on 26 May 1938. As part of this organisation, Volkswagen urged workers to \"save five marks a week and get your car\". Before the completion of the KdF factory, many Germans had already signed up for a savings plan to buy a car. At that time, Germany had fewer cars than other European countries. In 1930, there were only about 500,000 registered cars in Germany, while France and Great Britain had over 1 million each, and the USA had more than 26 million. However, the onset of the Second World War hindered the distribution of the cars, and there was a lack of time for series production. With the Volkswagen facility dedicated solely to wartime requirements, the over 330,000 KdF savers could not acquire their vehicles. Following the war, numerous KdF savers pressed for the receipt of a Volkswagen. When their request was denied, the VW saver initiative ensued, spanning several years.\nDuring the war, the factory predominantly built the \"K\u00fcbelwagen\" (Type 82), the \"Schwimmwagen\" (Type 166) and numerous other light utility vehicles. These vehicles were derived mechanically from the Type 1 and used by the \"Wehrmacht\". These vehicles, including several hundred \"Kommandeurswagen\" (Type 87), featured a Type 1 Beetle body mounted on the robust chassis of the four-wheel-drive Type 86 \"K\u00fcbelwagen\" prototype. The \"Kommandeurswagen\" included a portal axle, a \"Schwimmwagen\" drivetrain, wider fenders, and oversized Kronprinz all-terrain tyres, reminiscent of the later Baja Bugs. The production of the \"Kommandeurswagen\" persisted until 1944 when the production at the plant halted due to the extensive damage inflicted by the Allied air raids. Due to gasoline shortages late in the war, a few \"Holzbrenner\" (wood-burner) Beetles were built fueled with wood logs.\nPlanned for September 1939, \"Kraft durch Freude\" arranged an event to showcase Germany's Autobahn highway system and to promote the purported beginning of the production of the \"KdF-Wagen\", involving a 1,500-kilometre(930mi) journey from Berlin to Rome. Erwin Komenda supervised the development process, while Karl Froelich was responsible for creating official plans that they subsequently used to form a wooden scale model. The model was wind tunnel tested at Stuttgart University by Josef Mickl. Dubbed the \"Berlin-Rome car\", Porsche AG's engineers designed the Type 60 K 10, officially known as the Porsche 64. Although the engineers produced three vehicles, they never made it to the race due to the outbreak of war before the scheduled date; two of them disappeared during the conflict. Austrian Otto Math\u00e9 acquired the third Berlin-Rome car and raced it throughout the 1950s, becoming the fastest in its class during the 1950 Alpine Cup. He continued to use it until his death in 1995.\nPost-war production and success: 1945\u20131970.\nFollowing the war, the Beetle experienced a significant growth in success. On 11 April 1945, \"Stadt des KdF-Wagens bei Fallersleben\", where 17,000 people lived, was officially designated \"Wolfsburg\". Official series manufacture of the saloon began on 27 December 1945; Volkswagen made fifty-five vehicles by the end of the year. The Volkswagen facility, initially slated for dismantling and transportation to Britain under American control in 1945, faced a lack of interest from British car manufacturers; an official report included the statement, \"The vehicle does not meet the fundamental technical requirement of a motor-car [...] it is quite unattractive to the average buyer [...] To build the car commercially would be a completely uneconomic enterprise.\" Instead, the factory remained operational by producing cars for the British Army. Allied dismantling policy changed from late 1946 to mid-1947. During this period, heavy industry in Germany continued until 1951. In March 1947, Herbert Hoover helped change policy by stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is the illusion that the New Germany left after the annexations can be reduced to a \"pastoral state\". It cannot be done unless we exterminate or move 25,000,000 people out of it.\nMajor Ivan Hirst (1916\u20132000), a British Army officer, has been widely acknowledged for the reopening of the factory. Hirst was ordered to take control of the heavily bombed factory, which the Americans had captured. Recognising the scarcity of occupations in Germany and the shortage of vehicles in the British Army, Hirst persuaded the British military to order 20,000\u00a0cars, stating that it \"was the limit set by the availability of materials\". By March 1946, production capacity was rated at approximately 1,000 units per month. Based on an eight-hour shift in mid-1946, production was around 2,500 per month. At the time, about 1,800 machine tools were in operation, of which 200 were used exclusively for the key components.\nOnce Heinrich Nordhoff assumed management at Volkswagenwerk, manufacturing capacity increased significantly. Production in 1946 and 1947 was rated at 9,878 and 8,973 examples, respectively, but in Nordhoff's first year, 1948, manufacture doubled to approximately 19,244 units. On 6 August 1955, the millionth example was assembled and by 1959, production capacity was rated at 700,000 units per year. By mid-1948, the Forces of Occupation received 20,991 cars, leaving less than 10,000 for export or domestic consumption. The number of employees increased from 6,033 by the end of 1945 to almost 57,000 in 1957. After the war, over 10,000 apartments were built to house the workers in Wolfsburg, which then had a population of nearly 60,000. In 1959, Volkswagen invested more than DM500million to increase daily production by 1,000, reaching a final target of 3,000 per day. During 1960, the company occasionally increased production by around 100; by the end of 1960, Volkswagen planned to produce 4,000 examples daily. Nordhoff stated, \"Then we believe we shall have reached a balance between supply and demand so that we can finally deliver Volkswagens to customers without a waiting period\".\nBy the early 1960s, the Wolfsburg facility was massive. It accommodated about 10,000 production machines and covered in roofed area, more than the combined residential area in Wolfsburg. Daily production increased to approximately 5,091, and the plant employed over 43,500 workers. By 1962, Nordhoff had spent over DM675million in expanding the factory. At that time, Volkswagen sales constituted 34.5percent of the total West German automotive market and 42.3percent of sub- commercial vehicle market there. Nordhoff's recurring encouragement proved to be highly effective. He consistently urged the team to work harder, reduce expenses and avoid complacency and corporate inefficiencies. In January 1960, Nordhoff quoted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We shall some day speak of the Golden Fifties. We are now moving away from them and we must recognise that fact and use the time given us. The wheel of history never turns back! Whatever opportunities you miss today will never return! The new year will have 366 days this time; every day, we will cross one off\u2014and soon there will be only four left. No power of heaven or earth will bring those days back. Let us use this time, as long as we are free to do so, as we are now, and as we shall still be for a few years. \nThe Emden facility represented an expenditure exceeding DM154.4million, with Beetle operations beginning there on 1 December 1964. By late 1965, Volkswagen's annual production exceeded 1,600,000 units, averaging 6,800 units per day. Volkswagen's share of all cars produced in West Germany reached 48.6 percent, representing a 3.3% increase from the previous year. When including Audis produced at Ingolstadt, the combined output from Volkswagen and its Auto-Union company constituted 50.4% of all West German cars produced that year. In 1968, the Type 1 was officially given the name \"Beetle\" (from \"der K\u00e4fer\", German for beetle).\nDecline and end of West German production: 1970\u20131990.\nWhile it was largely successful in the 1960s, recording its highest sales growth in North America from 1960 to 1965, the Beetle started facing competition from more contemporary designs worldwide in the 1970s. The decade started out well for Volkswagen, which sold 569,000 Beetles in 1970. In 1970, fifteen American Volkswagen dealerships convened in Washington, D.C., to implement the Volkswagen American Dealers Association, which was made to preserve a free market of imported international automobiles through political pressure and lobbying. \nOn 17 February 1972, the world car production record was broken by the Beetle, with a total of 15,007,034 units produced worldwide, thereby surpassing the production figure that had been held by the American Ford Model T for nearly fifty years. Volkswagen donated the record-breaking car, a Super Beetle, to the Smithsonian Institution for permanent exhibition in its industrial history section. By 1973, over 16million Beetles had been manufactured. On 1 July 1974, the final Beetle was produced at the Wolfsburg plant after 11,916,519 units were made there. Following its discontinuation, Volkswagen ceased the ongoing development of the Beetle in Germany. On 19 January 1978, the last Beetle sedan manufactured in Europe rolled off the production line at the Emden plant with the chassis number 1182034030. After its discontinuation in Germany, production of the Volkswagen Beetle continued in Brazil, Mexico and Nigeria.\nIn the 1960s and '70s, Volkswagen augmented its product portfolio with several models to supplement the Type 1\u2014the Type 3, the Type 4 and the NSU-based K70 sedan. None of these models achieved the level of success of the Beetle. The overdependence on a singular model, which was experiencing a decline in popularity, meant that Volkswagen was in a financial crisis and needed German government funding to produce the Beetle's replacement. Consequently, the company introduced a new generation of water-cooled, front-engined, front-wheel-drive models, including the Golf, the Passat, the Polo and the Scirocco, all of which were styled by the Italian automotive designer Giorgetto Giugiaro. By 1979, the Golf constituted over 50 per cent of Volkswagen sales, and it eventually became Volkswagen's most successful model since the Beetle. As opposed to the Beetle, the Golf was substantially redesigned over its lifetime, with only a few components carried over between generations. On 10 January 1980, the final Beetle convertible of 330,281 rolled off the production line at the Karmann facility in Osnabr\u00fcck. It was the most successful convertible for a long time and was replaced by the first Golf cabriolet in 1979.\nThe number of Beetle units sold by Volkswagen was at its lowest in the 1980s. The Beetle faced competition from Japanese automakers such as Toyota and Honda, whose cars were uprated in reliability and performance. The closure of Volkswagen's Pennsylvania factory was due to high costs, subpar quality, and poor sales. In the United States, Volkswagen introduced the Rabbit and Corrado, both of which had little success. The overall sales suffered a significant downturn, leading to the loss of many dealerships for the company.\nNew Beetle and end of production: 1990\u20132003.\nIn 1991, the planning of a new car began once J Mays and Freeman Thomas returned to California to open Volkswagen's Design Centre at Simi Valley. Recognising that Japanese manufacturers dominated the market in the 1970s and '80s, Volkswagen needed to introduce a vehicle to regain popularity. Before this, the company began the development of a city car, codenamed \"Chico\", in which they invested millions of Deutsche Marks. In 1993, the brand stated that the Chico was intended to begin production in 1995. However, this plan was abandoned once Volkswagen realised that the project was commercially infeasible. Mays and Thomas recognised the difficulties faced by the brand and suggested the need for a vehicle that included the recognisable design of the Beetle as a potential solution to improve customer appeal. During development, this car was known as the \"Concept One\" project. The prototype version of the project was revealed at the 1994 Detroit Motor Show, and a red convertible variant of the model was showcased at the 1995 Geneva Motor Show.\nIt took a year for Volkswagen to officially confirm the production of the concept in its final form, which was slated for completion by the end of the century. To help gauge public demand of the forthcoming automobile in the United States, Volkswagen implemented a free-access telephone line to allow members to express their thoughts on the car. The line quickly became inundated with calls, with many saying, \"You build it, I'll buy it!\" Work on the Concept One continued, with further redesigns on its front fascia. To reduce production investments and expenses, Volkswagen initially planned to use the platform of the Polo. However, in 1995, at the Tokyo Motor Show, the company unveiled another prototype, sharing its wheelbase and its broader range of engine options with the Golf. Simultaneously, Volkswagen announced that it would be named the \"New Beetle\". After over six years of planning and development, Volkswagen introduced the New Beetle in 1997.\nOn 30 July 2003 at 9:05\u00a0a.m., at the Puebla plant in Mexico, Volkswagen produced the final Type 1, after 21,529,464 examples were produced globally during its tenure. Its production span of 65 years is the longest of any single generation of automobile, and its total production of over 21.5million is the most of any car of a single platform. To celebrate the occasion, Volkswagen marketed a series of 3,000 Beetles as \"\u00daltima Edici\u00f3n\" (Final Edition).\nModels and history of design.\nWhile the design of the Beetle changed little over its lifespan, Volkswagen implemented over 78,000 incremental updates. Typically subtle, these alterations usually involved minor updates to the exterior, interior, colours and lighting. More noteworthy changes have comprised new engines, models and systems, such as updated dashboards and hydraulic braking.\nInitial and successful models: 1946\u20131974.\nThe Type 11 standard limousine, initially designated as the Type 60 before 1946, received the dub \"Pretzel Beetle\" due to its distinctive oval-shaped, vertically divided rear window. On 1 July 1949, the Volkswagen lineup was expanded to include the \"export\" model featuring enhanced interiors, chrome bumpers, and trim. It was offered in a variety of colours to distinguish it from the preceding \"Standard\" model. Starting in 1950, an optional sunroof with a textile cover could be added at an extra cost. By March of the same year, the export model began to be equipped with a hydraulic brake system, which became a standard feature from April onwards. In 1952, the equipment was enhanced with the addition of vent windows in the doors, and the wheels were reduced to a diameter of from the previous . On 10 March 1953, the split rear window was replaced with a one-piece rear window. Starting in 1954, the Type 122 engine had a cylinder bore, increased by , and an engine displacement of , surpassing the previous . This engine produced , a improvement over its predecessor. In 1955, the traditional VW semaphore turn signals were replaced by conventional flashing directional indicator lamps for North America, followed by their worldwide replacement in 1961. In 1958, the Beetle received a revised instrument panel, and a larger rectangular rear window replaced the previous oval design.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The 1961 Volkswagen sedan provides the kind of happy surprise that comes when an excellent motor vehicle is made even better.\"\n\"Motor Trend\", August 1960\nIn 1960, Volkswagen introduced a series of technical alterations. The front indicators were relocated to the front bonnet within chrome housings, and the rear indicators were integrated into the tail lamps. In January, the valve-clearing adjusting nut was slightly enlarged and resistor-type ignition leads were adopted. In March, Volkswagen made several modifications to its front trailing arm and the steering damper. In May 1960, Volkswagen added plastic warm air ducts to decrease noise.\nIn the mid-1960s, the traditional labels \"standard\" and \"export\" for the Beetle's model variants were superseded by numerical designations, approximately correlating with the engine displacements. In the October 1961 issue of \"Motor Trend\", Don Werner noted, \"Five years ago, out of every ten imported cars sold, six were Volkswagens. [The] latest figures show the ratio is now down to about every four [Volkswagens] out of every ten. If the current VW starts to slip, the new [Type 3]\u2014soon to be introduced\u2014probably will be imported to justify the [company's] more than 600 [Volkswagen] dealerships and the $100million investment in facilities\". He continued by expressing that the Type 3 had failed to leave a positive impression on industry executives in both Europe and North America. The new engine essentially possessed identical specifications to the previous model; it was a horizontally opposed, overhead valve, four-cylinder air-cooled engine. It generated at 3,900rpm and produced at 2,000rpm.\nThe 1961 Beetle introduced a fully synchronised four-speed manual transmission, replacing the former non-synchronised first gear. The Volkswagen facility implemented 27 alterations to the new model, some of which were minor. Noteworthy changes comprised an automatic choke, an anti-icing carburettor heater, a redesigned fuel tank that increased boot capacity, an external gas tank vent to prevent odours in the car, standard windshield wipers with a manual washer system, and a new ignition switch. Stylistic improvements included new paint colours and interior design options, a coloured steering wheel, a speedometer. For 1962, the manual windscreen washer system was replaced by a powered system that was pressurized by the air pressure in the front mounted spare wheel. The system included a built in-valve to prevent the tire from losing too much pressure to be usable. This system would be implemented in multiple other VW models throughout the 1960s and 1970s. On 30 July 1962, Volkswagen made several updates for the 1963 model year, including the incorporation of an air filter into the oil filter, the introduction of larger-diameter cylinder head induction ports and the adoption of plastic for the headliner and window guides. Volkswagen replaced the Wolfsburg crest on the hood, which had been present since 1951, with the company's lettering. A heating system was also introduced. In 1965, the 1200A designation was introduced for the standard Beetle with the engine.\nVolkswagen introduced the 1300 in August 1965, equipped with a 1.3-litre engine producing . Although featuring an identical design, the increase was achieved through the adoption of the crankshaft from the Type 3. This extended the stroke from to , resulting in an engine displacement of . 1965 also marked the Beetle's most extensive design change when its body stampings were extensively revised. It allowed for significantly larger windows, a departure from previous designs. The windshield increased by 11% in area and adopted a slight curvature, replacing its flat configuration. Door windows also expanded by 6%, with a slight backward canting of door vent window edges. Rear side windows increased by 17.5%, and the rear window by 19.5%.\nIn 1967, updates comprised shortened front and rear bonnets, box-profile bumpers with a railway rails design that were installed at a higher position, vertically oriented scattering discs for the headlights and larger rear lights with an iron design. Volkswagen introduced an external fuel filler flap, eliminating the need to open the front bonnet for refuelling. In September 1967, the 1500 Beetle was introduced. Its engine displacement was approximately , its power output was and featured a three-speed semi-automatic transmission. In 1968, the 1200 received fully independent suspension, some stylistic improvements and an external fuel cap. The 1300 transitioned from six-volt to twelve-volt electrics and received dual circuit braking and a fuel gauge. The 1500 also received these alterations, as well as carburettor enhancements. In 1969, the 1200 received twelve-volt electrics, hazard warning lamps and a locking fuel cap. The 1300 was available with a semi-automatic transmission and radial-ply tyres. In 1970, the 1500 received a new carburettor and dual circuit braking, and Volkswagen discontinued the 1500.\nIn 1971, the 1200 received a larger windscreen, while the 1300 received a power increase to and larger brakes, effectively replacing the 1500. Volkswagen replaced the 1300 with the 1300A \"economy version\" in 1973 for the 1974 model year, possessing the same specifications as the 1300 but maintaining the same overall design as the 1200.\nMid-life and declining models: 1970\u20131986.\nThe VW 1302, introduced in August 1970, featured a redesigned front end. It incorporated a new front axle featuring MacPherson suspension struts, wishbones and a stabiliser. The enlargement of the front trunk became possible as a result. Unlike its predecessor, the spare wheel was no longer positioned diagonally at the front under the hood but instead rested horizontally under a cover in the trunk area. The company initially intended to designate the car as the \"1301\", but a trademark already held by the French company Simca compelled Volkswagen to use \"1302\" instead. Volkswagen produced the more powerful 1302S alongside the 1302. The latter has an engine displacement of , while the former has a capacity of . In English-speaking countries, the name \"Super Beetle\"\u2014alongside \"1600\"\u2014was included on the written description but not the engine cover.\nThe 1302 possessed the same output as the 1300, whereas the 1302S saw an increase to . This was facilitated by a twin-port cylinder head, enabling the engines to breathe more effortlessly. The British automotive magazine \"Autocar\" expressed disappointment in its power increase, noting, \"Even with 14 [percent] more power, the total output of 50bhp is very modest for the size of the engine\". The Super Beetle had a increase in wheelbase, but the extra space was in front of the windshield. For 1971, the overall length increased by , doubling the front trunk capacity and adding of luggage space. Volkswagen also implemented a new fresh-air ventilation system, drawing its air from the rear quarter panels.\nIn August 1972, the 1303 range superseded the 1302 model, which featured a curved windshield. This design change elicited mixed opinions; some favoured it, while others expressed dissatisfaction. Despite the effort to infuse the Beetle with a modernised design, this did not resonate with consumers, resulting in declining Beetle sales. In 1975, the 1303 and 1303S received rack and pinion steering, but in July of that year, Volkswagen discontinued both of them. The long-serving 1200 was renamed the \"1200L\" in 1976, with the additional deluxe features incorporated into the car's interior. In July 1984, Volkswagen eliminated the engine lid louvres.\nFinal models: 1986\u20132003.\nStarting in 1986, for the 1987 model year, the sole model available was the single-carburettor version with . From late 1992 for the 1993 model year, Volkswagen standardised catalytic converters, the Bosch Digifant engine management system, a lambda probe and electric ignition. This fuel-injection system proved much more straightforward and reliable than previous injection systems used on German-assembled Volkswagens since 1967. Vehicles with these modifications can be identified externally by the reintroduced louvred engine lid, heavier and larger bumper bars, four-stud wheels with twenty ventilation holes and a \"1600i\" badge on the engine lid. The 1993 model also featured a third-generation Golf-style steering wheel and front seats, a protection alarm, handbrake and engine compartment lamps and an optional ZF limited-slip differential. The engine received hydraulic tappets, a full-flow oil filter, a 6.6:1 compression ratio\u2014allowing for the use of unleaded fuel\u2014and an electric fuel pump. A standard version was also released in 1993, featuring painted bumper bars and many minor removals.\nFrom 1997, front disc brakes and an immobiliser became available, and the De Luxe model featured small traffic indicator side lamps ahead of the top door hinge. The steering wheel's centre boss was restyled to resemble that of the contemporary Golf and Polo. In 1998, Volkswagen removed the small through-flow ventilation slots behind the rear side windows and standardised front disc brakes. Furthermore, Volkswagen included a security alarm as standard and removed the \"1600i\" inscription from the engine lid.\nCultural impact and legacy.\nWhile the Beetle was seen throughout its production as an affordable car appealing to the masses, its near-consistent style over its 65-year run coupled with record-breaking sales led to the car becoming a global cultural icon. The company's advertising campaign from the 1950s through the 1970s achieved significant success due to its playful and sometimes self-deprecating nature. The campaign, including the famed Think Small ad, was voted as the best of the 20th century by \"Ad Age\", while its 1960 Lemon ad popularized the term lemon car. The punch buggy car trip game, also called slug bug, took hold around this time. During the 1960s, its low purchase and operating costs, combined with its quirky style, made the model's popularity soar in several subcultures that morphed its popular image in the United States and beyond. Hippies, as part of the counterculture movement, embraced the Beetle as a symbol of anti-materialism. At the beach and desert, the Beetle served as the platform for modified off-road vehicles such as Baja Bugs and fiberglass-bodied dune buggies, due to the large variety of aftermarket performance equipment available from companies such as EMPI.\nWith its growing cult status, the Beetle began to feature prominently in mass media. Herbie, a sentient 1963 Beetle race car, is a fictional Disney character that helmed a five-decade series of films and TV appearances. Starting with the film \"The Love Bug\", which was one of the top grossing movies of 1969, Herbie himself became a fixture in popular culture, and was partially responsible for boosting Beetle sales in the late 1960s and early 1970s. In response, American Volkswagen dealers offered cross-promotions with the release of Herbie sequels, with items ranging from posters to Herbie decal kits, and a Love Bug special edition of 1974 Beetles. The Beetle also featured prominently in the \"Superbug\" film series produced in West Germany, and as Bumblebee in the \"Transformers\" franchise.\nDespite production ending worldwide by 2003, the Beetle continues to have an enduring impact on society. In Mexico, the Beetle remained in production for 25 years after European manufacturing ceased, and has become an essential part of the country's culture. Nostalgia for the model led Volkswagen to introduce the New Beetle and a follow-up model, redesigned Golf-based versions that were in production from 1997 to 2019. Enthusiasts continue to buy, restore, and modify original Beetles, and several enthusiast subcultures exist, including Beetle-based art cars, Cal-Style VWs, Cal Look Beetles, hot-rod crossovers, dune buggies, Baja Bugs, and Herbie replicas. In 2023, Volkswagen partnered with eClassics to produce an electric-power retrofit kit for vintage Beetles, with a 36.8 kWh battery that provides a top speed of and an estimated range of .\nMarkets and assembly.\nOver its 65-year tenure, Volkswagen produced the Volkswagen Type 1 in numerous locations worldwide. The following list encompasses all the locations in which it was manufactured.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Emden, Germany\nSpecific markets.\nBrazil.\nOfficial exportation of the Beetle to the Brazilian market began on 23 March 1953, with its parts imported from Germany. For the local market, the Type 1 was officially known \"Volkswagen Fusca\". In January 1959, Volkswagen shifted assembly to the new S\u00e3o Bernardo do Campo plant, initially maintaining 60percent of its German parts. However, by the mid-1960s, the cars had about 99.93percent Brazilian-made components. Production persisted until 1986, after over 3.3million examples were produced there, and resumed in 1992, extending until 1996.\nMexico.\nThe production of the Beetle was possible through agreements with companies like Chrysler in Mexico and the Studebaker-Packard Corporation, which assembled cars imported in complete knock-down form. The Beetle was introduced to the Mexican market in 1954, and began official production ten years later. The local market referred to the Beetle as the \"Vocho\". The introduction of a new taxi regulation in Mexico City, requiring only four-door vehicles to be permitted to prevent robberies, influenced Volkswagen's decision to end the production of the Beetle in 2003.\nAustralia.\nFormal introduction of the Volkswagen Beetle to the Australian market took place in 1953, followed by local assembly operations at the Clayton, Victoria facility in the subsequent year. The establishment of Volkswagen Australia Ltd took place in 1957, and by 1960, locally manufactured body panels were integrated for the first time. Despite the introduction of larger windows for the European Type One body in 1965, Volkswagen Australia opted to maintain production of the smaller-windowed bodies with features tailored for Australian models. This decision was influenced by the constraints of the market size and the expenses associated with retooling. By this juncture, Australian content had surged to nearly 95percent. The final Australian-assembled Beetle rolled off the production line in July 1976.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65686", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65686", "title": "Science-fiction fanzine", "text": "Fanzine on science fiction\nA science-fiction fanzine is an amateur or semi-professional magazine published by members of science-fiction fandom, from the 1930s to the present day. They were one of the earliest forms of fanzine, within one of which the term \"fanzine\" was coined, and at one time constituted the primary type of science-fictional fannish activity (\"fanac\").\nOrigins and history.\nThe first science-fiction fanzine, \"The Comet\", was published in 1930 by the Science Correspondence Club in Chicago. The term \"fanzine\" was coined by Russ Chauvenet in the October 1940 issue of his fanzine \"Detours\". \"Fanzines\" were distinguished from \"prozines\", that is, all professional magazines. Prior to that, the fan publications were known as \"fanmags\" or \"letterzines\".\nTraditionally, science-fiction fanzines were (and many still are) available for \"the usual\", meaning that a sample issue will be mailed on request; to receive further issues, a reader sends a \"letter of comment\" (LoC) about the fanzine to the editor. The LoC might be published in the next issue: some fanzines consisted almost exclusively of letter columns, where discussions were conducted in much the same way as they are in internet newsgroups and mailing lists, though at a relatively slow pace.\nSince 1955, the annual Worldcon has awarded Hugo Awards for Best Fanzine; awards for Best Fan Writer and Best Fan Artist were added in 1967 and have continued since then.\nSemiprozines.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s, some fanzines\u2014especially sercon (serious and constructive) zines devoted to science fiction and fantasy criticism, and newszines such as \"Locus\"\u2014became more professional journals, produced by desktop publishing programs and offset printing. These new magazines were labeled \"semiprozines\", and were eventually sold rather than traded, and paid their contributors. Some semiprozines publish original fiction. The Hugo Awards recognized semiprozines as a separate category from fanzines in 1984 after \"Locus\" won the award for best fanzine several years running (See Hugo Award for Best Semiprozine). Well-known semiprozines include \"Locus\", \"Ansible\", \"The New York Review of Science Fiction\", and \"Interzone\".\nAPAs.\nAmateur press associations (APAs) publish fanzines made up of the contributions of the individual members collected into an assemblage or bundle called an apazine.\nThe first science-fiction APA was the Fantasy Amateur Press Association (FAPA) formed by a group of science-fiction fans in 1937. Some APAs are still active as hardcopy publications, and some are published as virtual \"e-zines\", distributed on the internet.\nOther types of fanzines.\nThe term \"fanzine\" is also used to refer to fan-created magazines concerning other topics: the earliest rock-and-roll fanzines were edited by science-fiction fans. A significant part of modern computer/Web/Internet slang, abbreviations, etc. is derived from the jargon of the fanzine fans. See fanzine, fanspeak.\nThe fanzine movement is now well represented on the Web; see webzine.\nConventions.\nFanzine readers and producers naturally gather at science fiction conventions, but there are also small conventions dedicated to fanzines. The first fanzine-only annual convention was Autoclave, held by a Detroit-based fan group for several years in the 1970s. In 1984, the first Corflu was held in Berkeley, California. A second convention, Ditto, started in Toronto in 1988. Both of these conventions continue to take place each year."}
{"id": "65688", "revid": "2", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65688", "title": "Abolition of slavery", "text": ""}
