{"id": "70914", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70914", "title": "United States Department of Housing and Urban Development", "text": "U.S. Federal government department\nThe United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) is one of the executive departments of the U.S. federal government. It administers federal housing and urban development laws. It is headed by the secretary of housing and urban development, who reports directly to the president of the United States and is a member of the president's Cabinet.\nAlthough its beginnings were in the House and Home Financing Agency, it was founded as a Cabinet department in 1965, as part of the \"Great Society\" program of President Lyndon B. Johnson, to develop and execute policies on housing and metropolises.\nHistory.\nThe idea of a department of Urban Affairs was proposed in a 1957 report to President Dwight D. Eisenhower, led by New York governor Nelson A. Rockefeller. The idea of a department of Housing and Urban Affairs was taken up by President John F. Kennedy, with Pennsylvania Senator and Kennedy ally Joseph S. Clark Jr. listing it as one of the top seven legislative priorities for the administration in internal documents.\nThe department was established on September 9, 1965, when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Department of Housing and Urban Development Act into law. It stipulated that the department was to be created no later than November 8, sixty days following the date of enactment. The actual implementation was postponed until January 14, 1966, following the completion of a special study group report on the federal role in solving urban problems.\nHUD is administered by the U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. Its headquarters is located in the Robert C. Weaver Federal Building. Some important milestones for HUD's development include:\nOrganizational structure.\nMajor programs.\nThe major program offices are:\nOffice of Inspector General.\nThe United States Congress enacted the Inspector General Act of 1978 to ensure integrity and efficiency in government. The Inspector General is appointed by the President and subject to Senate confirmation. He or she is responsible for conducting and supervising audits, investigations, and inspections relating to the programs and operations of HUD. The OIG is to examine, evaluate and, where necessary, critique these operations and activities, recommending ways for the department to carry out its responsibilities in the most effective, efficient, and economical manner possible.\nThe mission of the Office of Inspector General (OIG) is to:\nThe OIG accomplishes its mission by conducting investigations pertinent to its activities; by keeping Congress, the Secretary, and the public fully informed of its activities, and by working with staff (in this case of HUD) in achieving success of its objectives and goals.\nThe Honorable Rae Oliver Davis, who was appointed on January 23, 2019, is the current Inspector General.\nBudget and staffing.\nThe Department of Housing and Urban Development was authorized a budget for Fiscal Year 2015 of $48.3 billion. The budget authorization is broken down as outlined in the following chart.\nCriticisms.\nA scandal arose in the 1990s when at least 700 houses were sold for profit by real estate speculators taking the loans; at least 19 were arrested. The scandal devastated the Brooklyn and Harlem housing market, with $70 million in HUD loans going into default. Critics said that the department's lax oversight of their program allowed the fraud to occur. In 1997, the HUD Inspector General issued a report saying: \"The program design encourages risky property deals, land sale, and refinance schemes, overstated property appraisals, and phony or excessive fees.\"\nIn June 1993, HUD Secretary Henry Cisneros admitted that \"HUD has in many cases exacerbated the declining quality of life in America.\" In 1996, Vice President Al Gore, referring to public housing projects, declared that, \"These crime-infested monuments to a failed policy are killing the neighborhoods around them\".\nHUD Assistant Secretary for Fair Housing Roberta Achtenberg has been quoted as saying \"HUD walks a tightrope between free speech and fair housing. We are ever mindful of the need to maintain the proper balance between these rights.\" Libertarian critic James Bovard commented that, \"The more aggressive HUD becomes, the fewer free speech rights Americans have. Many words and phrases are now effectively forbidden in real estate ads... Apparently, there are two separate versions of the Bill of Rights -- one for private citizens and the other for federal bureaucrats and politicians\".\nIn 2006, \"The Village Voice\" named HUD \"New York City's worst landlord\" and \"the #1 worst in the United States\" based upon decrepit conditions of buildings and questionable eviction practices.\nIn September 2010, HUD started auctioning off delinquent home mortgage loans, defined as at least 90 days past due, to the highest bidder. It sold 2,000 loans in six national auctions. In 2012, this sale was massively increased under a \"Distressed Asset Stabilization Program\" (DASP), and the 100,000 loans sold as of 2014 have netted $8.8 billion for the FHA, rebuilding cash reserves that had been depleted by loan defaults. The second stated and eponymous objective is to stabilize communities, by requiring purchasers to service the loans in a manner that stabilizes the surrounding communities by getting the loans to re-perform, renting the home to the borrower, gifting the property to a land bank or paying off the loans in full. An audit published August 2014 found \"only about 11 percent of the loans sold through DASP [were] considered 're-performing'\". \"Rather than defaulting\u2014[FHA] keeps many of the properties they\u2019re tied to from going through the typical foreclosure process. As a result, the FHA might actually be diverting housing stock from first-time homebuyers, the very group it was formed to serve...\"\nIn October 2025 the watchdog group Public Citizen filed a Hatch Act complaint against Scott Turner as HUD secretary alleging that the HUD's shutdown notice about the 2025 United States federal government shutdown was \"electioneering\" while on duty.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70915", "revid": "15970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70915", "title": "Housing and Urban Development", "text": ""}
{"id": "70916", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70916", "title": "Hud", "text": "Hud or HUD may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "70917", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70917", "title": "U.S. Department of Energy", "text": ""}
{"id": "70918", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70918", "title": "U.S. Department of Education", "text": ""}
{"id": "70919", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70919", "title": "United States Department of Education", "text": "U.S. federal government department\nThe United States Department of Education is a cabinet-level department of the United States government, originating in 1980. The department began operating on May 4, 1980, having been created after the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare was split into the Department of Education and the Department of Health and Human Services by the Department of Education Organization Act, which President Jimmy Carter signed into law on October 17, 1979. An earlier iteration was formed in 1867 but was quickly demoted to the Office of Education a year later. Since its official renaming, the department's official abbreviation is ED (\"DOE\" refers to the United States Department of Energy) but is also abbreviated informally as \"DoEd\".\nThe Department of Education is administered by the United States secretary of education. In 2021 it had more than 4,000 employees \u2013 the smallest staff of the Cabinet agencies \u2013 and a 2024 budget of $268 billion, up from $14 billion when it was established in 1979. In 2025, the department's budget was about four percent of the total US federal spending.\nDuring Donald Trump's second term, the Department of Government Efficiency announced it would shrink the Department of Education's workforce by half, and Trump signed an executive order on March 20 aimed at closing the department to the maximum extent allowed by law. There are limits to how much can be done by executive action as significant parts of it are statutorily defined by Congress and signed into law by previous presidents. The presidential action was held off by a US district court in Boston on May 22, which the Trump administration appealed, and a federal appeals court declined to lift the injunction in early June. On July 14, the Supreme Court overturned the lower courts allowing the layoffs to proceed.\nPurpose and functions.\nThe department identifies four key functions:\nThe Department of Education is a member of the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness and works with federal partners to ensure proper education for homeless and runaway youth in the United States.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn 1867, President Andrew Johnson signed legislation to create a Department of Education. It was seen as a way to collect information and statistics about the nation's schools and provide advice to schools in the same way the Department of Agriculture helped farmers. The department was originally proposed by Henry Barnard and leaders of the National Teachers Association, renamed the National Education Association. Barnard served as the first United States Commissioner of Education. He resigned when the office was reconfigured as a bureau in the Department of Interior, known as the United States Office of Education due to concerns it would have too much control over local schools.\nOver the years, the office remained relatively small, operating under different titles and housed in various agencies, including the United States Department of the Interior and the former United States Department of Health Education and Welfare (DHEW), now the United States Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS). In 1920, an unsuccessful attempt at creating a Department of Education, headed by a secretary of education, came with the Smith\u2013Towner Bill.\nIn 1939, the organization, then a bureau, was transferred to the Federal Security Agency, where it was renamed as the Office of Education. After World War II, President Dwight D. Eisenhower promulgated \"Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953\". The Federal Security Agency was abolished and most of its functions were transferred to the newly formed DHEW.\nPromotion to department.\nIn 1979, President Carter advocated for creating a cabinet-level Department of Education. Carter's plan was to transfer most of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare's education-related functions to the Department of Education. Carter also planned to transfer the education-related functions of the departments of Defense, Justice, Housing and Urban Development, and Agriculture, as well as a few other federal entities. Among the federal education-related programs that were not proposed to be transferred were Headstart, the Department of Agriculture's school lunch and nutrition programs, the Department of the Interior's Native Americans' education programs, and the Department of Labor's education and training programs.\nUpgrading Education to cabinet-level status in 1979 was opposed by many in the Republican Party, who saw the department as unconstitutional, arguing that the Constitution does not mention \"education\", and deemed it an unnecessary and illegal federal bureaucratic intrusion into local affairs. However, others saw the department as constitutional under the Commerce Clause, and that the funding role of the department is constitutional under the Taxing and Spending Clause. The National Education Association supported the bill, while the American Federation of Teachers opposed it.\nIn 1979, the Office of Education had 3,000 employees and an annual budget of $12 billion. Congress appropriated to the Department of Education an annual budget of $14 billion and 17,000 employees when establishing the Department of Education. During the 1980 presidential campaign, Gov. Reagan called for the total elimination of the U.S. Department of Education, severe curtailment of bilingual education, and massive cutbacks in the federal role in education. Once in office, President Reagan significantly reduced its budget, but in 1988, perhaps to reduce conflict with Congress, he decided to change his mind and ask for an increase from $18.4 billion to $20.3 billion.\nLate twentieth century.\nThe 1980 Republican Party platform called for the elimination of the Department of Education created under Carter, and President Ronald Reagan promised during the 1980 presidential election to eliminate it as a cabinet post, but he was not able to do so with a Democratic House of Representatives. In the 1982 State of the Union Address, he pledged: \"The budget plan I submit to you on Feb. 8 will realize major savings by dismantling the Department of Education.\"\nIn 1984, the GOP dropped the call for elimination from its platform. With the election of President George H. W. Bush in 1988, the Republican position evolved in almost lockstep with that of the Democrats, with Goals 2000 a virtual joint effort.\nIn 1994, after the Newt Gingrich\u2013led \"revolution\" took control of both houses of Congress, federal control of and spending on education soared. That trend continued unabated despite the fact that the Republican Party made abolition of the department a cornerstone of its 1996 platform and campaign promises, calling it an inappropriate federal intrusion into local, state, and family affairs. The GOP platform read: \"The Federal government has no constitutional authority to be involved in school curricula or to control jobs in the market place. This is why we will abolish the Department of Education, end federal meddling in our schools, and promote family choice at all levels of learning.\"\nIn 2000, the Republican Liberty Caucus passed a resolution to seek to abolish the Department of Education.\nTwenty-first century.\nThe George W. Bush administration made reform of federal education a key priority of the president's first term. In 2008 and 2012, presidential candidate Ron Paul campaigned in part on an opposition to the department.\nUnder President George W. Bush, the department primarily focused on elementary and secondary education, expanding its reach through the No Child Left Behind Act. The department's budget increased by $14 billion between 2002 and 2004, from $46 billion to $60 billion.\nIn March 2007, President George W. Bush signed into law , which designates the ED Headquarters building as the Lyndon Baines Johnson Department of Education Building.\nIn December 2015, President Barack Obama signed the Every Student Succeeds Act, which reauthorized the Elementary Secondary Education Act, which replaced the No Child Left Behind Act.\nIn 2022 extra costs, mostly from the Office of Federal Student Aid (total spending $540 billion compared with $170 bn in 2021) relating student loan forgiveness, (and, to a much lesser extent, pandemic costs) resulted in a nominal departmental expenditure of $639 bn. However the scheme never took place, as a result of a SCOTUS ruling (\"Biden v. Nebraska\"), and as no payments were actually made a balancing entry was introduced in the following years federal budget.\nThe department's 2023 budget was $274 billion, which included funding for children with disabilities (IDEA), pandemic recovery, early childhood education, Pell Grants, Title I, work assistance, among other programs.\nSecond Trump administration.\nIn March 2025, President Donald Trump signed which would begin the dismantling of the Department of Education, seeking to fulfill decades of conservative ambition to eliminate the agency, but raising new questions for public schools and parents. The White House earlier said the agency would continue to oversee \"critical function\" like student loans. In April 2025, Linda McMahon announced that the Department of Education would resume garnishment of the wages of student debtors whose loans are in default.\nRepublican attempts to close the agency date back to the 1980s. Partisanship over the department has been rife since the start, from progressive-leaning teachers' unions who organized against President George W. Bush's \"No Child Left Behind\" policies, to conservative Republican presidential candidates in 2016 who ran against the Common Core standards elevated by President Barack Obama's \"Race to the Top\" program. Closing efforts gained critical momentum during the coronavirus pandemic, after a parental rights movement grew out of a backlash to school shutdowns. There was also opposition to progressive policies that promoted certain education standards and inclusive policies for LGBTQ students which, it was contended, undermined parental rights.\nProject 2025, a Heritage Foundation policy plan, deals heavily with the closure of the Department of Education, mass privatization of public schools, and ending subsidized and free school lunches. Project 2025 also seeks to create a conservative school curriculum for all public schools. The plan also includes provisions for the layoffs of millions of public employed teachers. Trump's second term policies have been compared to Project 2025.\nMultiple polls in February and March 2025 showed that roughly two-thirds of Americans oppose the idea. It is broadly opposed by educators who believe the federal government has historically played an important role in American education. The position of the National Education Association (NEA), representing 2.8 million American teachers, was that stripping the department of its resources and mission would negatively impact the millions of students in low-income communities who need educational services and support.\nOn March 3, 2025, Linda McMahon was sworn in as the nation's 13th Secretary of Education. Trump emphasized that McMahon's primary objective would be to close the Department of Education, stating, \"I want her to put herself out of a job.\" McMahon echoed Trump's comments, stating that the department was not needed when asked directly if the United States needed the department.\nOn March 11, 2025, seven weeks after Donald Trump's second term began, the Department of Government Efficiency announced it would fire nearly half the Department of Education's workforce. Trump signed an order on March 20 aimed at closing the department to the maximum extent allowed by law; the department cannot be entirely closed without the approval of Congress, which created it. U.S. district judge Myong Joun in Boston blocked the mass layoff and the dismantle attempt on May 22, 2025. Though the Trump administration appealed, a federal appeals court declined on June 4 to lift Joun's ruling. On July 14, the Supreme Court allowed the mass layoffs to proceed in a 6-3 decision.\n2025 workforce reduction and reorganization.\nOn March 11, 2025, the Department of Education announced a major workforce reduction, eliminating nearly half of its employees\u2014reducing staff from approximately 4,100 to about 2,100. The move, described by Secretary of Education Linda McMahon as part of a broad modernization effort, included a reorganization of Federal Student Aid (FSA) and the Office for Civil Rights (OCR). Remaining staff were placed on paid administrative leave beginning March 21, with separation or retirement packages scheduled by June 9. The Department stated the restructuring was necessary to streamline operations, reduce federal oversight in education, and shift key responsibilities to other federal agencies.\nOn March 20, 2025, Trump signed directing the secretary of education to \"facilitate the closure of the Department of Education and return authority over education to the States and local communities\". However, the department cannot be closed without the approval of Congress, which created it. NBC News said, \"Given their narrow majority, Republicans would need Democratic support to do that, which would make it unlikely for such a bill to pass.\"\nIn November 2025, McMahon argued on social media that other federal agencies or state governments could take on the grantmaking and informational work that was currently performed by the Education Department.\nLayoffs.\nIn February 2025, US Department of Education offered its staff incentives to resign or retire early. In March 2025, the department announced a plan to reduce its workforce by half.\nImpacts.\nBased on a preliminary review of the layoffs that were ordered, the majority of cuts were seen in the Federal Student Aid office which oversees financial aid disbursement and student loans, and the Office for Civil Rights, which protects students and teachers from discrimination. While current Education Secretary McMahon has claimed that congressionally appropriated monies such as financial aid will not be affected by the plan to downsize or close the department, staff turnover could create multiple problems for those receiving aid.\nThe Trump administration has promised that formula funding for schools, funding such as Title 1 for high poverty schools, and the Rural Education Achievement Program (REAP) which are protected by law would be preserved. However, nearly all statisticians and data experts who work with the program would be affected by the layoffs and downsizing of the department, as the department was downsized from over 100 people to just three workers.\nThe department oversees the lending of tens of billions of dollars in loans to students and parents and oversees the collections process of the roughly $1.6 trillion in outstanding loans for over 40 million borrowers as of March 2025. If the department were to be closed, it has been theorized by experts other federal entities such as the Treasury Department would take over the responsibilities of managing the loans. On March 21, 2025 it was announced by Trump that the management of the entire federal student loan portfolio and the other \"special needs\" programs overseen by the department would be moved to other departments. Trump specified that the Small Business Administration would take over responsibility for student loans and the Health and Human Services office would take on the special needs and nutrition programs.\nResponses.\nIn a joint letter, senators Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders and a group of Democratic senators spoke out against the mass layoffs that were seen in March 2025 and urged Education Secretary McMahon to reinstate employees that were laid off. Representative Bobby Scott, the ranking member on the House Committee on Education and the Workforce raised claims that the dismantling of the department would \"exacerbate existing disparities, reduce accountability and put low-income students, students of color, students with disabilities, rural students and English as a Second Language students at risk\".\nDerrick Johnson, the president and CEO of the NAACP, criticized Trump's attempt to close the department while raising allegations that Trump was dismantling the basic functions of democracy.\nBudget.\nFor 2024, the US Department of Education's budget was approximately $268 billion with $79,052,238 in discretionary spending. The department currently holds and maintains approximately $1.7 trillion in federal student loan debt.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70920", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70920", "title": "U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs", "text": ""}
{"id": "70921", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70921", "title": "Libertarian Futurist Society", "text": ""}
{"id": "70922", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70922", "title": "United States Department of Veterans Affairs", "text": "U.S. federal executive department\nThe United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) is a Cabinet-level executive branch department of the federal government charged with providing lifelong healthcare services to eligible military veterans at the 170 VA medical centers and outpatient clinics located throughout the country. Non-healthcare benefits include disability compensation, vocational rehabilitation, education assistance, home loans, and life insurance. The VA also provides burial and memorial benefits to eligible veterans and family members at 135 national cemeteries.\nWhile veterans' benefits have been provided by the federal government since the American Revolutionary War, a veteran-specific federal agency was not established until 1930, as the Veterans' Administration. In 1982, its mission was expanded to include caring for civilians and people who were not veterans in case of a national emergency. In 1989, the Veterans' Administration became a cabinet-level Department of Veterans Affairs. The president appoints the secretary of veterans affairs, who is also a cabinet member, to lead the agency.\nAs of \u00a02020,[ [update]] the VA employed 412,892 people at hundreds of Veterans Affairs medical facilities, clinics, benefits offices, and cemeteries. In fiscal year 2016 net program costs for the department were $273\u00a0billion, which includes the VBA Actuarial Cost of $106.5\u00a0billion for compensation benefits. The long-term \"actuarial accrued liability\" (total estimated future payments for veterans and their family members) is $2.491\u00a0trillion for compensation benefits; $59.6\u00a0billion for education benefits; and $4.6\u00a0billion for burial benefits.\nHistory.\nThe history and evolution of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs are inextricably intertwined and dependent on the history of America's wars, as wounded former soldiers and other US military veterans are the population the VA cares for. The list of wars involving the United States from the American Revolutionary War to the present totals ninety-nine wars. The majority of the United States military casualties of war, however, occurred in the following eight wars: American Revolutionary War (est. 8,000), American Civil War (218,222), World War I (53,402), World War II (291,567), Korean War (33,686), Vietnam War (47,424), Iraq War (3,836), and the War in Afghanistan (1,833). It is these wars that have primarily driven the mission and evolution of the VA. The VA maintains a detailed list of war wounded, as it is this population that comprises the VA care system.\nOrigins.\nThe Continental Congress of 1776 encouraged enlistments during the American Revolutionary War by providing pensions for soldiers who were disabled. Three weeks after passing the law compensating the injured, the Continental Congress in September 1776 also approved a resolution awarding grants of public land to all who served in the Continental Army for the duration of the conflict. Direct medical and hospital care given to veterans in the early days of the U.S. was provided by the individual states and communities. In 1811, the first domiciliary and medical facility for veterans was authorized by the federal government but not opened until 1834. In the 19th century, the nation's veterans assistance program was expanded to include benefits and pensions not only for veterans but also their widows and dependents.\nPrior to the end of the American Civil War in 1865, Delphine Baker, a volunteer nurse during the war, rallied support to petition the federal government to create a national home for Civil War veterans, based on the U.S. Soldiers Home in Washington, D.C. and the Naval Asylum in Philadelphia for U.S. active-duty veterans. The bill establishing the National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers was passed on March 3, 1865. The very next day, President Abraham Lincoln vouched for the mission of the future facilities in his second inaugural address: With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan\u2014to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and a lasting peace, among ourselves, and with all nations.The middle section of that quote would later form the guiding principle for the future Department of Veterans Affairs.\nWhile domiciliary care for Civil War veterans was managed by the National Home system at 11 various campuses, the pension benefits was split amongst various agencies in the federal government. Throughout the mid-to-late 19th Century, the Bureau of Pensions managed financial benefits to veterans, widows and dependent children. With the completion of the Civil War and an expansion of eligibility in 1890, pension numbers soared, from 303,000 to 966,000 in 1893. Eventually the workforce had to be housed in a new purpose-built home, the https://, which housed the organization from 1885 to 1926.\nFurthermore, many state veterans' homes were established. Since domiciliary care was available at all state veterans homes, incidental medical and hospital treatment was provided for all injuries and diseases, whether or not of service origin. Indigent and disabled veterans of the Civil War, Indian Wars, Spanish\u2013American War, and Mexican Border periods, as well as discharged regular members of the Armed Forces, were cared for at these homes.\nVeterans' Bureau.\nThe United States' entrance into World War I in 1917 caused a massive increase in veterans, overwhelming the federal system. When the Republican nominee for president, Warren G. Harding, accepted his party's nomination to the 1920 presidential election, he issued a promise to the more than four million Americans who served in the war: It is not only a duty, it is a privilege to see that the sacrifices made shall be requited, and that those still suffering from casualties and disabilities shall be abundantly aided and restored to the highest capabilities of citizenship and enjoyment.At the time of the election, dissatisfaction with the benefits programs for World War I veterans ran rampant throughout the country. To receive benefits, veterans had to navigate through three different federal agencies: the Bureau of War Risk Insurance (BWRI) for insurance and compensation, the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) for medical and hospital care, and the Federal Board for Vocational Education for rehabilitation, education, and job training. Veterans from previous conflicts continued to rely on the Bureau of Pensions and National Homes for Disabled Volunteer Service for their compensation and medical care respectively.\nAfter winning the election, President Harding appointed a committee in April 1921 to identify a solution. On August 8, 1921, Harding signed Public Law 67-47, popularly known as the Sweet Act, which established the https://, which absorbed the War Risk Bureau and the Rehabilitation Division of the Federal Board for Vocational Education. In 1922, it gained a large number of veterans' hospital facilities from the Public Health Service, most of which had been recently established on former U.S. Army bases.\nOne of the landmark measures included in the new law was removing the burden of proof for two disabilities that veterans claimed - tuberculosis and neuropsychiatric disorders. While the legislation only applied to those two categories, it was groundbreaking in establishing presumptive conditions for future claims.\nCharles Forbes led the fledgling agency through its initial two years, before resigning in 1923. His replacement, former brigadier general Frank T. Hines took on director of the Veterans' Bureau. By the 1920s, the various benefits were administered by three different federal agencies: the Veterans' Bureau, the Bureau of Pensions, and the National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers.\nThe United States final federal consolidation of veteran government entities came on July 21, 1930, when President Herbert Hoover signed Executive Order 5398, merging all three agencies into the Veterans' Administration. Hines, who had remained in charge of the Veterans' Bureau for seven years, was named the first administrator of Veterans Affairs, a job he held until 1945 when he was replaced by General Omar Bradley.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1940, with war already raging in Europe and Asia, VA began preparing for potential American involvement in the conflict. Hines informed Congress that the agency was coordinating with the War Department to assist in the event of a national emergency with both hospital bed space and highly trained medical staff.\nFollowing the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and America's entry into World War II, the U.S. Army's need for physicians and other healthcare professionals was acute. As the surgeon general of the Army, Maj. Gen. Norman T. Kirk, bluntly reported, \"It was difficult during the past year to secure the additional Medical Corps officers needed to meet the requirements of the increasing Army since there are not sufficient physicians available to meet both military and civilian medical needs.\"\nThe military's demand for healthcare professionals drained staff from the civilian medical community and VA alike. Between 1942 and mid-1944, 16 percent of VA employees were furloughed for military service. A December 1943 agreement between Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson and the VA's administrator paved the way for a collaborative use of limited medical personnel. Their solution included inducting select VA doctors and dentists into the Army but allowing them to remain at VA facilities. While detailed to VA, Army personnel wore a distinctive shoulder sleeve insignia designed by the Heraldic Section of the Army's Office of the Quartermaster General. One of the most notable to wear this patch was Gen. Omar N. Bradley.\nThe close of World War II resulted in not only a vast increase in the veteran population but also a large number of new benefits enacted by Congress for veterans of the war. In addition, during the late 1940s, the VA had to contend with aging World War I veterans. During that time, \"the clientele of the VA increased almost fivefold with an addition of nearly 16,000,000 World War II veterans and approximately 4,000,000 World War I veterans.\" Prior to World War II, in response to scandals at the Veterans Bureau, programs that cared for veterans were centralized in Washington, D.C. This centralization caused delays and bottlenecks as the agency tried to serve World War II veterans. As a result, the VA went through a decentralization process, giving more authority to the field offices.\nThe Servicemen's Readjustment Act, commonly known as the GI Bill, was signed into law on June 22, 1944, by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. \"The United States government began serious consolidated services to veterans in 1930. The GI Bill of Rights, which was passed in 1944, had more effect on the American way of life than any other legislation\u2014with the possible exception of the Homestead Act.\"\nUnlike previous legislation, the GI Bill stipulated that all benefits were to be managed by the VA. Further educational assistance acts were passed for the benefit of veterans of the Korean War.\nPromotion to Department of Veterans Affairs.\nThe Department of Veterans Affairs Act of 1988 (Pub. L.\u00a0) changed the former Veterans' Administration, an independent government agency established in 1930 into a Cabinet-level Department of Veterans Affairs. It was signed into law by President Ronald Reagan on October 25, 1988, but came into effect under the term of his successor, George H. W. Bush, on March 15, 1989.\nThe reform period of 1995 to 2000 saw the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) dramatically improve care access, quality, and efficiency. This was achieved by leveraging its national integrated electronic health information system (VistA) and in so doing, implementing universal primary care, which increased patients treated by 24%, had a 48% increase in ambulatory care visits, and decreased staffing by 12%. By 2000, the VHA had 10,000 fewer employees than in 1995 and a 104% increase in patients treated since 1995, and had managed to maintain the same cost per patient-day, while all other facilities' costs had risen by over 30% to 40% during the same period.\nAuthored by Senator Jim Webb, the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2008 doubled the GI Bill's college benefits and provided a 13-week extension to federal unemployment benefits. The new GI Bill more than doubled the value of the benefit from $40,000 to about $90,000. In-state public universities are essentially covered to provide full scholarships for veterans under the new education package. For those veterans who served at least three years, a monthly housing stipend was also added to the law. Congress and President Barack Obama extended the new GI Bill in August 2009 at a cost of roughly $70\u00a0billion over the next decade. The Department of Defense (DoD) allows individuals who, on or after August 1, 2009, have served at least six years in the Armed Forces and who agree to serve at least another four years in the U.S. Armed Forces to transfer unused entitlement to their surviving spouse. Service members reaching 10-year anniversaries could choose to transfer the benefit to any dependents, such as their spouse or children.\nIn May 2014, critics of the VA system reported problems with scheduling timely access to medical care. In May 2014, a retired doctor said that veterans died because of delays in getting care at the Phoenix, Arizona, Veterans Health Administration facilities. An investigation of delays in treatment in the Veterans Health Administration system conducted by the Veterans Affairs Inspector General of 3,409 veteran patients found that there were 28 instances of clinically significant delays in care associated with access or scheduling. Of these 28 patients, six were deceased. The same OIG report stated that the Office of Investigations had opened investigations at 93 sites of care in response to allegations of wait time manipulations, and found that wait time manipulations were prevalent throughout the VHA. On May 30, 2014, Secretary of Veterans Affairs Eric Shinseki resigned from office due to the fallout from the scandal, saying he could not explain the lack of integrity among some leaders in VA healthcare facilities. \"That breach of integrity is irresponsible, it is indefensible, and unacceptable to me. I said when this situation began weeks to months ago that I thought the problem was limited and isolated because I believed that. I no longer believe it. It is systemic. I was too trusting of some and I accepted as accurate reports that I now know to have been misleading with regard to patient wait-times,\" Shinseki said in a statement.\nIn September 2017, the VA declared its intent to abolish a 1960s conflict of interest rule prohibiting employees from owning stock in, performing service for, or doing any work at for-profit colleges; arguing that, for example, the rule prohibits VA doctors from teaching veterans at for-profit universities with special advantages for veterans. In 2018, the VA instead established a process for employees to seek waivers of the policy based on individual circumstances.\nIn 2023, the VA adopted a new mission statement: \"To fulfill President Lincoln's promise to care for those who have served in our nation's military and for their families, caregivers, and survivors.\" The VA's previous mission statement, established in 1959, was \"To fulfill President Lincoln's promise \u2018to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow, and his orphan\u2019 by serving and honoring the men and women who are America's veterans.\"\nThe VA increased its staff by more than 60,000 in 2023 and 2024 to address more than a million burn pit-related claims following passage of the Honoring our PACT Act of 2022. More than 80,000 VA employees, including many of those hired under PACT Act funding, were targeted in 2025 to be fired by President Donald Trump and the Department of Government Efficiency, which would delay benefits for affected veterans.\nFunctions.\nThe VA's primary function is to support veterans in their time after service by providing benefits and support.\nProviding care for non-veteran civilian or military patients in case hospitals overflowed in a crisis was added as a role by Congress in 1982, and became known as the VA's \"fourth mission\" (besides the three missions of serving veterans through care, research, and training). It can provide medical services (reimbursed from other federal agencies) to the general public for major disasters and emergencies declared by the president of the United States, and when the secretary of health and human services activates the National Disaster Medical System. During disasters and health emergencies, requests for VA assistance are made by state governors to the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Department of Health and Human Services, which then relay approved requests to the VA. The VA is also allowed to provide paid medical care on an emergency basis to non-veterans. On March 27, 2020, the VA made public its COVID-19 response plan within its medical facilities to protect veterans, their families, and staff.\nOne initiative in the department is to prevent and end veterans' homelessness. The VA works with the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness to address these issues. The USICH identified ending veterans' homelessness by 2015 as a primary goal in its proposal \"Opening Doors: Federal Strategic Plan to Prevent and End Homelessness\", released in 2010; amendments to the 2010 version made in 2015 include a preface written by U.S. Secretary of Labor Thomas E. Perez that cites a 33% reduction in veteran homelessness since the creation of the \"Opening Doors\" initiative. The prominent role of the Department of Veterans Affairs and its joined up approach to veteran welfare are such that they have been deemed to distinguish the US response to veteran homelessness internationally.\nThe General Services Administration (GSA) has delegated authority to the VA to procure medical supplies under the VA Federal Supply Schedules Program for both the VA itself and other government agencies.\nOrganization.\nThe Department of Veterans Affairs is headed by the secretary of veterans affairs, appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the Senate.\nThe twelfth and current secretary of veterans affairs is Doug Collins, who was selected by President Donald Trump and sworn into office by associate justice Clarence Thomas on February 5, 2025. The deputy secretary of veterans affairs position is currently vacant with the retirement of Thomas G. Bowman on June 15, 2018. The third listed executive on the VA's official web site is its chief of staff (currently Pamela J. Powers); the chief of staff position does not require Senate confirmation. In addition to secretary and deputy secretary, the VA has ten more positions requiring presidential appointment and Senate approval.\nThe department has three main subdivisions, known as administrations, each headed by an undersecretary:\nThere are assistant secretaries of veteran affairs for: Congressional and Legislative Affairs; Policy and Planning; Human Resources and Administration; and Operations, Security and Preparedness. Other Senate-approved presidential nominees at the VA include the Chief Financial Officer; Chairman of the Board of Veterans' Appeals; General Counsel; and Inspector General.\nAs of 2017, the VA employs 377,805 people, of whom 338,205 are nonseasonal full-time employees. The American Federation of Government Employees represents 230,000 VA employees, with VA matters addressed in detail by the \"National VA Council\".\nAbout one fourth of VA employees are veterans.\nVeterans Benefits Administration.\nThe VA, through its Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), provides a variety of services for veterans, including disability compensation, pension, education, home loans, life insurance, vocational, rehabilitation, survivors' benefits, health care, and burial benefits.\nThe Department of Labor (DOL) provides job development and job training opportunities for disabled and other veterans through contacts with employers and local agencies.\nNational Cemetery Administration.\nIn 1973, the Department of Veterans Affairs assumed responsibility for the National Cemetery System (NCS), with the exception of Arlington National Cemetery, which was transferred from the Department of the Army. This was made official by Public Law 93-43, also known as the National Cemeteries Act of 1973.\nFive years later, Congress established the State Cemetery Grants Program under Public Law 95-476. The National Cemetery Administration now administers this program, which provides assistance to states and U.S. territories in establishing, expanding, and improving veterans cemeteries.\nThe National Cemetery Administration (NCA) is a division of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) responsible for providing burial and memorial benefits to eligible veterans and their families. Its primary mission is to honor veterans and their service to the nation by ensuring they receive dignified and respectful interments in national cemeteries.\nKey responsibilities of the NCA include:\nCenter for Women Veterans.\nThe Center for Women Veterans (CWA) was established within the Department of Veterans Affairs by Public Law 103-446 in November 1994. The center's mission is to:\nCenter for Women Veterans activities include monitoring and coordinating delivery of benefits and services to women veterans; coordinating with Federal, state, and local agencies and organizations and non-government partners which serve women veterans; serving as a resource and referral center for women veterans, their families, and their advocates; educating VA staff on women' military contributions; ensuring that outreach materials portray and target women veterans; promoting recognition of women veterans' service with activities and special events; and coordinating meetings of the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans. CWA has held summits and forums for female veterans and created social media campaigns and exhibits to highlight women's military service. CWA offers a Women Veterans Call Center (1-855-829-6636) to assist female U.S. military veterans with VA services and resources. In 2018, the Center for Women Veterans launched the \"I Am Not Invisible\" photography project, featuring individual portraits, to highlight and represent the contributions, needs, and experiences of America's two million women veterans.\nCosts for care.\nThe VA categorizes veterans into eight priority groups and several additional subgroups, based on factors such as service-connected disabilities, and their income and assets (adjusted to local cost of living).\nVeterans with a 50% or higher service-connected disability as determined by a VA regional office \"rating board\" (e.g., losing a limb in battle, PTSD, etc.) are provided comprehensive care and medication at no charge. Veterans with lesser qualifying factors who exceed a pre-defined income threshold have to make co-payments for care for non-service-connected ailments and prescription medication. VA dental and nursing home care benefits are more restricted.\nReservists and National Guard personnel who served stateside in peacetime settings or have no service-related disabilities generally do not qualify for VA health benefits.\nThe VA's budget has been pushed to the limit in recent years by the war on terrorism. In December 2004, it was widely reported that VA's funding crisis had become so severe that it could no longer provide disability ratings to veterans in a timely fashion. This is a problem because until veterans are fully transitioned from the active-duty TRICARE healthcare system to VA, they are on their own with regard to many healthcare costs.\nThe VA's backlog of pending disability claims under review (a process known as \"adjudication\") peaked at 421,000 in 2001, and bottomed out at 254,000 in 2003, but crept back up to 340,000 in 2005. As of 2025, the backlog of pending disability claims was 178,003.\nThese numbers are released every Monday.\nNo copayment is required for VA services for veterans with military-related medical conditions. VA-recognized service-connected disabilities include problems that started or were aggravated due to military service. Veteran service organizations such as the American Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and Disabled American Veterans, as well as state-operated Veterans Affairs offices and County Veteran Service Officers (CVSO), have been known to assist veterans in the process of getting care from the VA.\nIn his budget proposal for fiscal year 2009, President George W. Bush requested $38.7\u00a0billion\u2014or 86.5% of the total Veterans Affairs budget\u2014for veteran medical care alone.\nIn the 2011 Costs of War report from Brown University, researchers projected that the cost of caring for veterans of the war on terror would peak 30\u201340 years after the end of combat operations. They also predicted that medical and disability costs would ultimately total between $600\u00a0billion and $1\u00a0trillion for the hundreds of thousands treated by the Department of Veterans Affairs.\nFreedom of Information Act processing performance.\nIn a 2015 Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act (United States) (FOIA) requests (using 2012 and 2013 data, the most recent years available), the VA earned a D by scoring 64 out of a possible 100 points, i.e. did not earn a satisfactory overall grade, for facilitating FOIA requests.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70923", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70923", "title": "A Brilliant Madness", "text": "2002 TV documentary on mathematician John Nash\nA Brilliant Madness is a PBS \"American Experience\" documentary on the life of mathematician John Nash. It first aired April 28, 2002, and was produced by Randall MacLowry and directed by Mark Samels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70924", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70924", "title": "Music technology (electronic and digital)", "text": "Digital music technology encompasses the use of digital instruments to produce, perform or record music. These instruments vary, including computers, electronic effects units, software, and digital audio equipment. Digital music technology is used in performance, playback, recording, composition, mixing, analysis and editing of music, by professions in all parts of the music industry.\nHistory.\nIn the late 19th century, Thaddeus Cahill introduced the Telharmonium, which is commonly considered the first electromechanical musical instrument. In the early 20th century, Leon Theremin created the Theremin, an early electronic instrument played without physical contact, creating a new form of sound creation.\nIn the mid-20th century, sampling emerged, with artists like Pierre Schaeffer and Karlheinz Stockhausen manipulating recorded sounds on tape to create entirely new compositions. This laid the foundation for future electronic music production techniques.\nIn the 1960s, the Moog synthesizer, invented by Robert Moog, popularized analog synthesis. Musician Wendy Carlos demonstrated Robert's invention with the album \"Switched-On Bach\", which consisted of works composed by Johann Sebastian Bach interpreted with the Moog synthesizer. Meanwhile, tape-based studios, like the BBC Radiophonic Workshop, were at the forefront of electronic sound design.\nThe 1980s saw a major shift towards digital technology with the development of the Musical Instrument Digital Interface (MIDI) standard. This allowed electronic instruments to communicate with computers and each other, transforming music production. Digital synthesizers, such as the Yamaha DX7, became widely popular.\nThe 1990s and 2000s witnessed the explosive growth of electronic dance music and its various subgenres, driven by the accessibility of digital music production tools and the rise of computer-based software synthesizers.\nEducation.\nProfessional training.\nCourses in music technology are offered at many different universities as part of degree programs focusing on performance, composition, music research at the undergraduate and graduate level. The study of music technology is usually concerned with the creative use of technology for creating new sounds, performing, recording, programming sequencers or other music-related electronic devices, and manipulating, mixing and reproducing music. Music technology programs train students for careers in \"...sound engineering, computer music, audio-visual production and post-production, mastering, scoring for film and multimedia, audio for games, software development, and multimedia production.\" Those wishing to develop new music technologies often train to become an audio engineer working in research and development. Due to the increasing role of interdisciplinary work in music technology, individuals developing new music technologies may also have backgrounds or training in electrical engineering, computer programming, computer hardware design, acoustics, record producing or other fields.\nUse of music technology in education.\nDigital music technologies are widely used to assist in music education for training students in the home, elementary school, middle school, high school, college and university music programs. Electronic keyboard labs are used for cost-effective beginner group piano instruction in high schools, colleges, and universities. Courses in music notation software and basic manipulation of audio and MIDI can be part of a student's core requirements for a music degree. Mobile and desktop applications are available to aid the study of music theory and ear training. Some digital pianos provide interactive lessons and games using the built-in features of the instrument to teach music fundamentals.\nAnalog Synthesizers.\nClassic analog synthesizers include the Moog Minimoog, ARP Odyssey, Yamaha CS-80, Korg MS-20, Sequential Circuits Prophet-5, Roland TB-303, Roland Alpha Juno. One of the most iconic synthesizers is the Roland TB-303, was widely used in acid house music.\nDigital synthesizer history.\nClassic digital synthesizers include the Fairlight CMI, PPG Wave, Nord Modular and Korg M1.\nComputer music history.\nMax Mathews.\nComputer and synthesizer technology joining together changed the way music is made and is one of the fastest-changing aspects of music technology today. Max Mathews, an acoustic researcher at Bell Telephone Laboratories' Acoustic and Behavioural Research Department, is responsible for some of the first digital music technology in the 1950s. Mathews also pioneered a cornerstone of music technology; analog-to-digital conversion.\nAt Bell Laboratories, Matthews conducted research to improve the telecommunications quality for long-distance phone calls. Owing to long-distance and low-bandwidth, audio quality over phone calls across the United States was poor. Thus, Matthews devised a method in which sound was synthesized via computer on the distant end rather than transmitted. Matthews was an amateur violinist, and during a conversation with his superior, John Pierce at Bell Labs, Pierce posed the idea of synthesizing music through a computer. Since Matthews had already synthesized speech, he agreed and wrote a series of programs known as MUSIC. MUSIC consisted of two files: an orchestra file containing data telling the computer how to synthesize sound, and a score file instructing the program what notes to play using the instruments defined in the orchestra file. Matthews wrote five iterations of MUSIC, calling them MUSIC I-V respectively. Subsequently, as the program was adapted and expanded to run on various platforms, its name changed to reflect its new changes. This series of programs became known as the MUSIC-N paradigm. The concept of the MUSIC now exists in the form of Csound.\nLater Max Matthews worked as an advisor to IRCAMin the late 1980s. There, he taught Miller Puckette, a researcher. Puckette developed a program in which music could be programmed graphically. The program could transmit and receive MIDI messages to generate interactive music in real-time. Inspired by Matthews, Puckette named the program Max. Later, a researcher named David Zicarelli visited IRCAM, saw the capabilities of Max and felt it could be developed further. He took a copy of Max with him when he left and eventually added capabilities to process audio signals. Zicarelli named this new part of the program MSP after Miller Puckette. Zicarelli developed the commercial version of MaxMSP and sold it at his company, Cycling '74, beginning in 1997. The company has since been acquired by Ableton.\nLater history.\nThe first generation of professional commercially available computer music instruments, or workstations as some companies later called them, were very sophisticated elaborate systems that cost a great deal of money when they first appeared. They ranged from $25,000 to $200,000. The two most popular were the Fairlight, and the Synclavier.\nIt was not until the advent of MIDI that general-purpose computers started to play a role in music production. Following the widespread adoption of MIDI, computer-based MIDI editors and sequencers were developed. MIDI-to-CV/Gate converters were then used to enable analog synthesizers to be controlled by a MIDI sequencer.\nMIDI.\nAt the NAMM Show of 1983 in Los Angeles, MIDI was released. A demonstration at the convention showed two previously incompatible analog synthesizers, the Prophet 600 and Roland Jupiter-6, communicating with each other, enabling a player to play one keyboard while getting the output from both of them. This development immediately allowed synths to be accurately layered in live shows and studio recordings. MIDI enables different electronic instruments and electronic music devices to communicate with each other and with computers. The advent of MIDI spurred a rapid expansion of the sales and production of electronic instruments and music software.\nIn 1985, several of the top keyboard manufacturers created the MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA). This newly founded association standardized the MIDI protocol by generating and disseminating all the documents about it. With the development of the MIDI file format specification by Opcode, every music software company's MIDI sequencer software could read and write each other's files.\nSince the 1980s, personal computers became the ideal system for utilizing the vast potential of MIDI. This has created a large consumer market for software such as MIDI-equipped electronic keyboards, MIDI sequencers and digital audio workstations. With universal MIDI protocols, electronic keyboards, sequencers, and drum machines can all be connected together.\nVocal synthesis history until 1980s.\nVODER.\nCoinciding with the history of computer music is the history of vocal synthesis. Prior to Max Matthews synthesizing speech with a computer, analog devices were used to recreate speech. In the 1930s, an engineer named Homer Dudley invented the Voice Operating Demonstrator (VODER), an electro-mechanical device which generated a sawtooth wave and white-noise. Various parts of the frequency spectrum of the waveforms could be filtered to generate the sounds of speech. Pitch was modulated via a bar on a wrist strap worn by the operator. In the 1940s Dudley, invented the Voice Operated Coder (VOCODER). Rather than synthesizing speech from scratch, this machine operated by accepting incoming speech and breaking it into its spectral components. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, bands and solo artists began using the VOCODER to blend speech with notes played on a synthesizer.\nSinging computer.\nAt Bell Laboratories, Max Matthews worked with researchers Kelly and Lochbaum to develop a model of the vocal tract to study how its properties contributed to speech generation. Using the model of the vocal tract,\u2014a method, which would come to be known as physical modeling synthesis, in which a computer estimates the formants and spectral content of each word based on information about the vocal model, including various applied filters representing the vocal tract\u2014to make a computer (an IBM 704) sing for the first time in 1962. The computer performed a rendition of \"Daisy Bell\".\nCHANT at IRCAM.\nAt IRCAM in France, researchers developed software called CHANT (French for \"sing\"), the first version of which ran between 1979 and 1983. CHANT was based FOF () synthesis, in which the peak frequencies of a sound are created and shaped using granular synthesis\u2014as opposed to filtering frequencies to create speech.\nConcatenation synthesis using MIDI.\nThrough the 1980s and 1990s, as MIDI devices became commercially available, speech was generated by mapping MIDI data to samples of the components of speech stored in sample libraries.\nVocal synthesis after 2010s.\nIn the 2010s, singing synthesis technology took advantage of the advances in artificial intelligence, deep listening and machine learning, to better represent the nuances of the human voice. New high-fidelity sample libraries combined with digital audio workstations facilitate editing in fine detail, such as shifting of formants, adjustment of vibrato, and adjustments to vowels and consonants. Sample libraries for various languages and various accents are available. With advancements in vocal synthesis, artists sometimes use sample libraries in lieu of backing singers.\nSynthesizers and drum machines.\nSynthesizers.\nA synthesizer is an electronic musical instrument that generates electric signals that are converted to sound through instrument amplifiers and loudspeakers or headphones. Synthesizers may either imitate existing sounds (instruments, vocal, natural sounds, etc.), or generate new electronic timbres or sounds that did not exist before. They are often played with an electronic musical keyboard, but they can be controlled via a variety of other input devices, including sequencers, instrument controllers, fingerboards, guitar synthesizers, wind controllers, and electronic drums. Synthesizers without built-in controllers are often called sound modules, and are controlled using a controller device.\nSynthesizers use various methods to generate a signal. Among the most popular waveform synthesis techniques are subtractive synthesis, additive synthesis, wavetable synthesis, frequency modulation synthesis, phase distortion synthesis, physical modeling synthesis and sample-based synthesis or a variant, granular synthesis. Synthesizers are used in many genres of pop, rock and dance music. Contemporary classical music composers from the 20th and 21st centuries write compositions for synthesizer.\nDrum machines.\nA drum machine is an electronic musical instrument designed to imitate the sound of drums, cymbals and other percussion instruments. Drum machines generate drum and cymbal sounds in a rhythm and tempo that is programmed by a musician. Drum machines are most commonly associated with electronic dance music genres such as house music, but are also used in many other genres. They are also used when session drummers are not available or if the production cannot afford the cost of a professional drummer. In the 2010s, most modern drum machines are sequencers with a sample playback (often a rompler) or synthesizer component that specializes in the reproduction of drum timbres.\nElectro-mechanical drum machines were first developed in 1949, with the invention of the Chamberlin Rhythmate. Transistorized electronic drum machines Seeburg Select-A-Rhythm appeared in 1964.\nClassic drum machines include the Korg Mini Pops 120, PAiA Programmable Drum Set, Roland CR-78, LinnDrum, Roland TR-909, Oberheim DMX, E-MU SP-12, Alesis HR-16, and Elektron SPS1 Machinedrum (in chronological order).\nDrum machines in Japan.\nIn the late 1970s and 1980s, Japanese manufacturers, including Roland and Korg, assumed pivotal roles in the transformation of the musical landscape. Roland's TR-808 and TR-909 significantly changed the landscape of rhythm production. shaping genres like hip-hop and electronic dance music. Korg's KPR-77 and DDD-1 also made an impact. These drum machines were known for their distinctive sound and affordability. Over time, Japanese companies continued to innovate, producing increasingly sophisticated and user-friendly drum machines, such as the Roland TR-8 and Korg Volca Beats. These instruments continue to influence contemporary music production and remain integral to the electronic music landscape worldwide.Sly and the Family Stone's 1971 album \"There's a Riot Goin' On\" helped to popularize the sound of early drum machines, along with Timmy Thomas' 1972 R&amp;B hit \"Why Can't We Live Together\" and George McCrae's 1974 disco hit \"Rock Your Baby\" which used early Roland rhythm machines.\nEarly drum machines sounded drastically different than the drum machines that gained their peak popularity in the 1980s and defined an entire decade of pop music. The most iconic drum machine was the Roland TR-808, widely used in hip hop and dance music.\nSampling technology after 1980s.\nDigital sampling technology, introduced in the 1970s, Devices that use sampling, record a sound digitally (often a musical instrument, such as a piano or flute being played), and replay it when a key or pad on a controller device (e.g., an electronic keyboard, electronic drum pad, etc.) is pressed or triggered. Samplers can alter the sound using various audio effects and audio processing. Sampling has its roots in France with the sound experiments carried out by musique concr\u00e8te practitioners.\nIn the 1980s, when the technology was still in its infancy, digital samplers cost tens of thousands of dollars and they were only used by the top recording studios and musicians. These were out of the price range of most musicians. Early samplers include the 8-bit Electronic Music Studios MUSYS-3 circa 1970, Computer Music Melodian in 1976, Fairlight CMI in 1979, Emulator I in 1981, Synclavier II Sample-to-Memory (STM) option circa 1980, Ensoniq Mirage in 1984, and Akai S612 in 1985. The latter's successor, the Emulator II (released in 1984), listed for $8,000. Samplers were released during this period with high price tags, such as the K2000 and K2500.\nSome important hardware samplers include the Kurzweil K250, Akai MPC60, Ensoniq Mirage, Ensoniq ASR-10, Akai S1000, E-mu Emulator, and Fairlight CMI.\nOne of the biggest uses of sampling technology was by hip-hop music DJs and performers in the 1980s. Before affordable sampling technology was readily available, DJs would use a technique pioneered by Grandmaster Flash to manually repeat certain parts in a song by juggling between two separate turntables. This can be considered as an early precursor of sampling. In turn, this turntablism technique originates from Jamaican dub music in the 1960s and was introduced to American hip hop in the 1970s.\nIn the 2000s, most professional recording studios use digital technologies. In recent years, many samplers have only included digital technology. This new generation of digital samplers are capable of reproducing and manipulating sounds. Digital sampling plays an integral part in some genres of music, such as hip-hop and trap. Advanced sample libraries have made complete performances of orchestral compositions possible that sound similar to a live performance. Modern sound libraries allow musicians to have the ability to use the sounds of almost any instrument in their productions.\nSampling technology in Japan.\nEarly samplers include the 12-bit Toshiba LMD-649 in 1981.\nThe first affordable sampler in Japan was the Ensoniq Mirage in 1984. Also the AKAI S612 became available in 1985, retailed for US$895. Other companies soon released affordable samplers, including Oberheim DPX-1 in 1987, and more by Korg, Casio, Yamaha, and Roland. Some important hardware samplers in Japan include the Akai Z4/Z8, Roland V-Synth, Casio FZ-1.\nMIDI.\nMIDI has been the musical instrument industry standard interface since the 1980s through to the present day. It dates back to June 1981, when Roland Corporation founder Ikutaro Kakehashi proposed the concept of standardization between different manufacturers' instruments as well as computers, to Oberheim Electronics founder Tom Oberheim and Sequential Circuits president Dave Smith. In October 1981, Kakehashi, Oberheim and Smith discussed the concept with representatives from Yamaha, Korg and Kawai. In 1983, the MIDI standard was unveiled by Kakehashi and Smith.\nSome universally accepted varieties of MIDI software applications include music instruction software, MIDI sequencing software, music notation software, hard disk recording/editing software, patch editor/sound library software, computer-assisted composition software, and virtual instruments. Current developments in computer hardware and specialized software continue to expand MIDI applications.\nComputers in music technology after 1980s.\nFollowing the widespread adoption of MIDI, computer-based MIDI editors and sequencers were developed. MIDI-to-CV/Gate converters were then used to enable analogue synthesizers to be controlled by a MIDI sequencer.\nReduced prices in personal computers caused the masses to turn away from the more expensive workstations. Advancements in technology have increased the speed of hardware processing and the capacity of memory units. Software developers write new, more powerful programs for sequencing, recording, notating, and mastering music.\nDigital audio workstation software, such as Pro Tools, Logic, and many others, have gained popularity among the vast array of contemporary music technology in recent years. Such programs allow the user to record acoustic sounds with a microphone or software instrument, which may then be layered and organized along a timeline and edited on a flat-panel display of a computer. Recorded segments can be copied and duplicated ad infinitum, without any loss of fidelity or added noise (a major contrast from analog recording, in which every copy leads to a loss of fidelity and added noise). Digital music can be edited and processed using a multitude of audio effects. Contemporary classical music sometimes uses computer-generated sounds\u2014either pre-recorded or generated and manipulated live\u2014in conjunction or juxtaposed on classical acoustic instruments like the cello or violin. Music is scored with commercially available notation software.\nIn addition to the digital audio workstations and music notation software, which facilitate the creation of fixed media (material that does not change each time it is performed), software facilitating interactive or generative music continues to emerge. Composition based on conditions or rules (algorithmic composition) has given rise to software which can automatically generate music based on input conditions or rules. Thus, the resulting music evolves each time conditions change. Examples of this technology include software designed for writing music for video games\u2014where music evolves as a player advances through a level or when certain characters appear\u2014or music generated from artificial intelligence trained to convert biometrics like EEG or ECG readings into music. Because this music is based on user interaction, it will be different each time it is heard. Other examples of generative music technology include the use of sensors connected to computer and artificial intelligence to generate music based on captured data, such as environmental factors, the movements of dancers, or physical inputs from a digital device such as a mouse or game controller. Software applications offering capabilities for generative and interactive music include SuperCollider, MaxMSP/Jitter, and Processing. Interactive music is made possible through physical computing, where the data from the physical world affects a computer's output and vice versa.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70925", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70925", "title": "United States Department of Veterans' Affairs", "text": ""}
{"id": "70926", "revid": "294180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70926", "title": "U.S. Department of Commerce", "text": ""}
{"id": "70927", "revid": "1281573616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70927", "title": "Schoenberg (surname)", "text": "Schoenberg () is a surname. Notable persons with that surname include:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Surname listThis page lists people with the surname . "}
{"id": "70928", "revid": "49800004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70928", "title": "Robbin Crosby", "text": "American guitarist (1959\u20132002)\nRobbinson Lantz Crosby (August 4, 1959 \u2013 June 6, 2002) was an American guitarist who was a member of glam metal band Ratt, earning several platinum albums in the US in the 1980s. Crosby died in 2002 from a heroin overdose.\nEarly life.\nCrosby was born in La Jolla, California, and had two sisters, Ristin and Bronle. Robbin attended Bird Rock Elementary, Muirlands Junior High and La Jolla High School, graduating in June 1976. He previously played baseball prior to shifting his focus to the guitar. He was the son of Harry W. Crosby, a science schoolteacher at La Jolla High and an author of books about California history.\nCareer.\nBefore Ratt.\nIn the late 1970s, Crosby played in several San Diego bands. From 1977\u201378 he played in Phenomenon, recording a single \"The Final Word,\" which was written by Crosby. It was released in 1980. Phenomenon also featured future Warrior member Parramore McCarty. While playing with Phenomenon, he took lessons from Thom Beebe, described as \"a monster player in the Blackmore vein.\" After Phenomenon folded, Crosby and the drummer from Phenomenon began playing with Metropolis from 1978\u20131979, playing popular Judas Priest and Robin Trower songs on the La Jolla Beach Circuit. Metropolis didn't last long, and, in 1979, Crosby teamed up with former members of Phenomenon and Metropolis to create a new band, Secret Service. Crosby moved to Manhattan Beach, California, in 1979, living with his girlfriend Tawny Kitaen. The band was short lived and, in 1980, Crosby was in a band Aircraft. The same year he also recorded a live demo with the band Aircraft, which also featured Rob Lamothe, later in Riverdogs with Dio/Whitesnake/Def Leppard guitarist Vivian Campbell. In 1981, Aircraft changed its name to Mac Meda, which Crosby's brother-in-law managed. They recorded six songs on Vulture record label sometime in 1981, but the songs didn't help them launch a career. However, the move to the Los Angeles area provided Mac Meda with access to a vibrant club scene, which they soon became a part of, even playing the famed Troubadour (West Hollywood, California) on May 7, 1981.\nWith Ratt.\nCrosby was one of the original members of the San Diego rock band Mickey Ratt, later to be rechristened simply \"Ratt\". He would end up co-writing many of Ratt's songs, including \"Round and Round\", \"Wanted Man\" and \"Lay It Down\". The album \"Out of the Cellar\" went to triple platinum based on \"Round and Round\".\nCrosby was dating actress Tawny Kitaen at the time he joined Ratt, and she appears on the album covers of both the \"Ratt EP\" (1983) and \"Out of the Cellar\" (1984). Crosby and Kitaen broke up in 1984 after a six-year relationship.\nIn the coming years, Crosby would buy a home in the Hollywood Hills of Los Angeles. He married Playboy Playmate Laurie Carr in 1987; they divorced in 1991. They had no children. Crosby did however, have a daughter, Shania, in a romantic relationship in 1997.\nCrosby's solos were blues-based, as he drew inspiration from Jimi Hendrix, which gave Ratt melodic flavors. His style was at odds with shredding style of fellow Ratt guitarist Warren DeMartini, but their two styles also complemented each other, differentiating Ratt from other west coast glam rock bands. Feeling \"overshadowed\" by DeMartini, Crosby began \"self-medicating with drugs and alcohol,\" which led to a crippling heroin addiction.\nAs Ratt stepped in the studio in 1990, Crosby entered rehab. According to Crosby's brother-in-law, the guitarist was also addicted to cocaine and \"other stuff\" and was repeatedly in and out of rehab.\nAfter Ratt.\nCrosby eventually left Ratt. Prior to leaving, Crosby worked as a producer for metal band Lillian Axe.\nIn a June 1999 interview for a Ratt episode of VH1's \"Behind the Music\", Crosby talked about how drug addiction and his HIV status changed his life. \"What has drug addiction done for me?\" he asked. \"It's cost me my career, my fortune, basically my sex life when I found out I was HIV positive.\"\nIn 2001, Crosby publicly stated that he had AIDS and had been HIV-positive since 1994. He had also been in and out of the hospital for eight years dealing with back problems and health issues associated with HIV. To occupy his time he became a Little League coach, and also worked on a guitar fan/collector project, which was to create a limited-edition run of Jackson King V \"Big Red\" replica guitars.\nCrosby also attempted various musical projects, first (post-Ratt) re-uniting with Perry McCarty, Krys Baratto, Dino Guerrero and Mark Lewis as an updated version of Secret Service, a moniker used by McCarty and Crosby previously for their pre-Ratt San Diego band. Later moving to El Paso in 1996, he briefly played with the Country/Western group War Party. One of his last projects was with former collaborator and ex-Ratt bassist Juan Croucier.\nDeath.\nCrosby died at his home in Los Angeles on June 6, 2002. Although his death was reported to be from complications from AIDS, he actually died of a heroin overdose (although he had also previously tested positive for HIV). According to an autopsy report after his death, Crosby was and weighed .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70929", "revid": "9155723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70929", "title": "Toastmasters International", "text": "Nonprofit organization promoting communication, public speaking and leadership\nToastmasters International (TI) is a US-headquartered nonprofit educational organization that operates clubs worldwide for the purpose of helping people develop communication, public speaking, and leadership skills. Most clubs accept guests for free to get a Toastmasters Experience.\nHistory.\nOn 24 March 1905, Dr. Ralph C. Smedley, a 1903 graduate from Illinois Wesleyan University, who was also the educational director for Bloomington YMCA in Illinois, started a club in a dinner meeting, to train young boys and men in speech, to face an audience, and to express their thoughts. He envisioned it as a weekly social club, with training programs for short speeches, debates, and work in chairmanship. The members took turn to speak in 5 to 6 minutes while the elder men served as speech evaluators. George Sutton, General Secretary of YMCA, named the club \"a Toastmasters Club\". Smedley later noticed a significant improvement in his members' speeches and leadership abilities. When YMCA transferred Smedley to another city named Freeport in Illinois, he decided to expand his club to the new city.\nThe organization grew out of a single club founded by Smedley on October 22, 1924, at the YMCA in Santa Ana, California, United States. It originated as a set of classes with the aim of improving the communication skills of the young men under his charge. Toastmasters International was incorporated under Californian law on December 19, 1932.\nThe first international chapter was established in Vancouver, Canada, in 1932. The organization began admitting women in 1973.\nIn 1999, Toastmasters International (TI) had 170,000 members spanning 68 countries. By 2016, TI had 345,000 members and 16,000 clubs worldwide. By 2025, TI had 265,000 members across 149 countries and 13,833 clubs worldwide.\nToastmasters club structure.\nToastmasters International uses a local club-based structure, with an average club size of around 22 members. Meetings are held every week or bi-weekly and usually in the evening, although some clubs meet in the morning or afternoon. Each club operates as a separate entity with a set of requirements leading to chartered status for them to be recognised as official Toastmasters clubs. The chartered status allows clubs to use the names, promotional material and program of Toastmasters International.\nEvery meeting is based on a set of organized speeches. Speakers are given feedback, often by a more experienced member, who then gives an impromptu speech with constructive feedback based on their performance.\nPart of the meetings is devoted to Table Topics, which are impromptu speeches that are assigned on the spot by a Topicsmaster. The goal of this is to think on one's feet with minimal preparation. In most clubs guests can choose to participate in the Table Topics segment of the club meeting. In some clubs, attendees are then asked to vote on who they thought gave the best speech.\nEducation programs.\nToastmasters International places a large emphasis on building the public speaking and leadership skills of its members. The current education system Pathways consists of 6 differing paths suited to their needs and requirements, based around \"Public Speaking\", \"Interpersonal Communication\", \"Management\", \"Strategic Leadership\", and \"Confidence\". The available pathways are \u2018\"Dynamic Leadership, Engaging Humor, Motivational Strategies, Persuasive Influence, Presentation Mastery and Visionary Communication\"\u2019. Every path is made up of at least 14 projects. Content consists of online and print materials, it being the first time in the organization\u2019s history to provide modern technology in its programs. Content is available in English, translations are available in 5 languages. Speechcraft is a 4- to 8-week program with materials hosted online and is conducted by experienced Toastmasters members for non-members. To develop leadership skills, members lead at the club, area, or district levels, focus on content development, and participate in speech contests.\nPublic speaking championship.\nToastmasters runs an international public speaking championship formally known as the Toastmasters International World Champion of Public Speaking, which is held annually at its International Convention in August. It started in 1938 and involves over 33,000 participants in 141 countries, making it the world's largest oratory contest. There is a six-month process of elimination to reach the semifinals; in 2018, there were 106 participants who made it that far. There are ten places in the final, and speeches are judged on content, gestures, organization, and style.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70931", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70931", "title": "Music Theory", "text": ""}
{"id": "70933", "revid": "12959150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70933", "title": "S\u00e9curit\u00e9", "text": "Maritime emergency radio signal\nS\u00e9curit\u00e9 (; French: \"s\u00e9curit\u00e9\") (often repeated thrice, \"S\u00e9curit\u00e9, s\u00e9curit\u00e9, s\u00e9curit\u00e9\") is a procedure word used in the maritime radio service that warns the crew that the following message is important safety information. The most common use of this is by coast radio stations before the broadcast of navigational warnings and meteorological information.\nNavigational warnings are issued regularly and usually give information about people or vessels in distress and objects or events that can be an immediate danger to people at sea and how they are navigating. In the United States, MARAD (Marine Administration) sends out infrequent advisories about potential global political climate dangers. There are four types of navigational warnings, which are categorized by their location. These areas are NAVAREA IV, HYDROLANT, NAVAREA XII, and HYDROPAC.\nMeteorological information is information that is about the marine atmosphere. These meteorological advisories include the development of weather systems such as and not limited to, rain squalls, big tidal drops, major current shifts, lightning storms, hurricane and tsunami warnings, high winds, and cyclones.\nIt is normal practice to broadcast the S\u00e9curit\u00e9 call itself on a distress and listening frequency such as VHF Channel 16 or MF 2182 kHz, and then change frequency to a working channel for the body of the messages. An equivalent Morse code signal is TTT, with each letter sent distinctly.\nAlthough mostly used by coast radio stations, there is nothing to stop individual craft broadcasting their own S\u00e9curit\u00e9 messages where appropriate, for example, a yacht becalmed (rendered motionless for lack of wind), or any vessel adrift or unable to manoeuvre near other craft or shipping lanes.\nMayday, pan-pan, s\u00e9curit\u00e9.\nOf the three distress and urgency calls, S\u00e9curit\u00e9 is the least urgent.\nS\u00e9curit\u00e9: A radio call that usually issues navigational warnings, meteorological warnings, and any other warning needing to be issued that may concern the safety of life at sea, yet may not be particularly life-threatening. \nPan-pan: This is the second most important call. This call is made when there is an emergency aboard a vessel, yet there is not immediate danger to life, or the safety of the vessel itself. This includes, but is not limited to injuries on deck, imminent collision that has not yet occurred, or being unsure of vessel's position.\nMayday: This is the most important call that can be made, due to the fact that it directly concerns a threat to life or the vessel. Some instances when this call would be made are, but not limited to death, collision, and fire at sea. When the Mayday call is made, the vessel is requiring immediate assistance.\nExample usage.\n Third on the list of calls, a Safety or S\u00e9curit\u00e9 call takes priority of all communications besides distress and urgency. The DSC safety alert should not be acknowledged by voice, but merely listened to and noted. The proper etiquette for sending a safety alert is as follows: first, the DSC safety alert must be sent on Channel 16 VHF or at 2182 kHz instead of using a working channel or frequency. Second, the targeted group must be selected, if necessary. This can be all ships, ships of a specific geographic area, or an individual ship. Lastly, the call should be made. GMDSS protocol requires that the safety call must be spoken to attract attention of the selected vessels. Procedure for the call is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;S\u00c9CURIT\u00c9 x 3\nALL STATIONS x 3\nTHIS IS (Ship/Station Identification) x 3\nWithout a break, continue on to the safety message:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;S\u00c9CURIT\u00c9\nNAME, CALLSIGN, MMSI\nPOSITION\nNATURE OF SAFETY MESSAGE\nADVICE/OTHER INFORMATION\n\u201cOUT\u201d"}
{"id": "70935", "revid": "10059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70935", "title": "Parliamentary procedure", "text": "Guidelines to conduct meetings\nParliamentary procedures are the accepted rules, ethics, and customs governing meetings of an assembly or organization. Their object is to allow orderly deliberation upon questions of interest to the organization and thus to arrive at the sense or the will of the majority of the assembly upon these questions. Self-governing organizations follow parliamentary procedure to debate and reach group decisions, usually by vote, with the least possible friction.\nIn the United Kingdom, Canada, Ireland, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, and other English-speaking countries, parliamentary procedure is often called \"chairmanship\", \"chairing\", the \"law of meetings\", \"procedure at meetings\", the \"conduct of meetings\", or the \"standing orders\". is used and often referred to as \"Erskine May\" in the United Kingdom, and influential in other countries that use the Westminster system. In the United States, terms used are \"parliamentary law\", \"parliamentary practice\", \"legislative procedure\", \"rules of order\", or \"Robert's rules of order\".\nRules of order consist of rules written by the body itself (often referred to as bylaws), usually supplemented by a published parliamentary authority adopted by the body. Typically, national, state, or provincial, and other full-scale legislative assemblies have extensive internally-written rules of order, whereas non-legislative bodies write and adopt a limited set of specific rules as the need arises.\nHistory.\nThe term \"parliamentary procedure\" gets its name from its use in the parliamentary system of government.\nIn the 16th and 17th century, the parliaments of England began adopting rules of order. In the 1560s, Sir Thomas Smyth began the process of writing down accepted procedures and published a book about them for the House of Commons in 1583. Early rules included:\nWestminster procedures.\nThe Westminster parliamentary procedures are followed in several Commonwealth countries, including the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, and South Africa, as well as in the Republic of Ireland.\nIn Canada, for example, the House of Commons uses \"House of Commons Procedure and Practice\" as its primary procedural authority. Others include Arthur Beauchesne's \"Parliamentary Rules and Forms of the House of Commons of Canada\", Sir John George Bourinot's \"Parliamentary Procedure and Practice in the Dominion of Canada\", and Erskine May's from Britain.\nAmerican procedures.\nThe rules of the United States Congress were developed from parliamentary procedures used in Britain. Many nations' legislatures follow American parliamentary procedure, including Indonesia, the Philippines, Mexico and South Korea.\nOther.\nThe Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (1957) states that each of the European Parliament, Council of the European Union, and European Commission adopt their own rules. For the Parliament, these are the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament.\nThe procedures of the Diet of Japan moved away from the British parliamentary model, when in Occupied Japan, there were efforts to align Japanese parliamentary procedures with American congressional practices. In Japan, informal negotiations are more important than formal procedures.\nIn Italy, written rules govern the Houses of the Parliament. The Constitutional Court has adjudicated on the limits beyond which these regulations cannot go (judgement n. 120 of 2014) and on their bad application when a law is passed.\nParliamentary authority usage patterns.\nParliamentary procedure is based on the principles of allowing the majority to make decisions effectively and efficiently (majority rule), while ensuring fairness towards the minority and giving each member or delegate the right to voice an opinion. Voting determines the will of the assembly. While each assembly may create their own set of rules, these sets tend to be more alike than different. A common practice is to adopt a standard reference book on parliamentary procedure and modify it through special rules of order that supersede the adopted authority.\nA parliamentary structure conducts business through motions, which cause actions. Members bring business before the assembly by introducing main motions. \"Members use subsidiary motions to alter a main motion, or delay or hasten its consideration.\" Parliamentary procedure also allows for rules in regards to nomination, voting, debate, disciplinary action, appeals, and the drafting of organization charters, constitutions, and bylaws.\nOrganizations and civic groups.\nIn the US \"Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised\" aspires to be a comprehensive guide, based on the original 1876 version written primarily to help guide voluntary associations in their operations of governance: \"New editions have marked the growth of parliamentary procedure as cases occurring in assemblies have pointed to a need for further rules or additional interpretations to go by.\" \"Robert's Rules of Order The Modern Edition\" and \"The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure\" aspire to be concise. \"This book is a basic reference book but does not claim to be comprehensive. For most organization and for most meetings, it will prove very adequate.\" \"Alice Sturgis believed that confusing or unnecessary motions and terminology should be eliminated. Her goal was to make the process simpler, fairer, and easier to understand, and The Standard Code of Parliamentary Procedure did just that ...\"\nA common text in use in the UK, particularly within trade unions, is Walter Citrine's \"ABC of Chairmanship\".\nIn English-speaking Canada, popular authorities include Kerr &amp; King's \"Procedures for Meeting and Organizations\". The Conservative Party of Canada uses \"Wainberg's Society meetings including rules of order\" to run its internal affairs.\nIn French-speaking Canada, commonly used rules of order for ordinary societies include Victor Morin's (commonly known as the ) and the .\nLegislatures.\nLegislative assemblies in all countries, because of their nature, tend to have a specialized set of rules that differ from parliamentary procedure used by clubs and organizations.\nIn the United Kingdom, (frequently updated; originally \"Treatise on the Law, Privileges, Proceedings and Usage of Parliament\"; often referred to simply as \"Erskine May\") is the accepted authority on the powers and procedures of the Westminster parliament. There are also the Standing Orders for each House.\nOf the 99 state legislative chambers in the United States (two for each state except Nebraska, which has a unicameral legislature), \"Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure\" governs parliamentary procedures in 70; \"Jefferson's Manual\" governs 13, and \"Robert's Rules of Order\" governs four. The United States Senate follows the Standing Rules of the United States Senate, while the United States House of Representatives follows \"Jefferson's Manual\".\n\"Mason's Manual\", originally written by constitutional scholar and former assistant secretary of the California Senate Paul Mason in 1935, and since his death revised and published by the National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL), governs legislative procedures in instances where the state constitution, state statutes, and the chamber's rules are silent.\nParliamentarians in the United States.\nIn the United States, individuals who are proficient in parliamentary procedure are called parliamentarians (in countries with parliamentary governments where the term refers to a member of Parliament).\nSeveral organizations offer certification programs for parliamentarians, including the National Association of Parliamentarians and American Institute of Parliamentarians. Agriculture teachers who coach teams in the parliamentary procedure contest of the National FFA Organization (formerly Future Farmers of America) can earn the title accredited parliamentarian. parliamentarians perform an important role in many meetings, including counselling organizations on parliamentary law, holding elections, or writing amendments to the constitution and bylaws of an organization.\nParliamentarians in the Republic of Ireland.\nD\u00e1il \u00c9ireann follows standing orders originally adopted on 11 September 1922.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70936", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70936", "title": "Uighurs", "text": ""}
{"id": "70938", "revid": "48701621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70938", "title": "Patrick Stewart", "text": "English actor (born 1940)\nSir Patrick Stewart (born 13 July 1940) is an English actor. With a career spanning over seven decades of stage and screen, he has received various accolades, including two Olivier Awards and a Grammy Award, as well as nominations for a Tony Award, three Golden Globe Awards, four Emmy Awards, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. He was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II for services to drama in 2010.\nIn 1966, Stewart became a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company. He made his Broadway theatre debut in 1971 in a production of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". In 1979, he received the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for his performance in \"Antony and Cleopatra\" in the West End. His first television role was in \"Coronation Street\" in 1967. His first major screen roles were in \"Fall of Eagles\" (1974), \"I, Claudius\" (1976) and \"Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy\" (1979). In 2008 he reprised his role as King Claudius in \"Hamlet\" and received his second Olivier Award and his first Tony Award nomination for respectively the West End and Broadway theatre productions.\nStewart gained international stardom for his leading role as Captain Jean-Luc Picard in ' (1987\u20131994), a role he reprised in a series of films and ' (2020\u20132023). He starred as Captain Ahab in the USA Network miniseries \"Moby Dick\" (1998), Ebenezer Scrooge in TNT television film \"A Christmas Carol\" (1999) and King Henry II in the Showtime film \"The Lion in Winter\" (2003). He was Primetime Emmy Award-nominated for his comedic roles in the NBC sitcoms \"Frasier\" (2003) and BBC comedy series \"Extras\" (2005). He also starred as the lead of the Starz comedy series \"Blunt Talk\" (2015\u20132016). He voices CIA executive Avery Bullock on \"American Dad!\" (2005\u2013present).\nOn film, he gained stardom portraying Professor Charles Xavier in the \"X-Men\" film series from 2000 to 2017, reprising the role in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. He also acted in \"Hedda\" (1975), \"Excalibur\" (1981), \"Dune\" (1984), \"L.A. Story\" (1991), ' (1993), \"Jeffrey\" (1995) and \"The Kid Who Would Be King\" (2019). He has also voiced roles in \"The Pagemaster\" (1994), \"The Prince of Egypt\" (1998), ' (2001), \"Chicken Little\" (2005), \"Gnomeo &amp; Juliet\" (2011), and \"Ted\" (2012). \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nPatrick Stewart was born in Mirfield in the West Riding of Yorkshire on 13 July 1940, the son of Gladys (n\u00e9e Barrowclough), a weaver and textile worker, and Alfred Stewart (1905\u20131980), a regimental sergeant major in the British Army Parachute Regiment during the Second World War who later worked as a general labourer and postman. He has two older brothers named Geoffrey (born 1925) and Trevor (born 1935). He spent much of his childhood in a poor household in Mirfield, where he experienced domestic violence at the hands of his father. As a result of wartime service during the Dunkirk evacuation, his father suffered from combat fatigue, which is now known as PTSD. Stewart said in 2008, \"My father was a very potent individual, a very powerful man, who got what he wanted. It was said that when he strode onto the parade ground, birds stopped singing. It was many, many years before I realised how my father inserted himself into my work. I've grown a moustache for \"Macbeth\". My father didn't have one, but when I looked in the mirror just before I went on stage I saw my father's face staring straight back at me.\"\nStewart attended Crowlees Junior and Infant School, a Church of England\u2013affiliated school in Mirfield. He later attributed his acting career to his English teacher there, Cecil Dormand, who \"put a copy of Shakespeare in [Stewart's] hand\" and told him to get up and perform. He entered Mirfield Secondary Modern School in 1951, aged 11, and continued to study drama there. Around the same time, he met and befriended fellow actor Brian Blessed on a drama course in Mytholmroyd. At the age of 15, he left school and increased his participation in local theatre. He supported himself with work as a newspaper reporter and obituary writer for the local newspaper, Stewart left after one year when his boss gave him an ultimatum to choose acting or journalism. According to one of his brothers, Stewart would attend theatre rehearsals when he was supposed to be in work and then invent the stories he was reporting on, or persuade other reporters to cover for him. Stewart got a job in a furniture store, that not only allowed him to attend rehearsals with little scheduling conflict, but he also found that his thespian talent was applicable, resulting him in becoming productive in sales while practising his acting technique by tailoring his sales pitch for each customer. He also trained in boxing. He has said that acting served as a means of self-expression in his youth. Stewart and Blessed later received grants to attend the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School. Stewart was the first person who was neither a graduate of Oxford nor Cambridge to receive a grant from West Riding Council.\nCareer.\nEarly acting career (1959\u20131987).\nStewart's first professional stage appearance was on 19 May 1959 at the Theatre Royal, Bristol (for the Bristol Old Vic Company), playing Cutpurse (a thief among the audience for the play-within-a-play) in \"Cyrano de Bergerac\", directed by John Hale. Following a period with Manchester's Library Theatre, Stewart became a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1966, remaining with them until 1982. He was an associate artist of the company in 1967. He appeared with actors such as Ben Kingsley and Ian Richardson. In January 1967, he made his debut TV appearance on \"Coronation Street\" as a fire officer. In 1969, he had a brief TV cameo role as Horatio, opposite Ian Richardson's Hamlet, in a performance of the gravedigger scene as part of episode six of Sir Kenneth Clark's \"Civilisation\" television series. During the early 1970s, UCSB professor Homer Swander recruited him to help teach American university students about Shakespeare, which led to his breakthrough into Hollywood. He made his Broadway debut as Snout in Peter Brook's legendary 1970 production of \"A Midsummer Night's Dream,\" then moved to the Royal National Theatre in the early 1980s.\nOver the years, Stewart took roles in many major television series without ever becoming a household name. He appeared as Vladimir Lenin in \"Fall of Eagles\"; Sejanus in \"I, Claudius\"; Karla in \"Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy\" and \"Smiley's People\"; Claudius in a 1980 BBC adaptation of \"Hamlet\". He took the romantic male lead in the 1975 BBC adaptation of Elizabeth Gaskell's \"North and South\". He also took the lead, as psychiatric consultant Dr Edward Roebuck, in BBC's \"Maybury\" in 1981. He continued to play minor roles in films, such as King Leondegrance in John Boorman's \"Excalibur\" (1981), the character Gurney Halleck in David Lynch's \"Dune\" (1984), Dr. Armstrong in Tobe Hooper's \"Lifeforce\" (1985) and Henry Grey in \"Lady Jane\" (1986), the story of English Queen Lady Jane Grey.\nStewart preferred classical theatre to other genres, asking \"Doctor Who\" actress Lalla Ward why she would work in science fiction or on television. In 1987, he nonetheless agreed to work in Hollywood on a revival of \"\", after Robert H. Justman saw him while attending a literary reading at UCLA. Stewart knew nothing about the cultural influence of Star Trek or its iconic status in American culture. He was reluctant to sign the standard contract of six years, but did so as he, his agent, and others with whom Stewart consulted, all believed the new show would quickly fail, and that he would return to his London stage career after making some money. Regardless, Stewart's trusted colleague, Ian McKellen, was particularly vocal in advising Stewart not to throw away his theatrical career for this foray into television, which Stewart had to disregard considering the opportunity. While in Hollywood, he spent 18 months using the professional name \"Patrick Hewes Stewart\" while negotiating the rights to his original name from an American actor who had already registered it with the Screen Actors Guild.\nFilm and TV career (1987\u2013present).\n\"Star Trek: The Next Generation\".\nWhen Stewart was picked for the role of Captain Jean-Luc Picard in \"\" (1987\u20131994), the \"Los Angeles Times\" called him an \"unknown British Shakespearean actor\". Still living out of his suitcase because of his scepticism that the show would succeed, he was unprepared for the long schedule of television production that began at 4:45 am each day. He initially experienced difficulty fitting in with his less-disciplined castmates. In interviews, he recalled with embarrassment a time when he scolded the main cast for being unprofessional in his opinion, by saying \"We're not here... to have fun!\" Furthermore, Stewart has stated that his \"spirits used to sink\" whenever he was required to memorise and recite technobabble. He eventually came to better understand the cultural differences between the stage and television and relaxed to a degree at work, and his favourite technical line became \"spacetime continuum\".\nStewart remained close friends with his fellow \"Star Trek\" actors and became their advocate with the producers when necessary. Marina Sirtis credited Stewart with \"at least 50%, if not more\" of the show's success because others imitated his professionalism and dedication to acting. Jonathan Frakes said that, with some shows he'd been on, there were actors who showed up without having read the script, but Stewart had \"set such a high bar for preparation. We all came to work in the morning completely prepared. We knew our lines and had broken down the script\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt really wasn't until the first season ended [when] I went to my first \"Star Trek\" convention ... [I] had expected that I would be standing in front of a few hundred people and found that there were two and a half thousand people and that they already knew more about me than I could ever possibly have believed.\nStewart, on when he realised he had become famous\nStewart unexpectedly became wealthy because of the show's success. In 1992, during a break in filming, Stewart calculated that he earned more during that break than from ten weeks of \"Woolf\" in London. From 1994 to 2002, he also portrayed Picard in the films \"Star Trek Generations\" (1994), ' (1996), ' (1998) and ' (2002); and in ''s pilot episode \"\", and received a 1995 Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for \"Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series\".\nWhen asked in 2011 for the highlight of his career, he chose \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\", because \"it changed everything [for me].\" He has also said he is very proud of his work on \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" for its social messages and educational impact on young viewers. When questioned about his role's significance compared to his distinguished Shakespearean career, he said, \"The fact is all of those years in Royal Shakespeare Company\u2014playing all those kings, emperors, princes and tragic heroes\u2014were nothing but preparation for sitting in the captain's chair of the Enterprise.\" The accolades he has received include the readers of \"TV Guide\" in 1992 choosing him with Cindy Crawford, of whom he had never heard, as television's \"most bodacious\" man and woman. In an interview with Michael Parkinson, he expressed gratitude for Gene Roddenberry's response to a reporter who said, \"Surely they would have cured baldness by the 24th century,\" to which Roddenberry replied, \"In the 24th century, they wouldn't care.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"It came to a point where I had no idea where Picard began and I ended. We completely overlapped. His voice became my voice, and there were other elements of him that became me\" ... No director in Hollywood wanted to cast this grand, deep-voiced, bald English guy because everybody knew he was Picard and couldn't possibly be anybody else. In the event, he effectively reprised the part as Professor Charles Xavier \u2013 a grand, deep-voiced, bald English guy \u2013 in the \"X-Men\" films.\n\u2013 Interview, \"The Times\"\nOn 4 August 2018, CBS and Stewart jointly announced that he would reprise his role as Jean-Luc Picard in a new \"Star Trek\" series. In a prepared statement, Stewart said he and the new show's producers would \"endeavour to bring a fresh, unexpected and pertinent story to life once more.\"\n\"X-Men\" film series.\nThe success of the \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" TV and film franchises typecast Stewart as Picard and obtaining other roles became difficult. He also found returning to the stage difficult because of his long absence. He commented that he would never have joined \"The Next Generation\" had he known that it would air for seven years: \"No, no. NO. And looking back now it still frightens me a little bit to think that so much of my life was totally devoted to Star Trek and almost nothing else.\"\nHowever, in the late 1990s he accepted a key role in the big-budget \"X-Men\" film series, as Professor Charles Xavier, founder and mentor of the superhero team, a role similar in many ways to Picard. He was initially reluctant to sign on to another movie franchise, but his interest in working with director Bryan Singer persuaded him. In addition, Stewart was joined by Ian McKellen, who had by then conceded that his friend had made a prudent choice performing in popular screen science fiction, who played Xavier's friend and ideological nemesis, the supervillain Magneto. Stewart has played the role in seven feature films (\"X-Men\", \"X2\", ', ', \"The Wolverine\", ' and \"Logan\") and voiced the role in several video games (\"X-Men Legends\", \"X-Men Legends II\", and '). Stewart announced that he would be leaving the \"X-Men\" film franchise after \"Logan\".\nIn 2022, Stewart portrayed Professor Xavier of Earth-838 in the Marvel Cinematic Universe film \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness.\" He is reprising his role in the upcoming film \"\".\nDocumentaries.\nIn 2011, Stewart appeared in the feature-length documentary \"The Captains\" alongside William Shatner (who played \"Star Trek\" Captain James Kirk) \u2013 Shatner also wrote and directed the film. In the film, Shatner interviews actors who have portrayed captains within the \"Star Trek\" franchise. The film pays a great deal of attention to Shatner's interviews with Stewart at his home in Oxfordshire, as well as at a \"Star Trek\" Convention in Las Vegas, Nevada; Stewart reveals the fear and personal failings that came along with his tenure as a Starfleet captain, and also the great triumphs he believes accompanied his role as Picard. In 2016, he narrated \"Connected Universe\", a crowdfunded documentary film directed by Malcolm Carter on the ideas of self-styled physicist Nassim Haramein.\nOther film and television.\nStewart's other film and television roles include the flamboyantly gay Sterling in the 1995 film \"Jeffrey\" and King Henry II in \"The Lion in Winter\", for which he received a Golden Globe Award nomination for his performance and an Emmy Award nomination for executive-producing the film. He portrayed Captain Ahab in the 1998 made-for-television film version of \"Moby Dick\", receiving an Emmy Award nomination and Golden Globe Award nomination for his performance. He starred in the 1998 film \"Safe House\". He also starred as Scrooge in a 1999 television film version of Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\", receiving a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for his performance.\nIn late 2003, during the 11th and final season of NBC's \"Frasier\", Stewart appeared on the show as a gay Seattle socialite and opera director, who mistakes Frasier for a potential lover. In July 2003, he appeared in Series 2 (Episode 09) of \"Top Gear\" in the Star in a Reasonably-Priced Car segment, achieving a time of 1:50 in the Liana. In 2005, he was cast as Professor Ian Hood in an ITV thriller 4-episode series \"Eleventh Hour\", created by Stephen Gallagher. The first episode was broadcast on 19 January 2006. He also, in 2005, played Captain Nemo in a two-part adaptation of \"The Mysterious Island\". Stewart also appeared as a nudity-obsessed caricature of himself in Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant's television series \"Extras\". He played John Bosley in the 2019 action comedy film \"Charlie's Angels\", released on 15 November.\nHe also was a voice actor on the animated films \"The Prince of Egypt\", \"\", \"Chicken Little\", \"The Pagemaster\", \"The Emoji Movie\", \"Dragon Rider\", the English dubbings of the Japanese anime films \"Nausica\u00e4 of the Valley of the Wind\", by Hayao Miyazaki, and \"Steamboy\", by Katsuhiro Otomo. He supported his home town of Dewsbury in West Yorkshire by lending his voice to a series of videos on the town in 1999. He voiced the pig Napoleon in a made-for-TV film adaptation of George Orwell's \"Animal Farm\" and guest starred in the \"Simpsons\" episode \"Homer the Great\" as Number One. Stewart also recorded a narration planned for the prologue and epilogue for Tim Burton's \"The Nightmare Before Christmas\" but the final movie used another voice (the original narration appears only on the first edition of the film's soundtrack). He plays a recurring role as CIA Deputy Director Avery Bullock, lending his likeness as well as his voice on the animated series \"American Dad!\". He has also made several guest appearances on \"Family Guy\" in various roles. Stewart also appears as narrator in Seth MacFarlane's 2012 film directorial debut, \"Ted\". In 2006, Stewart voiced Bambi's father, the Great Prince of the Forest, in Disney's direct-to-video sequel \"Bambi II\".\nTheatre (1990\u2013present).\nAfter \"The Next Generation\" began, Stewart soon found that he missed acting on the stage. Although he remained associated with the Royal Shakespeare Company, the lengthy filming for the series had prevented him from participating in most other works, leaving a \"gaping hole\" of many years in his CV as a Shakespearean actor, causing him to miss opportunities to play such notable roles as Hamlet, Romeo, and Richard III. Instead, Stewart began writing one-man shows that he performed in California universities and acting schools. One of these\u2014a version of Charles Dickens's \"A Christmas Carol\" in which he portrayed all 40-plus characters\u2014became ideal for him as an actor as well, because of its limited performing schedule.\nIn 1991, Stewart performed it on Broadway, receiving a nomination for that year's Drama Desk Award for Outstanding One-Person Show. He staged encore Broadway performances in 1992 and 1994, with the 1993 run held in London and the 1996 production in Los Angeles. Stewart brought the show back to Broadway in 2001, with all proceeds going to charity \u2013 and the show of 28 December's revenue, specifically, going to the 11 September campaign of the Actors Fund of America. A 23-day run re-opened in London's West End in December 2005. For his performances in this play, Stewart has received the Drama Desk Award for Best Solo Performance in 1992 and the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Entertainment for Solo Performance in 1994. He was also the co-producer of the show, through the company he set up for the purpose: Camm Lane Productions, a reference to his birthplace in Camm Lane, Mirfield.\nShakespeare roles during this period included Prospero in Shakespeare's \"The Tempest\", on Broadway in 1995, a role he would reprise in Rupert Goold's 2006 production of \"The Tempest\" as part of the Royal Shakespeare Company's Complete Works Festival. In 1997, he took the role of Othello with the Shakespeare Theatre Company (Washington, D.C.) in a \"photo negative\" production of a white \"Othello\" with an otherwise all-black cast. Stewart had wanted to play the title role since the age of 14, so he and director Jude Kelly inverted the play so Othello became a comment on a white man entering a black society.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[London theatre] critics ... have showered him with perhaps the highest compliment they can conjure. He has, they say, overcome the technique-destroying indignity of being a major American television star.\n\"The New York Times\", 2008\nHe played Antony again opposite Harriet Walter's Cleopatra in \"Antony and Cleopatra\" at the Novello Theatre in London in 2007 to excellent reviews. During this period, Stewart also addressed the Durham Union Society on his life in film and theatre. When Stewart began playing Macbeth in the West End in 2007, some said that he was too old for the role; he and the show again received excellent reviews, with one critic calling Stewart \"one of our finest Shakespearean actors\". He was named as the next Cameron Mackintosh Visiting Professor of Contemporary Theatre based at St Catherine's College, Oxford in January 2007. In 2008, Stewart played King Claudius in \"Hamlet\" alongside David Tennant. He won the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Supporting Actor for the part. When collecting his award, he dedicated the award \"in part\" to Tennant and Tennant's understudy Edward Bennett, after Tennant's back injury and subsequent absence from four weeks of \"Hamlet\" disqualified him from an Olivier nomination.\nIn 2009, Stewart appeared alongside Ian McKellen as the lead duo of Vladimir (Didi) and Estragon (Gogo), in \"Waiting for Godot\". Stewart had previously appeared only once alongside McKellen on stage, but the pair had developed a close friendship while waiting around on set filming the \"X-Men\" films. Stewart stated that performing in this play was the fulfilment of a 50-year ambition, having seen Peter O'Toole appear in it at the Bristol Old Vic while Stewart was just 17. Reviewers stated that his interpretation captured well the balance between humour and despair that characterises the work.\nIn 2014, Stewart and McKellen appeared on Broadway with two alternating productions, \"Waiting for Godot\" and \"No Man's Land\". To promote the plays, Stewart and McKellen, acted on Stewart's wife's suggestion to tour New York City in a Twitter campaign in which the actors would take playful photographs of themselves visiting various tourist locations on their days off while wearing their \"Godot\" characters' bowler hats. Although the plays' marketing department disapproved of the idea, the actors proceeded with the inexpensive publicity campaign, which proved a major success. Furthermore, this campaign changed Stewart's image as a serious actor by emphasising his sense of humour, which led to frequent guest appearances in various comedy programs.\nStewart has been a prolific actor in performances by the Royal Shakespeare Company, appearing in more than 60 productions. His first appearance was in 1966 in \"The Investigation\" and in the years that followed he became a core member of the company, taking on three or four major roles each season. On 18 November 2012, Stewart appeared on stage at St Martin's Theatre in the West End for a 60th anniversary performance of Agatha Christie's \"The Mousetrap\", the world's longest-running play.\nVoice work.\nKnown for his strong and authoritative voice, Stewart has lent his voice to a number of projects. He has narrated recordings of Prokofiev's \"Peter and the Wolf\" (winning a Grammy), Vivaldi's \"The Four Seasons\" (which had also been narrated by William Shatner), C. S. Lewis's \"The Last Battle\" (conclusion of the series \"The Chronicles of Narnia\"), Rick Wakeman's \"Return to the Centre of the Earth\"; as well as numerous TV programmes such as \"High Spirits with Shirley Ghostman\". Stewart provided the narration for \"Nine Worlds\", an astronomical tour of the Solar System and nature documentaries such as \"The Secret of Life on Earth\" and \"Mountain Gorilla\". He is heard as the voice of the Magic Mirror in Disneyland's live show, \"Snow White \u2013 An Enchanting Musical\". He also was the narrator for the American release of \"\". He is narrator for two fulldome video shows produced and distributed by Loch Ness Productions, called \"MarsQuest\" and \"The Voyager Encounters\".\nHe lent his voice to the Activision-produced \"Star Trek\" computer games ', ', ', ', ', and ', all reprising his role as Picard. Stewart reprised his role as Picard in \"\" for both PC and Xbox 360, along with the four other major Starfleet captains from the different Star Trek series.\nIn addition to voicing his characters from \"Star Trek\" and \"X-Men\" in several related computer and video games, Stewart worked as a voice actor on games unrelated to both franchises, such as ', ', ' and ' for which in 2006 he won a Spike TV Video Game Award for his work as Emperor Uriel Septim. He also lent his voice to several editions of the \"Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia\".\nHis voice talents also appeared in a number of commercials including the UK TV adverts for the relaunch of TSB Bank, Domestos bleach and Moneysupermarket.com, an advertisement for Shell fuel and an American advertisement for the prescription drug Crestor. He also voiced the UK and Australian TV advertisements for the PAL version of \"Final Fantasy XII\".\nStewart used his voice for Pontiac and Porsche cars and MasterCard Gold commercials in 1996, and Goodyear Assurance Tyres in 2004. He also did voice-overs for RCA televisions. He provided the voice of Max Winters in \"TMNT\" in March 2007. In 2008, he was also the voice of television advertisements for Currys and Stella Artois beer. Currently, he is heard during National Car Rental television spots.\nHe voiced the narrator of the Electronic Arts computer game, \"The Sims Medieval\", for the game's cinematic introduction and trailer released on 22 March 2011. He also voiced the story plaques and trailer of the MMOG \"LEGO Universe\" and the narrator of \"My Memory Of Us\".\nAwards and honours.\nIn 2004, Stewart was appointed chancellor of the University of Huddersfield and subsequently as a professor of performing arts in July 2008. In these roles, Stewart has regularly attended graduation ceremonies in the UK and Hong Kong and teaches master classes for drama students. He stepped down from the chancellorship in July 2015, and was named chancellor emeritus in the installation ceremony for his successor, Prince Andrew, Duke of York (now Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor). In August 2016 a building at the university was renamed the \"Sir Patrick Stewart Building\".\nOn 16 December 1996, Patrick Stewart received a Star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7021 Hollywood Blvd. In 1993, \"TV Guide\" named him the Best Dramatic Television Actor of the 1980s. Stewart was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2001 New Year Honours for services to acting and the cinema and a Knight Bachelor in the 2010 New Year Honours for services to drama. Stewart's knighthood was conferred by Queen Elizabeth II at an investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 2 June 2010. Stewart carried the Olympic torch in July 2012 as part of the official relay for the 2012 London Summer Olympics and stated it was an experience he \"will never forget\", adding that it was better than any movie premiere. In a 2018 poll for Yorkshire Day, Stewart was ranked the third greatest Yorkshireman ever behind Monty Python comedian Michael Palin and fellow actor Sean Bean.\nIn July 2001, Stewart received an honorary fellowship from the University of Wales, Cardiff. In 2011, he received an honorary doctorate of letters (D.Litt.) from the University of East Anglia. In July 2014, he received a D.Litt. from the University of Leeds. In May 2015, Stewart received an honorary doctorate (Dr.h.c.) from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel. He is an emeritus fellow of St Catherine's College, Oxford.\nFrom 2017 until 2021, Stewart shared with Hugh Jackman the Guinness World Record for the longest career as a live-action Marvel Comics superhero for his portrayal of Professor X; they were subsequently eclipsed by Tobey Maguire and Willem Dafoe. In 2022, Stewart retook the record by appearing as the character in \"Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness\", but was once again eclipsed by Wesley Snipes in 2024. Also in 2022, Stewart was awarded as Honorary Fellow of the Institution of Engineering and Technology (Hon FIET), this \"in recognition of the inspiration given through the promotion of science and technology to future generations of engineers and technicians\".\nCharity work and activism.\nIn 2006, Stewart made a short video against domestic violence for Amnesty International, in which he recollected his father's physical attacks on his mother and the effect it had on him as a child. He said, \"The physical harm ... [was] a shocking pain. But there are other aspects of violence which have more lasting impact psychologically on family members. It is destructive and tainting. As a child witnessing these events, one cannot simply help somehow feeling responsible for them; for the pain, and the screaming, and the misery.\" In the same year, he gave his name to a scholarship at the University of Huddersfield, where he was Chancellor (2004\u20132015), to fund post-graduate study into domestic violence. Stewart's childhood experience also led him to become a patron of Refuge, a UK charity for abused women.\nIn 2009, Stewart gave a speech at the launch of \"Created Equal,\" a book about women's rights, talking again about his personal experiences with domestic violence and the impacts they had on him. He said, \"Violence is a choice, and it's a choice a man makes ... the lasting impact on my mother\u00a0... and indeed on myself ... was extreme. Overcoming the lessons of that male stereotype that I was being shown was a struggle.\" He now hopes to set an example of \"what it has been like to be in an environment of such violence and that it can pass and that one can survive it and even though sometimes still a struggle.\" Additionally, in October 2011, he presented a BBC Lifeline Appeal on behalf of Refuge, discussing his own experience of domestic violence and interviewing a woman whose daughter was murdered by her ex-husband.\nStewart has supported the armed forces charity Combat Stress since learning about his father's post-traumatic stress disorder when researching his family genealogy for the documentary series \"Who Do You Think You Are?\" He is a patron of the United Nations Association \u2013 UK, and delivered a speech at UNA-UK's UN Forum 2012 on Saturday 14 July 2012, speaking of his father's experiences in the Second World War, and how he believed the UN was the best legacy of that period.\nOn 15 April 2018 Stewart attended the launch event of the People's Vote, a campaign group calling for a public vote on the final Brexit deal between the UK and the European Union.\nIn 2019, he acted as an International Rescue Committee spokesperson.\nStewart is an avid advocate for pit bulls. He has fostered several dogs through Wags and Walks, a dog rescue in Los Angeles, and was honoured at the rescue's annual gala in 2018. He partnered with the ASPCA in 2017 for their National Dog Fighting Awareness Day Campaign. He frequently tweets pictures of himself with his foster dogs. In 2021, the ASPCA gave him their Pit Bull Advocate &amp; Protector Award.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and children.\nStewart married his first wife, Sheila Falconer, in 1966; they divorced in 1990. Together, they have a son, Daniel, and a daughter, Sophia. Daniel is also an actor, and appeared alongside his father in the film \"Death Train\", the sitcom \"Blunt Talk\", and the \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\" episode \"\", playing his son in the latter.\nIn 1997, Stewart became engaged to American producer Wendy Neuss, one of the producers of \"Star Trek: The Next Generation\". They married on 25 August 2000 and divorced three years later. Four months before his divorce from Neuss, Stewart co-starred with English actress Lisa Dillon in a production of \"The Master Builder\", and the two were romantically involved until 2007.\nIn 2008, Stewart began dating American singer and songwriter Sunny Ozell, whom he met while performing in \"Macbeth\" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. He purchased a home in Brooklyn's Park Slope neighbourhood in August 2012, and subsequently began living there with Ozell. In March 2013, it was reported that they were engaged, and they married in September 2013 with Ian McKellen officiating. In 2020, Stewart revealed that his marriage to Ozell in Nevada had not been legally binding because McKellen's marriage credentials were not valid in Nevada. Upon learning that McKellen's credentials would not be valid, the couple held a secret official ceremony with McKellen at a Mexican restaurant in Los Angeles a couple weeks prior to the Nevada ceremony.\nBeliefs, causes, and interests.\nStewart has stated that his politics are rooted in a belief in \"fairness\" and \"equality\". He considers himself a socialist and is a member of the Labour Party. He stated, \"My father was a very strong trade unionist and those fundamental issues of Labour were ingrained into me.\" He was critical of the Iraq War and UK government legislation in the area of civil liberties, in particular its plans to extend detention without charge to 42 days for terrorist suspects. He signed an open letter of objection to this proposal in March 2008. In August 2018 he was widely misquoted by the \"Daily Telegraph\" among others, who announced that he had left Labour owing to concerns over the leadership of Jeremy Corbyn. He posted on Twitter to confirm that he had been misquoted and denied that he had left the party.\nStewart is an atheist and a patron of Humanists UK. He also identifies as a feminist. He has publicly advocated the right to assisted suicide. In January 2011, he became a patron of Dignity in Dying and campaigns for an assisted dying law in the UK.\nIn August 2014, Stewart was one of 200 public figures who signed a letter to \"The Guardian\" expressing their hope that Scotland would vote to remain part of the United Kingdom in September's referendum on that issue. In 2016, Stewart was among more than 280 figures from the arts world who backed a vote to remain in the EU in the referendum on that issue.\nOn 2 March 2017, Stewart said he was going to apply for US citizenship to oppose the Trump administration. However, in an interview by the Press Association at the British Film Institute Luminous Fundraising Gala on 3 October 2017, he said that he hoped the US would pass stronger gun laws, but did not mention any intention of becoming an American citizen in furtherance of that hope.\nStewart is a lifelong supporter of his local football club Huddersfield Town. He was at Wembley Stadium in 2017 when the club won promotion to the top division for the first time since 1972. Since 2010, he has been president of Huddersfield Town Academy, the club's project for identifying and developing young talent.\nIn an interview with \"American Theatre\", he said: \"From time to time, I have fantasies of becoming a concert pianist. I've been lucky enough through the years to work very closely with the great Emanuel Ax. I've said to him that if I could switch places with anyone it would be with him.\"\nIn 2015, Stewart defended the Belfast-based Christian bakers who were penalised for discrimination after refusing to bake a cake with words reading, \"Support Gay Marriage\". Stewart, on his Facebook profile, said that while he was still opposed to organised religion, \"It was not because it was a gay couple that they objected, it was not because they were celebrating some sort of marriage or an agreement between them. It was the actual words on the cake they objected to. Because they found the words offensive. I would support their rights to say 'No, this is personally offensive to my beliefs, I will not do it.'\" The Christian bakers ultimately won in a landmark Supreme Court decision for the United Kingdom, almost simultaneously with a similar case in the United States.\nStewart is an avid car enthusiast and is regularly seen at Silverstone during British Grand Prix weekends. He conducted the podium interview with the top three finishers in the 2017 Canadian Grand Prix. On a 2003 appearance on \"Top Gear\", he set a lap time of 1 minute and 50 seconds on the \"Star in a Reasonably Priced Car\" feature. He holds a Motorsport UK competition licence and competed in the 2012 Silverstone Classic Celebrity Challenge race, finishing ninth, 3 m 02.808 s behind winner Kelvin Fletcher. In 2012, Stewart met his racing hero Stirling Moss for the BBC Two documentary \"Racing Legends\".\nStewart is a fan of the animated television series \"Beavis and Butt-Head\".\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70942", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70942", "title": "477 BC", "text": "Calendar year\n \nYear 477 BC was a year of the pre-Julian Roman calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Pulvillus and Lanatus (or, less frequently, year 277 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 477 BC for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nRoman Republic.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70947", "revid": "1315098190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70947", "title": "Henry the Young King", "text": "Junior King of England from 1170 to 1183\nHenry the Young King (28 February 1155 \u2013 11 June 1183) was the eldest son of Henry II of England and Eleanor of Aquitaine to survive childhood. In 1170, he became titular King of England, Duke of Normandy, Count of Anjou and of Maine. Henry the Young King was the only English king since the Norman Conquest to be crowned during his father's reign, but he was frustrated by his father's refusal to grant him meaningful autonomous power. He died aged 28, six years before his father, during the course of a campaign in Limousin against his father and his brother Richard.\nEarly life.\nHenry was born 28 February 1155 to Henry II of England and Eleanor of Aquitaine. His mother's children by her first marriage to Louis VII of France were Marie and Alix. He had one elder brother, William, who died at age 3. His younger siblings included Matilda, Richard, Geoffrey, Eleanor, Joan and John.\nIn June 1170, the 15-year-old Henry was crowned king during his father's lifetime, a traditional practice of the French Capetian dynasty which held formal overlordship of Henry II's continental domains. King Stephen had previously attempted to have his son Eustace crowned as early as 1143 but was unable to secure papal support prior to Eustace's death.\nHe was known in his own lifetime as \"Henry the Young King\" to distinguish him from his father. As he was not a reigning king, he is not counted in the numerical succession of kings of England. According to one of Thomas Becket's correspondents, Henry was knighted by his father before the coronation, but William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke, assert in \"History of William Marshal\" that Henry was knighted by Marshall during the Revolt of 1173\u20131174.\nTournament hero and celebrity.\nHenry did not appear to have been very interested in the day-to-day business of government, which distinguished him from his father and younger brothers. His father, however, is reputed to have failed to delegate authority to his son, retaining power in England. The majority opinion amongst historians is that of W. L. Warren: \"The Young Henry was the only member of the family who was popular in his own day ... also the only one who gave no evidence of political sagacity, military skill, or even ordinary intelligence...\" Warren elaborates \"He was gracious, benign, affable, courteous, the soul of liberality and generosity. Unfortunately, he was also shallow, vain, careless, empty-headed, incompetent, improvident, and irresponsible.\"\nThe Young King's contemporary reputation, however, was positive. Likely this was due to the enthusiastic tournament culture of his time. In the \"History of William Marshal\" (the biography of the knight assigned to him as a tutor in 1170 and his tournament team leader until 1182) he is described as a constant competitor at tournaments across northern and central France between 1175 and 1182. With his cousins Counts Philip I of Flanders and Baldwin V of Hainaut, he was a key patron of the sport. He brought 200 knights to the tournament of Lagny-sur-Marne in November 1179, paying each 20 shillings per day.\nThough he lacked political weight, his patronage brought him celebrity status throughout western Europe. The baron and troubadour Bertran de Born knew him, stating: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[He was] the best king who ever took up a shield, the most daring and best of all tourneyers. From the time when Roland was alive, and even before, never was seen a knight so skilled, so warlike, whose fame resounded so around the world \u2013 even if Roland did come back, or if the world were searched as far as the River Nile and the setting sun.\nThere was a perception amongst his contemporaries, and the next generation, that his death in 1183 marked a decline both in the tournament and knightly endeavour. His chaplain Gervase of Tilbury remarked on his passing: \"Assuredly, as he was a solace to the world while he lived, so it was a blow to all chivalry when he died in the very glow of youth.\"\nThe traditional view of Young Henry propagated into the modern era by Warren, has, however, been challenged in recent years. Matthew Strickland has argued in his compendium of the Young King's life and career that he was, in fact, an able and likeable individual who merely grew frustrated at his father's refusal to grant him any domains or responsibilities of his own.\nPolitical career.\nHenry played an important part in the politics of his father's reign. On 2 November 1160 he was betrothed to Margaret of France, daughter of Louis VII of France and his second wife, Constance of Castile, when he was five years of age and she was at least two. The marriage was an attempt to finally settle the struggle between the counts of Anjou and the French kings over possession of the frontier district of the Norman Vexin, which Louis VII had acquired from Henry's grandfather, Geoffrey Plantagenet, Count of Anjou, in around 1144. By the terms of the settlement, Margaret would bring the castles of Vexin to her husband when she wed. However, the marriage was pushed through by Henry II when Young Henry and Margaret were small children so that he could seize the castles. A bitter border war followed between the kings.\nHenry II had toyed with the idea of having Young Henry crowned king as early as 1162 and even procured a papal bull from Pope Alexander III ordering the Archbishop Roger of York to crown Young Henry whenever required. Thomas Becket, newly ordained as Archbishop of Canterbury, had been ordered to prepare for the coronation of Young Henry, and the pipe rolls for 1162 record the allocation of funds for the commissioning of a golden circlet. This was not to be, however; Barlow suggests that the southern prelates dissuaded Henry II from using the papal bull as the Archbishopric of Canterbury was occupied. This greatly upset Roger of York, who wrote to Rome asking for confirmation of his right to crown kings; while ultimately unsuccessful, Roger's delays derailed Henry's plans.\nYoung Henry was finally crowned on Saturday 14 June 1170 on the feast of St Basil at Westminster Abbey, in the presence of most of the Anglo-Norman nobility and the overwhelming majority of the non-vacant English bishoprics. Strickland notes that the exiled Becket had few supporters left in the upper ranks of the English church after six years of dispute with Henry II.\nIt was almost certainly a calculated insult to Louis VII that Margaret of France was not crowned alongside her husband in 1170. Twelfth-century chronicler Robert of Torigny argues she simply arrived from Normandy too late to participate, but other sources reveal she was deliberately delayed at Caen. Warren believes that this was an ultimately fruitful attempt to prevent Louis VII from dissuading Becket from accepting his latest overtures. Whatever the case, Louis was so enraged by this that he launched an immediate attack on the Norman border, forcing Henry to return to the duchy personally to oversee its defences. Mediation by Count Theobald of Blois, however, led to a meeting between the two monarchs at Vend\u00f4me, and following subsequent meetings at La Fert\u00e9 and Fr\u00e9teval, Henry was able to placate Louis.\nYoung Henry and Margaret were formally married on 27 August 1172 at Winchester Cathedral, when Henry, aged 17, was crowned King of England a second time, this time together with Margaret, by Rotrou, the Archbishop of Rouen.\nYoung Henry fell out with his father in 1173. Contemporary chroniclers allege that this was owing to the young man's frustration that his father had given him no realm to rule, and his feeling starved of funds. The rebellion seems, however, to have drawn strength from much deeper discontent with his father's rule, and a formidable party of Anglo-Norman, Norman, Angevin, Poitevin and Breton magnates joined him. The revolt of 1173\u20131174 came close to toppling the king; he was narrowly saved by the loyalty of a party of nobles with holdings on the English side of the Channel and by the defeat and capture of William I, the King of Scotland. Young Henry sought a reconciliation after the capture of his mother Eleanor and the failure of the rebellion. His funds were much increased by the terms of the settlement, and he apparently devoted most of the next seven years to the amusement of the tournament.\nIn November 1179, he represented his father at the coronation of Philip Augustus as associate king of France at Reims. He acted as steward of France and carried the crown in the coronation procession. Later, he played a leading role in the celebratory tournament held at Lagny-sur-Marne, to which he brought a retinue of over 500 knights at huge expense.\nYoung Henry's affairs took a turn for the worse in 1182. He fell out with William Marshal, the leader of his tournament \"mesn\u00e9e\". The unknown author of \"L'Histoire de Guillaume le Mar\u00e9chal\" suggests that Marshal's disgrace was because he had been falsely accused of a clandestine affair with Queen Margaret. David Crouch, one of the Marshal's principal modern biographers, argues that the charge against William was actually one of \"l\u00e8se-majest\u00e9\", brought on by Marshal's own arrogance and greed. By this account, the charge of adultery was only introduced in the \"History of William Marshal\" as a distraction from the real charges, of which he was most probably guilty. Though the Young King sent his wife early in 1183 to the French court, it was done most likely to keep her safe in the impending war with his brother Richard rather than because she was in disgrace.\nMargaret gave birth to a baby boy named William, who may have been born prematurely on 19 June 1177, and died only three days later.\nDeath and burial.\nHenry the Young King died, aged 28, in the summer of 1183, during the course of a campaign in Limousin against his father and his brother Richard. He had just finished pillaging local monasteries to raise money to pay his mercenaries. He contracted dysentery at the beginning of June. Weakening fast, he was taken to Martel in Quercy. It was clear to his household that he was dying on 7 June, when he was confessed and received the last rites. \nAs a token of his penitence for his war against his father, he prostrated himself naked on the floor before a crucifix. He made a testament, and since he had taken a crusader's vow, he gave his cloak to Marshal with the plea that he should take the cloak (presumably with the crusader's cross stitched to it) to the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem. On his deathbed, he reportedly asked to be reconciled to his father, but King Henry, fearing a trick, refused to see him. He died on 11 June, clasping a ring his father had sent instead as a sign of his forgiveness. After his death, his father is said to have exclaimed: \"He cost me much, but I wish he had lived to cost me more.\" \nAfter Henry's death, there was an attempt by his mother and a faction of his friends to promote his sainthood. Thomas of Earley, Archdeacon of Wells, published a sermon not long afterward detailing miraculous events attending the cort\u00e8ge that took his body north to Normandy. Henry had left orders that his entrails and other body parts should be buried at the abbey of Charroux, but the rest of his body should rest in Rouen Cathedral. However, during the funeral procession, a member of Henry's household was seized by his mercenary captains for debts the late king had owed them. The knights accompanying his corpse were so penniless they had to be fed by charity at the monastery of Vigeois. There were large and emotional gatherings wherever his body rested. At Le Mans, the local bishop halted the procession and ordered the body buried in his cathedral, perhaps to help defuse the civil unrest Henry's death had caused. The dean of Rouen recovered the body from the chapter of Le Mans a month later by a lawsuit so that the Young Henry could be buried in Normandy as he had desired in his testament. Henry's remains are in Rouen Cathedral, where his tomb is on the opposite side of the altar from the tomb of the heart of his younger brother, Richard I of England, with whom he was perpetually quarrelling. The tomb of the Archbishop of Rouen, who had married him to Margaret, lies nearby in the ambulatory. His brothers Richard and John each later became kings of England. \nAppearance and character.\nThe physical appearance of Henry at his coronation in 1170 is given in a contemporary court poem written in Latin. It describes the 15-year-old prince as being very handsome, \"tall but well proportioned, broad-shouldered with a long and elegant neck, pale and freckled skin, bright and wide blue eyes, and a thick mop of reddish-gold hair\".\nHenry and Richard were \"both tall in stature, rather above the middle size, and of commanding aspect. In courage and magnanimity, they were nearly equal; but in the character of their virtues, there was great disparity... [Henry] was admirable for gentleness and liberality... had a commendable suavity... commended for his easy temper... remarkable for his clemency... the vile and undeserving found their refuge in [Henry]... was the shield of bad men... was bent on martial sports... bestowed his favours on foreigners... [Henry's] ambition magnanimously compassed the world.\"\nAnother description says \"He was tall in stature and distinguished in appearance; his face expressed merriment and mature judgment in good measure; fair among the children of men, he was courteous and cheerful. Gracious to all, he was loved by all; amiable to all, he was incapable of making an enemy. He was matchless in warfare, and as he outstripped them all in valour, cordiality, and the outstanding graciousness of his manners, his true generosity, and true integrity...\"\nCultural depictions.\nHenry was portrayed by Riggs O'Hara in the 1964 film \"Becket\". He was portrayed by Alan Cox (as a young boy), Dominic Savage (as a teenager) and Kevin McNally (as an adult) in the 1978 BBC TV series \"The Devil's Crown\", which dramatises the reigns of his father and brothers.\nGenealogical table.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Norman English and early Plantagenet monarchs and their relationship with rulers of Western Europe\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70948", "revid": "49473253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70948", "title": "Colorado Avalanche", "text": "National Hockey League team in Denver\nThe Colorado Avalanche (colloquially known as the Avs) are a professional ice hockey team based in Denver. The Avalanche compete in the National Hockey League (NHL) as a member of the Central Division in the Western Conference. The team plays its home games at Ball Arena, which it shares with the National Basketball Association's (NBA) Denver Nuggets and Colorado Mammoth of the National Lacrosse League (NLL).\nFounded in 1972 as the Quebec Nordiques, the team was one of the charter franchises of the World Hockey Association (WHA). The franchise joined the NHL in 1979 as a result of the NHL\u2013WHA merger. Following the 1994\u201395 season, they were sold to the COMSAT Entertainment Group and moved to Denver.\nDuring their first season in Denver, the Avalanche won the Pacific Division and went on to sweep the Florida Panthers in the 1996 Stanley Cup Final. The 1996 Avalanche became the first Denver-based team in the four major North American professional sports leagues to win a league championship. They were also the second major North American sports team to win a championship a year after moving, joining the National Football League (NFL)'s 1937 Washington Redskins. In the 2001 Stanley Cup Final, the Avalanche defeated the New Jersey Devils in seven games to win their second championship. In the 2022 Stanley Cup Final, the Avalanche defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning in six games to win their third championship. As a result, they remain the only active NHL team that has won all of its appearances in the Stanley Cup Final.\nThe Avalanche have won twelve division titles since moving to Denver (and set the league record for most consecutive division titles at nine in a row from 1995 to 2003; one in Quebec, the rest in Colorado), and qualified for the playoffs in each of their first ten seasons after the move; this streak ended in 2007.\nHistory.\nQuebec Nordiques (1972\u20131995).\nThe Quebec Nordiques were one of the World Hockey Association's (WHA) original teams when the league began play in 1972. Though first awarded to a group in San Francisco, the team was subsequently sold and moved to Quebec City prior to the start of the league's opening. During their seven WHA seasons, the Nordiques won the Avco World Trophy once, in 1977, and lost the finals once, in 1975. In 1979, the franchise entered the NHL, along with the WHA's Edmonton Oilers, Hartford Whalers, and Winnipeg Jets.\nAfter making the postseason for seven consecutive years, from 1981 to 1987, the Nordiques started to decline. From 1987\u201388 to 1991\u201392, the team finished last in their division every season, with three of those finishes landing them last in the league. This included a dreadful 12-win season in 1989\u201390 that is still the worst in franchise history. As a result, the team earned three consecutive first overall draft picks, used to select Mats Sundin (1989), Owen Nolan (1990), and Eric Lindros (1991). Lindros made it clear he did not wish to play for the Nordiques, to the extent he did not wear the team's jersey for the press photographs, only holding it when it was presented to him. On advice from his mother, he refused to sign a contract and began a holdout that lasted over a year. On June 30, 1992, he was traded to the Philadelphia Flyers in exchange for five players, the rights to Swedish prospect Peter Forsberg, two first-round draft picks, and US$15\u00a0million. The Eric Lindros trade turned the moribund Nordiques into a Stanley Cup contender almost overnight, and is seen in hindsight as one of the most one-sided deals in sports history. In the first season after the trade, 1992\u201393, the Nordiques reached the playoffs for the first time in six years. Two years later, they won the Northeast Division and had the second best regular season record during the lockout-shortened season.\nWhile the team experienced on-ice success, it spent most of its first 23 years struggling financially. Quebec City was by far the smallest market in the NHL, and the changing financial environment in the NHL made things even more difficult. In 1995, team owner Marcel Aubut asked for a bailout from Quebec's provincial government as well as a new publicly funded arena. The bailout fell through, and Aubut subsequently began talks with COMSAT Entertainment Group in Denver, which already owned the Denver Nuggets.In May 1995, COMSAT announced an agreement in principle to purchase the team. The deal became official on July 1, 1995, and 12,000 season tickets were sold in the 37 days after the announcement of the move.\nCOMSAT considered several names for the team, including \"Extreme,\" \"Blizzards,\" and \"Black Bears.\" It also debated whether to brand the team as a Denver team or as a regional franchise representing either Colorado or the entire Rocky Mountain region. Initially, COMSAT filed for copyright protection for \"Black Bears\", but reportedly decided to name the team Rocky Mountain Extreme. When \"The Denver Post\" leaked the intended name, fan reaction was so negative that COMSAT reconsidered and chose the name Colorado Avalanche. The new name was revealed on August 10, 1995. With the move, the newly relocated team transferred to the Pacific Division of the Western Conference.\nColorado Avalanche (1995\u2013present).\nEarly success (1995\u20132001).\nAfter purchasing the team, COMSAT organized its Denver sports franchises under a separate subsidiary, Ascent Entertainment Group Inc., which went public in 1995. COMSAT retained an 80% controlling interest, with the other 20% available on NASDAQ. The Avalanche played their first game in the McNichols Sports Arena in Denver on October 6, 1995, winning 3\u20132 against the Detroit Red Wings. It marked a return of the NHL to Denver after an absence of 13 years, when the Colorado Rockies (not to be confused with the Major League Baseball team of the same name) moved to New Jersey to become the New Jersey Devils. Valeri Kamensky scored the first goal as the Avalanche, as well as the game-winning goal in the final minutes. Led on the ice by captain Joe Sakic, forward Peter Forsberg, and defenseman Adam Foote and with Pierre Lacroix as the general manager and Marc Crawford as the head coach, the Avalanche became stronger when All-Star Montreal Canadiens goaltender Patrick Roy joined the team. Roy joined the Avalanche on December 6, 1995, together with ex-Montreal captain Mike Keane in a trade for Jocelyn Thibault, Martin Rucinsky, and Andrei Kovalenko.\n1995\u201396 Stanley Cup champions.\nThe Avalanche finished the regular season with a 47\u201325\u201310 record for 104 points, won the Pacific Division, and finished second in the Western Conference. Colorado progressed to the playoffs, defeating the Vancouver Canucks, Chicago Blackhawks, and the Presidents' Trophy-winning Detroit Red Wings in the conference finals, all in six games. In the Stanley Cup Final, the Avalanche met the Florida Panthers, who were also in their first Cup Final series. The Avalanche swept the series 4\u20130. In Game 4, during the third overtime and after more than 100 minutes of play with no goals, defenseman Uwe Krupp scored to claim the franchise's first Stanley Cup. Joe Sakic was the playoff's scoring leader with 34 points (18 goals and 16 assists), winning the Conn Smythe Trophy. The 1995\u201396 Cup was the first major professional championship won by a Denver team. The Avalanche are the only team in NHL history to win the Stanley Cup their first season after a move, and only the second team to win a championship their first season after a move in any of the four major North American sports leagues, following the NFL's Washington Commanders. They also became the second team from the WHA to win the Cup. With the Cup win, Russians Alexei Gusarov and Valeri Kamensky, and Swede Peter Forsberg became members of the Triple Gold Club, the exclusive group of ice hockey players who have won Olympic gold, World Championship gold, and the Stanley Cup.\nIn 1996\u201397, Colorado won the Pacific Division again as well as the Presidents' Trophy for finishing the regular season with the best record in the NHL, at 49\u201324\u20139 for 107 points. The team was also the NHL's best scoring with an average of 3.38 goals scored per game. The Avalanche met the two lowest scorers of the Western Conference in the first two rounds of the playoffs, the Chicago Blackhawks and the Edmonton Oilers, defeating them in six and five games, respectively. During a rematch of the previous year conference finals, the Avalanche lost to the Detroit Red Wings in six games. Detroit went on to sweep the Stanley Cup Final just as the Avalanche had done the year before. Sandis Ozolinsh was elected for the NHL's first All-Star team at the end of the season.\nAs a free agent during the summer of 1997, Joe Sakic signed a three-year, $21\u00a0million offer sheet with the New York Rangers. Under the collective agreement in place at the time between the NHL and NHL Players' Association (NHLPA), the Avalanche had one week to match the Rangers' offer or let go of Sakic. Colorado would match the offer, which instigated a salary raise for NHL players.\nThe Avalanche sent nine players representing seven countries, as well as head coach Marc Crawford representing Canada, to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan. Alexei Gusarov and Valeri Kamensky won the silver medal with Russia, and Jari Kurri won bronze with Finland.\nIn the following season, Colorado won the Pacific Division with a 39\u201326\u201317 record for 95 points. The team lost in the conference quarterfinals against the Edmonton Oilers in seven games, having led the series 3\u20131. Peter Forsberg was the NHL's second-highest scorer in the regular season with 91 points (25 goals and 66 assists) and was elected for the NHL's First All-Star Team. After the end of the season, head coach Marc Crawford rejected the team's offer of a two-year contract. Bob Hartley was hired to the head coach position in June 1998.\nIn 1998\u201399, with the addition of the Nashville Predators, the NHL realigned their divisions, moving the Avalanche to the new Northwest Division. Despite a slow 2\u20136\u20131 start, Colorado finished with a 44\u201328\u201310 record for 98 points, won the Division and finished second in the Western Conference. Between January 10 and February 7, the Avalanche had their longest ever winning streak with 12 games. Following the Columbine High School massacre, Colorado postponed their first two playoff games to a later date; they would wear patches in honor of the Columbine victims on their jerseys during the playoffs. The series was altered to a 2\u20133\u20132 format as a result of the tragedy. After defeating both the San Jose Sharks and the Detroit Red Wings in six games in the first two rounds, Colorado met the Presidents' Trophy-winning Dallas Stars in the conference finals, where they lost in seven games. Forsberg, the playoffs' leading scorer with 24 points (8 goals and 16 assists), was again elected to the NHL's First All-Star team, and Chris Drury won the Calder Memorial Trophy for the best rookie of the season. Both Drury and Hejduk were elected to the NHL All-Rookie Team at the end of the season.\nIt was in the 1999\u20132000 season that the Colorado Avalanche played their first game in the new Pepsi Center, which cost US$160\u00a0million. Milan Hejduk scored the first goal of a 2\u20131 victory against the Boston Bruins on October 13, 1999. The Avalanche finished the season with a 42\u201328\u201311\u20131 record for 96 points, winning the Division. Before the playoffs, the Avalanche strengthened their defense for a run towards the Stanley Cup by acquiring Hockey Hall of Fame defenseman Ray Bourque and forward Dave Andreychuk. Bourque, who had been a Bruin since 1979, requested a trade to a contender for a chance to win the Stanley Cup. However, Colorado lost in the conference finals against the Dallas Stars in seven games after defeating the Phoenix Coyotes and Detroit Red Wings in five games.\nThe Avalanche's success came amid considerable turmoil in the front office. COMSAT's diversification into sports ownership was proving a drain on the company. Cost overruns associated with the construction of Pepsi Center had shareholders up in arms. Finally, in 1997, COMSAT agreed in principle to sell Ascent to Liberty Media. However, Liberty was not interested in sports ownership at the time (though it has since purchased Major League Baseball's Atlanta Braves), and made the deal contingent upon Ascent selling both the Avalanche and Nuggets.\nAfter almost two years, Ascent sold the teams to Wal-Mart heirs Bill and Nancy Laurie for $400\u00a0million. However, a group of Ascent shareholders sued, claiming the sale price was several million dollars too low. Ascent then agreed to sell the teams to Denver banking tycoon Donald Sturm for $461\u00a0million.\nA new wrinkle appeared when the City of Denver refused to transfer the parcel of land on which Pepsi Center stood unless Sturm promised to keep the Avalanche and Nuggets in Denver for at least 25 years. Sturm had made his bid in his own name, and the city wanted to protect taxpayers in the event Sturm either died or sold the teams. While Sturm was willing to make a long-term commitment to the city, he was not willing to be held responsible if he died or sold the teams. After negotiations fell apart, Liberty bought all of Ascent, but kept the Nuggets and Avalanche on the market.\nFinally, in July 2000, the teams and the Pepsi Center were bought by real estate entrepreneur Stan Kroenke, and brother-in-law to the Lauries, in a $450\u00a0million deal, with Liberty retaining a 6.5% interest. As part of the deal, Kroenke placed the teams into a trust that would ensure they stay in Denver until at least 2025. After the deal, Kroenke organized his sports assets under Kroenke Sports Enterprises.\n2000\u201301 Stanley Cup champions.\nThe 2000\u201301 season was the best season the team has ever had due to phenomenal play by the all-time leading scorer in Avalanche history, Joe Sakic. The Avalanche won the Division and captured their second Presidents' Trophy after having finished the regular season with 52\u201316\u201310\u20134 for 118 points. Sakic finished the regular season with 118 points (54 goals and 64 assists), only three behind Jaromir Jagr's 121 points. On February 4, 2001, the Avalanche hosted the 2001 NHL All-Star Game. Patrick Roy, Ray Bourque, and Joe Sakic played for the North American team, who won 14\u201312 against the World team, which featured Milan Hejduk and Peter Forsberg. All but Hejduk were part of the starting lineups. Before the playoffs, the Avalanche acquired star defenseman Rob Blake and center Steven Reinprecht from the Los Angeles Kings in exchange for Adam Deadmarsh, Aaron Miller, and their 2001 first-round draft pick.\nIn the playoffs, Colorado swept their conference quarterfinals against the Vancouver Canucks. In the conference semifinals, the Avalanche defeated the Los Angeles Kings in seven games, after having wasted a 3\u20131 lead. After the last game of the series, Peter Forsberg underwent surgery to remove a ruptured spleen and it was announced he would not play until the following season. The injury was a huge upset for the team \u2013 former NHL goaltender Darren Pang considered it \"devastating... to the Colorado Avalanche\". The team would overcome Forsberg's injury; in the conference finals, Colorado defeated the St. Louis Blues 4\u20131 and progressed to the Stanley Cup Final, where they faced the defending champion New Jersey Devils. The Avalanche came back from a 3\u20132 series deficit and won the series 4\u20133, marking the second year in a row that the defending champions lost in the Cup Final series, as the Devils themselves defeated the Dallas Stars in 2000. After being handed the Cup from NHL commissioner Gary Bettman, captain Joe Sakic immediately turned and gave it to Ray Bourque, capping off Bourque's 22-year career with his only championship. Sakic was the playoffs' leading scorer with 26 points (13 goals and 13 assists). He won the Hart Memorial Trophy, given to the NHL's most valuable player during the regular season; the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy, awarded to the player that has shown the best sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct combined with performance in play; the Lester B. Pearson Award; and shared the NHL Plus/Minus Award with Patrik Elias of the Devils. Patrick Roy won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the MVP of the playoffs. Shjon Podein was awarded the King Clancy Memorial Trophy for significant humanitarian contributions to his community, namely his work on charitable organizations and his own children foundation. Ray Bourque and Joe Sakic were elected to the NHL's First All-Star Team. Rob Blake was elected to the Second All-Star Team.\nRemaining competitive (2001\u20132010).\nIn the 2001\u201302 season, Colorado finished the regular season with 99 points from a 45\u201328\u20138\u20131 record, winning the Northwest Division. Colorado had the league's lowest goals conceded: 169, an average of 2.06 per game. The NHL season was interrupted by the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City. The Avalanche had nine players representing six countries. Canada won the ice hockey tournament, with Rob Blake, Adam Foote, and Joe Sakic won gold medals. American Chris Drury took home a silver medal. With the win, Blake and Sakic became members of the Triple Gold Club. The Avalanche advanced through the first two rounds of the playoffs, winning 4\u20133 against the Los Angeles Kings and 4\u20133 against the San Jose Sharks. Patrick Roy had a shutout on the decisive game of each series. The Avalanche made the conference finals for the fourth consecutive season (and sixth overall in the last seven seasons), meeting the Detroit Red Wings in the playoffs for the fifth time in seven years. Colorado had a 3\u20132 lead after five games, but lost Game 6 at home, 2\u20130, and Game 7 in Detroit, 7\u20130. As in 1997, Detroit went on to win the Stanley Cup. Peter Forsberg was the playoffs' leading scorer with 27 points (9 goals, 18 assists). Roy won the William M. Jennings Trophy, given to the goaltenders of the team with fewest goals scored against. Roy and Sakic were both elected to the NHL's First All-Star Team, with Rob Blake elected to the Second All-Star Team.\nThe following season, 2002\u201303, saw the Avalanche claim the NHL record for most consecutive division titles, nine, breaking the Montreal Canadiens' streak of eight titles from 1974 to 1982. The division title came after a bad start by the team, that led to the exit of head coach Bob Hartley in December. General manager Pierre Lacroix promoted assistant coach Tony Granato, who had only three months of coaching experience as an assistant, to the head coach position. The team's playoff spot seemed in doubt at one point, but the Avalanche managed to finish with 105 points, ahead of the Vancouver Canucks by one. The race to the title was exciting, namely the second-to-last game of the season, as the Avalanche needed to win the game to stay in the race, and Milan Hejduk scored with ten seconds left in overtime to defeat the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. The title was guaranteed in the final day of the regular season, when the Avalanche defeated the St. Louis Blues 5\u20132 and the Vancouver Canucks lost against the Los Angeles Kings 2\u20130. In the conference quarterfinals, the Avalanche blew a 3\u20131 series lead over the Minnesota Wild, losing in overtime in Game 7. Peter Forsberg won the Art Ross Trophy for the leading scorer of the regular season, which he finished with 106 points (29 goals, 77 assists). Forsberg also won the Hart Memorial Trophy for the regular season's most valuable player, and shared the NHL Plus/Minus Award with teammate Hejduk. Hejduk scored 50 goals to win the Maurice \"Rocket\" Richard Trophy, awarded annually to the leading goal scorer in the NHL. Forsberg was elected to the NHL's First All-Star Team; Hejduk was elected to the Second All-Star Team.\nPatrick Roy retired after that season, and the team signed star wingers Paul Kariya from the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, and Teemu Selanne from the San Jose Sharks. Both struggled during their first season with the team\u2014Kariya spent most of the 2003\u201304 season injured and Selanne scored only 32 points (16 goals and 16 assists) in 78 games. There were doubts if goaltender David Aebischer could perform at the top level the team was used to while having Roy. Having \"nine elite players\", \"the most talented top six forwards on one team since the days of the Edmonton Oilers\" was not good enough as the franchise failed to win the Northwest Division title, ending the NHL record streak. The 40\u201322\u201313\u20137 record was good enough for 100 points, one less than the Northwest Division champion Vancouver Canucks. This ended a streak of nine consecutive division titles dating to the team's last year in Quebec.\nDuring a game against Vancouver on March 8, 2004, Canucks player Todd Bertuzzi punched Colorado's Steve Moore from behind, leaving Moore unconscious. It was said to be retaliation for a hit Moore had delivered to Canucks captain Markus Naslund the month before. Moore sustained three fractured neck vertebrae, among other injuries caused by the hit and subsequent pile up, ending his career. Bertuzzi was away from professional hockey for 17 months as a result of suspensions. In Denver, after the Moore hit, it became tradition for the home fans to boo Todd Bertuzzi every time he gained possession of the puck, whenever his team faced the Avalanche at Pepsi Center.\nIn the 2004 playoffs, Colorado won the conference quarterfinals against the Dallas Stars in five games, but lost in the conference semifinals against the Sharks in six games. Joe Sakic was, once again, elected to the 2004 All-star team, winning the NHL/Sheraton Road Performer Award, and became the first Avalanche player ever to be chosen as game MVP, when he scored a hat-trick. In July 2004, Joel Quenneville was hired as head coach, while Granato was retained as his assistant.\nThe 2004\u201305 NHL season was canceled because of an unresolved lockout. During the lockout, many Avalanche players played in European leagues. David Aebischer returned home with Alex Tanguay to play for Swiss club HC Lugano; Milan Hejduk and Peter Forsberg returned to their former teams in their native countries, HC Pardubice and Modo Hockey. Nine other players from the roster played in Europe during the lockout.\nAfter the 2004\u201305 lockout and implementation of a salary cap, the Avalanche were forced to release some of their top players. Peter Forsberg and Adam Foote were lost in free agency to save room in the cap for Joe Sakic and Rob Blake. Although the salary cap was a blow to one of the highest spenders of the league, the team finished the 2005\u201306 regular season with a 43\u201330\u20139 record for 95 points, good enough to finish second in the Division, seven behind the Calgary Flames and tied with the Edmonton Oilers. The season paused in February for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy. The Avalanche sent a league-leading 11 players from eight countries. Finland's Antti Laaksonen earned the silver medal, while Ossi Vaananen ended up not playing because of an injury; Milan Hejduk won a bronze medal with the Czech Republic team. In the conference quarterfinals, Colorado defeated Dallas Stars team that had the second-best record in the conference, in five games. The team was swept in the conference semifinals by the Anaheim Ducks.\nThe next day, Pierre Lacroix resigned after service as GM since 1994 and Fran\u00e7ois Gigu\u00e8re was hired as his replacement. Lacroix remained president of the franchise until spring 2013, when the team owner's son, Josh Kroenke, took over as team president and governor. Pierre Lacroix remained an advisor to the team until his death in 2020 from COVID-19.\nBy the beginning of the 2006\u201307 season, Joe Sakic and Milan Hejduk were the only two remaining members from the 2000\u201301 Stanley Cup-winning squad, with Sakic being the only one from the team's days in Quebec, though Hejduk \"was\" drafted by the Nordiques. Paul Stastny, son of Nordiques player Peter Stastny, also provided a link to the franchise's past. Before the previous season's playoffs, in a move reminiscent of Patrick Roy's trade, the Avalanche traded Aebischer to the Montreal Canadiens for the Vezina Trophy-winning Jose Theodore. However, the move would not turn out to be as successful when Theodore posted a 13\u201315\u20131 record in 2006\u201307, with an .891 save percentage, and 3.26 goals against average (GAA). His US$6\u00a0million salary became a heavy burden for the Avalanche in the salary cap era. That same season saw an 11-year sell-out streak of 487 home games ended on October 16, 2006, in a home game against the Chicago Blackhawks, that saw the Pepsi Center under capacity by 326 seats. The sell-out streak was an all-time NHL record for the longest consecutive attendance sell-outs at home games with 487; and began on November 9, 1995, on the Avalanche's eighth regular season home game during the 1995\u201396 season at the McNichols Sports Arena. The record has since been broken by the Pittsburgh Penguins, who saw their own streak end in October 2021 at 633 games.\nThe Avalanche missed the playoffs for the 2006\u201307 season, missing it for the first time since 1993\u201394, when they were still in Quebec. The team had a 15\u20132\u20132 run in the last 19 games of the season to keep their playoffs hopes alive until the penultimate day of the season. A 4\u20132 loss against the Nashville Predators on April 7, with former player Peter Forsberg assisting the game-winning goal scored by another former player, Paul Kariya, eliminated Colorado from the playoff race. As consolation, the team won the last game of the season against the Calgary Flames the following day and finished fourth in the Northwest Division and ninth in the Western Conference with a 44\u201331\u20137 record for 95 points, one less than eighth-seeded Calgary. Nonetheless, the result was greater than expected by hockey pundits; \"Sports Illustrated\" previewed before the start of the season that the Avalanche would finish 13th in the Western Conference. During that last game of the season, Joe Sakic scored a goal and two assists and became the second-oldest player in NHL history to reach 100 points, behind only Gordie Howe, who had 103 points at age 40 in the 1968\u201369 season. During the season, Paul Stastny set an NHL record for longest point streak by a rookie, with 20 games, three more than the previous record, held by Teemu Selanne and Karlis Skrastins set a new NHL record for the longest game streak by a defenseman, with 495 games. Until the Avalanche's 2006\u201307 season, no team in the history of the NHL had ever made it to 95 points without earning a spot in the playoffs. In the Eastern Conference, three teams progressed to the playoffs with fewer than 95 points: the New York Rangers (94), the Tampa Bay Lightning (93) and the New York Islanders (92).\nFor the 2007\u201308 season, the Avalanche signed two free agents: defenseman Scott Hannan and left winger Ryan Smyth. These acquisitions filled the team's needs and were expected to help make an impact in the playoffs. On February 25, 2008, unrestricted free agent Peter Forsberg signed with the Avalanche for the remainder of the 2007\u201308 season. A day later, at the trade deadline, they re-acquired defenseman Adam Foote from the Columbus Blue Jackets as well as Ruslan Salei from the Florida Panthers. In the conference quarterfinals, Colorado defeated the Minnesota Wild in six games. In the conference semifinals, however, the Avalanche were swept by the eventual Stanley Cup champion Detroit Red Wings.\nOn May 9, 2008, the Avalanche announced that Joel Quenneville would not return to coach the team next season. Two weeks later, Tony Granato was named head coach of the Avalanche for the second time.\nThe 2008\u201309 season was the worst season the Avalanche had since moving to Denver. Posting a record of 32\u201345\u20135, finishing 15th in the Western Conference (28th overall), and recording the fewest points since their days in Quebec during the 1979\u201380 season. The Avalanche missed the postseason for the second time in three seasons. It would be the first time in Avalanche history the team's top scorer would score less than 70 points on the season, as Milan Hejduk and Ryan Smyth would register only 59 points each. On April 13, 2009, just one day after the end of the season, the Avalanche relieved Francois Giguere of his general manager duties. Colorado would go on to receive the highest draft pick in Avalanche history, third overall. That pick turned out to be Brampton Battalion star Matt Duchene.\nIn the 2009 off-season, the Avalanche named Greg Sherman the new general manager and Joe Sacco the new head coach. The following month, top scorer Ryan Smyth was traded to the Los Angeles Kings and Joe Sakic, the only team captain the Avalanche had ever known, retired after 21 seasons in the NHL. The Avalanche named Adam Foote as his replacement. Sakic's jersey retirement ceremony took place on October 1, 2009, before the season opener at home against the San Jose Sharks where the Avalanche won 5\u20132. The Avalanche started the season off strong until the 2010 Winter Olympics break in Vancouver. Three Avalanche team members played in the Winter Olympics \u2013 Paul Stastny for the United States, Ruslan Salei for Belarus and Peter Budaj for Slovakia. Following the Winter Olympics, the Avalanche struggled but eventually clinched a playoff spot with 95 points on the season, a 26-point improvement from the previous year's effort, and good enough for eighth place in the Western Conference. The Avalanche fell in the conference quarterfinals to the top-seeded San Jose Sharks in six games.\nStan Kroenke purchased full ownership in the NFL's St. Louis Rams in 2010. Since the NFL does not allow its owners to hold majority control of major-league teams in other NFL cities, Kroenke turned over day-to-day control of the Nuggets and Avalanche to his son, Josh, toward the end of 2010. Kroenke had to sell his controlling interest in both teams by 2014.\nIn 2010, the Avalanche made it to the playoffs but lost in the conference quarterfinals 4\u20132 against San Jose. Joe Sacco finished third in Jack Adams Trophy voting that season.\nDecline (2010\u20132017).\nIn the 2010\u201311 season, the Avalanche saw their worst season yet since moving to Denver. They only had 68 points in the standings and had winless streaks after the All-Star break. They finished 29th in the 30-team NHL, besting only their division mates, the Edmonton Oilers. Matt Duchene set a franchise record as the youngest scoring leader in Quebec/Colorado history with 67 points, sharing the club goals-leader title with David Jones. Former Avalanche player Peter Forsberg attempted a comeback in the NHL with Colorado mid-season. However, after two games, no points and compiling a plus-minus rating of \u22124, Forsberg announced his retirement from professional hockey. Captain Adam Foote also retired after the final game of the season.\nIn the off-season, Colorado had two first-round picks. Present at the draft, former Avalanche great Joe Sakic served his first duties as new alternate governor and adviser of hockey operations of the club. With their first pick, second overall, they selected Gabriel Landeskog, the young captain of the Ontario Hockey League's Kitchener Rangers. Second, they selected defenseman Duncan Siemens 11th overall, a pick acquired from the St. Louis Blues in the controversial trade that sent power-forward Chris Stewart, long time top prospect Kevin Shattenkirk and a second-round pick to the Blues in exchange for their first-round pick, veteran Jay McClement and 2006 former first overall pick, Erik Johnson. A complete overhaul at the goal-tending position sent Peter Budaj to the Montreal Canadiens and Brian Elliott to St. Louis, Elliott having been acquired from the Ottawa Senators for Craig Anderson during the team's downward spiral the season previous. Goaltender Semyon Varlamov was dealt to Colorado from the Washington Capitals in exchange for a first and second pick, while veteran netminder and former Conn Smythe Trophy winner Jean-S\u00e9bastien Gigu\u00e8re was signed as a free agent in hopes to mentor the young Varlamov. Duncan Siemens was sent back to his major junior team, the Saskatoon Blades in camp, while Gabriel Landeskog made the opening night roster against the Red Wings on October 8, 2011, at Pepsi Center. Adam Deadmarsh was promoted from video/developmental coach to offensive assistant coach after Steve Konowalchuk accepted a job as head coach in the minor league.\nPeter Forsberg's number 21 became the fourth jersey number retired by the Avalanche on opening night, a contest Colorado would lose to Detroit 3\u20130. Colorado redeemed themselves in game two of the season on October 10, 2011, against the 2011 Stanley Cup champion Boston Bruins. Varlamov negated all 30 shots registered by Boston and posted the fifth shutout of his career and first win as an Avalanche in the regular season. Milan Hejduk scored the game-winning goal and first goal of the season for the club in a 1\u20130 victory over the defending champions. In April 2012, the Avalanche were eliminated from playoff contention and finished 11th place in the Western Conference. Despite a 20-point improvement from last season's efforts, the team failed to reach the playoffs for the second-straight year, the first time the club history since their move to Denver. Head coach Joe Sacco signed a two-year contract extension shortly after the end of the season. Stand out rookie Gabriel Landeskog overtook Matt Duchene as the youngest in franchise history to lead the team in goals, scoring 22 in 82 games.\nHaving resigned most of their free agents, the club wouldn't see much change in the 2012 off-season, with the exception of losing unrestricted free agents Peter Mueller, Jay McClement and Kevin Porter. Colorado would add Greg Zanon, John Mitchell and high scoring winger P. A. Parenteau to its roster. Gabriel Landeskog, the Avalanche's lone representative at the 2012 NHL Awards, won the Calder Memorial Trophy, joining Chris Drury, Peter Forsberg and Peter Stastny for earning top rookie honors for the Avalanche.\nOn September 4, 2012, Gabriel Landeskog was named the fourth captain of the Avalanche. Milan Hejduk relinquished the captaincy a week earlier. At 19 years and 286 days old, Landeskog became the youngest captain in NHL history at that time, being 11 days younger than when Sidney Crosby was named captain of the Pittsburgh Penguins at 19 years and 297 days.\nAfter a disappointing 2012\u201313 season which saw the Colorado Avalanche finish 15th in the Conference and 29th overall in the League, it was announced on April 28, 2013, that head coach Joe Sacco had been relieved of his duties. On May 10, it was announced that former long-time Avalanche captain and Hockey Hall of Famer Joe Sakic would be named Executive Vice President of hockey operations, overseeing all matters involving hockey personnel. It was also announced that Josh Kroenke, son of owner Stan Kroenke, was named President of the Avalanche, succeeding Pierre Lacroix. On May 23, Patrick Roy returned to the Avalanche as head coach and Vice President of hockey operations. Although Sherman retained his role as general manager, he was largely reduced to an advisory role. Roy and Sakic shared most of the duties held by a general manager on most other NHL teams, though Sakic had the final say on hockey matters. The Avalanche held the top overall pick in the 2013 NHL draft, which they used to draft Nathan MacKinnon, who had previously played against the team that Patrick Roy had coached in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL).\nUnder Roy, in 2013\u201314, the Avalanche returned to the playoffs, finishing first in the Central Division and second in the Western Conference, but would lose a seven-game series to the Minnesota Wild in the first round. Nonetheless, for his outstanding job as a first-year coach, Roy won the Jack Adams Award for the NHL's top coaching honors.\nJust prior to the start of the 2014\u201315 season, Sakic was given the title of general manager while Sherman was demoted to assistant GM, formalizing the \"de facto\" arrangement that had been in place since 2013. Despite the front office changes, the Avalanche failed to qualify for the 2015 playoffs after finishing with a record of 39\u201331\u201312, resulting in a seventh-place finish in the Central Division.\nAfter failing to qualify for the playoffs again following the 2015\u201316 season, Roy resigned his posts on August 11, 2016.\nFollowing the departure of Roy, the Avalanche hired Jared Bednar from the Calder Cup champions, the Lake Erie Monsters of the American Hockey League (AHL), as head coach. Bednar walked into a difficult situation. He was hired just a month before the opening of training camp, and thus had nowhere near enough time to install his own system. He was also unable to bring his own staff, having to make do with holdovers from Roy's staff. On December 10, 2016, the Avalanche allowed ten goals in a 10\u20131 loss to the Canadiens. The Avalanche closed out their season with a record of 22\u201356\u20134 and 48 points, the worst record in the league and the franchise's worst since moving to Denver (only the 1989\u201390 and 1990\u201391 Nordiques finished with fewer points). It was also the worst record of any team in the NHL since the Atlanta Thrashers finished with a record of 14\u201361\u20137 and 39 points in the 1999\u20132000 season (which was their first season in the league) and one of the worst for a non-expansion team since 1967. During the 2017 NHL draft, Colorado held the fourth overall pick, which they used to draft defenseman Cale Makar.\nReturn to prominence and third Presidents' Trophy (2017\u20132021).\nAfter much speculation about wanting out of Colorado, the Avalanche traded Duchene to the Ottawa Senators in a three-team trade on November 5, 2017. From Ottawa, the Avalanche acquired Andrew Hammond, Shane Bowers, a 2018 first-round pick and a 2019 third-round pick. Additionally, the Avalanche acquired Samuel Girard, Vladislav Kamenev and a 2018 second-round pick from the Predators. The Avalanche had a ten-game win streak from January 2 to 22. During that stretch, the Avalanche outscored their opponents 41\u201316. Offensively, the Avalanche were led by Nathan MacKinnon and Mikko Rantanen. MacKinnon finished fifth in league scoring with 97 points, while Rantanen scored 84 points in his sophomore season. The Avalanche qualified for the playoffs in their final game of the regular season, defeating the Blues, who they were battling with for the final wild-card spot, 5\u20132. The team finished with 95 points, a 47-point increase from their previous season. The Avalanche matched up with the Presidents' Trophy-winning Nashville Predators in the first round. After finding themselves down 3\u20131, the Avalanche rallied to win Game 5 2\u20131 after scoring two goals late in the third period. With Varlamov and Jonathan Bernier both out with injuries, Hammond started the game, making a career-high 44 saves. However, the Predators blanked the Avalanche 5\u20130 in Game 6 to win the series.\nOn November 18, 2018, the Avalanche earned its 1,000th win in team history, defeating the Ducks in overtime. On May 2, 2019, it was announced that the City of Denver and KSE reached an agreement to keep both the Avalanche and Nuggets in the city until 2040. The Avalanche returned to the playoffs in the 2019 season, finishing again in the final wild-card spot. However, the Avalanche were able to defeat the Calgary Flames in five games, with rookie Cale Makar scoring in his first career game during game 3. The Avalanche would then get eliminated in game 7 of the second round by the San Jose Sharks. \nDuring the 2019 off-season, the Avalanche traded long time defenseman Tyson Barrie to the Toronto Maple Leafs along with Alexander Kerfoot and a sixth-round pick in exchange for Nazem Kadri, Calle Rosen, and a third-round pick. The Avalanche improved their record significantly and were sitting at second in their division when the COVID-19 pandemic paused the 2019\u201320 season in March 2020. When the NHL resumed their season in September, the Avalanche defeated the Arizona Coyotes in the first round, before being eliminated in game 7 by the Dallas Stars in second round.\nFollowing the 2020 playoffs, the Avalanche acquired Devon Toews from the New York Islanders in exchange for second-round picks in the 2021 and 2022. The Avalanche continued to improve and finished the regular season with the Presidents' Trophy. The Avalanche started the postseason with six straight wins, including a sweep over the St. Louis Blues in the first round and a 7\u20131 in game 1 of the second round against the Vegas Golden Knights. However, despite the Avalanche building a 2\u20130 series lead over Vegas, they failed to win another game of the series and were eliminated in six games. This loss marked their third straight second round exit.\n2021\u201322 Stanley Cup champions.\nDuring the 2021 off-season, goaltender Philipp Grubauer left during free agency and signed a contract with the Seattle Kraken. To address the need for a goaltender, the Avalanche traded Conor Timmins and a 2022 first-round pick in exchange for Darcy Kuemper. In the 2021\u201322 season, the Avalanche finished with 119 points, clinching the playoffs for the fifth straight time. They began the playoffs with a sweep over the Nashville Predators before defeating the St. Louis Blues in six games to advance to the conference finals for the first time in 20 years. The Avalanche then swept the Edmonton Oilers to reach the Stanley Cup Final. On June 26, 2022, the Avalanche won their third Stanley Cup in franchise history, defeating the two-time defending champion Tampa Bay Lightning in six games. Following their victory, the Avalanche had finished the postseason 16\u20134, which tied for the best postseason record since the 2012 playoffs. Cale Makar was named the winner of the Conn Smythe and Norris Memorial trophies, following his exceptional regular season and playoff performances.\nMixed success (2022\u2013present).\nIn the following season, the Avalanche finished as division champions, but were upset by the Seattle Kraken in seven games in the first round of the 2023 playoffs. In the 2023\u201324 season, the Avalanche finished third in the Central Division. They eliminated the Winnipeg Jets in five games in the opening round of the 2024 playoffs, and then lost to the Dallas Stars in six games in the second round.\nTeam information.\nLogo.\nThe Colorado Avalanche logo is composed by a burgundy letter A with snow wrapped around, similar to an avalanche. There is a hockey puck in the lower\u2013right end of the snow and a steel blue oval on the background.\nThe team's original alternate logo was the foot of a Yeti and was seen on the shoulders of the Avalanche's home and away jerseys. The logo was used on their jerseys since 1995; however, prior to the start of the 2015 NHL entry draft, the club unveiled a new alternate logo. The new logo features the insignia taken from the Colorado state flag and re-colored to match the team's color scheme. The logo was featured on a patch located on the shoulders of the team's uniforms, along with a 20th-anniversary logo, for the 2015\u201316 season.\nJerseys.\nThe team colors are burgundy, steel blue, black, silver, and white. For the 2007\u201308 season, the NHL introduced the new-look \"Reebok EDGE\" jerseys. The Avalanche debuted their new version of the Reebok EDGE jerseys on September 12, 2007, at an Avalanche press conference. The design is similar to the previous jerseys, with some added piping.\nThe road jersey from 1995 to 2003 was predominantly burgundy and steel blue in color. Along the jersey, there are two black and white zigzag lines, one on the shoulders, and the other near the belly. Between them, the jersey is burgundy; outside those lines it is steel blue. Similar lines exist around the neck. The Avalanche logo is in the center of the jersey. On top of the shoulders, there is an alternate logo, one on each side. The away jersey is similar but with different colors. The burgundy part on the home jersey is white on the away jersey, the steel blue part is burgundy, and the black and white lines became gray and steel blue. In 2003, the NHL switched home and road jerseys, with colors being worn at home and white jerseys on the road.\nThe Avalanche introduced a third jersey during the 2001\u201302 season. It is predominantly burgundy. \"Colorado\" is spelled in a diagonal across the jersey where the logo is on the other jerseys. From the belly down, three large horizontal stripes, the first and the last being black and the middle one being white. In the middle of the arms, there are five stripes, black, white, and burgundy from the outside inside on both sides. On the shoulders is the primary \"A\" logo. The third jersey was not worn by the Avalanche for the 2007\u201308 or the 2008\u201309 seasons after the NHL switched to the Reebok EDGE jerseys.\nIn the 2009\u201310 season, the Avalanche introduced a new third jersey that was worn for the first time during the November 14, 2009, home game against the Vancouver Canucks. It is similar to the club's previous third jersey, but is primarily steel blue instead of burgundy and features burgundy patches on the shoulders with the \"A\" logo inside. It also does not have horizontal striping on the bottom. On the arms, there are five stripes, burgundy, white, and black from the outside inside on both sides. They are closer to the elbows than the stripes on the previous third jerseys.\nPrior to the 2015\u201316 season, the Avalanche modified their existing uniform set by replacing the yeti foot shoulder logo in favor of the burgundy and black \"C\" logo. A new third jersey was also unveiled, featuring navy (instead of steel blue) as the dominant color, and a minimalized, recolored version of the Rockies logo in front.\nThe \"C\" logo also served as the main crest of the Avalanche's 2016 Stadium Series uniforms, which featured a white base, enlarged lettering and numbers, and steel blue, silver, and burgundy sleeve stripes.\nBefore the 2017\u201318 season, the Avalanche unveiled new uniforms as part of the switch to Adidas. The look was inspired from the original uniforms they wore from 1995 to 2007, save for the bold silver border that pays homage to Colorado's silver mining industry. There were no third jerseys used during that season, but for the 2018\u201319 season, the Avalanche would wear their 2015\u20132017 navy uniforms as their alternates. The navy uniforms are currently used in regular season home games against Central Division opponents (though during the 2020\u201321 season, they only wore them against the Minnesota Wild and St. Louis Blues as both Central Division teams were briefly realigned with the Avalanche on the West Division, and made an exception in the 2021, 2022 and 2023 home openers by wearing burgundy uniforms against the Chicago Blackhawks, and in the 2025 home opener against the Utah Mammoth, as well as the November 21, 2022, home game against the Dallas Stars by wearing the \"Reverse Retro\" uniforms), which the Avalanche dub as \"Division Rivalry Nights\".\nAs part of the 2020 Stadium Series, the Avalanche unveiled special edition uniforms inspired by Colorado's majestic landscape and the Cadet Chapel of the United States Air Force Academy. The uniforms bore a steel blue top and burgundy bottom, with white accents forming the shape of an \"A\" in front and the middle stripe at the back.\nBefore the 2020\u201321 season, the Avalanche unveiled a \"Reverse Retro\" alternate uniform. The design was taken from the classic Quebec Nordiques uniforms but recolored to match the Avalanche's current color scheme. The Avalanche also revealed a new color scheme for their pants and helmets, with black replaced by steel blue. The following season, the road white uniforms were tweaked to feature burgundy player names and steel blue numbers with burgundy trim, thus eliminating black from the color scheme.\nA second \"Reverse Retro\" uniform (branded as Reverse Retro 2.0) was unveiled in the 2022\u201323 season, utilizing the 1995\u20132007 white uniform template but recolored to the blue, red and gold colors originally used by the NHL's Rockies and is found on the Colorado state flag. The \"C\" alternate logo replaced the primary in front.\nIn the 2025\u201326 season, the Avalanche paid tribute to the Nordiques by wearing that franchise's classic baby blue uniforms for seven games. This includes two throwback-themed games against the Carolina Hurricanes, who wore Hartford Whalers throwbacks as a tribute to both teams' storied history in the WHA and in the NHL's Adams Division.\nBroadcasters.\nAvalanche games air on regional sports network Altitude Sports and Entertainment since 2004, replacing FSN Rocky Mountain. Peter McNab, the long-time color commentator for the Colorado Avalanche from 1995 until his death in 2022, is honored inside Ball Arena with a banner under broadcast booth.\nSeason-by-season record.\n\"This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Avalanche. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Colorado Avalanche seasons\"\n\"Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against\"\nPlayers and personnel.\nCurrent roster.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Navbar-header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeam captains.\n\"Note: This list of team captains does not include captains from the Quebec Nordiques (WHA &amp; NHL).\"\nGeneral managers.\n\"Note: This list does not include general managers from the Quebec Nordiques (WHA &amp; NHL).\"\nHead coaches.\nThe current head coach is Jared Bednar, who was named on August 31, 2016.\nHonored members.\nRetired numbers.\nIn addition to those below, the NHL retired Wayne Gretzky's No. 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game.\nNotes:\nThe numbers retired when the franchise was in Quebec \u2013 J. C. Tremblay's No. 3, Marc Tardif's No. 8, Michel Goulet's No. 16 and Peter Stastny's No. 26 \u2013 were entered back into circulation after the move to Colorado.\nHall of Famers.\nThe Colorado Avalanche hold an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame. Eleven inductees from the players category of the Hall of Fame are affiliated with the Avalanche. Of those eleven, Forsberg, Roy, and Sakic earned their credentials primarily with the Avalanche.\nPlayers\nBuilders\nRivalries.\nDetroit Red Wings.\nIn 1996, the Colorado Avalanche met the Detroit Red Wings in the conference finals and upset the Red Wings 4\u20132. During Game 6, Red Wings player Kris Draper was checked into the boards face-first by Avalanche player Claude Lemieux. As a result, Draper had to undergo facial reconstructive surgery and had to have his jaw wired shut for five weeks. The incident marked the beginning of a rivalry often considered one of the most intense in NHL history by the press and fans.\nIn the following season, in the last regular season meeting between the Avalanche and the Red Wings on March 26, 1997, a brawl known as the Brawl in Hockeytown broke out. The game ended with nine fights, 11 goals, 39 penalties, 148 penalty minutes, one hat-trick (by Valeri Kamensky) and a goaltender fight between Stanley Cup champion Patrick Roy and Mike Vernon. Claude Lemieux was one of the players singled out by the Red Wings players. The Red Wings ended up winning the game in overtime 6\u20135. The teams met again in the conference finals that season, with the Red Wings emerging victorious and going on to win the Stanley Cup.\nThe rivalry between the Avalanche and the Red Wings was at its peak from 1996 to 2002. During those seven seasons the two teams played five postseason series against each other in the Stanley Cup playoffs, with the Avalanche winning three of the series (1995\u201396, 4\u20132; 1998\u201399, 4\u20132; 1999\u20132000, 4\u20131) and the Red Wings winning two of them (1996\u201397, 4\u20132; 2001\u201302, 4\u20133). During this time frame, these two teams combined for a total of five Stanley Cup championships in seven years, the Avalanche winning twice (1995\u201396 and 2000\u201301) and the Red Wings winning three times (1996\u201397, 1997\u201398 and 2001\u201302). After 2002, the rivalry between the two teams began to cool down, and the two teams would not meet again in the playoffs until 2008, when the Red Wings swept the Avalanche in the conference semifinals and went on to win the Stanley Cup. The Red Wings moved to the Eastern Conference in 2013\u201314 season as part of the realignment which makes the two rivals only see each other twice a year.\nFranchise records and leaders.\nFranchise scoring leaders.\nThese are the top-ten-point-scorers in franchise (Quebec and Colorado) history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.\n\"Note: Pos = Position; GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; P/G = Points per game\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFranchise records.\n\"Note: This list does not include records from the Quebec Nordiques. Items in bold are NHL records.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "70949", "revid": "9856656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70949", "title": "Berengaria of Navarre", "text": "Queen of England from 1191 to 1199\nBerengaria of Navarre (, , ; c. 1165\u20131170\u00a0\u2013 23 December 1230) was Queen of England as the wife of Richard I of England. She was the eldest daughter of Sancho VI of Navarre and Sancha of Castile. As is the case with many of the medieval English queens, little is known of her life.\nTraditionally known as \"the only English queen never to set foot in the country\", she may in fact have visited England after her husband's death, but did not do so before, nor did she see much of Richard during her marriage, which was childless. She did (unusually for the wife of a crusader) accompany him on the start of the Third Crusade, but mostly lived in his French possessions, where she gave generously to the church, despite difficulties in collecting the pension she was due from Richard's brother and successor John after she became a widow.\nEarly years.\nBerengaria was born in Navarre c.\u20091165 as the eldest daughter of Sancho VI of Navarre and Sancha of Castile.\nIn 1185, Berengaria was given the fief of Monreal in Navarre by her father. Eleanor of Aquitaine promoted the engagement of Berengaria to her son Richard the Lionheart. An alliance with Navarre meant protection for the southern borders of Eleanor's Duchy of Aquitaine and helped create better relations with neighbouring Castile, whose queen was Richard's sister Eleanor. Also, Navarre had assimilated the troubadour culture of Aquitaine and Berengaria's reputation was unbesmirched. It seems that Berengaria and Richard did in fact meet once, years before their marriage, and writers have claimed that there was an attraction between them at that time.\nIn 1190, Eleanor met King Sancho VI in Pamplona, and he hosted a banquet in the Royal Palace of Olite in her honour. The betrothal could not be celebrated openly, for Richard had been betrothed for many years to Alys, half-sister of King Philip II of France. Richard terminated his betrothal to Alys in 1190 while at Messina. It has been suggested that Alys had become the mistress of Richard's own father, Henry II of England, and possibly the mother of an illegitimate child; a marriage between Richard and Alys therefore would have been technically impossible for religious reasons of affinity.\nMarriage.\nRichard had Berengaria brought to him by his mother Eleanor of Aquitaine. Because Richard was already on the Third Crusade, having wasted no time in setting off after his coronation, the two women had a long and difficult journey to catch up with him. They arrived at Messina in Sicily in 1191 during Lent (when the marriage could not take place) and were joined by Richard's sister Joan, the widowed queen of Sicily. Berengaria was left in Joan's custody. En route to the Holy Land, the ship carrying Berengaria and Joan ran aground off the coast of Cyprus, and they were threatened by the island's ruler, Isaac Comnenus. Richard came to their rescue, captured the island, and overthrew Comnenus. Berengaria married Richard the Lionheart on 12 May 1191 in the Chapel of St. George at Limassol on Cyprus and was crowned the same day by the archbishop of Bordeaux and the bishops of \u00c9vreux and Bayonne.\nQueen consort.\nWhether the marriage was ever even consummated is a matter for conjecture. In any case, Richard certainly took his new wife with him for the first part of the Third Crusade. This was unusual (although Richard's mother and Berengaria's predecessor, Eleanor of Aquitaine, had, when queen of France, been with her husband throughout the Second Crusade). Berengaria returned well before Richard left the Holy Land; on his return to Europe, he was captured and imprisoned. Berengaria remained in Europe, based at Beaufort-en-Vall\u00e9e, attempting to raise money for his ransom. \nAfter his release, Richard returned to England and was not joined by his wife. Richard then set about reclaiming the territories in France that had been lost by his brother John or taken by King Philip II. His focus was on his kingdom, not his queen. He was ordered by Pope Celestine III to reunite with Queen Berengaria and to show fidelity to her in the future. Richard, now mostly spending his time in France, obeyed and took Berengaria to church every week thereafter. When he died in 1199, she was distressed, perhaps more so at deliberately being overlooked as queen of England. Some historians believe that Berengaria honestly loved her husband, and Richard's feelings for her were merely formal because the marriage was a political rather than a romantic union.\nQueen dowager.\nBerengaria never visited England during King Richard's lifetime, and Richard spent less than six months in England while they were married. There is evidence, however, that she may have done so in the years following his death, since she is believed to have been present at the translation of St Thomas Becket's remains at Canterbury in 1220. The traditional description of her as \"the only English queen never to set foot in the country\" still would be true because she did not visit England during the time she was Richard's consort. She certainly sent envoys to England several times, mainly to inquire about the pension she was due as dowager queen and Richard's widow, which King John failed to pay. Although Queen Eleanor intervened and Pope Innocent III threatened him with an interdict if he did not pay Berengaria what was due, King John still owed her more than \u00a34,000 () when he died. The payments were eventually made during the reign of John's son Henry III of England.\nLady of Le Mans.\nBerengaria became the Lady (Lord) of Le Mans, one of her dower properties, where she eventually settled. She founded L'\u00c9pau Abbey in Le Mans in 1229, where she was buried. In 1240, Archbishop Rodrigo Jimenez de Rada of Toledo wrote of Berengaria that she lived \"as a most praiseworthy widow and stayed for the most part in the city of Le Mans, which she held as part of her marriage dower, devoting herself to almsgiving, prayer and good works, witnessing as an example to all women of chastity and religion and in the same city she came to the end of her days with a happy death.\" A skeleton thought to be hers was rediscovered in 1960 during the restoration of the abbey. These remains are preserved beneath the stone effigy of the queen, which is now to be found in the chapter house of the abbey.\nHistorical significance.\nHistorian Ann Trindade says about Berengaria that she \"is remembered as a benefactor of several\u2026religious congregations and institutions and was regarded as a model of piety.\" She also states that \u201cBerengaria\u2019s life illustrates very clearly the constraints under which medieval women, even aristocratic ones, were obliged to live.\u201d Berengaria's struggles are a good example of what many women faced in the thirteenth century, and \u201cthose long years of widowhood reveal, on the basis of record, a strong courageous woman, independent, solitary, battling against difficult political and economic circumstances, with little interest in the trappings of courtly existence, sustained by her faith in Christianity and her loyalty to the See of St Peter, not afraid to assert her rights against powerful enemies, both lay and clerical.\u201d\nIn fiction.\nNovels featuring Berengaria include:\nIn the media.\nIn the 1923 film \"Richard the Lion-Hearted\", Queen Berengaria is played by Kathleen Clifford. The 1935 film \"The Crusades\", starring Loretta Young and Henry Wilcoxon, tells a fictionalised story of Richard and Berengaria's marriage. The 1954 historical drama film \"King Richard and the Crusaders\", starring George Sanders and Paula Raymond, shows Richard and Berengaria as married and on the Third Crusade. The 1960s British television series \"Richard the Lionheart\" features their marriage prominently, with Berengaria played by Sheila Whittingham. All versions were highly romanticised and are not reliable sources of information about the queen. \nBerengaria was played by Laila Taher in the 1963 film \"Saladin\". She was played by Zo\u00eb Wanamaker in the BBC 13-part drama \"The Devil's Crown\" (1978).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70950", "revid": "50744177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70950", "title": "Clove", "text": "Spice, flower buds of Syzygium aromaticum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCloves are the aromatic flower buds of a tree in the family Myrtaceae, Syzygium aromaticum (). They are native to the Maluku Islands, or Moluccas, in Indonesia, and are commonly used as a spice, flavoring, or fragrance in consumer products, such as toothpaste, soaps, or cosmetics. Cloves are available throughout the year owing to different harvest seasons across various countries.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"clove\", first used in English in the 15th century, derives via Middle English , Anglo-French \"clowes de gilofre\" and Old French , from the Latin word ' \"nail\". The related English word \"gillyflower\", originally meaning \"clove\", derives via said Old French and Latin ', from the Greek \"clove\", literally \"nut leaf\".\nDescription.\nThe clove tree is an evergreen that grows up to tall, with large leaves and crimson flowers grouped in terminal clusters. The flower buds initially have a pale hue, gradually turn green, then transition to a bright red when ready for harvest. Cloves are harvested at long, and consist of a long calyx that terminates in four spreading sepals, and four unopened petals that form a small central ball.\nClove \"stalks\" are slender stems of the inflorescence axis that show opposite decussate branching. Externally, they are brownish, rough, and irregularly wrinkled longitudinally with short fracture and dry, woody texture. \"Mother cloves (anthophylli)\" are the ripe fruits of cloves that are ovoid, brown berries, unilocular and one-seeded. \n\"Blown cloves\" are expanded flowers from which both corollae and stamens have been detached. \"Exhausted cloves\" have most or all the oil removed by distillation.\nUses.\nCloves are used in the cuisine of Asian, African, Mediterranean, and the Near and Middle East countries, lending flavor to meats (such as baked ham), curries, and marinades, as well as fruit (such as apples, pears, and rhubarb). Cloves may be used to give aromatic and flavor qualities to hot beverages, often combined with other ingredients such as lemon and sugar. They are a common element in spice blends (as part of the Malay \"rempah empat beradik\" \u2013\"four sibling spices\"\u2013 besides cinnamon, cardamom and star anise for example), including pumpkin pie spice and speculaas spices. \nIn Mexican cuisine, cloves are best known as \"clavos de olor\", and often accompany cumin and cinnamon. They are also used in Peruvian cuisine, in a wide variety of dishes such as \"carapulcra\" and \"arroz con leche\". \nA major component of clove's taste is imparted by the chemical eugenol, and the quantity of the spice required is typically small. It pairs well with cinnamon, allspice, vanilla, red wine, basil, onion, citrus peel, star anise, and peppercorns.\nNon-culinary uses.\nIt is often added to betel quids to enhance aroma while chewing. The spice is used in a type of cigarette called \"kretek\" in Indonesia. Clove cigarettes were smoked throughout Europe, Asia, and the United States. Clove cigarettes are currently classified in the United States as cigars, the result of a ban on flavored cigarettes in September 2009.\nClove essential oil may be used to inhibit mold growth on various types of foods. In addition to these non-culinary uses of clove, it can be used to protect wood in a system for cultural heritage conservation, and showed the efficacy of clove essential oil to be higher than a boron-based wood preservative. Cloves can be used to make a fragrant pomander when combined with an orange. When given as a gift in Victorian England, such a pomander indicated warmth of feeling.\nAdverse effects and potential uses.\nThe use of clove for any medicinal purpose has not been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration, and its use may cause adverse effects if taken orally by people with liver disease, blood clotting and immune system disorders, or food allergies.\nCloves are used in traditional medicine as an essential oil, which is intended to be an anodyne (analgesic) mainly for dental emergencies. There is evidence that clove oil containing eugenol is effective for toothache pain and other types of pain. Clove essential oil may prevent the growth of \"Enterococcus faecalis\" bacteria which may be present in an unsuccessful root canal treatment. \nOne review reported the efficacy of eugenol combined with zinc oxide as an analgesic for alveolar osteitis. Studies to determine its effectiveness for fever reduction, as a mosquito repellent, and to prevent premature ejaculation have been inconclusive. It remains unproven whether blood sugar levels are reduced by cloves or clove oil. The essential oil may be used in aromatherapy.\nHistory.\nUntil the colonial era, cloves only grew on a few islands in the Moluccas (historically called the Spice Islands), including Bacan, Makian, Moti, Ternate, and Tidore.\nCloves were first traded by the Austronesian peoples in the Austronesian maritime trade network (which began around 1500\u00a0BC, later becoming the Maritime Silk Road and part of the Spice Trade). The first notable example of modern clove farming developed on the east coast of Madagascar, and is cultivated in three separate ways, a monoculture, agricultural parklands, and agroforestry systems.\nArchaeologist Giorgio Buccellati found cloves in Terqa, Syria, in a burned-down house which was dated to 1720\u00a0BC during the kingdom of Khana. This was the first evidence of cloves being used in the west before Roman times. The discovery was first reported in 1978. They reached Rome by the first century AD.\nOther archeological finds of cloves include: At the Batujaya site a single clove was found in a waterlogged layer dating to between the 100s BC to 200s BC corresponding to the Buni culture phase of this site. A study at the site of \u00d3c Eo in the Mekong Delta of Vietnam found starch grains of cloves on stone implements used in food processing. This site was occupied from the first to eighth century BC, and was a trading center for the kingdom of Funnan. Two cloves were found during archaeological excavations at the Sri Lankan city of Mantai dated to around 900\u20131100 AD.\nCloves are mentioned in the \"Ramayana\". Cloves are also mentioned in the \"Charaka Samhita\". One of the earliest examples of literary evidence of cloves in China is from the book the \"Han Guan Yi\" (Etiquettes of the Officialdom of the Han Dynasty, dating to around 200 BC). The book states a rule that ministers should suck cloves to sweeten their breath before speaking to the emperor. From Chinese records during the Song Dynasty (960 to 1279 AD) cloves were primarily imported by private ventures, called Merchant Shipping Offices, who bought goods from middlemen in the Austronesian polities of Java, Srivijaya, Champa, and Butuan. During the Yuan dynasty (1271 to 1368 AD) Chinese merchants began sending ships directly to the Moluccas to trade for cloves, and other spices.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" records an endowment made by Passinopolis under Pope Sylvester I. This endowment included an Egyptian estate, its annual revenues, 150 libra (around 50 kg or 108 lb) of cloves, and other amounts of spices and papyrus. Cosmas Indicopleustis in his book \"Topographia Christiana\" outlined his travels to Sri Lanka, and recounted that the Indians said that cloves, among other products, came in from unspecified places along sea trade routes.\nCloves were also present in records in China, Sri Lanka, Southern India, Persia, and Oman by around the third century to second century BC. These mentions of \"cloves\" reported in China, South Asia, and the Middle East come from before the establishment of Southeast Asian maritime trade. But all of these are misidentifications that referred to other plants (like cassia buds, cinnamon, or nutmeg); or are imports from Maritime Southeast Asia mistakenly identified as being natively produced in these regions.\nArchaeologists recovered the earliest known example of macro-botanical cloves in northwest Europe from the wreck of the Danish-Norwegian flagship, Gribshunden. The ship sank near Ronneby, Sweden in June 1495 while King Hans was sailing to political summit at Kalmar, Sweden. Exotic luxuries including cloves, ginger, peppercorns, and saffron would have impressed the noblemen and high church officials at the summit.\nCloves have been documented in the burial practices of Europeans from the late middle ages into the early modern period. During renovations on the Grote Kerk of Breda a tomb was rediscovered that was used between 1475 and 1526 AD by eight members of the house of Nassau. These burials had to be moved, but before being re-interred these burials were studied for botanical remains. The burial of contained pollen from cloves. The Dutch Physician Pieter Van Foreest wrote down multiple recipes for embalming some of which included cloves. One of these recipes he wrote down was that used by his fellow physicians Spierinck and Goethals. An embalming jar associated with Vittoria della Rovere also contained clove pollen. This probably came from her ingestion of clove oil as a medicine in her final days. When burials needed to be moved from the church of Saint Germain in Flers, France they were also studied for botanical remains. The body and coffin of Philippe Ren\u00e9 de la Motte Ango, count of Flers who was buried in 1737 AD contained whole cloves.\nDuring the colonial era, cloves were traded like oil, with an enforced limit on exportation. As the Dutch East India Company consolidated its control of the spice trade in the 17th century, they sought to gain a monopoly in cloves as they had in nutmeg. However, \"unlike nutmeg and mace, which were limited to the minute Bandas, clove trees grew all over the Moluccas, and the trade in cloves was beyond the limited policing powers of the corporation\". One clove tree named \"Afo\" that experts believe is the oldest in the world on Ternate may be 350\u2013400 years old. Tourists are told that seedlings from this very tree were stolen by a Frenchman named Pierre Poivre in 1770, transferred to the Isle de France (Mauritius), and then later to Zanzibar, which was once the world's largest producer of cloves.\nCurrent leaders in clove production are Indonesia, Madagascar, Tanzania, Sri Lanka, and Comoros. Indonesia is the largest clove producer, but only about 10\u201315% of its cloves production is exported, and domestic shortfalls must sometimes be filled with imports from Madagascar. The modern province of Maluku remains the largest source of cloves in Indonesia with around 15% of national production, although provinces comprising the island of Sulawesi produced over 40% collectively.\nPhytochemicals.\nEugenol comprises 72\u201390% of the essential oil extracted from cloves, and is the compound most responsible for clove aroma. Complete extraction occurs at 80 minutes in pressurized water at . Ultrasound-assisted and microwave-assisted extraction methods provide more rapid extraction rates with lower energy costs.\nOther phytochemicals of clove oil include acetyl eugenol, beta-caryophyllene, vanillin, crategolic acid, tannins, such as bicornin, gallotannic acid, methyl salicylate, the flavonoids eugenin, kaempferol, rhamnetin, and eugenitin, triterpenoids such as oleanolic acid, stigmasterol, and campesterol and several sesquiterpenes. Although eugenol has not been classified for its potential toxicity, it was shown to be toxic to test organisms in concentrations of 50, 75, and 100\u00a0mg per liter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70954", "revid": "50881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70954", "title": "Five spices powder", "text": ""}
{"id": "70955", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70955", "title": "Five spice powder", "text": ""}
{"id": "70957", "revid": "34170145", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70957", "title": "Santa Ana, California", "text": "Santa Ana (Spanish for 'Saint Anne') is a city in and the county seat of Orange County, California, United States. Located in the Greater Los Angeles region of Southern California, the city's population was 310,227 at the 2020 census. As of 2023, Santa Ana is the third most populous city in Orange County (after Anaheim and Irvine), the 14th-most populous city in California, and the 65th most populous city in the United States. Santa Ana is a major regional economic and cultural hub for the Orange Coast.\nIn 1810, the Spanish governor of California granted Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana to Jos\u00e9 Antonio Yorba. Following the Mexican War of Independence, the Yorba family rancho was enlarged, becoming one of the largest and most valuable in the region and home to a diverse Californio community. Following the American Conquest of California, the rancho was sold to the Sep\u00falveda family, who subsequently lost their land claim. In 1869, William H. Spurgeon then purchased the rancho and formally founded the modern city of Santa Ana.\nApproximately four-fifths Hispanic or Latino, Santa Ana has been characterized by \"The New York Times\" as the \"face of a new California, a state where Latinos have more influence in everyday life\u2014electorally, culturally and demographically\u2014than almost anywhere else in the country.\"\nHistory.\nMembers of the Tongva and Juane\u00f1o/Luise\u00f1o are indigenous to the area. The Tongva called the Santa Ana area \"Hotuuk\". The village of Pajbenga was located at modern day Santa Ana along the Santa Ana River. The Santa Ana river was a source for many of the Tongva villages and the Spanish Portola Expedition stayed and named this river.\nSpanish and Mexican eras.\nAfter the 1769 expedition of Gaspar de Portol\u00e1 out of Mexico City, then capital of New Spain, Friar Jun\u00edpero Serra named the area Vallejo de Santa Ana (Valley of Saint Anne, or Santa Ana Valley). On November 1, 1776, Mission San Juan Capistrano was established within this valley.\nIn 1810, the first year of the Mexican War of Independence, Jose Antonio Yorba, a sergeant of the Spanish army, was granted land that he called Rancho Santiago de Santa Ana. Yorba's rancho included the lands where the cities of Olive, Orange, Irvine, Yorba Linda, Villa Park, Santa Ana, Tustin, Costa Mesa and unincorporated El Modena, and Santa Ana Heights, are today. This rancho was the only land grant in Orange County granted under Spanish Rule. Surrounding land grants in Orange County were granted after Mexican Independence by the new government.\nAfter the Mexican-American War ended in 1848, Alta California became part of the United States and American settlers arrived in this area.\nPost-Conquest era.\nSanta Ana was listed as a township of Los Angeles County in the 1860 and 1870 census, with an area encompassing most of what is now northern and central Orange County. It had a population of 756 in 1860 and 880 in 1870. The Anaheim district was enumerated separately from Santa Ana in 1870.\nClaimed in 1869 by Kentuckian William H. Spurgeon on land obtained from the descendants of Jose Antonio Yorba, Santa Ana was incorporated as a city in 1886 with a population of 2000 and in 1889 became the seat of the newly formed Orange County.\nIn 1877, the Southern Pacific Railroad built a branch line from Los Angeles to Santa Ana, which offered free right of way, land for a depot, and $10,000 in cash to the railroad in exchange for terminating the line in Santa Ana and not neighboring Tustin. In 1887, the California Central Railway (which became a subsidiary of the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway the following year) broke the Southern Pacific's local monopoly on rail travel, offering service between Los Angeles and San Diego by way of Santa Ana as a major intermediate station.\nIn 1890, whites made up 71 percent of the city's population, most of whom migrated to Santa Ana from confederate states following the American Civil War in search of real estate ventures and other economic opportunities.\n20th century.\nBy 1905, the Los Angeles Interurban Railway, a predecessor to the Pacific Electric Railway, extended from Los Angeles to Santa Ana, running along Fourth Street downtown. Firestone Boulevard, the first direct automobile route between Los Angeles and Santa Ana, opened in 1935; it was enlarged into the Santa Ana Freeway in 1953. The Pacific Electric Santa Ana Line ran from 1905 to 1958.\nSanta Ana was the home of the original Glenn L. Martin aviation company, founded in 1912 before merging with the Wright Company in 1916. Later, Glenn Luther Martin created a second company of the same name in Cleveland, Ohio which eventually merged with the Lockheed Corporation to form the largest defense contractor in the world, Lockheed Martin.\nAlthough there was a significant wave of Mexican migration to the city following the 1910 Mexican Revolution, the city remained majority white in 1939.\nDuring World War II, the Santa Ana Army Air Base was built as a training center for the United States Army Air Forces. The base was responsible for continued population growth in Santa Ana and the rest of Orange County as many veterans moved to the area to raise families after the end of the war.\nSanta Ana was at the center of Orange County's economic boom in the 1950s with its agricultural and defense industries. However, most of this prosperity was only experienced by the city's white residents, while Latinos did not similarly benefit. Instead, economic inequality between the two groups rapidly increased during this time.\nIn 1958, the Honer Plaza and Bullock's Fashion Square malls opened and would supplant Downtown Santa Ana, with its department stores such as Rankin's, Ward's, Penney's and Buffums. Fashion Square was completely renovated and became MainPlace Mall in 1987.\n\"Latino\" city.\nBy the 1970s, Santa Ana was becoming an increasingly Latino city, with white flight to surrounding suburbs coinciding with the city's downtown becoming increasingly frequented by Latinos. This changed perceptions of the city and its economic value, with property values dropping significantly by 1974, while surrounding cities of Laguna Beach, Newport Beach, and Villa Park increased in value.\nSanta Ana entered the 1980s as a city of equal numbers of whites and Latinos. What had been the white commercial center of the city, Fourth Street, was now a street of Latino businesses and character. Latino immigrant and working-class families could now be found in every neighborhood of the city, rather than in just a few ethnic enclaves, as they were previously. \"Santa Ana\" became more often referred to as \"Santana\" and \"Fourth Street\" as \"La Cuatro.\"\nHaving been a charter city since November 11, 1952, the citizens of Santa Ana amended the charter in November 1988 to provide for the direct election of the Mayor who until that point had been appointed from the council membership. Miguel A. Pulido was the first mayor of Latino descent in the city's history and the first Mayor directly elected by the voters.\nSince the 1980s, Santa Ana has been characterized by an effort to revitalize the downtown area which had declined in influence, even as it had become a dynamic commercial and entertainment center for working-class Latinos. The Santa Ana Artist's Village was created around Cal State Fullerton's Grand Central Art Center to attract artists and young professionals to live-work lofts and new businesses. The process continued into 2009 with the reopening of the historic Yost Theater.\nIn the 2010s, gentrification became a larger concern of Santa Ana residents, with its roots starting in the 1990s. Despite strong Latino political representation, gentrification efforts have increasingly displaced the Mexican immigrant presence in the downtown area of the city in favor of outsiders. Primarily Spanish-speaking businesses that served immigrant populations have been demolished in favor of arts projects to draw in outside investment, which bring clientele who further question why Spanish-speaking businesses are present, leading to a cycle of displacement.\nResidents formed a social movement to address lead concentrations in lower-income areas of the city. A 2020 study found that areas of Santa Ana with a median income below $50,000 had five times higher lead concentrations than higher-income areas of the city, which is particularly a concern for children. Residents continue to advocate for environmental justice in the city.\nGeography.\nSanta Ana is nested on flat, low-lying plains with little land elevation change. Running through the west end of the city is the mostly channelized Santa Ana River, which is also largely seasonal due to the construction of the Prado Dam and Seven Oaks Dam. The river caused several severe floods in the 20th century, and is a continued threat despite the existence of the dams.\nCityscape.\nNow fully developed, Santa Ana has several distinct districts. The core of the city is the downtown area, which contains both retail and housing, as well as the Santa Ana Civic Center, which is a dense campus of administrative buildings for both the city and the county of Orange. The civic center is also home to the Ronald Reagan Federal Building and Courthouse. Several historic homes dating from the late 1800s can be found as well, and their preservation is a key issue as development of the downtown area continues.\nNorth of downtown is the \"Midtown\" district along Main St., home to entertainment destinations such as the Bowers Museum, MainPlace Mall, and the Discovery Science Center.\nNear the intersection of the Santa Ana Freeway and the Costa Mesa Freeway is the newly designated \"Metro East\" area, which the city council has envisioned as a secondary mixed-use development district. Currently the area is occupied by several office towers, but little retail or housing. Also on the east side of the city is the Santa Ana Zoo, notable for its collection of monkeys and species from South and Central America.\nThe southeast end of the city is part of the South Coast Metro area, which is shared with the city of Costa Mesa. South Coast Plaza, a major shopping center, is the primary destination of this area, which also contains several high-rise office and apartment buildings. Yokohama Tire Corporation's United States headquarters are located at 1 MacArthur Place in the South Coast Metro area of Santa Ana, and Banc of California's headquarters relocated from the neighboring city of Irvine.\nBiogeography.\nThe most common native species: Hairy Sand Verbena, Red Sand Verbena, and Pink Sand Verbena.\nClimate.\nSanta Ana experiences a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen: BSh), with hot, dry summers and mild winters with moderate rainfall. Rainfall averages about per year, most of which falls from November through April. There are an average of 35 days with measurable precipitation annually.\nThe record high temperature for Santa Ana was on June 14, 1917. The record low temperature was on January 12, 1989. There are an average of 30.1 days with highs of or higher.\nThe wettest \"rain year\" in Santa Ana was from July 1940 to June 1941 with , and the driest was from July 2017 to June 2018 with a mere . The most rainfall in one month was in February 1998. The most rainfall in 24 hours was on February 16, 1927.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSanta Ana first appeared in the 1880 United States census with a population of 711 as part of Santa Ana Township (pop 3,024 in 1880).\n2020.\nThe 2020 United States census reported that Santa Ana had a population of 310,227. The population density was . The racial makeup was 18.5% White, 1.1% African American, 3.7% Native American, 12.3% Asian, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 45.1% from other races, and 19.1% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 76.7% of the population.\nThe census reported that 98.3% of the population lived in households, 0.5% lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 1.2% were institutionalized.\nThere were 76,622 households, out of which 46.4% included children under the age of 18, 50.8% were married-couple households, 8.1% were cohabiting couple households, 24.5% had a female householder with no partner present, and 16.6% had a male householder with no partner present. 13.4% of households were one person, and 5.1% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 3.98. There were 61,388 families (80.1% of all households).\nThe age distribution was 24.8% under the age of 18, 11.2% aged 18 to 24, 30.0% aged 25 to 44, 23.8% aged 45 to 64, and 10.2% who were 65years of age or older. The median age was 33.5years. For every 100 females, there were 102.4 males.\nThere were 79,181 housing units at an average density of , of which 76,622 (96.8%) were occupied. Of these, 45.6% were owner-occupied, and 54.4% were occupied by renters.\nIn 2023, the US Census Bureau estimated that the median household income was $88,354, and the per capita income was $28,859. About 8.8% of families and 11.1% of the population were below the poverty line.\nEthnicity.\nThe most common Hispanic ancestries in Santa Ana are Mexican, Salvadorian and Guatemalan. The most common European ancestries are German, Irish, English and Italian. By the late 1970s, African-American families began to move out of Santa Ana.&lt;ref name=\"OCR 2011/03/10\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States census reported that Santa Ana had a population of 324,528. The population density was . The racial makeup of Santa Ana was 148,838 (45.9%) White (9.2% Non-Hispanic White), 4,856 (1.5%) African American, 3,260 (1.0%) Native American, 34,138 (10.5%) Asian, 976 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 120,789 (37.2%) from other races, and 11,671 (3.6%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino people of any race were 253,928 (78.2%).\nThe census reported that 319,870 people (98.6% of the population) lived in households, 1,415 (0.4%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 3,243 (1.0%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 73,174 households, out of which 41,181 (56.3%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 41,389 (56.6%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 11,808 (16.1%) had a female householder with no husband present, 6,451 (8.8%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 4,933 (6.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 556 (0.8%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 9,254 households (12.6%) were made up of individuals, and 3,378 (4.6%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 4.37. There were 59,648 families (81.5% of all households); the average family size was 4.54.\nThe age distribution of the population was as follows: 99,678 people (30.7%) under the age of 18, 39,165 people (12.1%) aged 18 to 24, 102,399 people (31.6%) aged 25 to 44, 61,375 people (18.9%) aged 45 to 64, and 21,911 people (6.8%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 104.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.6 males.\nThere were 76,896 dwelling units at an average density of , of which 34,756 (47.5%) were owner-occupied, and 38,418 (52.5%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.9%; the rental vacancy rate was 4.9%. 154,045 people (47.5% of the population) lived in owner-occupied dwelling units and 165,825 people (51.1%) lived in rental dwelling units.\nDuring 2009\u20132013, Santa Ana had a median household income of $53,335, with 21.5% of the population living below the federal poverty line.\nEconomy.\nSanta Ana is the corporate headquarters of several companies, including Behr Paint, First American Corporation, Greenwood &amp; Hall, Ingram Micro, SchoolsFirst Federal Credit Union, STEC, TTM Technologies, Kern's, and Wahoo's Fish Taco. It also houses major regional headquarters for the Xerox corporation, Ultimate Software, and T-Mobile. Nonprofits based in Santa Ana include Open Doors.\nOne of Santa Ana's most notable businesses is the Rickenbacker musical instrument company, whose electric guitars and bass guitars earned fame in the hands of many rock and roll legends.\nThen Glenn L. Martin Company, a precursor to Lockheed Martin, was founded in Santa Ana in 1912 before merging with the Wright Company in 1916.\nIn recent years, the nearby city of Irvine has outpaced Santa Ana in commercial growth, with the Irvine Business District located near John Wayne Airport. To compete with this, Santa Ana has approved commercial projects in the South Coast Metro area, as well as the \"Metro East\" development, located at the confluence of the Santa Ana Freeway and the Costa Mesa Freeway.\nThe Historic South Main Business District contains many older retail shops and other small businesses. It extends from downtown Santa Ana southwards on Main Street to the South Coast Metro area.\nThere was a recession in the 2000s, and the expected year for return to peak employment for the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Santa Ana area was 2015. The pre-recession peak year was 2007. Due to the recession, 519,300 jobs were lost, a 9% decrease. According to the Employment Development Department, the unemployment rate for 2015 was 5 percent.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2024 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\nOther large employers include Western Medical Center, TTM Technologies, MSC Software Corp, and Sterns Learning Inc.\nArts and culture.\nThe Bowers Museum is art and history museum started in the 1930s with a large collection of fine art and artifacts from around the world and several traveling exhibits each year.\nSanta Ana has several wall paintings and murals depicting local history, community events and cultural diversity in Orange County.\nThe Chiarini Fountain, designed and carved by Chiarini Marble &amp; Stone, was donated by the Chiarini family in honor of George C. Chiarini and to recognize the artists who have helped make Downtown Santa Ana a creative center in Orange County.\nGreenville, a former rural part of Santa Ana, has buildings over a century old, but industrial complexes have replaced the agricultural fields once surrounding the town.\nThe Disneyland and Knott's Berry Farm amusement parks are located northwest of Santa Ana, several kilometers away. Beaches are located around 20 minutes to the south, accessible by the 55 freeway. Huntington Beach and Newport Beach as well as other coastal communities offer shopping, dining, boating, swimming and surfing.\nSites of interest.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSports.\nSanta Ana has highly competitive high school and collegiate sports teams playing at Santa Ana Stadium and the Santa Ana Unified School District Sports Complex Stadium.\nThe Dons of Santa Ana College are one of the most successful soccer teams in the state of California, and is a frequent top finisher, statewide. In 2008, the Dons clinched their fifteenth consecutive Orange Empire Conference title. The college is also known for its historically successful baseball teams, and for producing former Texas Rangers and Los Angeles Angels pitcher C. J. Wilson.\nMater Dei High School has one of the most successful and reputable football programs in the country.\nGovernment.\nSanta Ana is a charter city and utilizes a council-manager form of government. The council consists of six members who are elected by the populace of the city. Each member serves for four years and can serve a total of three terms. A mayor pro tem is elected by the council members from within the council.\nIn the California State Legislature, Santa Ana is in the senatorial district, represented by Democrat Tom Umberg and is split between the Assembly district, represented by Democrat Avelino Valencia, and the Assembly district, represented by Republican Tri Ta.\nIn the United States House of Representatives, Santa Ana is in California's congressional district, represented by Democrat Lou Correa.\nAdditionally, in the Orange County Board of Supervisors, Santa Ana is in the second district represented by Vicente Sarmiento since 2023.\nLike most majority-minority cities in the United States, Santa Ana is a stronghold of the Democratic Party. Despite the city's high percentage of Democrats, the city tends to vote conservatively on social issues, much like the rest of northern Orange County. It voted in favor of Proposition 8\u2014California's amendment defining marriage in the state as a legal union between a man and a woman\u2014by 61.9%, above the county's average of 57.7%. On Proposition 4, which would have amended the California Constitution to require minors to notify their parents before having an abortion, Santa Ana voted in favor of the measure by 62.0%, much higher than the county as a whole, which voted in favor of the measure by only 54.3%.\nThe Consulate-General of Mexico in Santa Ana is located on 828\u00a0North Broadway Street. The Consulate-General of El Salvador in Santa Ana is located in Suite\u00a0103 at 840\u00a0North Grand Avenue.\nEducation.\nThe majority of the city is served by the Santa Ana Unified School District, which includes 37 K\u20135 elementary schools, nine 6\u20138 intermediate schools, eight 9\u201312 high schools, five special schools, and one charter school. Some elementary schools are John Adams Elementary School, Manuel Esqueda Elementary School, Diamond Elementary School.\nThe school district provides an online accountability report card.\nOther school districts that serve Santa Ana are the Garden Grove, Orange and Tustin Unified School Districts.\nSanta Ana Unified School District's public high schools include Valley High School (Santa Ana), Middle College High School, Santa Ana High School, Saddleback High School, Century High School, newly opened Segerstrom Fundamental High School and Godinez Fundamental High School, and other public schools in the area, along with the Orange County School of the Arts in the midtown district.\nThe Roman Catholic Diocese operates Mater Dei High School. The Diocese also operates several K\u20138 schools in Santa Ana, including School of Our Lady, Saint Anne, Saint Barbara, and Saint Joseph. Immaculate Heart of Mary and Our Lady of the Pillar schools were closed in 2005 and merged into the School of Our Lady, which is located at Immaculate Heart of Mary Parish. (See Roman Catholic Diocesan Schools in Santa Ana, California). In September 2005 the Orange County Campus of International School of Los Angeles (LILA) moved to Santa Ana. In July 2015 it moved back to Orange.\nThe city is also home to Santa Ana College, a two-year public community college, as well as California Coast University, and the Orange County branch of the Art Institute of California. Taft Law School, a correspondence law school, is also based in Santa Ana. Trinity Law School is a Christian, CBE-accredited law school that is the only California campus of the Trinity International University system of schools. Detective Training Institute is a correspondence/distance learning institution that offers private investigator diplomas and is approved to operate by the Bureau for Private Postsecondary Education. Career Networks Institute College, a post-secondary occupational learning center for allied health, is also based in the city.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nA few freeways run through Santa Ana, connecting it to other areas in Orange County, the Greater Los Angeles Area, and beyond. The Santa Ana Freeway (Interstate 5) heads north to Los Angeles, and south towards Southern Orange County and San Diego. The Garden Grove Freeway (State Route 22) runs along near Santa Ana's northern border, connecting Long Beach to the west and the City of Orange to the east. The Costa Mesa Freeway (State Route 55) travels south to Costa Mesa; and then north to the Riverside Freeway (State Route 91), providing connections to Riverside to the east and Beach Cities to the west. The southern terminus of the Orange Freeway (State Route 57) (where the freeway intersects with I-5 and SR 22 at the Orange Crush interchange) is partially within the city limits of Santa Ana and provides a connection to Pomona and the San Gabriel Valley in Los Angeles County.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Santa Ana several times on weekdays with less frequent service on weekends. It operates its \"Pacific Surfliner\" between San Diego to the south and either Los Angeles or San Luis Obispo to the north (see Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center). Greyhound Lines is the largest bus transportation service in Santa Ana, and serves the continental United States and Canada. The bus lines Crucero, Intercalifornias, and others serve all points into Mexico.\nThe Santa Ana Regional Transportation Center is also served by commuter rail trains of Metrolink: the Orange County Line (Oceanside to Union Station), and Inland Empire\u2013Orange County Line (San Bernardino to Oceanside).\nPublic transit bus service is available via the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) and is mainly focused on busses and freeways. 24 bus routes run through the city crossing 659 different bus stops. A 4.15-mile OCTA light rail line running between Santa Ana and Garden Grove, the OC Streetcar, is currently under construction and planned to enter service in 2024.\nJohn Wayne Airport is located at 18601 Airport Way Santa Ana, CA 92707. The IATA code for the airport is SNA.\nSome main roads that run through Santa Ana include McFadden Avenue, Warner Avenue, MacArthur Boulevard, Civic Center Drive, and Santa Ana Boulevard, running east to west. Bristol Street, Fairview Street, and Main Street are all important streets running from north to south.\nUtilities.\nElectricity for the city is provided by Southern California Edison. The Southern California Gas Company provides natural gas service. Phone and cable television service is provided by AT&amp;T. Water in Santa Ana is supplied by the Santa Ana Water Resource Division. A majority of this water is groundwater, which is pumped by 20 wells tapped into the Orange County Groundwater Basin. Additional water is imported through the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, which sources water from Lake Havasu via the Colorado River Aqueduct and the State Water Project from Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers in Northern California.\nEmergency services.\nLaw enforcement is provided by the Santa Ana Police Department from three stations throughout the city. The department includes five canine units, an 11-officer equestrian unit and a 37-member SWAT team. The city shares a helicopter with the cities of Costa Mesa and Newport Beach via the Airborne Law Enforcement (ABLE) program.\nIn March 2012, the city disbanded its municipal fire department, which had provided fire protection for 128 years, and contracted with the Orange County Fire Authority.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70959", "revid": "50256051", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70959", "title": "Maui", "text": "Second largest island in Hawaii\nMaui is the second-largest island in the Hawaiian archipelago, at 727.2 square miles (1,883\u00a0km2). It is the 17th-largest in the United States. Maui is one of Maui County's four sizable islands, along with Moloka\u02bbi, L\u0101na\u02bbi, and Kaho\u02bbolawe.\nIn 2020, Maui had a population of 168,307, the third-highest of the Hawaiian Islands, behind O\u02bbahu and Hawai\u02bbi Island. Kahului is the largest census-designated place (CDP) on the island, with a 2020 population of 28,219. It is Maui's commercial and financial hub. Wailuku is the county seat and was the third-largest CDP as of 2010[ [update]]. Other significant populated areas include K\u012bhei (including Wailea and Makena in the Kihei Town CDP), L\u0101hain\u0101 (including K\u0101\u02bbanapali and Kapalua in the L\u0101hain\u0101 Town CDP), and Upcountry Maui (including Makawao, Pukalani, Kula, and Ulupalakua), although L\u0101hain\u0101 was mostly destroyed by fire in 2023.\nOnce part of Maui Nui, Maui is dominated by two volcanic features: Haleakal\u0101 in the southeast, and the West Maui Mountains in the northwest. The two are connected by an isthmus about six miles wide that gives the island its nickname, the Valley Isle.\nMaui has a significant tourism industry, with nearly three million visitors in 2022. A 2023 report based on 2017 data concluded that nearly 40% of Maui County's economy was tourism-related. Popular tourist destinations include the resorts in the K\u0101\u02bbanapali, Kapalua, and Kihei/Wailea/Makena areas; H\u0101na and the Hana Highway; \u02bb\u012aao Valley; Haleakal\u0101 National Park; and its many beaches.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nNative Hawaiian tradition gives the origin of the island's name in the legend of Hawai\u02bbiloa, the navigator credited with discovering the Hawaiian Islands. According to that tradition, Hawai\u02bbiloa named the island after his son, who in turn was named for the demigod M\u0101ui. Maui's previous name was \u02bbIhikapalaumaewa. Maui Island is also called the \"Valley Isle\" for the large isthmus connecting its northwestern and southeastern volcanic masses.\nGeology.\nLike all other Hawaiian Islands, Maui was formed from the volcanism associated with the Hawaii hotspot.\nThe islands' volcanic cones are formed from basalt, a dark, iron-rich/silica-poor rock, which poured out of thousands of vents as fluid lava over millions of years. Some of its volcanoes were close enough to each other that lava flows on their flanks overlapped, merging into a single island. Maui is one such \"volcanic doublet,\" formed from two shield volcanoes that overlapped to form Maui.\nThe older, western volcano has eroded considerably, forming the peaks of the West Maui Mountains (in Hawaiian, Mauna Kahalawai). Pu\u02bbu Kukui is the highest, at . The larger, younger volcano to the east, Haleakal\u0101, rises to above sea level, and measures from seafloor to summit. The eastern flanks of both volcanoes are cut by deeply incised valleys and steep-sided ravines that run downslope to the rocky, windswept shoreline. The isthmus was formed by sandy erosional deposits.\nMaui's last eruption (originating in Haleakal\u0101's Southwest Rift Zone) likely occurred between 1480 and 1600; the resulting lava flows are located at Cape K\u012bna\u02bbu between \u02bb\u0100hihi Bay and La Perouse Bay. Haleakal\u0101 is dormant, but not extinct.\nMaui is part of a much larger unit, Maui Nui, that includes the islands of L\u0101na\u02bbi, Kaho\u02bbolawe, Moloka\u02bbi, and the now submerged Penguin Bank. During periods of reduced sea level, including as recently as 200,000 years ago, the channels between them become exposed and join the island into a single landmass.\nClimate.\nThe climate is characterized by a two-season year, tropical and uniform temperatures at any given elevation, geographic differences in rainfall, high relative humidity, extensive cloud formations (except on the leeward coasts and at the highest elevations), and dominant trade wind flow (especially at lower elevations).\nMaui has a range of climatic conditions and weather patterns:\nMaui displays diverse climatic conditions, each of which is specific to a sub-region. These sub-regions are defined by major physiographic features (such as mountains and valleys) and by location on the windward or leeward side.\nMaui's daytime temperatures average between and year round, while evening temperatures are about cooler in the more humid windward areas, about cooler in the drier leeward areas, and cooler still in higher elevations.\nAn exception to the normal pattern is the occasional winter Kona storm that brings rainfall to the South and West areas accompanied by high southwesterly winds (opposite of the prevailing trade wind direction).\nMicroclimates.\nMaui has examples of all microclimates, each typical to specific locations.\n These microclimates help to define the major regions: Central Maui; leeward South Maui and West Maui; windward North Shore and East Maui; and Upcountry.\nRainfall.\nShowers are common; while some of these are heavy, the majority are light and brief. Thunder and lightning are rare, even during intense storms. Throughout the lowlands, summer trade winds produce a drier season. Annual rainfall averages in leeward coastal areas, such as the shoreline from Maalaea Bay to Kaupo. At the other extreme, the average exceeds along the lower windward slopes of Haleakal\u0101, particularly along H\u0101na Highway. Big Bog, a spot on the edge of Haleakal\u0101 National Park overlooking Hana at about elevation had an estimated mean annual rainfall of over the 30-year period of 1978 to 2007. If the islands of Hawaii did not exist, the average annual rainfall on the same patch of water would be about . Instead, the mountainous topography induces an average of about .In the lowlands, rainfall is most likely to occur during night or morning hours, and least likely in mid-afternoon. The most pronounced daily variations in rainfall occur during the summer because summer rainfall generally consists of night-time trade wind showers. Winter rainfall in the lowlands is the result of storm activity, which is as likely to occur in the daytime as at night. Rainfall variability is far greater during the winter when occasional storms contribute appreciably to rainfall totals. Such wide swings in rainfall produce occasional droughts, sometimes causing economic losses. These occur when winter rains fail to produce sufficient significant rain, impacting normally dry areas outside the trade winds that depend on them the most. The winter of 2011\u20132012 produced extreme drought on the leeward sides Maui, and some other islands.\nNatural history.\nMaui is home to a large rainforest on the northeastern flanks of Haleakal\u0101, which serves as the drainage basin for that side.\nMaui is home to many coral reefs. However, many have been damaged by pollution, run-off, and tourism, although sea turtles, dolphins, and Hawaii's tropical fish remain abundant. Leeward Maui once had a dry cloud forest, but this was destroyed by human activities over the last three hundred years.\nWildlife.\nMaui is the leading whale-watching center in the Hawaiian Islands for the humpback whales who winter in Maui County's sheltered \u02bbAu\u02bbau Channel. These mammals migrate approximately from Alaskan waters each autumn and spend November\u2013April mating and birthing in the warm waters. They are typically sighted in pods: small groups of several adults, or groups of a mother, her calf, and a few suitors. Humpbacks are an endangered species protected by U.S. federal and Hawai\u02bbi state law. An estimated 21,000-26,000 humpbacks live in North Pacific waters. Although they face many dangers, due to pollution, commercial vessels, and military sonar testing, their numbers have increased rapidly in recent years, estimated at 7% growth per year.\nBirdlife lacks the concentration of endemic species found in some other Hawaiian islands. As recently as 200,000 years ago Maui was part of Maui Nui, thus reducing the odds that birds or other species would be endemic to any single one of these. Although Moloka\u02bbi had several endemic bird species, in modern times Maui Nui's other islands host little endemic birdlife. During and after the Maui Nui period, Maui hosted a species of moa-nalo (also found on Moloka\u02bbi, L\u0101na\u02bbi, and Kaho\u02bbolawe), a species of harrier (the wood harrier, shared with Moloka\u02bbi), an undescribed sea eagle (Maui only), and three species of ground-dwelling flightless ibis (\"Apteribis sp.\"), plus other species. Today, Maui's most notable surviving endemic birds are probably the \u02bbAkohekohe (\"Palmeria dolei\") and the Maui parrotbill (\"Pseudonestor xanthophrys\"), also known as \"Kiwikiu\", both of which are critically endangered and only found in an alpine forest on the windward slopes of Haleakal\u0101.\nConservation efforts have examined how to mitigate female parrotbill mortality since that is a key driving factor driving population decline. The parrotbill lacks resistance to mosquito-born diseases, particularly avian malaria, so only forests above 1500 meters of elevation provide refuge. The habitat was undergoing restoration in east Maui as of 2018. As Maui's human population grew, previously undeveloped areas that provided a refuge decreased in size. More than 250 species of local flora are federally listed as endangered or threatened. Birds found on other islands as well as Maui include the \u02bbI\u02bbiwi (\"Drepanis coccinea\"], \u02bbApapane (\"Himatione sanguinea\"), Hawai\u02bbi \u02bbAmakihi (\"Chlorodrepanis virens),\" as Maui \u02bbAlauahio (\"Paroreomyza montana\") well as the Nene (\"Branta sandvicensis\", Hawaii's state bird), Hawaiian coot (\"Fulica alai\"), Hawaiian stilt (\"Himantopus mexicanus knudseni\").\nIn 2024, Haleakal\u0101 National Park began to employ the incompatible insect technique to reduce the park's mosquito population.\nMaui is also home to the Hawaiian hoary bat, Hawaii's only native terrestrial mammal. Marine mammals notably include spinner, bottlenose, and spotted dolphins.\nHistory.\nPolynesians from Tahiti were Maui's original inhabitants. They introduced the kapu system, a strict social order that affected all aspects of life and became the core of Hawaiian culture. Modern Hawaiian history began in the mid-18th century. Kamehameha I, king Hawai\u02bbi island, invaded Maui in 1790 and fought the inconclusive Battle of Kepaniwai. He returned to Hawai\u02bbi to battle a rival, subduing Maui a few years later.\nEuropean Contact.\nOn November 26, 1778, explorer James Cook became the first European to see Maui. Cook never set foot on the island, because he was unable to find a suitable landing. The first European to come ashore was French admiral Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse, who landed on the shores of what became La Perouse Bay on May 29, 1786. More Europeans followed: traders, whalers, loggers (e.g., of sandalwood) and missionaries. The latter began to arrive from New England in 1823, settling in Lahaina, at that time Hawaii's capitol. Missionaries taught reading and writing, devised the Hawaiian alphabet in order to translate a Bible into Hawaiian, operated a printing press in Lahaina, and began recording the islands' history, which had been transmitted only orally. The missionaries both altered and preserved the native culture. The religious work altered the culture while the literacy efforts preserved history and language. Missionaries started the first school in Lahaina, Lahainaluna Mission School, which opened in 1831 and still exists.\nWhaling.\nAt the height of the whaling era (1843\u20131860), Lahaina was a major center. In one season over 400 ships visited with up to 100 anchored at one time in L\u0101hain\u0101 Roads. Ships tended to stay for weeks rather than days, fostering extended drinking and the rise of prostitution, against which the missionaries battled. Whaling declined steeply at the end of the 19th century as petroleum replaced whale oil.\nAlong with the rest of Hawaii, Maui was part of the Hawaiian Kingdom, the Republic of Hawaii, Hawaiian territory, and the state of Hawaii.\nIn 1937, Vibora Luviminda trade union conducted the final ethnic strike action in the Hawaiian Islands against four Maui sugarcane plantations, demanding higher wages and the dismissal of five foremen. Manuel Fagel and nine other strike leaders were arrested, and charged with kidnapping a worker. Fagel spent four months in jail while the strike continued. Eventually, Vibora Luviminda made its point and the workers won a 15% increase in wages after 85 days on strike, but no written contract was signed.\nWorld War II.\nMaui was involved in the Pacific Theater of World War II as a staging center, training base, and rest and relaxation site. At the peak in 1943\u20131944, more than 100,000 soldiers were based there. The main base of the 4th Marine Division was in Haiku. Beaches were used to practice landings and train in marine demolition and sabotage.\nDevelopment.\nThe island experienced rapid population growth through 2007. At the time, K\u012bhei was one of the most rapidly growing towns in the United States. The island attracted many retirees, with accompanying service providers. Population growth produced strains, including traffic, housing cost/availability, and access to water.\nIn the 2000s, controversies raged over whether to allow continued real-estate development. Vacation rentals in residential neighborhoods became a flashpoint - many were unpermitted, and were later closed after enforcement escalated. The Hawaii Superferry briefly offered interisland service, before it was banned for not having completed an EIS.\nThe creator of the apparel company Uniqlo and the richest man in Japan, Tadashi Yanai a golf enthusiast, paid $75 million to purchase two golf courses from Maui Land &amp; Pineapple in 2014, the company primarily controlled by Steve Case, a native of Hawaii.\nIn 2016, Maui residents convinced officials to switch to organic pesticides for highway applications after they learned that label requirements for glyphosate formulations had not been followed.\nWater supply.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe new millennium brought droughts, increasing pressure on the \u02bb\u012aao aquifer, with withdrawals rising above 18 million U.S. gallons (68,000 m3) per day. Recent estimates indicate that Maui has a potential supply of potable water around 476 million U.S. gallons (1,800,000 m3) per day, virtually all of which drains into the ocean.\nWater for agriculture comes mostly from East Maui streams, routed through a network of tunnels and ditches dug by Chinese laborers in the 19th century.\nIn 2006, Paia petitioned the county to avoid mixing in treated water from wells known to be contaminated with 1,2-dibromoethane and 1,2-dibromo-3-chloropropane from former pineapple cultivation. Agriculture companies were released from liability for these chemicals. In 2009, the Office of Hawaiian Affairs and others successfully argued in court that sugar companies should reduce the amount of water they take from four streams.\nEconomy.\nTourism is Maui's major industry. Other large sectors include development, retail, business services, health care, and government. Maui has a growing presence in agriculture and information technology.\nUnemployment tends to be well below the US average, e.g., 1.7% in December 2006, rising to only 9% in March 2009 before falling to 2.1% in January, 2018. The 2023 fires upended that norm, raising unemployment above the Hawaii and US figures.\nAgriculture.\nMaui's primary agriculture products are corn and other seeds, fruits, cattle, wine, and vegetables. Specific products include coffee, macadamia nuts, papaya, flowers and fresh pineapple. In 1974, Emil Tedeschi of the Napa Valley winegrower family of Calistoga, California, established the first Hawaiian commercial winery, the Tedeschi Winery (later Maui Wine) at Ulupalakua Ranch, initially focused on pineapple wine.\nHistorically, Maui's primary products were sugar and pineapple. Maui Land &amp; Pineapple Company and Hawaiian Commercial and Sugar Company (HC&amp;S, a subsidiary of Alexander and Baldwin Company) dominated agricultural activity. In 2016, sugar production ended. Haliimaile Pineapple Co. grows pineapple on former Maui Land &amp; Pineapple Co. land.\nIn November 2014, a Maui County referendum enacted a moratorium on genetically engineered crops. Shortly thereafter Monsanto and other agribusinesses obtained a court injunction suspending the moratorium.\nIn 2018, Canadian pension fund Public Sector Pension Investment Board purchased A&amp;B's Maui farmlands (41,000 acres) and contracted with Mahi Pono, a subsidiary of Trinitas Partners to return these fallow lands to agriculture. Mahi Pono also has a controlling interest in Maui Cattle Company.\nInformation technology.\nMost technology organizations that are located on the island occupy the Maui Research &amp; Technology Park which is located in Kihei. This includes the Maui Research and Technology Center and the Pacific Disaster Center. It is a program of the High Technology Development Corporation, an agency of the State of Hawaii, whose focus is to facilitate the growth of Hawaii's commercial high-technology sector.\nAstrophysics.\nMaui is an important center for advanced astronomical research. The Haleakal\u0101 Observatory was Hawaii's first astronomical research and development facility, operating at the Maui Space Surveillance Site (MSSS) electro-optical facility. \"At the 10,023-foot summit of the long-dormant volcano Haleakal\u0101, operational satellite tracking facilities are co-located with a research and development facility providing data acquisition and communication support. The high elevation, dry climate, and freedom from light pollution offer virtually year-round observation of satellites, missiles, man-made orbital debris, and astronomical objects.\"\nSports.\nSnorkeling/diving.\nSnorkeling and diving are popular activities on Maui, with over 30 beaches and bays and at Molokini. Maui's trade winds tend to come from the northeast, making the most popular places to snorkel on the sheltered south and west shores. Maui's ocean water is especially clear due in part to its isolation in the Central Pacific.\nWindsurfing.\nMaui is a well-known destination for windsurfing. Kanaha Beach Park is a very well-known windsurfing spot and may have stand-up paddle boarders or surfers if there are waves and no wind. Windsurfing has evolved on Maui since the early 1980s when it was recognized as an ideal location to test equipment and publicize the sport.\nSurfing.\nSurfing is one of Hawaii's most popular sports. Ho'okipa Beach Park is one of Maui's most famous surfing and windsurfing spots. Other frequently surfed areas include Slaughterhouse Beach, Honolua Bay, Pe'ahi (Jaws), and Fleming Beach. The north side absorbs the most swell during the winter season and the south and west in the summertime. Due to island blocking, summer south swells tend to be weak and rare. Standup paddleboarding is popular across Maui.\nKitesurfing.\nKitesurfing is popular, particularly at Kanaha Beach Park.\nTourism.\nThe main tourist attractions are H\u0101na and Haleakal\u0101 National Park. H\u0101na Highway runs along the east coast, crossing many streams and passing black sand beaches and waterfalls. Haleakal\u0101 National Park is home to Haleakal\u0101, a dormant volcano. Another attraction is the Maui Ocean Center aquarium in Ma'alaea.\nHowever, visitors spend most of their time at and around the resorts in West Maui (K\u0101\u02bbanapali, N\u0101pili-Honok\u014dwai, Kahana, Napili, Kapalua) and South Maui (K\u012bhei, Wailea-M\u0101kena). Cruise ships dock at Kahului Harbor. Smaller ports at Lahaina Harbor (temporarily closed) and Ma\u02bbalaea Harbor (located between Lahaina and Kihei). The town of Lahaina was a popular attraction until the 2023 fires, but is closed indefinitely.\nWhile winning travel industry awards as \"Best Island In The World\" in recent years some locals and environmentalists criticized what the saw as overdevelopment. Activist groups such as Save Makena have taken the government to court to protect local citizens' rights.\nTransport.\nAirports.\nThree airports provide air service to Maui:\nMajor highways.\nAll route numbers on Maui begin with the number 3. Two-digit routes represent primary highways, which are maintained by the state. Three- and four-digit routes typically serve as secondary arterials, with the first two digits often corresponding to an associated primary highway. Some of these secondary routes are county-maintained and may remain unsigned.\nHealthcare.\nMalama I Ke Ola Health Center and Maui Memorial Medical Center (MMMC) are the only acute care hospital in Maui County. Kula Hospital is a critical access hospital located on the southern half in the rural town of Kula. Kula Hospital is an MMMC affiliate. Although not technically a hospital or emergency room, Hana Health Clinic (or Hana Medical Center), works in cooperation with American Medical Response and MMMC to stabilize and transport patients with emergent medical conditions. These facilities operate 24/7.\nInternational relations.\nMaui is twinned with:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70960", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70960", "title": "Xena Warrior Princess", "text": ""}
{"id": "70961", "revid": "28422", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70961", "title": "Kaua\u02bbi", "text": "Fourth largest island in Hawaii\nKaua\u02bbi, sometimes written Kauai, is one of the main Hawaiian Islands. \nKaua\u02bbi has an area of 562.3 square miles (1,456.4 km2), making it the fourth-largest of the islands and the 21st-largest island in the United States. Kaua\u02bbi is 73 miles (117 km) northwest of O\u02bbahu, across the Kaua\u02bbi Channel. The island's 2020 population was 73,298.\nStyling itself the \"Garden Isle\", Kaua\u02bbi is the site of Waimea Canyon State Park and N\u0101 Pali Coast State Park. It forms the bulk of Kaua\u02bbi County, which includes Ni\u02bbihau as well as the small nearby islands of Ka\u02bbula and Lehua.\nEtymology and language.\nHawaiian narrative derives the name's origin from the legend of Hawai\u02bbiloa, the Polynesian navigator credited with discovering the Hawaiian Islands. The story relates that he named the island after a favorite son; a possible translation of Kaua\u02bbi is \"place around the neck\", describing how a father would carry his child. Another possible translation is \"food season\".\nKaua\u02bbi was known for its distinct dialect of the Hawaiian language, which still survives on Ni\u02bbihau. While the dominant dialect is based on that of Hawai\u02bbi island, which has no sound, the Kaua\u02bbi dialect had this sound. This happened because the Kaua\u02bbi dialect had retained the old Polynesian sound, replaced in the \"standard\" Hawai\u02bbi dialect by . This difference applies to all words with these sounds, so the Kauaian name for Kaua\u02bbi was pronounced \"Taua\u02bbi\", and Kapa\u02bba was pronounced \"Tapa\u02bba\".\nHistory.\nSettlement.\nIt is uncertain when humans discovered the Hawaiian islands. Early archaeological studies suggested that Polynesian explorers from the Marquesas Islands or Society Islands may have arrived as early as 600AD, possibly with a second wave arriving from Tahiti around 1100AD Later analyses suggest that the first settlers arrived around 900\u20131200AD\nArrival of James Cook.\nIn January 1778, British navigator James Cook made the first recorded contact between any European and the indigenous people of the Hawaiian Islands when he arrived at Kaua\u02bbi by accident while crossing the Pacific during his third voyage of exploration. The British immediately observed similarities in language and culture between the Kauaians and the parts of Polynesia with which they were already familiar, such as Tahiti. After some Kauaians were persuaded to board his ship, Cook later wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLater, while investigating a location for the ships to anchor, a shore party was mobbed by a crowd, a shot was fired, and one Kauaian was killed. The next day, January 20, 1778, the two ships anchored in Waimea Bay on the southwest coast, where the expedition spent days obtaining fresh water and trading for fresh food. The local people especially valued iron: even small amounts, such as a single nail, could be traded for plentiful food supplies. Within two weeks, Cook left the vicinity of the Hawaiian Islands to continue his original mission.311-31512-15\nCession to the Kingdom of Hawaii.\nAt the time of Cook's visit, the Hawaiian islands comprised several kingdoms.30 By 1795, the king of Hawaii Island, Kamehameha I, had established the Kingdom of Hawaii, uniting most of the islands, but Kaua\u02bbi remained independent. Kamehameha tried to conquer Kaua\u02bbi in 1796, but stormy seas caused the attack from Oahu to be canceled and he was afterward distracted by events elsewhere. By 1803, Kaua\u02bbi was ruled by Kaumuali\u02bbi, who maintained his independence from the Kingdom of Hawaii. A second invasion of Kaua\u02bbi from Oahu was planned but this too was canceled after an epidemic broke out among Kamehameha's forces. In 1810, a diplomatic agreement was reached whereby Kaumuali\u02bbi agreed to be Kamehameha's vassal,47-50 and to cede Kaua\u02bbi to the Kingdom of Hawai\u02bbi upon his death by making Kamehameha's son his heir.155-156, 186\nSch\u00e4ffer affair.\nThe Sch\u00e4ffer affair was a diplomatic episode instigated in 1815 by Georg Anton Sch\u00e4ffer, a German working with the Russian American Company. While at Kaua\u02bbi in 1816, Sch\u00e4ffer involved Kaumuali\u02bbi in \"a treasonable design\" whereby Kaua\u02bbi would accept the protection of the Russian Empire in exchange for exclusive trading privileges. In 1817, a fort was built at Waimea and a Russian flag raised over it. But on Kamehameha's orders, and persuaded by other foreign traders, Kaumuali\u02bbi abandoned his relationship with Sch\u00e4ffer and forced the Russians to leave Kaua\u02bbi.57-58\nPlantations.\nFrom the 1830s till the mid-20th century, plantations of sugarcane were Kaua\u02bbi's most important industry. In 1835, the first sugarcane plantation was founded on Kaua\u02bbi, and for the next century the industry dominated Hawai\u02bbi's economy. Kaua\u02bbi's last sugarcane plantation, the 118-year-old Gay &amp; Robinson Plantation, stopped planting sugarcane in 2008.\nOld Sugar Mill of Koloa.\nIn 1835, Old Koloa Town opened a sugar mill. From 1906 to 1934 the office of County Clerk was held by John Mahi\u02bbai K\u0101neakua, who had been active in attempts to restore Queen Liliuokalani to the throne after the U.S. takeover of Hawai\u02bbi in 1893.\nValdemar Knudsen.\nValdemar Emil Knudsen was a Norwegian who arrived on Kaua\u02bbi in 1857. Knudsen, or \"Kanuka\", originally managed Grove Farm in Koloa. He later sought a warmer land and purchased the leases to Mana and Kekaha, where he became a successful sugarcane plantation owner. He settled in Waiawa, between Mana and Kekaha, immediately across the channel from Ni\u02bbihau Island. His son, Eric Alfred Knudsen, was born in Waiawa.\nKnudsen was appointed land administrator by King Kamehameha IV for an area covering 400 km2, and was given the title \"konohiki\" as well as a position as a noble under the king. Knudsen, who spoke fluent Hawaiian, later became an elected representative and an influential politician.\nKnudsen lends his name to the Knudsen Gap, a narrow pass between H\u00e3\u2019upu Ridge and the Kahili Ridge. Its primary function was as a sugar farm.\nFrank VanderSloot.\nThe historic 105-acre Valley House home on Kauai, where scenes from Jurassic Park and Pirates of the Caribbean were filmed, is owned by Frank VanderSloot, the wealthy creator of the health and wellness company \"Melaleuca\". He runs the two biggest meat processing facilities in the state. He is an advocate for localising Hawaii's cattle sector. He has said, \"The pineapple has vanished. There is no more sugarcane. Cattle are actually the only thing left at the moment..\"\nGeography.\nThe five-million-year-old island, the oldest of the main islands (Ni\u02bbihau is older), was formed volcanically as the Pacific Plate passed over the Hawaii hotspot. It consists of an eroded shield volcano with a diameter summit caldera and two flanking calderas. Rejuvenation of the volcano 0.6\u20131.40 million years ago left lava flows and cones over the eastern two-thirds of the island.\nKaua\u02bbi's highest peak is Kawaikini, at . The second-highest is Mount Wai\u02bbale\u02bbale, near the center of the island, above sea level. One of the wettest spots on earth, with an annual average rainfall of , is on the east side of Mount Wai\u02bbale\u02bbale. The rain has eroded deep valleys in the central mountains, carving out canyons with many scenic waterfalls. On the west side of the island, Waimea town is at the mouth of the Waimea River, whose flow formed Waimea Canyon, one of the world's most scenic canyons, which is part of Waimea Canyon State Park. At deep, Waimea Canyon is often called \"The Grand Canyon of the Pacific\". Kokeo Point lies on the island's south side. The Na Pali Coast is an isolated center for recreation, including kayaking along the beaches and hiking on the trail along the coastal cliffs. The headlands Kamala Point, Kawai Point, Kawelikoa Point, Kuahonu Point, Pao\u02bba Point, and Molehu Point are on the southeast of the island; Makaokaha\u02bbi Point and Weli Point are in the south.\nClimate.\nKaua\u02bbi's climate is tropical, with generally humid and stable conditions year-round, although infrequent storms cause severe flooding. At the lower elevations, the annual precipitation varies from an average of about on the windward (northeastern) shore to less than on the (southwestern) leeward side of the island. The average temperature in Lihu'e, the county seat, ranges from in February to in August and September. \nKaua\u02bbi's mountainous regions offer cooler temperatures in contrast to the warm coastal areas. At K\u014dke\u02bbe State Park, ASL, day temperatures vary from an average of in January to in July. In the winter, temperatures have been known to drop down to the 30s and 40s at the park, which holds an unofficial record low of , recorded in February 1986 at Kanaloahuluhulu Meadow.\nPrecipitation in Kaua\u02bbi's mountainous regions averages annually. About southeast of K\u014dke\u02bbe state park, at an elevation of , is the Mt. Wai\u02bbale\u02bbale rain gauge. Mt. Wai\u02bbale\u02bbale is often cited as the wettest spot on earth, although this has been disputed. Based on data for the period from 1931 through 1960, the average yearly precipitation was (U.S. Environmental Science Services Administration, 1968). Between 1949 and 2004, the average yearly precipitation at Mt. Wai\u02bbale\u02bbale was .\nKaua\u02bbi also holds a record in hourly precipitation. During a storm on January 24\u201325, 1956, a rain gauge at Kaua\u02bbi's former Kilauea Sugar Plantation recorded a record of precipitation in just 60 minutes. The value for one hour is an underestimate, since the rain gauge overflowed, which may have resulted in an error by as much as . An accurate measurement may have exceeded Holt, Missouri's world-record rainfall of in 42 minutes on June 22, 1947.\nTime zone.\nHawaii Standard Time () is observed on Kaua\u02bbi year-round. When mainland states are on daylight saving time, for example, the time on Kaua\u02bbi is three hours behind the West Coast of the United States and six hours behind the East Coast.\nEconomy.\nTourism is Kaua\u02bbi's largest industry. In 2007, 1,271,000 people visited. The two largest groups were from the continental United States (84% of all visitors) and Japan (3%). As of 2003, approximately 27,000 jobs existed on Kaua\u02bbi. The largest sector was accommodation/food services (26%, 6,800 jobs), followed by government (15%) and retail (14.5%), with agriculture accounting for 2.9% (780 jobs) and educational services providing 0.7% (183 jobs). The visitors' industry accounted for one third of Kaua\u02bbi's income. Employment is dominated by small businesses, with 87% of all non-farm businesses having fewer than 20 employees. As of 2003, Kaua\u02bbi's poverty rate was 10.5%, compared to the mainland at 10.7%.\nAs of 2014, the median home price was about $400,000.\nLand in Kaua\u02bbi is very fertile; farmers raise many varieties of fruit and other crops. Guava, coffee, sugarcane, mango, banana, papaya, avocado, star fruit, kava, noni and pineapple are all cultivated on the island, but most agricultural land is used for raising cattle. \nKaua\u02bbi is home to the U.S. Navy's \"Barking Sands\" Pacific Missile Range Facility, on the western shore. \nMF and HF (\"shortwave\") radio station WWVH, sister station to WWV and low frequency WWVB in Fort Collins, Colorado, is on the west coast of Kaua\u02bbi, about south of Barking Sands. WWVH, WWV and WWVB are operated by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology, broadcasting standard time and frequency information to the public.\nEnergy.\nKaua\u02bbi Island Utility Cooperative was formed in November 2002. KIUC operates as a not-for-profit organization that is owned by its members and governed by an elected board of directors. It serves 39,978 meters (electric accounts). Of those, it has 29,000 residential member-owners and 4,000 commercial member-owners. KIUC serves 550 square miles with 1,530 transmission and distribution lines. Its generating capacity is 259.2 megawatts. In 2023, KIUC reported that 57.8% of its electricity came from renewable energy sources. In 2023, the fuel mix by source was 42.1% fossil fuel, 24.7% utility solar, 13.4% customer solar, and 7.8% biomass. KIUC is headquartered in L\u012bhu\u02bbe.\nIn the 1970s, Kaua\u02bbi burned sugarcane waste to supply most of its electricity.\nBy 2008, transition of energy sources and growth in generating capacity had occurred, with most of Kaua\u02bbi's electricity produced by imported liquid petroleum. In 2006 and 2007, the inputs cost $69.3\u00a0million and $83\u00a0million, respectively. By 2011, 92% of KIUC's power came from diesel.\nBy 2017, KIUC's fuel mix was 56% fossil fuels, 9% hydroelectric, 12% biomass and 23% solar. KIUC integrated large-scale solar into its grid so that, during sunny daylight hours, 97% or more of its generation came from renewable sources. KIUC offers $1,000 rebates to residential customers who have solar water heating systems installed on their homes.\nIn 2017, KIUC opened a Tesla Energy 13 MW / 52 MWh battery next to the 12 MW Kapaia solar plant for 13.9\u00a2/kWh. In December 2018, KIUC opened an AES Distributed Energy project for 20 MW solar with 20 MW / 100 MWh batteries priced at 11.1\u00a2/kWh.\nTowns and communities.\nL\u012bhu\u02bbe, on the island's southeastern coast, is the seat of Kaua\u02bbi County and the island's second-largest town. Kapa\u02bba, on the \"Coconut Coast\" (site of an old coconut plantation) about north of L\u012bhu\u02bbe, has a population of over 10,000, or about 50% greater than L\u012bhu\u02bbe. Princeville, on the island's north side, was once the capital of Kaua\u02bbi.\nCommunities on Kaua\u02bbi range in population from the roughly 10,000 people in Kapa\u02bba to tiny hamlets. Below are the larger or more notable of those from the northernmost end of Hawaii Route 560 to the western terminus of Hawaii Route 50:\nTransport.\nAir.\nLocated on the southeastern side of the island, Lihue Airport is the island's only commercial airport. It has direct routes to Honolulu, Kahului/Maui, Kona/Hawaii, the U.S. mainland, and Vancouver, Canada. General aviation airports on the island are Port Allen Airport and Princeville Airport.\nThe Pacific Missile Range Facility has a 6,006-foot runway that is closed to general aviation traffic, but could be used for an emergency landing.\nCruise ships.\nSome Princess Cruises and Norwegian Cruise Line ships stop in Nawiliwili Harbor, Lihue.\nHighways.\nSeveral state highways serve Kaua\u02bbi County:\nOther major highways that link other parts of the Island to the main highways of Kaua\u02bbi are:\nMass transit.\nThe Kaua\u02bbi Bus is the public transportation service of the County of Kaua\u02bbi.\nPlaces of interest.\nThe Kaua\u02bbi Heritage Center of Hawai\u02bbian Culture and the Arts was founded in 1998. Its mission is to nurture appreciation and respect for Hawaiian culture. It offers classes in Hawaiian language, hula, lei and cordage making, the lunar calendar, chanting, and trips to cultural sites.\nPopular culture.\nKaua\u02bbi has been featured in more than 70 Hollywood movies and TV shows, including the musical \"South Pacific\" and Disney's 2002 animated feature film \"Lilo &amp; Stitch\" along with its franchise's three sequel films (2003's \"Stitch! The Movie\", 2005's ', and 2006's \"Leroy &amp; Stitch\") and first television series ('). Scenes from \"South Pacific\" were filmed in the vicinity of Hanalei. Waimea Canyon was used in the filming of the 1993 film \"Jurassic Park\" and its 2015 sequel \"Jurassic World\" was shot in Kaua\u02bbi. Scenes by a waterfall in \"Mighty Joe Young\" were shot in Kaua\u02bbi. Parts of the island were used for the opening scenes of the film \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\". Other movies filmed here include \"Six Days Seven Nights\", the 1976 \"King Kong,\" and John Ford's 1963 film \"Donovan's Reef\". Recent films include \"Tropic Thunder\" and a biopic of Bethany Hamilton, \"Soul Surfer\". A scene in the opening credits of popular TV show \"M*A*S*H\" was filmed in Kaua\u02bbi (helicopter flying over mountain top). Some scenes from \"Just Go with It\", \"George of the Jungle\", and \"\" were also filmed in Kaua\u02bbi. \"A Perfect Getaway\" is set in Kaua\u02bbi.\nParts of the 2002 film \"Dragonfly\" were filmed in 2001 in Kaua\u02bbi, but the people and the land were presented as South American.\nMajor acts of two Elvis Presley films, 1961's \"Blue Hawaii\" and 1966's \"Paradise, Hawaiian Style\", were filmed on Kaua\u02bbi. Both have scenes shot at the Coco Palms resort.\n\"The Descendants\", a 2011 film, has major parts shot in Kaua\u02bbi, where the main character and his cousins own ancestral lands they are considering selling. The film is based on the 2007 novel by Hawaiian writer Kaui Hart Hemmings.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70962", "revid": "36172507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70962", "title": "Hawai\u02bbi (island)", "text": "Largest island in Hawaii\n&lt;/noinclude&gt;\nHawai\u02bbi, sometimes written Hawaii, is the largest island in the United States, located in the state of Hawaii, the southernmost state in the union. It is the southeasternmost of the Hawaiian Islands, a chain of volcanic islands in the North Pacific Ocean. With an area of , it has 63% of the Hawaiian archipelago's combined landmass. However, it has only 13% of the archipelago's population. The island of Hawai\u02bbi is the third largest island in Polynesia, behind the North and South Islands of New Zealand.\nThe island is often referred to as the Island of Hawai\u02bbi or Hawai\u02bbi Island to distinguish it from the state. It is also referred to as The Big Island, due to its size relative to the other islands. In Hawaiian, the island is sometimes called \"Moku o Keawe\". The word \"keawe\" has several meanings. One definition, \"southern cross\", is said to be the name of an ancient chief. Another definition is \"the bearer\".\nHawai\u02bbi County is the local administrative unit. As of the 2020 census, the population was 200,629. The county seat and largest city is Hilo. Hawai\u02bbi County has no incorporated cities.\nHistory.\nHawai\u02bbi is allegedly named after Hawai\u02bbiloa, a legendary Polynesian navigator who is said to have discovered the island. Other accounts attribute the name to the legendary realm of Hawaiki, a place from which some Polynesians are said to have originated, the place where they transition to in the afterlife, or the realm of the gods and goddesses. The indigenous Hawaiian name of the island was originally\u00a0rendered and published as \"Owyhee\" or \"Owhyhee\".\nIt is uncertain when Hawai\u02bbi was first discovered by humans. Early archaeological studies suggested that Polynesian explorers from the Marquesas Islands or Society Islands may have arrived in the Hawaiian islands as early as the 3rd century AD, possibly with a second wave arriving from Tahiti around 1100. However, more recent analyses suggest that the first settlers arrived around 900\u20131200 AD.\nOral tradition holds one of the most famous \"ali\u02bbinui\" of Hawai\u02bbi to be \u02bbUmi-a-L\u012bloa, who united the island by force. He was the illegitimate son of L\u012bloa, ali\u02bbinui of Hawai\u02bbi who ruled from Waipi\u02bbo Valley in the H\u0101m\u0101kua district. When L\u012bloa died, the island passed to \u02bbUmi's half-brother Hakau. However, \u02bbUmi attacked and killed Hakau along with the \"ali\u02bbi (nobles)\" who served him, winning control of H\u0101m\u0101kua. He then proceeded to conquer the rebelling districts of Hilo, Puna, Ka\u02bb\u016b, and Kona. He placed the seat of his new government in Kailua in the Kona district.\nIn 1779, Captain James Cook made his second voyage to the Hawaiian islands, anchoring in Kealakekua Bay on the island of Hawai\u02bbi. He spent several weeks there, meeting and trading with locals and readying his ships for a planned trip to the Arctic. The Hawaiians received him hospitably, considering him to be an incarnation of the god Lono. Early in 1780, Cook departed. However, his ships were damaged in a storm immediately after setting sail, and he was forced to return to Kealakekua after only a week at sea. During this second anchoring, an altercation between the Europeans and the Hawaiians turned violent, resulting in the death of multiple people on both sides, including Cook himself. Peaceful relations were eventually restored with the crew of his ships, who departed for good later that month.15\u201320\nIn 1780, the island of Hawai\u02bbi was controlled by the \"ali\u02bbinui\" Kalani\u02bb\u014dpu\u02bbu, a descendant of \u02bbUmi-a-L\u012bloa. On his death in 1782, he designated his son K\u012bwala\u02bb\u014d as his heir. However, a feud between K\u012bwala\u02bb\u014d and Kalani\u02bb\u014dpu\u02bbu's nephew Pai\u02bbea Kamehameha soon escalated into a civil war. K\u012bwala\u02bb\u014d was killed in the Battle of Moku\u02bb\u014dhai later that same year, leaving control of the island divided between Kamehameha in the west, K\u012bwala\u02bb\u014d's uncle and advisor Keawema\u02bbuhili in the northeast, and K\u012bwala\u02bb\u014d's half-brother Ke\u014dua K\u016b\u02bbahu\u02bbula in the south. The three chiefs, aided by Western ships and weapons, fought to a standstill for eight years until 1790, when Ke\u014dua defeated and killed Keawema\u02bbuhili. In 1791 Kamehameha's men killed Ke\u014dua at a diplomatic meeting, leaving control of Hawai\u02bbi to Kamehameha.32\u201338\nKamehameha went on to conquer the rest of the Hawaiian islands, consolidating his control in 1810 with the peaceful surrender of Kaumuali\u02bbi, king of Kauai.47-60 He gave his new kingdom, and by extension the island chain itself, the name of his native island \u2013 the Kingdom of Hawai\u02bbi.\nIn 1822, missionary William Ellis arrived and was one of a party that completed a tour of the island, descriptions of which were later published in his journal.\nIn July, 1898, Hawai\u02bbi and all the Hawaiian islands were annexed by the United States, becoming the Territory of Hawaii. In 1905, the passage of the County Act established the County of Hawai\u02bbi, providing the island with local government for the first time since 1810.\nGeology and geography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (20.8%) is water. The county's land area comprises 62.7 percent of the state's land area. It is the highest percentage by any county in the United States. Delaware's Sussex County comes in second at 48.0 percent, while Rhode Island's Providence County is third at 39.6 percent.\nAt its greatest dimension, the island is across. Measured from its sea floor base to its highest peak, Mauna Kea at is the world's tallest mountain, taller than even Mount Everest, since the base of Mount Everest is above sea level.\nThe most southern point of Hawai\u02bbi, Ka Lae, is the southernmost point of the United States. The nearest landfall to the south is the Line Islands. To the northwest of the island of Hawai\u02bbi is the island of Maui, whose Haleakal\u0101 volcano is visible from Hawai\u02bbi Island across the \u02bbAlenuih\u0101h\u0101 Channel.\nVolcanism.\nThe island of Hawai\u02bbi is built from five separate shield volcanoes that erupted somewhat sequentially, one overlapping the other. These are (from oldest to youngest):\nGeological evidence from exposures of old surfaces on the south and west flanks of Mauna Loa led to the proposal that two ancient volcanic shields (named N\u012bnole and Kulani) were all but buried by the younger Mauna Loa. Geologists now consider these \"outcrops\" to be part of Mauna Loa.\nBased on geochemical (including trace elements) and isotope differences in their eruptive products, Hawaiian volcanoes fall into two families. The differences are believed due to their separate magma systems. Hual\u0101lai and Mauna Loa are members of one family, while Kohala, Mauna Kea, and Kilauea are members of the other.\nBecause Mauna Loa and K\u012blauea are active volcanoes, the island is growing. Between January 1983 and September 2002, lava flows added to the island. Lava flowing from K\u012blauea destroyed several towns, including Kapoho in 1960 and again in 2018, and Kalapana and Kaim\u016b in 1990. In 1987 lava filled in \"Queen's Bath\", a large, L-shaped, freshwater pool in the Kalapana area. Another 875 acres were added between May and July 2018 by the 2018 lower Puna eruption, with \"Fissure 8\" located within Leilani Estates subdivision being a primary source of the lava. Green Lake, the largest freshwater lake on the island, was covered by lava in that eruption as well as Ahalanui Beach Park and part of Isaac Hale Beach Park, the latter of which was inundated with black sand, rendering its boatramp unusable. Mauna Loa erupted briefly in 2022, 38 years after the prior activity.\nSome geologists also count two undersea volcanoes in the base of the island. M\u0101hukona off the northwest corner of the island has eroded below the ocean surface. Kama\u02bbehuakanaloa (formerly L\u014d\u02bbihi) is under water southeast of Hawai\u02bbi. It is an erupting seamount that has grown to reach below the ocean surface, and it is forecast to break the surface in 10,000 to 100,000 years.\nGreat Crack.\nThe Great Crack is an , and fissure in the island, in the district of Ka\u02bb\u016b. According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the Great Crack is the result of crustal dilation from magmatic intrusions into the southwest rift zone of K\u012blauea. While neither the earthquake of 1868 nor that of 1975 caused a measurable change in the Great Crack, lava welled out of its lower in 1823.\nTrails, rock walls, and archaeological sites from as old as the 12th century exist near the Great Crack. In August 2018, the National Park Service purchased nearly of private land adjacent to Hawai\u02bbi Volcanoes National Park, claiming that the area had important geological features to be studied and preserved.\nHilina Slump.\nThe Hilina Slump is a section of the south slope of K\u012blauea that is moving away from the island. Between 1990 and 1993, Global Positioning System (GPS) measurements showed a southward displacement of about per year. Undersea measurements show a \"bench\" that has formed a buttress and that this buttress may tend to reduce the likelihood of catastrophic detachment.\nEarthquakes and tsunamis.\nOn 2 April 1868, an earthquake with a magnitude estimated between 7.25 and 7.9 rocked the southeast coast of Hawai\u02bbi. This was the most destructive earthquake in the Hawai\u02bbi's recorded history. It triggered a landslide on Mauna Loa, north of P\u0101hala, killing 31 people. A tsunami claimed 46 more lives. The villages of Punalu\u02bbu, N\u012bnole, K\u0101w\u0101\u02bba, Honu\u02bbapo, and Keauhou were severely damaged. The tsunami reportedly rolled over the tops of the coconut trees up to high, and it reached inland a distance of a quarter of a mile (400 meters) in some places.\nOn 29 November 1975, a section of the Hilina Slump dropped and slid toward the ocean. This movement caused a 7.2 magnitude earthquake and a tsunami. Oceanfront property was washed off its foundations in Punalu\u02bbu. Two deaths were reported at Halape, and 19 other people were injured.\nThe island suffered damage from a tsunami caused by earthquakes in Alaska on 1 April 1946, and in Chile on 23 May 1960. Downtown Hilo was damaged by both tsunamis, with many lives lost. Just north of Hilo, Laup\u0101hoehoe lost 16 schoolchildren and five teachers in the tsunami of 1946.\nIn March 2011, a 9.0 magnitude earthquake off the east coast of Japan again created a tsunami that caused minor damage in Hawai\u02bbi. The estimated damage to public buildings was about US$3 million. In the Kona area this tsunami washed a house into Kealakekua Bay, destroyed a yacht club and tour boat offices in Keauhou Bay, caused extensive damage in Kailua-Kona, flooded the ground floor of the King Kamehameha Hotel, and temporarily closed the Kona Village Resort.\nIn early May 2018, hundreds of small earthquakes were detected on K\u012blauea's East Rift Zone, leading officials to issue evacuation warnings. On 3 May 2018, the volcano erupted in Puna after a 5.0 earthquake earlier in the day, causing evacuations of Leilani Estates and Lanipuna Gardens subdivisions. A seemingly related 5.3 magnitude quake and a subsequent 6.9 magnitude earthquake occurred on 4 May.\nVolcanic fog.\nVog (volcanic fog) can envelop the island of Hawai\u02bbi when K\u012blauea is active. Since the termination of volcanic activity in September 2018, vog has largely disappeared on the west side of the island. The gas plumes created a blanket of vog that the trade winds mostly deflect toward the Kona coast. Vog can damage the health of plants, humans, and other animals. Most of the aerosols are acidic and of a size where they can remain in the lungs to damage them. Flu-like symptoms and general lethargy are reported, and are especially pronounced in people with respiratory conditions.\nNational protected areas.\nThe island hosts many specialized ecosystems/microclimates, including many protected by federal designation:\nEconomy.\nSugarcane was the backbone of the island economy for more than a century. In the mid-20th century, sugarcane plantations began to downsize, and in 1995 the island's last plantation closed.\nMost of the island's economy depends on tourism, centered primarily in resort areas on the western coast of the island in the North Kona and South Kohala districts. Sustainable tourism is increasing.\nDiversified agriculture is a growth sector. Major crops include macadamia nuts, papaya, flowers, tropical and temperate vegetables, aquaculture, and coffee beans. The island's orchid production is the state's largest. The island is home to one of the United States' largest cattle ranches: Parker Ranch, on in Waimea.\nThe island is known for astronomy, with numerous telescopes positioned on the summit of Mauna Kea at the Mauna Kea Observatories, where atmospheric clarity is excellent and little light pollution intrudes. Astronomy has become somewhat controversial, given accusations of mismanagement by the observatory manager, the University of Hawai\u02bbi. The proposed addition of the Thirty Meter Telescope (TMT) generated protests that stalled the project and led to the transfer of management responsibility to a Governor-appointed body.\nNELHA (Natural Energy Laboratory of Hawaii Authority), a state developed site, is a green economic development ocean science and technology park on the west side of the island. It provides resources and facilities for energy and ocean-related research, education, and commercial activities in an environmentally sound and culturally sensitive manner. Business tenants on this coastal site include microalgae farms, aquaculture, solar technology and marine biotech. Tenants have access to three sets of pipelines delivering deep-sea water from a depth of up to , as well as pristine sea surface water and almost constant sunshine. A 2012 study by the University of Hawai\u02bbi Economic Research Organization reported that the total economic impact of activities at NELHA was $87.7\u00a0million and created 583 jobs.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the county's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top employers in the county are the following:\nTransportation.\nAir.\nTwo commercial airports serve Hawai\u02bbi Island:\nThe 2 private airports are:\nRail.\nNo railroad or tram service exists today on Hawai\u02bbi Island.\nThe Hawai\u02bbi Consolidated Railway (originally the Hilo Railroad) operated in varying magnitudes from 1899 until 1947. The railway ran out of Hilo, northbound to Pa\u02bbauilo and southbound to P\u0101hoa, Glenwood (near Volcano), and Kamaili.\nOther smaller freight only railroads also operated on the island, primarily for the transport of sugarcane and other crops. Some of these include Wai\u0101kea Plantation Railroad (in Hilo), Honoka\u02bba Plantation Railroad, Hawaii Railway (on the north shore), Hawaiian Agricultural Company Railroad (in P\u0101hala) and West Hawaii Railway (between Kailua-Kona and Captain Cook).\nBus.\nIsland-wide bus service is provided by Hele-On Bus.\nMajor highways.\nThe 3 Hawai\u02bbi Scenic Byways are:\nMaritime.\nThe major ports are Hilo Harbor on the east side and Kawaihae Harbor and Kailua Pier on the west side.\nCruise ships often stop at Kailua-Kona (90 times in 2017) and Hilo (108 times in 2017).\nThere are several small boatramps throughout the island for public and private use.\nTourism.\nHotels on the east coast.\nThe larger hotels on the east coast are:\nHotels on the west coast.\nThe larger hotels on the west coast, from north (Puak\u014d) to south ():\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70963", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70963", "title": "Basil Valentine", "text": "Pseudonymous author\nBasil Valentine is the Anglicised version of the name Basilius Valentinus, ostensibly a 15th-century alchemist, possibly Canon of the Benedictine Priory of Saint Peter in Erfurt, Germany but more likely a pseudonym used by one or several 16th-century German authors.\nAccording to John Maxson Stillman, who wrote on the history of chemistry, there is no evidence of such a name on the rolls in Germany or Rome and no mention of this name before 1600. His putative history, like his imaginary portrait, appears to be of later creation than the writings themselves.\nDuring the 18th century it was suggested that the author of the works attributed to Basil Valentine was Johann Th\u00f6lde, a salt manufacturer in Germany who lived roughly 1565\u20131624. Modern scholarship now suggests that one author was Th\u00f6lde, but that others were involved. Th\u00f6lde published the first five books under Valentine's name.\nWhoever he was, Basil Valentine had considerable knowledge of chemistry. He demonstrated that ammonia could be obtained by the action of alkali on sal-ammoniac (ammonium chloride), described the production of hydrochloric acid by acidifying brine of common salt (sodium chloride), and created ethyl chloride and oil of vitriol (sulfuric acid), among other achievements.\n\"The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine\".\n\"The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine\" is a widely reproduced alchemical book attributed to Valentine, first published in 1599 by Johann Th\u00f6lde. It contains two parts, the second of which houses the twelve keys. These were accompanied by woodcut engravings from later publications in the early seventeenth century.\nSelected publications.\nNumerous publications on alchemy in Latin and German were published under the name Basil Valentine. They have been translated into many European languages, including English, French, Russian and others. The following list is roughly organized in order of translation or publication date.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70964", "revid": "40638945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70964", "title": "Loretta Sanchez", "text": "American politician (born 1960)\nLoretta Lorna Sanchez (born January 7, 1960) is an American politician who served in the United States House of Representatives from 1997 to 2017, representing parts of central Orange County, California. A member of the Democratic Party, she was first elected in 1996, when she defeated long-serving Republican U.S. Representative Bob Dornan by fewer than 1,000 votes. During her time in the House of Representatives, Sanchez was a member of the Blue Dog Coalition of moderate-to-conservative Democrats.\nSanchez chose not to run for re-election to the House in 2016, instead opting to run in the state's U.S. Senate race. She was defeated in the general election by fellow Democrat, California Attorney General and future U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris, 61.6% to 38.4%.\nShe is the sister of Linda S\u00e1nchez, who currently represents California congressional district in the U.S. House of Representatives.\nEarly life and education.\nSanchez was born in Lynwood, California, and graduated from Katella High School in Anaheim in 1978. Her father was a unionized machinist, and her mother worked as a secretary. Her Mexican-immigrant parents had seven children, one of whom\u2014Linda S\u00e1nchez\u2014also served in Congress, making them the first (and, as of December\u00a02023[ [update]], the only) sisters to serve simultaneously in Congress.\nLoretta Sanchez joined the United Food and Commercial Workers when she worked as an ice cream server in high school and received a union scholarship to college. She received her undergraduate degree in economics from Chapman College in Orange in 1982, obtained her MBA from American University in Washington, D.C. in 1984, and was a financial analyst for defense contractor Booz Allen Hamilton until entering the House. Sanchez describes herself as growing up a \"shy, quiet girl\" who did not speak English. She credits government with much of her success in public life.\nU.S. House of Representatives.\nCongressional Hispanic Caucus.\nIn February 2006, Sanchez withdrew from the Congressional Hispanic Caucus's political action committee, along with five other members, because the caucus chairman, Joe Baca, authorized political contributions to members of his family who were running for state and local offices in California.\nSanchez and other CHC members also claim that Baca was improperly elected chairman of the caucus in November 2006 because the vote failed to use secret ballots, as required in the group's bylaws. On January 31, 2007, Sanchez quit the CHC because she claimed that Baca repeatedly treated the group's female members with disrespect. Other female lawmakers have made the same complaint about Baca. In the election for caucus chairman, only one female member of the 23-member caucus voted to support Baca's candidacy.\nAccording to Sanchez, as well as Linda S\u00e1nchez (her sister), and Hilda Solis, Baca called Loretta Sanchez \"a whore\" while speaking to other lawmakers. Baca denied the charge. Politico reported that Sanchez claimed California Assembly Speaker Fabian N\u00fa\u00f1ez heard the comment from Baca and repeated it to Sanchez, yet N\u00fa\u00f1ez claimed not to recall any such comment. Sanchez, however, claimed after the article was published that she had never mentioned N\u00fa\u00f1ez to Politico.\nPolitical positions.\nSanchez has stated she is a \"moderate\" Democrat, but in 2009, Sanchez had a 'zero' approval rating from the American Conservative Union.\nShe represented a district in Orange County, long a bastion of suburban conservatism, and is a member of the Blue Dog Coalition and the New Democrat Coalition; she reportedly voted with Nancy Pelosi 97.8% of the time during the 111th Congress.\nSanchez is known for her interests in education, crime, economic development, and protections for senior citizens.\n\"National Journal\" rated her votes in 2006 in three areas: Economic, Social, and Foreign. The ratings are: Economic = 71 liberal/28 conservative; Social = 80 liberal/19 conservative; Foreign = 70 liberal/28 conservative.\nEducation.\nSanchez staunchly opposed the Republicans' Head Start program overhaul in the 108th Congress, invoking her experience growing up poor and challenged by a speech impediment. During debate on the bill, she said:\nI know about these kids, because I am one of those kids ... It hurts to hear you talk about how we are not successful, or how we are losers. But we are very successful. We have had a lot of successes with Head Start.\nSanchez has asserted that conservative Republicans are not committed to improving public education. When President Bush's 2003 budget proposal threatened to cut education grants, she responded:\nIf he can run deficits for the military, then he can run deficits to educate our children.\nArmed services, social issues, and labor.\nSanchez was the second-ranking Democrat on the Homeland Security Committee and a senior member of the Armed Services Committee, and the most senior woman on that committee. Loretta has fought to reform both the law and culture of the U.S. military relating to investigation of sexual crimes, prosecution of sex offenders and care of sexual assault victims. Her leadership contributed to a decision to examine the problem of sexual assault at the military service academies, which revealed that the problem was much more prevalent than previously thought. As a result, she led the fight to change sexual assault provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. In early 2011, Sanchez introduced a bill requiring the United States Department of Homeland Security to issue rules governing searches and seizures of the laptops, cellphones, and other electronic devices of American citizens returning to the U.S. from abroad.\nSanchez is regarded as a liberal on social issues. She voted against a constitutional ban on same-sex marriage and supports abortion rights. She also sought to reverse the ban on abortions at overseas military bases and installations. In August 2000, Sanchez refused to relocate a political fundraiser she had planned at the Playboy Mansion in California. As a result, Democratic National Committee chairman Joe Andrew cancelled her scheduled speaking role at the Democratic National Convention. Sanchez's address was reinstated just before the convention, when she agreed to relocate her fundraiser to Universal Studios.\nForeign policy.\nAccording to \"Congressional Quarterly\", \"In 2002, Sanchez voted against reviving fast-track procedures for congressional action on trade deals. And, coming from a district with one of the largest ethnically Vietnamese communities outside Vietnam, she voted against a trade agreement with Vietnam, saying that political and human rights conditions in that country needed improvement. Her outspokenness led the Hanoi regime to refuse to allow her into the country late in 2004 when she applied for an entry visa to meet with dissidents.\" By April 2006, Sanchez had been denied a visa to visit Vietnam four times by the country's officials. In honor of International Human Rights Day, she joined a bipartisan group of 11 House Members that issued a letter to Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung calling for the release of two U.S. citizens arrested by the government of Vietnam.\nOn October 10, 2002, Sanchez was among the 133 members of the House who voted against authorizing the invasion of Iraq, but she has voted in favor of every appropriation bill for the war in Iraq. She opposed the troop surge in February 2007. On March 7, 2007, Sanchez led a female congressional delegation to visit troops in Iraq. This was her third visit to Iraq.\nSanchez has a strong record on supporting human rights and is a member of the bipartisan Congressional Human Rights Caucus. Two major votes include voting yes in 2001 to keep the Cuba travel ban until political prisoners are released, but later voting in 2009 to lift the travel ban unilaterally, and yes to acknowledge the Armenian genocide of the early 1900s. She voted to implement the 9/11 Commission Recommendations Act of 2007.\nSanchez has stated that she was briefly denied access to a United Airlines flight in October 2006 because her name appeared on a no-fly list set up after the September 11 attacks. Sanchez said she was instructed to check in with a United employee, who told her she was on the terrorist watch list. The employee asked her for identification.\nIn a December 2015 interview with Larry King, in response to his question about the threat of extremist groups within Islam, Sanchez suggested some experts estimate that \"anywhere between 5 and 20 percent\" of Muslims worldwide supported the creation of a Caliphate to overthrow the United States. Sanchez's comments, which came on the heels of both the recent Islamist terror attack in San Bernardino and 2016 Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump's call to temporarily ban Muslim immigration to the United States, were criticized as contributing to Anti-Muslim sentiment. Sanchez explained that she was merely echoing President Obama's remarks in his December 6, 2015 Oval Office Address wherein he stated: \"Extremist ideology has spread within some Muslim communities. This is a real problem that Muslims must confront, without excuse.\" She further noted that she has a well-known record of defending the civil liberties of Muslim groups and that she believed most Muslims \"are actually with us\" in fighting Islamic extremism.\nHomeland and cyber security.\nOn September 13, 2016, the House Committee on Homeland Security unanimously approved two amendments authored by Sanchez to strengthen counterterrorism and cybersecurity programs.\nThe first bill, the Community Counterterrorism Preparedness Act, H.R. 5859, \"establishes a grant program to help major metropolitan areas prepare for and respond to terror attacks that include active shooters.\" Sanchez's amendment requires that \"unclassified threat information\" be provided by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to grant applicants. According to Sanchez, \"With this change, we not only provide needed funds to help regions prepare for attacks, we also give them critical tips and best practices to help them respond.\"\nThe second bill, the Cyber Preparedness Act of 2016, H.R. 5459, \"clarifies that DHS grants for states and urban areas can be used for similar statewide initiatives.\" Sanchez's new amendment will increase the use of DHS grants in focusing on identifying threats and improving \"cybersecurity sharing dissemination.\" According to Sanchez, \"Given our increased reliance on cyber technology for commerce and critical infrastructure, and given the increasing sophistication of hackers who would do us harm, we must improve our efforts to identify, neutralize, and prevent cyberattacks.\"\nWater policy.\nIn 2009, Loretta Sanchez secured $49.7 million in federal funding for critical water projects in Orange County, including local dam building, water treatment, and conservation projects:\n$49,310,000 for the continuing construction of the Santa Ana River Mainstem Project, including the Prado Dam. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers labeled the Santa Ana River the worst flood threat west of the Mississippi River. Federal funding allowed for the construction of a new dam to help mitigate this threat, as well as the potential environmental impact imposed by the dam.\n$2.870,000 for the Upper Newport Bay Ecosystem Restoration \u2013 Funding for this initiative helped manage sedimentation in the Upper Newport Bay by increasing the capacity of sediment basins, restoring and enhancing estuarine habitats, and improving educational and recreational opportunities.\n$426,000 for the Westminster-East Garden Grove Watershed Study in Santa Ana to help the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers undertake a comprehensive study of the Westminster Watershed, to develop a rehabilitation plan for flood control, ecosystem restoration, recreation, and water quality solutions, including the East Garden Grove-Wintersburg Channel and the Bolsa Chica Flood Control Channel. This study helped bolster flood control efforts currently in place, and assisted with ecosystem restoration and overall water quality standards. Both projects were consistent with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' flood control and environmental restoration missions in Southern California.\n$558,000 for the Orange Country Regional Water Reclamation Project \u2013 Also known as the Groundwater Replenishment System (GWRS), this project was a water supply initiative designed to reuse approximately 140,000 acre-feet of treated and recycled waste water every year.\n$860,000 for the Westminster/East Garden Grove Watershed Study \u2013 Funding helped the Army Corps of Engineers continue its comprehensive study of the Westminster Watershed\n$546,000 for the Surfside-Sunset and Newport Beaches \u2013 Funding helped mitigate damage along 17 miles of the Orange County coastline that was caused by the construction of federal navigation and flood control works in Long Beach and Anaheim Bay.\n$369,000 for a Feasibility Study on the Aliso Creek Mainstem Project \u2013 Funding for the project helped to develop a plan to create stable flood plain areas and regenerate native riparian habitats, which resulted in cooler water and improved fish health.\nPolitical campaigns.\n1994.\nSanchez changed her party affiliation from Republican to Democratic in 1992, ahead of a 1994 campaign for Anaheim City Council. She ran under her married name Loretta Sanchez Brixey, but later dropped her married name because she believed that she and her seven brothers and sisters were better known in the community as the Sanchez family.\n1996.\nIn 1996, Sanchez ran for the US House in California's 46th District against six-term Republican incumbent Bob Dornan. The bitterly fought race saw Sanchez charge that Dornan was out of touch with his constituency, especially after a distracting run for the 1996 Republican presidential nomination. The 46th and its predecessors had always had a Democratic tilt, but became even more Democratic after the 1990 census when it absorbed a considerably larger number of Hispanics than had previously been in the district. Sanchez won by 984 votes, and Dornan contested the election, alleging that many votes were cast by people who were not American citizens. \nA 16-month Congressional investigation found some evidence that 624 votes were indeed cast illegally (of which 84 votes were cast by newly naturalized citizens on the actual date of the election who had registered before their naturalization, which is not allowed under California law). An additional 124 flawed absentee votes had already been thrown out by California officials.\nIn consultation with the INS, the House investigative panel began with an INS name-matching list of 4,329 individuals with entries in INS computer records, compared to the voter rolls in the 46th Congressional District; and proceeded to use other government records, including claims of non-citizenship to be excused from jury duty, ultimately arriving at a list of 7,841 \"suspicious\" votes. California's Secretary of State and the Orange County District Attorney also investigated a voter-registration group, Hermandad Mexicana Nacional and other alleged voter fraud in Orange County. Local investigators, and eventually the Los Angeles Times, confirmed that Hermandad, an immigration and naturalization service still very active today in both Texas and California, had helped 172 register to vote before their naturalization, under the erroneous belief by some of its employees that as long as someone was naturalized before the date of the election, this was lawful. The Orange County D.A. attempted to indict two employees of the organization, but when a grand jury declined to go along, the local investigation was dropped.\nIn February 1998 the House Committee on Oversight voted 8\u20131 to dismiss the matter, ending its investigation. As Federal law required a proportional reduction of vote totals for each candidate, there being no means of determining just which candidate an illegal (or suspected illegal) voter had actually voted for, it was clear the result of the disputed election would not change even if the probe had continued.\nThe acrimonious disputes between Republicans and Democrats throughout the investigation and a desire not to alienate voters of Hispanic/Latin descent in the forthcoming congressional elections by GOP leaders also seem to have played a role, along with former Rep. Dornan's rather abrasive personal style, which the House in general had grown tired of.\nIndeed, the supposed total of 624 'illegal' votes was bitterly disputed by the Democratic minority, which argued that the investigation had never actually proved that many of the identified voters were in fact non-citizens; indeed asserting that between one quarter to even one half of \"illegal\" voters \"were U.S. citizens at the time they voted in the 1996 election,\" although they registered to vote in advance of being sworn in as U.S. Citizens. And that in fact the Oversight Committee's suspected illegal voter list still \"contain[ed] a significant number of names whose Orange County Voter Records indicate that they were born in the United States...\" Despite the lengthy investigation, definitive proof of citizen or non-citizen status, and proof that the actual person still on the suspect voter list was actually the same individual whose name appeared in INS records was lacking for many of the 540 remaining voters, once those determined to have registered too early, before naturalization, were subtracted.\nSanchez became the first member of Congress of Mexican heritage to represent Orange County and was re-elected.\n1998\u20132008.\nIn a 1998 rematch, she easily defeated Dornan and would not face another serious contest in a congressional election. Her district was made even safer after the 2000 census, when it was renumbered as the 47th District and reconfigured as a Latino-majority district. During that redistricting process, Sanchez hired lobbyist Michael S. Berman, brother of California Democratic Congressman Howard Berman, for \"redistricting consulting\" on her behalf. She paid Berman $20,000 for his work.\nIn 2006, she defeated Tan D. Nguyen (R) with 62% of the vote.\n2003 gubernatorial recall election.\nDuring California's 2003 gubernatorial recall election, Sanchez was one of the first Democrats to break from Governor Gray Davis and state that a Democrat should run to succeed Davis in case the recall measure passed. Though she recommended that the Democratic candidate be California's senior Senator Dianne Feinstein, Sanchez stated that if no other serious Democratic contender stepped forward, she would be willing to run herself. Many California Democrats ultimately adopted Sanchez's position, paving the way for Lieutenant Governor Cruz Bustamante to enter the race.\n2008.\nSanchez won against Republican nominee Rosemarie Avila and American Independent Robert Lauten.\n2010.\nSanchez considered running for governor and for the United States Senate, but declined to enter the gubernatorial race after former governor Jerry Brown declared his candidacy and deferred to incumbent senator Barbara Boxer, who ran for re-election.\nSanchez was challenged by Republican nominee Van Tran and independent candidate Ceci Iglesias. According to \"Roll Call\", Sanchez considered running for governor or for the U.S. Senate in 2010. In November 2005, she opened an exploratory committee called People for Loretta 2010. However, in June 2009, she announced she would run for reelection to the House.\nIn September 2010, Loretta Sanchez appeared on the Spanish language network, Univisi\u00f3n and said that \"the Vietnamese and the Republicans are \u2013 with an intensity \u2013 trying to take away 'our' seat\", referring to her Vietnamese-born opponent, Van Tran. Sanchez also described Tran as \"anti-immigrant\".\n2011.\nIn September, 2011 Sanchez's campaign treasurer, Kinde Durkee, was arrested on suspicion of mail fraud. Sanchez and several others of Durkee's clients found their campaign funds wiped out. Sanchez's chief of staff, Adrienne Elrod, remarked that \"Kinde was someone whose services and counsel we trusted for many years. These charges if true are disheartening and a betrayal by a long time Democratic treasurer for many candidates and committees.\"\n2012.\nAfter the 2010 census, Sanchez' district was renumbered as the 46th district. She was reelected handily, taking 63.9 percent of the vote.\n2016.\nOn May 16, 2015, when talking to a group of Indian Americans, Sanchez made a gesture mocking Native Americans by making a \"war cry\" that is stereotypically attributed to them. She described her confusion between Native Americans and Indian Americans prior to a meeting with an Indian-American, saying \"I am going to his office, thinking that I am going to meet with a 'woo woo woo woo' (stereotypical Indian war cry) \u2014 Right? ... because he said Indian American.\" Many in the audience were shocked at the gesture, finding it offensive. After initially running away from a reporter who tried to question her about it, she apologized for it on May 17, saying \"in this crazy and exciting rush of meetings yesterday, I said something offensive and for that, I sincerely apologize.\"\nDue to Barbara Boxer's impending retirement, the 2016 Senate election in California had the first open seat Senate election in California in 24 years. On May 14, 2015, Loretta Sanchez announced her bid for this Senate seat. She competed against Attorney General of California Kamala Harris and thirty-two other candidates in California's top-two primary.\nOn June 7, 2016, Sanchez finished second in the Open Primary and faced fellow Democrat Harris in the general election.\nIn the June 2016 primary, with results detailed at the county level, Loretta Sanchez won six counties: Fresno, Imperial, Kings, Madera, Orange, and Tulare counties. With the exception of Orange County, these are all counties with a plurality Hispanic population. Of these six counties, the highest vote percentage was Imperial County at 35.4%.\nOn November 8, 2016, Sanchez lost the U.S. Senate race to Harris. She carried four counties: Fresno, Glenn, Imperial and Madera. She lost her home county, Orange, by seven points. In her concession speech, she stated that \"Although we don't know what our future will be, I can tell you that this is not the last that people will see of me\".\nDespite losing Orange County overall, Sanchez easily won Garden Grove by a 67%-33% margin, her widest margin of victory for a city in Orange County.\nIn January 2017, Sanchez donated her congressional papers to her alma mater, Chapman University in Orange, California. It encompasses twenty-five boxes of files, papers and committee work which will be available for public view at a later date. Sanchez has been a trustee and regular lecturer at the university.\n2019.\nIn December 2018, Sanchez announced that she was running for 3rd district Orange County supervisor, in a special election to fill a seat left vacant by Todd Spitzer after his election as the county's new district attorney. The election was held on March 12, 2019. Sanchez lost to Irvine mayor Donald P. Wagner but expressed interest in another run for the same seat in the next regular election, in 2020.\nPost-congressional career.\nIn September 2017, it was announced that Sanchez would be the executive producer of a new political drama show called \"Accidental Candidate\", which appeared on NBC. Since leaving the House, she has run unsuccessfully for two local offices in California, the Orange County Board of Supervisors and the Rancho Santiago Community College District as a college trustee."}
{"id": "70969", "revid": "12360729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70969", "title": "Enos Slaughter", "text": "American baseball player (1916\u20132002)\nEnos Bradsher Slaughter (April 27, 1916 \u2013 August 12, 2002), nicknamed \"Country\", was an American Major League Baseball (MLB) right fielder. He played for 19 seasons on four major league teams from 1938 to 1942 and 1946 to 1959. He is noted primarily for his playing for the St. Louis Cardinals and famously scored the winning run in Game 7 of the 1946 World Series for the Cardinals. A ten-time All-Star, he has been elected to both the National Baseball Hall of Fame and St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame.\nEarly life.\nSlaughter was born in Roxboro, North Carolina, where he earned the nickname \"Country\". In 1935, scout Billy Southworth signed him for the St. Louis Cardinals.\nCareer.\nMinor leagues.\nThe Martinsville Manufacturers were Slaughter's first professional team, in 1935. When Slaughter was a minor leaguer in Columbus, Georgia, he went running towards the dugout from his position in the outfield, slowed down near the infield, and began walking the rest of the way. Manager Eddie Dyer told him, \"Son, if you're tired, we'll try to get you some help.\" During the remainder of his major-league career, Slaughter ran everywhere he went on a baseball field. In 1937, he had 245 hits and 147 runs scored for Columbus.\nMajor leagues.\nSlaughter batted left-handed and threw right-handed. He was renowned for his smooth swing that made him a reliable \"contact\" hitter. Slaughter had 2,383 hits in his major league career, including 169 home runs, and 1,304 RBI in 2,380 games. Slaughter played 19 seasons with the St. Louis Cardinals, New York Yankees, Kansas City Athletics, and Milwaukee Braves. During that period, he was a ten-time All-Star and played in five World Series. His 1,820 games played ranks fifth in Cardinals' history behind Yadier Molina, Ozzie Smith, Lou Brock, and Stan Musial. He presently ranks third in RBI with 1,148; sixth in ABs with 6,775; and seventh in doubles with 366.\nAfter debuting with the Cardinals in 1938, Slaughter became an everyday outfielder for them in 1939.\nSlaughter served for three years in the Army Air Corps during World War II. He was a sergeant who taught physical education. Slaughter helped set up baseball teams in Tinian and Saipan, and their games inspired the troops while drawing upwards of 20,000 spectators. Immediately upon return from his military service in 1946, Slaughter led the National League with 130 RBI and led the Cardinals to a World Series win over the Boston Red Sox. In the decisive seventh game of that series, Slaughter, running with the pitch, made a famous \"Mad Dash\" for home from first base on Harry Walker's hit in the eighth inning, scoring the winning run that beat the throw of Johnny Pesky from the outfield. Walker's hit was ruled a double, although some observers felt it should have been ruled a single, with the throw home allowing Walker to advance to second base. This play was named No. 10 on the Sporting News list of Baseball's 25 Greatest Moments in 1999.\nSlaughter was known for his hustle, especially for running hard to first base on walks, a habit later imitated by Pete Rose and David Eckstein.\nSlaughter was reported at the time as being one of the leaders in racial taunting against the first black major league player, Jackie Robinson, and was accused of conspiring with teammate Terry Moore in an attempt to get the Cardinals to refuse to play Brooklyn with Robinson on the field. Sportswriter Bob Broeg, who covered the team at that time, refutes this claim and says that NL president Ford C. Frick considered the Cardinals fairer towards Robinson than any of the other teams. Slaughter later injured Robinson during a game by inflicting a seven-inch gash from his shoe spikes on Robinson's leg. Slaughter denied that he had any animosity towards Robinson, claiming that such allegations had been made against him because he was \"a Southern boy\", and that the injury suffered by Robinson had been typical of Slaughter's rough playing style. None of the contemporary accounts of the spiking suggested that the incident was intentional, although the August 21, 1947 edition of St. Louis Star and Times quoted Dodgers' second-baseman Eddie Stanky as saying, \"Slaughter deliberately spiked Robinson. I always had the highest regard for Slaughter. He is one of the keenest competitors I know, and I admire him for it. But that was the first time he spiked someone deliberately. I've lost all my respect for him.\" In the Ken Burns \"Baseball\" documentary, it was claimed that Slaughter, despite easily being out, ran and jumped at Robinson, cutting his thigh open. Most other accounts state that the cut was on Robinson's calf, and it was non-intentional, that Slaughter's spike caught Robinson while he was trying to beat the throw to first and Robinson was just not able to pull his leg away in time.\nWith the Yankees, Slaughter did not play as much, but he excelled as a pinch hitter for the ballclub. He batted fifth and played in left field in Game 5 of the 1956 World Series in which teammate Don Larsen pitched the only perfect game in World Series history, a 2\u20130 Yankees win. At age 40, he was the oldest player for either team in the game.\nPost-MLB career.\nSlaughter retired from major league baseball in 1959. He was a player-manager for the Houston Buffs of the Texas League in 1960 and for Raleigh Capitals of the Carolina League in 1961. Slaughter coached baseball for Duke University from 1971 to 1977. He provided aid to causes such as the Duke Children's Classic, the Person County Museum of History, and Piedmont Community College.\nPersonal life.\nSlaughter had five wives, each of whom he divorced. He had four daughters: Gaye, Patricia, Rhonda, and Sharon. Henry Slaughter, his cousin, was a well-known southern gospel musician. Slaughter also mentored Lou Brock when he joined the Cardinals.\nDeath.\nSlaughter died at age 86 on August 12, 2002. He had battled non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and two weeks before his death, he had undergone colon surgery to fix torn stomach ulcers. He was buried at Allensville United Methodist Church in Person County, North Carolina.\nPersonal honors.\nSlaughter was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1985.\nHis jersey number 9 was retired by the Cardinals on September 6, 1996.\nThe Cardinals dedicated a statue depicting his famous Mad Dash in 1999. Slaughter was a fixture at statue dedications at Busch Stadium II for other Cardinal Hall of Famers during the last years of his life.\nIn 2013, the Bob Feller Act of Valor Award honored Slaughter as one of 37 Baseball Hall of Fame members for his service in the United States Army Air Force during World War II.\nIn January, 2014, the Cardinals announced Slaughter among 22 former players and personnel to be inducted into the St. Louis Cardinals Hall of Fame Museum for the inaugural class of 2014.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70970", "revid": "31504254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70970", "title": "Andrew Fisher", "text": "Three-time Australian prime minister (1862\u20131928)\nAndrew Fisher (29 August 1862\u00a0\u2013 22 October 1928) was an Australian politician and trade unionist who served as the fifth prime minister of Australia from 1908 to 1909, 1910 to 1913 and 1914 to 1915. He held office as the leader of the Australian Labor Party (ALP), and was particularly notable for leading the party to its first federal election victory and first majority government at the 1910 federal election.\nFisher was born in Crosshouse, Ayrshire, Scotland. He left school at a young age to work in the nearby coal mines, becoming secretary of the local branch of the Ayrshire Miners' Union at the age of 17. Fisher emigrated to Australia in 1885, where he continued his involvement with trade unionism. He settled in Gympie, Queensland, and in 1893 was elected to the Queensland Legislative Assembly as a representative of the Labor Party. Fisher lost his seat in 1896, but returned in 1899 and later that year briefly was a minister in the government of Anderson Dawson.\nIn 1901, Fisher was elected to the new federal parliament representing the Division of Wide Bay. He was the Minister for Trade and Customs for a few months in 1904, in the short-lived government of Chris Watson. Fisher was elected deputy leader of the ALP in 1905 and replaced Watson as leader in 1907. He initially provided support to the minority government of Protectionist leader Alfred Deakin, but in November 1908 the ALP withdrew its support and Deakin resigned as prime minister. Fisher subsequently formed a minority government of his own. It lasted only a few months, as in June 1909 Deakin returned as prime minister at the head of a new anti-socialist Liberal Party.\nFisher returned as prime minister after the 1910 federal election, which saw Labor attain majority government for the first time in its history. His second government passed wide-ranging reforms \u2013 old-age and disability pensions, enshrined new workers' rights in legislation, established the Commonwealth Bank, oversaw the continued expansion of the Royal Australian Navy, began construction on the Trans-Australian Railway, and formally established what is now the Australian Capital Territory. However, at the 1913 election the ALP narrowly lost its House of Representatives majority to the Liberal Party, with Fisher being replaced as prime minister by Joseph Cook.\nAfter just over a year in office, Cook was forced to call a new election, the first double dissolution. Labor won back its majority in the House, and Fisher returned for a third term as prime minister. During the election campaign he famously declared that Australia would defend Britain \"to the last man and the last shilling\". However, he struggled with the demands of Australia's participation in World War I and in October 1915 resigned in favour of his deputy Billy Hughes. Fisher subsequently accepted an appointment as the High Commissioner of Australia to the United Kingdom, holding the position from 1916 to 1920. After a brief return to Australia, he retired to London, dying there at the age of 66. His cumulative total of just under five years as prime minister is the second-longest by an ALP leader, surpassed only by Bob Hawke.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family background.\nFisher was born on 29 August 1862 in Crosshouse, a mining village west of Kilmarnock, Scotland. He was the second of eight children born to Jane (n\u00e9e Garven or Garvin) and Robert Fisher; he had one older brother, four younger brothers, and two younger sisters. His younger sister died at the age of 10 in 1879, the only one of the siblings not to live to adulthood. Fisher's mother was the daughter of a blacksmith and worked as a domestic servant. On his father's side, he was descended from a long line of Ayrshire coalminers. According to family tradition, his paternal grandfather was persecuted for his involvement in the fledgling union movement, and on one occasion was left homeless with five young children. Although he was probably only partially literate, Fisher's father was prominent in the local community and involved with various community organisations. He was the leader of a temperance society, and in 1863 was one of ten miners who co-founded a cooperative society. He and his family were active members of the Free Church of Scotland.\nChildhood.\nFisher spent most of his childhood living in a miners' row, which had an earthen floor and no running water. He was kicked in the head by a cow as a small child, leaving him mostly deaf in one ear. The injury may have contributed to a childhood speech impediment and his reserved nature as an adult. As a boy, Fisher and his brothers fished in Carmel Water, a tributary of the River Irvine, and enjoyed long walks across the countryside. He was athletic, helping form a local football team, and stood as an adult, above the average at the time. In later life, Fisher recalled attending four schools as a boy. The exact details are uncertain, but he is known to have finished his schooling in Crosshouse and to have attended a school in nearby Dreghorn for a period. The standard of public education in Scotland was relatively high at the time, and his schoolmaster in Crosshouse had received formal training in Edinburgh; the main focus of the curriculum was on the three Rs. He later supplemented his limited formal education by attending night school in Kilmarnock and reading at the town library.\nThe exact age at which Fisher left school is uncertain, but he could have been as young as nine or as old as thirteen. He is believed to have begun his working life as a coal trapper, opening and closing the trapdoors that allowed for ventilation and the movement of coal. He was later placed in charge of the pit ponies, and finally took his place performing \"pick-and-shovel work\" at the coalface. When he was 16, he was promoted to air-pump operator, which required additional training and was seen as a relatively prestigious position. Fisher's father had black lung disease, and gave up mining around the same time as his oldest sons began working. He subsequently became the manager of the foodstore at the local cooperative, and the family moved out of miners' row. They later lived in Kilmaurs for a period, but eventually returned to Crosshouse and leased a small farm. Fisher's father then worked as a gardener and apiarist, supplementing his income with contract work repairing the machinery at local mines. He died of lung disease in 1887, aged 53.\nEarly political involvement.\nIn 1879, aged 17, Fisher was elected secretary of the Crosshouse branch of the Ayrshire Miners' Union. He soon came into contact with Keir Hardie, a leading figure in the union and a future leader of the British Labour Party. The pair met frequently to discuss politics and would renew their acquaintance later in life. Fisher and Hardie were leaders of the 1881 Ayrshire miners' strike, which was widely seen as a failure. The ten-week strike resulted in only a small pay rise rather than the 10 percent that had been asked for; many workers depleted their savings and some cooperatives came close to bankruptcy. Fisher had originally been opposed to the strike, and unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate a compromise with mine-owners. He lost his job, but soon found work at a different mine. Like many miners, Fisher was a supporter of Gladstone's Liberal Party, in particular the \"Liberal-Labour\" candidates who had the support of the unions. In 1884, he chaired a public meeting in Crosshouse in support of the Third Reform Bill. He subsequently wrote a letter to Gladstone and received a reply thanking him for his support. The following year, Fisher was involved in another miners' strike. He was not only sacked but also blacklisted. He was left with little future in Scotland and decided to emigrate; his older brother John had already left for England a few years earlier, becoming a police constable in Liverpool.\nImmigration to Australia.\nFisher and his younger brother James arrived in Brisbane, Queensland, on 17 August 1885, after a two-month steamship journey from London. He first saw Australia during a stopover at Thursday Island, where whites were a minority and there was a large Japanese population. His biographer David Day has speculated that this initial first impression may have contributed to his later opposition to non-white immigration. Fisher's path to Australia was virtually identical to that of Billy Hughes, who had arrived less than a year earlier in December 1884 \u2013 both men took assisted passage, arrived at the age of 22, and travelled from London to Brisbane. Unlike Hughes, Fisher never lost his original accent and retained a thick Scottish \"brogue\" for the rest of his life.\nAfter arriving in Brisbane, Fisher made his way to the Burrum River coalfields where there were already a number of Scottish miners. He began as an ordinary miner and joined the local miners' union, but after successfully sinking a new shaft at Torbanlea, he was employed as a mine manager. Prospering financially for the first time in his life, he built a timber cottage at Howard and began investing in shares. Fisher moved to the larger gold-mining town of Gympie in 1888, initially working in the No. 1 North Phoenix mine and then in the South Great Eastern Extended. He continued his involvement in unionism, helping form the Gympie branch of the Amalgamated Miners' Association (AMA) and serving terms as secretary and president. He obtained an engine-driver's certificate in 1891, and was elected president of the related craft union. This new job allowed him to work above-ground, operating the machinery that raised and lowered the cages in the mineshaft. During his time in Gympie, Fisher stayed in a boardinghouse in Red Hill; it is now heritage-listed as \"Andrew Fisher's Cottage\". He would eventually marry his landlady's daughter, Margaret Irvine.\nWithin years of arriving in the town, Fisher had become \"an important figure in the Gympie labour movement, straddling both its political and industrial wings\". He was a founding member of the Gympie cooperative, and in 1891 became the secretary of the Gympie Joint Labour Committee, the local labour council. He helped establish a branch of the Workers' Political Association, the forerunner of the Labor Party, and was the inaugural branch president with George Ryland as secretary. In 1892, he represented Gympie at the Labour-in-Politics Convention in Brisbane. He was sacked from his engine-driving job in the same year, and subsequently devoted his full attention to politics.\nQueensland politics.\nIn 1891, Fisher was elected as the first president of the Gympie branch of the Labour Party. In 1893, he was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Queensland as Labour member for the Electoral district of Gympie and by the following year had become Labour's deputy leader in the Legislative Assembly. In his maiden speech, he pushed for a 50% decrease in military spending and declared support for a federation. He was also active in the Amalgamated Miners Union, becoming President of the Gympie branch by 1891. Another policy area that captured his attention during this term, was the employment of workers from the Pacific Islands in sugar plantations, a practice that Fisher and Labour both strongly opposed. He lost his seat in 1896 following a campaign in which he was charged by his opponent Jacob Stumm with being a dangerous revolutionary and an anti-Catholic, accusations that were propagated by the newspaper \"Gympie Times\".\nThe 1896 establishment of the \"Gympie Truth\", a newspaper that he was to partly own, was part of his response. Intended as a medium to broadcast Labour's message, the newspaper played a vital role in Fisher's return to parliament in 1899. This time, he was the beneficiary of a scare campaign, in which conservative candidate Francis Power was consistently painted by the \"Gympie Truth\" as being a supporter of black labour and the alleged economic and social ills that accompanied it. In that year he was Secretary for Railways and Public Works in the seven-day government of Anderson Dawson, the first parliamentary Labour government in the world.\nFirst years in federal politics.\nThe state Labour parties and their MPs were mixed in their support for the Federation of Australia. However Fisher was a firm believer in federation, supporting the union of the Australian colonies and campaigned for the 'Yes' vote in Queensland's 1899 referendum. Fisher stood for the Division of Wide Bay at the inaugural 1901 Australian federal election and won the seat, which he held continuously for the rest of his political career. At the end of 1901, Fisher married Margaret Irvine, his previous landlady's daughter.\nFisher supported the White Australia policy but also argued that any Kanaka who had converted to Christianity and married should be allowed to remain in Australia.\nLabour improved their position at the 1903 election, gaining enough seats to be on par with the other two, a legislative time colloquially known as the \"three elevens\". When the Deakin government resigned in 1904, George Reid of the Free Trade Party declined to take office, resulting in Labour taking power and Chris Watson becoming Labour's first prime minister for a four-month period in 1904. Fisher established and demonstrated his ministerial capabilities as Minister for Trade and Customs in the Watson Ministry. The fourth Labour member in the ministry after Watson, Hughes, and Lee Batchelor, Fisher was promoted to Deputy Leader of the Labour Party in 1905.\nGeorge Reid adopted a strategy of trying to reorient the party system along Labour vs non-Labour lines \u2013 prior to the 1906 election, he renamed his Free Trade Party to the Anti-Socialist Party. Reid envisaged a spectrum running from socialist to anti-socialist, with the Protectionist Party in the middle. This attempt struck a chord with politicians who were steeped in the Westminster tradition and regarded a two-party system as very much the norm.\nAscent to party leadership.\nAt the 1906 election, Deakin remained prime minister even though Labour gained considerably more seats than the Protectionists. When Watson resigned in 1907, Fisher succeeded him as Labour leader, although Hughes and William Spence also stood for the position. Fisher was considered to have a better understanding of economic matters, was better at handling caucus, had better relations with the party organisation and the unions, and was more in touch with party opinion. He did not share Hughes' passion for free trade or that of Watson and Hughes for defence (and later conscription). In political terms he was a radical, on the left-wing of his party, with a strong sense of Labour's part in British working-class history.\nAt the 1908 Labour Federal Conference, Fisher argued for female representation in parliament:\nWith a majority of seats in the Labour-Protectionist government, Labour caucus by early 1908 had become restive as to the future of the Deakin minority government. With the Deakin ministry in trouble, Deakin spoke to Fisher and Watson about a possible coalition, and following a report agreed to it providing Labour had a majority in cabinet, that there was immediate legislation for old-age pensions, that New Protection was carried and that at the following election the government would promise a progressive land tax. No coalition was formed, however the pressure from Labour brought about productive change by Deakin: he agreed to a royal commission into the post office, old-age pensions were to be provided from the surplus revenue fund and \u00a3250,000 set aside for ships for an Australian Navy. New Protection was declared invalid by the High Court in June, Fisher found the tariff proposals of Deakin unsatisfactory, while caucus was also dissatisfied with the old-age pension proposals. Without Labour support the Deakin government collapsed in November 1908.\nDuring the parliamentary ballots that selected Yass-Canberra as the site of the national capital, in October 1908, Fisher voted consistently for Dalgety.\nPrime minister, 1908\u20131909.\nAppointment and government formation.\nOn 5 November 1908, the ALP caucus voted to withdraw its support from the Deakin government, with parliament passing a motion of no confidence on 10 November. Fisher was sworn in as prime minister on 13 November at the head of a minority government, with the support of Deakin and the Protectionists. He also appointed himself treasurer, with the other members of his ministry elected by the ALP caucus and assigned portfolios by Fisher.\nLegislation and policy agenda.\nFisher was reliant on the support of other parties to pass legislation, with only 26 seats out of 75 in the House of Representatives and only five senators. He sought to \"push on with some of the measures that had been initiated but not completed by Deakin\", including passing the Manufacturers' Encouragement Act to provide bounties for iron and steel manufacturers who paid fair and reasonable wages. His aim was to ensure Deakin's continued support to remain in office, buying time to build up public support for the ALP's agenda at the next election. A month after Fisher's appointment, parliament finally passed the \"Seat of Government Act 1908\" to establish Canberra as the site of the new national capital, following years of debate. He had originally favoured Dalgety, New South Wales, as the site for the capital.\nFisher committed Labour to amending the Constitution to give the Commonwealth power over labour, wages and prices, to expanding the navy and providing compulsory military training for youths, to extending pensions, to a land tax, to the construction of a transcontinental railway, to the replacement of pound sterling with Australian currency and to tariffs to protect the sugar industry.\nOuster.\nIn early 1909, during the parliamentary recess, Deakin and Anti-Socialist Party leader Joseph Cook began negotiations to merge their respective parties and form a single anti-Labor party. Fisher and Deakin simultaneously fell out over Fisher's refusal to recall parliament, which Deakin regarded as a broken promise.\nFisher eventually recalled parliament for 26 May 1909 and presented a throne speech proposed reforms, delivered by Governor-General Lord Dudley. On the same date, the Protectionists and Anti-Socialists agreed to form a united opposition under the leadership of Deakin. The new Liberal Party held a clear majority of seats in both the House and Senate. Fisher did not immediately resign as prime minister, but instead advised Dudley to dissolve parliament and call an early election. Dudley refused, on the grounds that Deakin could form a stable government, and Fisher correspondingly resigned as prime minister on 1 June.\nPrime minister, 1910\u20131913.\nAt the 1910 election, Labour gained sixteen additional seats to hold a total of forty-two of the seventy-five House of Representatives' seats, and all eighteen Senate seats up for election to hold a total of twenty-two out of thirty-six seats. This gave Labour control of both upper and lower houses and enabled Fisher to form his Second Fisher Ministry, Australia's first elected federal majority government, Australia's first elected Senate majority, and the world's first Labour Party majority government. The 113 acts passed in the three years of the second Fisher government exceeded even the output of the second Deakin government over a similar period.\nAccording to Labor MP and historian Denis Murphy, the second Fisher government represented \"the culmination of Labor's involvement in politics\", and was \"a period of reform unmatched in the Commonwealth until the 1940s\", under John Curtin and Ben Chifley. The Fisher government carried out many reforms in defence, finance, transport and communications, and social security, achieving the vast majority of their aims in just three years of government. These included extending old-age and disability pensions, introducing a maternity allowance and issuing Australia's first paper currency, forming the Royal Australian Navy, the start of construction of the Trans-Australian Railway, expanding the bench of the High Court of Australia, the founding of Canberra, and the establishment of the state-owned Commonwealth Bank. Fisher's second government also introduced uniform postal charges throughout Australia, carried out measures to break up land monopolies, put forward proposals for closer regulation of working hours, wages and employment conditions, and amended the 1904 Conciliation and Arbitration Act to provide greater authority for the court president, and to allow for Commonwealth employees' industrial unions, registered with the Arbitration Court.\nA land tax, aimed at breaking up big estates and give wider scope for small-scale farming, was also introduced, while coverage of the Arbitration system was extended to agricultural workers, domestics, and federal public servants. In addition, the age at which women became entitled to the old-age pension was lowered from sixty-five to sixty. The introduction of the maternity allowance was a major reform, because it enabled more births to be attended by doctors, thus leading to reductions in infant mortality rates. However, the maternity allowance was only available to white women, with the legislation barring \"women who are Asiatic, or are aboriginal natives of Australia, Papua or the Pacific Islands\" in line with the racial exclusions in the old-age pension. Compulsory preference to trade unionists in federal employment was also introduced, while the Seaman's Compensation Act of 1911 and the Navigation Act of 1912 were enacted to improve conditions for those working at sea, together with compensatory arrangements for seamen and next of kin. Eligibility for pensions was also widened. From December 1912 onwards, naturalised residents no longer had to wait three years to be eligible for a pension. That same year, the value of a pensioner's home was excluded from consideration when assessing the value of their property.\nFisher wanted additional Commonwealth power in certain areas, such as the nationalisation of monopolies. A constitutional referendum was initiated in 1911 which aimed to increase the federal government's legislative powers over trade and commerce and over monopolies. Both questions were defeated, with around 61 per cent voting 'No'. The Fisher government made another attempt, holding a referendum in 1913 which asked for greater federal powers over trade and commerce, corporations, industrial matters, trusts, monopolies, and railway disputes. All six questions were defeated, with around 51 per cent voting 'No'. At the 1913 election, the Commonwealth Liberal Party, led by Joseph Cook, defeated the Labor Party by a single seat.\nPrime minister, 1914\u20131915.\nLabor retained control of the Australian Senate despite defeat. In 1914, Cook, frustrated by the Labor-controlled Senate's rejection of his legislation, recommended to the new Governor-General Sir Ronald Munro Ferguson that both houses of the parliament be dissolved and elections called. This was Australia's first double dissolution election, and the only one until the 1951 election. The First World War had broken out in the middle of the 1914 election campaign, with both sides committing Australia to the British Empire. Fisher campaigned on Labor's record of support for an independent Australian defence force, and pledged that Australia would \"stand beside the mother country to help and defend her to the last man and the last shilling\". Labor won the election with another absolute majority in both houses and Fisher formed his third government on 17 September 1914.\nFisher and his party were immediately underway in organising urgent defence measures for planning and implementing Australian war effort. Fisher visited New Zealand during this time which saw Billy Hughes serve as acting prime minister for two months. Fisher and Labor continued to implement promised peacetime legislation, including the \"River Murray Waters Act 1915\", the \"Freight Arrangements Act 1915\", the \"Sugar Purchase Act 1915\", the \"Estate Duty Assessment\" and the \"Estate Duty\" acts in 1914. Wartime legislation in 1914 and 1915 included the \"War Precautions\" acts (giving the Governor-General power to make regulations for national security), a \"Trading with the Enemy Act\", \"War Census\" acts, a \"Crimes Act\", a \"Belgium Grant Act\", and an \"Enemy Contracts Annulment Act\". In December 1914, a War Pensions Act was passed to provide for the grant of Pensions upon the death or incapacity of Members of the Defence Force of the Commonwealth and Members of the Imperial Reserve Forces residents in Australia whose death or incapacity resulted from their employment in connection with warlike operations.\nIn October 1915, journalist Keith Murdoch reported on the situation in Gallipoli at Fisher's request, and advised him, \"Your fears have been justified\". He described the Dardanelles Expedition as being \"a series of disastrous underestimations\" and \"one of the most terrible chapters in our history\" concluding: \"What I want to say to you now very seriously is that the continuous and ghastly bungling over the Dardanelles enterprise was to be expected from such a general staff as the British Army possesses ... the conceit and self complacency of the red feather men are equalled only by their incapacity.\"\nFisher passed this report on to Hughes and to Defence Minister George Pearce, ultimately leading to the evacuation of the Australian troops in December 1915. The report was also used by the Dardanelles Commission on which Fisher served, while High Commissioner in London.\nFisher resigned as prime minister and from Parliament on 27 October 1915 after being absent from parliament without explanation for three sitting days. Three days later, Labor Caucus unanimously elected Billy Hughes leader of the Federal Parliamentary Party. Fisher's seat was narrowly won by the Commonwealth Liberal Party on a 0.2% margin at the 1915 Wide Bay by-election.\nHigh Commissioner to the United Kingdom.\nFisher was Australia's second High Commissioner to the United Kingdom from 1 January 1916 until 1 January 1921. Fisher opposed conscription which made his dealings with Billy Hughes difficult. Hughes asked Fisher for support by cable three weeks before the first referendum, but Fisher cabled back \"Am unable to sign appeal. Position forbids.\" He subsequently refused to publicly comment on the issue. Hughes' 1916 referendum on conscription had a No vote of around 52 per cent, while the 1917 referendum had a No vote of around 54 per cent. Fisher visited Australian troops serving in Belgium and France in 1919, and later presented Pearce with an album of battlefield photos from 1917 and 1918, showing the horrendous conditions experienced by the troops.\nThe Dardanelles Commission, including Fisher, interviewed witnesses in 1916 and 1917 and issued its final report in 1919. It concluded that the expedition was poorly planned and executed and that difficulties had been underestimated, problems which were exacerbated by supply shortages and by personality clashes and procrastination at high levels. Some 480,000 Allied troops had been dedicated to the failed campaign, with around half in casualties. The report's conclusions were regarded as insipid with no figures (political or military) heavily censured. The report of the commission and information gathered by the inquiry remain a key source of documents on the campaign.\nFinal years and death.\nFisher's term as High Commissioner officially ended on 22 April 1921, although it concluded with three months' paid leave and he left for Australia on 29 January. He arrived back in Melbourne with no firm plans for his future, but the rapturous receptions he received at labour movement gatherings led him to contemplate a return to active politics. He was the only remaining former prime minister in the Labor Party, which had lost many experienced MPs in the 1916 party split. The party's leader Frank Tudor had had frequent bouts of ill health, and T. J. Ryan, who was widely seen as Tudor's heir apparent, died suddenly of pneumonia in August 1921. Fisher seriously considered standing in the resulting by-election, but found there was no guarantee that the local party would accept him as a candidate. He was unwilling to actively campaign for preselection, and decided he would only stand if he were drafted, which did not happen.\nWith little else to keep them in Australia, Fisher and his wife decided to return to London to be closer to their children. They rented a property in Highgate for a period, and then in October 1922 bought a home on South Hill Park near Hampstead Heath. He explored the possibility of standing for the British House of Commons, but eventually opted for a permanent retirement from politics. By the time he was 60, Fisher's family and friends had begun to notice a decline in his mental faculties, which was probably a form of early-onset dementia. It was judged unsafe for him to be out alone in public, and in 1925 his assets were placed in trust. By 1928, he was unable to sign his own name, and his children were seriously considering having him institutionalised. Fisher contracted a severe case of influenza in September 1928, and eventually died from complications of the disease on 22 October, aged 66. He is one of only three Australian prime ministers to die overseas, and he and George Reid are the only ones who both began and ended their lives outside Australia.\nFisher was buried at Hampstead Cemetery on 26 October 1928. On the same day, a memorial service was held at St Columba's Church, London, which was attended by representatives of King George V and Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin, as well as Arthur Henderson representing the British Labour Party. In February 1930, Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald unveiled a granite obelisk above Fisher's grave. His widow eventually moved back to Australia, dying there in 1958.\nEvaluation.\nDespite the length of Fisher's service as prime minister, for many years he and his government were given relatively little scholarly attention. His decision to retire to England placed him out of the public eye, while his mental deterioration and early death deprived him of the opportunity to dictate his own legacy. Writers interested in the post-Federation era did not generally view him as an attractive biographical subject, which has been attributed to the relative orthodoxy of his political views and a reputation for propriety to the point of dullness. Fisher's 1981 entry in the \"Australian Dictionary of Biography\" was written by Denis Murphy, who had planned a full-length biography but died in 1984 before completing it. Clem Lloyd also began a biography in the 1990s, which was unfinished at the time of his death in 2001. The first complete biographies of Fisher did not emerge until the 100th anniversary of his prime ministership. These were David Day's \"Andrew Fisher: Prime Minister of Australia\" (2008) and Peter Bastian's \"Andrew Fisher: An Underestimated Man\" (2009), as well as a shorter volume by Edward Humphreys, \"Andrew Fisher: The Forgotten Man\" (2008).\nObituarists of Fisher generally emphasised his modesty, integrity, and dedication to the labour movement. Writing for \"The Australian Worker\", Henry Ernest Boote praised him as \"loyal to his class, courageous in the advocacy of their cause, and absolutely incorruptible\". In the decades after his death, a general view emerged of Fisher as a competent rather than brilliant leader. He was praised for successfully managing the conflicting personalities within his own party, but as a leader of his country was often compared unfavourably with Deakin and Hughes. In general, his prime ministership was seen as a relatively inconsequential interlude. However, beginning in the 1970s a different view of Fisher began to emerge, which coincided with more of his personal papers becoming available to researchers. His more recent biographers have credited Fisher with establishing Labor as a viable party of government and demonstrating that the party's platform did not have to be sacrificed for political expediency, and argued that he deserves the primary credit for the political and electoral accomplishments of his governments. He is now generally seen as one of the most significant figures in the early years of his party.\nHonours.\nAt the end of the First World War, France awarded him the L\u00e9gion d'honneur, but he declined it; he did not like decorations of any kind and adhered to this view throughout his life. In 1911 Fisher declined the offer of honorary degrees from the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, Glasgow and Birmingham, although he did accept the Freedom of the City from the cities of Glasgow, Edinburgh and Bristol.\nAnother honour Fisher did accept was appointment to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom on his visit to the UK in 1911 for the Coronation of King George V and the Imperial Conference at the same time as New Zealand Prime Minister Sir Joseph Ward and Governor Lord Islington, granting him use of \"The Right Honourable\". Public reaction to his appointment was positive, with the \"Brisbane Truth\" noting it would not change his humble nature: \"To plain Andrew Fisher, who lately refused to-be decorated with empty, unearned University degrees, a Privy Councillorship has been awarded. This is an honor to which our Prime Minister is justly entitled by reason of his inclusion in the secret councils of the Imperial Conference, which secrets include the private advice, tendered by him to the administrators of and in the administration of his Majesty's Imperial Government.\" Although admitted as a Privy Counsellor \"in absentia\" on 6 July 1911, it wasn't until 14 February 1916 when he was High Commissioner in London that he formally took his oath of office.\nThe federal electorate of Fisher was named after him. A Canberra suburb, Fisher, was also created in his memory, with its streets reflecting a mining theme in honour of Fisher's occupation before entering public life. Ramsay MacDonald, Britain's first Labour Prime Minister, unveiled a memorial to Fisher in Hampstead Cemetery in 1930. A memorial garden was also dedicated to Fisher at his birthplace in the late 1970s.\nIn 1972 he was honoured on a postage stamp bearing his portrait issued by Australia Post. In 1992, his home in Gympie (Andrew Fisher's Cottage) was listed on the Queensland Heritage Register. In 2008, Labor Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, a fellow Queenslander, launched a biography titled \"Andrew Fisher\", written by David Day. In turn, Rudd was presented with an item that once belonged to Fisher \u2013 a slightly battered gold pen engraved with Fisher's signature, which had been held in safekeeping for 80 years.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70971", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70971", "title": "Freedom of speach", "text": ""}
{"id": "70972", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70972", "title": "Richard le Breton", "text": "12th-century Anglo-Norman nobleman\nSir Richard le Breton or Richard de Brito (fl. 1170) was one of the four knights who in 1170 murdered Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury.\nOrigins.\nRoger Brito is listed in the Domesday Book of 1086 as holding land under the overlordship of the Church of Long Sutton in Somerset, in which county the family was later seated at Sampford Brett (\"alias\" Sandford-Bret). During the reign of King Henry I (1100\u20131135) Sampford Brett was held by Simon le Bret, from the feudal barony of Dunster by military service of half a knight's fee. He served in the household of Henry II's brother William, Count of Poitou and was a near neighbour of the FitzUrse family of Williton in Somerset, a member of which family was another of the assassins of Thomas Becket. Simon le Bret had two sons: Richard Brito, one of the assassins of Thomas Becket and Edmund le Bret, who adopted the surname \"de Sandford\" from his seat. William the Conqueror granted a manor in the eastern part of the parish of Great Stambridge in Essex and another in Sanford in Somerset to a Norman named Auvrai Le Breton following the Norman conquest of England. A later relative, Simon Le Breton, had two sons, Richard and Edmund, who inherited their share of Sanford and Great Master Bridge. Both were part of the royal court of King Henry II; in particular Richard Le Breton was a close friend of the king's brother, Prince William.\nBecket assassination.\nDuring the attack on Becket in 1170 by the four knights, Sir Reginald Fitzurse, Sir Hugh de Morville, Brito and Sir William de Tracy, Brito is said to have broken his sword when striking at Becket's head.\nAccording to Edward Grim:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... But the third knight inflicted a grave wound on the fallen one; with this blow he shattered the sword on the stone and his crown, which was large, separated from his head so that the blood turned white from the brain yet no less did the brain turn red from the blood; it purpled the appearance of the church with the colours of the lily and the rose, the colours of the Virgin and Mother and the life and death of the confessor and martyr...\nHe shouted \"Take that, for the love of my lord William, the king's brother!\" when he delivered the fatal blow. It was believed by William's friends that the count had died of a broken heart after Thomas Becket refused to allow his marriage.\nAftermath.\nAfter the assassination the four knights fled to Scotland and from there to Knaresborough Castle in Yorkshire. All four were excommunicated by the Pope Alexander III at Easter in 1171 and ordered to undertake penitentiary pilgrimages to the Holy Land for 14 years.\nBrito eventually retired to the island of Jersey. A ledger stone for one of the le Bretons of Jersey survives in St Thomas's Church in Salisbury. The Brett family of Whitestaunton in Somerset are said by the Duchess of Cleveland to be descended from the Brettes of Sampford Brett, and are the ancestors of the present Brett family, Viscounts Esher.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70973", "revid": "50405991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70973", "title": "Jackson structured programming", "text": "Computer programming method\nJackson structured programming (JSP) is a method for structured programming developed by British software consultant Michael A. Jackson. It was described in his 1975 book Principles of Program Design. The technique of JSP is to analyze the data structures of the files that a program must read as input and produce as output, and then produce a program design based on those data structures, so that the program control structure handles those data structures in a natural and intuitive way.\nJSP describes structures (of both data and programs) using three basic structures \u2013 sequence, iteration, and selection (or alternatives). These structures are diagrammed as (in effect) a visual representation of a regular expression.\nIntroduction.\nMichael A. Jackson originally developed JSP in the 1970s. He documented the system in his 1975 book \"Principles of Program Design\". In a 2001 conference talk, he provided a retrospective analysis of the original driving forces behind the method, and related it to subsequent software engineering developments. Jackson's aim was to make COBOL batch file processing programs easier to modify and maintain, but the method can be used to design programs for any programming language that has structured control constructs\u2014sequence, iteration, and selection (\"if/then/else\").\nJackson Structured Programming was similar to Warnier/Orr structured programming although JSP considered both input and output data structures while the Warnier/Orr method focused almost exclusively on the structure of the output stream.\nMotivation for the method.\nAt the time that JSP was developed, most programs were batch COBOL programs that processed sequential files stored on tape. A typical program read through its input file as a sequence of records, so that all programs had the same structure\u2014 a single main loop that processed all of the records in the file, one at a time. Jackson asserted that this program structure was almost always wrong, and encouraged programmers to look for more complex data structures. In Chapter 3 of \"Principles of Program Design\" Jackson presents two versions of a program, one designed using JSP, the other using the traditional single-loop structure. Here is his example, translated from COBOL into Java. The purpose of these two programs is to recognize groups of repeated records (lines) in a sorted file, and to produce an output file listing each record and the number of times that it occurs in the file.\nHere is the traditional, single-loop version of the program.\nString line;\nint count = 0;\nString firstLineOfGroup = null;\n// begin single main loop\nwhile ((line = in.readLine()) != null) {\n if (firstLineOfGroup == null || !line.equals(firstLineOfGroup)) {\n if (firstLineOfGroup != null) {\n System.out.println(firstLineOfGroup + \" \" + count);\n count = 0;\n firstLineOfGroup = line;\n count++;\nif (firstLineOfGroup != null) {\n System.out.println(firstLineOfGroup + \" \" + count);\nHere is a JSP-style version of the same program. Note that (unlike the traditional program) it has two loops, one nested inside the other. The outer loop processes groups of repeating records, while the inner loop processes the individual records in a group.\nString line;\nint numberOfLinesInGroup;\nline = in.readLine();\n// begin outer loop: process 1 group\nwhile (line != null) { \n numberOfLinesInGroup = 0;\n String firstLineOfGroup = line;\n // begin inner loop: process 1 record in the group\n while (line != null &amp;&amp; line.equals(firstLineOfGroup)) {\n numberOfLinesInGroup++;\n line = in.readLine();\n System.out.println(firstLineOfGroup + \" \" + numberOfLinesInGroup);\nJackson criticises the traditional single-loop version for failing to process the structure of the input file (a sequence of groups containing repeating records) in a natural way. One sign of its unnatural design is that, in order to work properly, it is forced to include special code for handling the first and last record of the file.\nThe basic method.\nJSP uses semi-formal steps to capture the existing structure of a program's inputs and outputs in the structure of the program itself.\nThe intent is to create programs which are easy to modify over their lifetime. Jackson's major insight was that requirement changes are usually minor tweaks to the existing structures. For a program constructed using JSP, the inputs, the outputs, and the internal structures of the program all match, so small changes to the inputs and outputs should translate into small changes to the program.\nJSP structures programs in terms of four component types:\nThe method begins by describing a program's inputs in terms of the four fundamental component types. It then goes on to describe the program's outputs in the same way. Each input and output is modelled as a separate Data Structure Diagram (DSD). To make JSP work for compute-intensive applications, such as digital signal processing (DSP) it is also necessary to draw algorithm structure diagrams, which focus on internal data structures rather than input and output ones.\nThe input and output structures are then unified or merged into a final program structure, known as a Program Structure Diagram (PSD). This step may involve the addition of a small amount of high-level control structure to marry up the inputs and outputs. Some programs process all the input before doing any output, whilst others read in one record, write one record and iterate. Such approaches have to be captured in the PSD.\nThe PSD, which is language neutral, is then implemented in a programming language. JSP is geared towards programming at the level of control structures, so the implemented designs use just primitive operations, sequences, iterations and selections. JSP is not used to structure programs at the level of classes and objects, although it can helpfully structure control flow within a class's methods.\nJSP uses a diagramming notation to describe the structure of inputs, outputs and programs, with diagram elements for each of the fundamental component types.\nA simple operation is drawn as a box.\n&lt;br&gt;An operation\nA sequence of operations is represented by boxes connected with lines. In the example below, A is a sequence consisting of operations B, C and D.\n&lt;br&gt;A sequence\nAn iteration is again represented with joined boxes. In addition the iterated operation has a star in the top right corner of its box. In the example below, A is an iteration of zero or more invocations of operation B.\n&lt;br&gt;An iteration\nSelection is similar to a sequence, but with a circle drawn in the top right hand corner of each optional operation. In the example, A is a selection of one and only one of operations B, C or D.\n&lt;br&gt;A selectionNote that it in the above diagrams, it is element A that is the sequence or iteration, not the elements B, C or D (which in the above diagrams are all elementary). Jackson gives the 'Look-down rule' to determine what an element is, i.e. look at the elements below an element to find out what it is.\nA worked example.\nAs an example, here is how a JSP programmer would design and code a run length encoder. A run length encoder is a program whose input is a stream of bytes which can be viewed as occurring in \"runs\", where a run consists of one or more occurrences of bytes of the same value. The output of the program is a stream of byte pairs, where each byte pair is a compressed description of a run. In each pair, the first byte is the value of the repeated byte in a run and the second byte is a number indicating the number of times that that value was repeated in the run. For example, a run of eight occurrences of the letter \"A\" in the input stream (\"AAAAAAAA\") would produce \"A8\" as a byte pair in the output stream. Run length encoders are often used for crudely compressing bitmaps.\nWith JSP, the first step is to describe the data structure(s) of a program's input stream(s). The program has only one input stream, consisting of zero or more \"runs\" of the same byte value. Here is the JSP data structure diagram for the input stream.\nThe second step is to describe the output data structure, which in this case consists of zero or more iterations of byte pairs.\nThe next step is to describe the correspondences between the components of the input and output structures.\nThe next step is to use the correspondences between the two data structures to create a program structure that is capable of processing the input data structure and producing the output data structure. (Sometimes this isn't possible. See the discussion of \"structure clashes\", below.)\nOnce the program structure is finished, the programmer creates a list of the computational operations that the program must perform, and the program structure diagram is fleshed out by hanging those operations off of the appropriate structural components. \nAlso, at this stage conditions on iterations (loops) and selections (if-then-else or case statements) are listed and added to the program structure diagram.\nOnce the diagram is finished, it can be translated into whatever programming language is being used. Here is a translation into C.\nint main(int argc, char *argv[])\n int c;\n int first_byte;\n int count;\n c = getchar(); /* get first byte */\n while (c != EOF) {\n /* process the first byte in the run */\n first_byte = c;\n count = 1;\n c = getchar(); /* get next byte */\n /* process the succeeding bytes in the run */\n while (c != EOF &amp;&amp; c == first_byte &amp;&amp; count &lt; 255) {\n /* process one byte of the same value */\n count++;\n c = getchar(); /* get next byte */\n putchar(first_byte);\n putchar(count);\n return EXIT_SUCCESS;\nTechniques for handling difficult design problems.\nIn \"Principles of Program Design\" Jackson recognized situations that posed specific kinds of design problems, and provided techniques for handling them.\nOne of these situations is a case in which a program processes two input files, rather than one. In 1975, one of the standard \"wicked problems\" was how to design a transaction-processing program. In such a program, a sequential file of update records is run against a sequential master file, producing an updated master file as output. (For example, at night a bank would run a batch program that would update the balances in its customers' accounts based on records of the deposits and withdrawals that they had made that day.) \"Principles of Program Design\" provided a standard solution for that problem, along with an explanation of the logic behind the design.\nAnother kind of problem involved what Jackson called \"recognition difficulties\" and today we would call parsing problems. The basic JSP design technique was supplemented by POSIT and QUIT operations to allow the design of what we would now call a backtracking parser.\nJSP also recognized three situations that are called \"structure clashes\"\u2014 a boundary clash, an ordering clash, and an interleaving clash\u2014 and provided techniques for dealing with them. In structure clash situations the input and output data structures are so incompatible that it is not possible to produce the output file from the input file. It is necessary, in effect, to write two programs\u2014 the first processes the input stream, breaks it down into smaller chunks, and writes those chunks to an intermediate file. The second program reads the intermediate file and produces the desired output.\nJSP and object-oriented design.\nJSP was developed long before object-oriented technologies became available. It and its successor method JSD do not treat what now would be called \"objects\" as collections of more or less independent methods. Instead, following the work of C. A. R. Hoare, JSP and JSD describe software objects as co-routines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70977", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70977", "title": "Oswald the Lucky Rabbit", "text": "Early animated Disney character\nOswald the Lucky Rabbit, also known as Oswald the Rabbit, Oswald Rabbit, and Ozzie, is an animated cartoon character created in 1927 by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks for Universal Pictures. He starred in several animated short films released to theaters from 1927 to 1938. Twenty-seven animated Oswald shorts were produced at the Walt Disney Studio. After Universal took control of Oswald's character in 1928, Disney created Mickey Mouse as a replacement to Oswald.\nIn 2003, Buena Vista Games pitched a concept for an Oswald-themed video game to then-Disney President and future-CEO Bob Iger, who became committed to acquiring the rights to Oswald. In 2006, The Walt Disney Company acquired the trademark of Oswald (with NBCUniversal effectively trading Oswald for the services of Al Michaels as play-by-play announcer on \"NBC Sunday Night Football\").\nOswald returned in Disney's 2010 video game, \"Epic Mickey\". The game's metafiction plot parallels Oswald's real-world history, dealing with the character's feelings of abandonment by Disney and envy toward Mickey Mouse. He has since appeared in Disney theme parks and comic books, as well as two follow-up games, ' and '. Oswald made his first appearance in an animated production in 85 years through his cameo appearance in the 2013 animated short \"Get a Horse!\" He was the subject of the 2015 feature film \"Walt Before Mickey\". Oswald also appears as a townsperson in \"Disney Infinity 2.0\". In 2022, Oswald appeared in a new short produced by Disney. He also has a cameo appearance in \"Once Upon a Studio\".\nIn January 2023, the copyrights on several of the original Oswald shorts, as well as the character, expired. Those films and the character are now in the public domain. In 2024, it was announced that the character will appear in \"Oswald: Down the Rabbit Hole\", an upcoming horror film directed by Lilton Stewart III, starring Ernie Hudson as the titular character.\nCharacteristics.\nWhile under Disney's creative control, Oswald was one of the first cartoon characters that had personality. As outlined by Walt himself: \"Hereafter we will aim to [make] Oswald a younger character, peppy, alert, saucy, and venturesome, keeping him also neat and trim\". With Oswald, Disney began to explore the concept of \"personality animation\", in which cartoon characters were defined as individuals through their movements, mannerisms, and acting, instead of simply through their design. Around this period, Disney had expressed: \"I want the characters to be somebody. I don't want them just to be a drawing\". Not only were gags used, but his humor differed in terms of what he used to make people laugh. He presented physical humor, used situations to his advantage and presented situational humor in general and frustration comedy best shown in the cartoon \"The Mechanical Cow\". He would use animal limbs to solve problems and even use his own limbs as props and gags. He could be squished as if he was made of rubber and could turn anything into a tool. His distinct personality was inspired by Douglas Fairbanks for his courageous and adventurous attitude as seen in the cartoon short \"Oh, What a Knight\".\nIn regard to Oswald's personality, Disney historian David Gerstein describes the difference between Mickey and Oswald: \"Imagine Mickey if he were a little more egotistical or fallible, or imagine Bugs Bunny if he talked the talk but wasn't as good at walking the walk\".\nIn order to make his Oswald cartoons look \"real\", Disney turned away from the styles of Felix the Cat, Koko the Clown, Krazy Kat, and Julius the Cat and began emulating the camera angles, effects, and editing of live-action films. To learn how to base gags on personality and how to build comic routines, rather than heaping one gag after another, he studied Laurel and Hardy, Harold Lloyd, Charlie Chaplin, and Buster Keaton. In order to stir emotion in an audience, Disney studied and scrutinized the shadow effects, cross-cutting, and staging of action in films featuring Douglas Fairbanks and Lon Chaney.\nOver several cartoons, Disney and his animators would develop Oswald's persona: an \"emotive, fast-moving wise guy, alternately ebullient and grouchy\".\nWalt Disney did not want for Oswald to simply be \"a rabbit character animated and shown in the same light as the commonly known cat characters\", as well as merely just a peg for gags. Instead, his stated intention was \"to make Oswald peculiarly and typically OSWALD\".\nHistory.\nCreation.\nIn 1927, because of cost and technical restrictions, Disney and his chief animator Ub Iwerks ended their work on the Alice Comedies and Julius the Cat. Around the same time, Charles Mintz got word that Universal Pictures wanted to get into the cartoon business, so he told Disney to create a new rabbit character that he could sell to Universal, because there were too many cat characters (Krazy Kat, Felix the Cat, etc.). After Oswald was created, Winkler signed a contract with Universal on March 4 the same year, which would guarantee 26 \"Oswald the Lucky Rabbit\" cartoons. Work on both the character and series began soon after Disney moved his studio to Hyperion Avenue.\nThe Universal studio heads rejected the first Oswald cartoon, \"Poor Papa\", for its poor production quality and the sloppiness and age of Oswald. Disney, together with Iwerks, created a second cartoon titled \"Trolley Troubles\" featuring a much younger, neater Oswald. The short, released on September 5, 1927, officially launched the series and proved to be Universal's greatest success to date. \"Poor Papa\" was later released in 1928 and the storyline was reused in a Mickey Mouse short five years later, in \"Mickey's Nightmare\". Oswald the Lucky Rabbit became Universal's first major hit in 1927, rivaling other popular cartoon characters, such as Felix the Cat and Koko the Clown.\nThe success of the Oswald series allowed the Walt Disney Studio to grow to a staff of nearly twenty. Walt's weekly salary from the series was $100 while Roy Disney's was $65. The Disney brothers earned $500 per Oswald short and split the year-end profits, with Walt receiving 60% ($5,361), and Roy receiving 40% ($3,574). With income gained from the Oswald series, Walt and Roy purchased ten acres of land in the desert. They also invested in an oil-drilling venture. Iwerks also invested his income in several stone mills to crush paint pigment he used to make paint formulas that were utilized by animators for decades.\nOswald's success also resulted in Universal and Winkler signing another contract in February 1928, guaranteeing three more years of Oswald cartoons.\nAs time passed, Disney feared that Mintz would forgo renewal of the contract, partly due to Iwerks informing Disney that George Winkler, at the behest of Mintz, had been going behind Disney's back during pick-up runs for Oswald reels and hiring away his animators. Eventually, Disney traveled with his wife Lilly to New York to find other potential distributors for his studio's cartoons, including Fox and MGM, prior to meetings with Mintz. As Walt later recalled, he placed two Oswald prints under one arm and\u2014feeling \"like a hick\"\u2014marched \"one half-block north\" on Broadway to MGM to visit Fred Quimby. During this period, Walt and Lillian attended the premier of the Oswald short \"Rival Romeos\", which debuted at the Colony on 53rd and Broadway.\nIn February 1928, Disney traveled to New York City in hopes of negotiating a more profitable contract with his producer Charles Mintz. As economic problems were apparent at the time, Mintz figured Disney should settle for a 20% cut, although large turnarounds were promised if the studio's finances showed considerable growth. While most of his fellow animators left for Mintz's studio, Disney quit working on the Oswald cartoons. On his long train ride home, he came up with an idea to create another character, and retain the rights to it. He and Iwerks would go on to develop a new cartoon in secret, starring a new character which would soon become the most successful cartoon character in film history, and later became the foundation of a global entertainment empire. The first Mickey Mouse cartoon to be filmed was \"Plane Crazy\" in the summer of 1928, but it was produced as a silent and held back from release. The first Mickey Mouse film with a synchronized soundtrack, \"Steamboat Willie\", reached the screen that fall and became a major hit, eclipsing Oswald. \"Plane Crazy\" was later given its own synchronized soundtrack and released on March 17, 1929.\nUniversal takes direct control.\nMintz, meanwhile, opened his own studio (later known as Screen Gems) consisting primarily of former Disney employees, where he continued to produce Oswald cartoons, among them the first Oswald with sound, \"Hen Fruit\" (1929). Coincidentally, Disney and Mintz each produced nine cartoons the first year and 17 the next, before others took over Oswald. Animators Hugh Harman and Rudolf Ising, unhappy with Mintz, asked Universal head Carl Laemmle to remove Mintz, suggesting they would be the ones to continue the Oswald series. Laemmle terminated Mintz's contract but, instead of hiring Harman and Ising, he opted to have the Oswald cartoons produced right on the Universal lot. Laemmle selected Walter Lantz to produce the new series of Oswald shorts (the first of which was 1929's \"Race Riot\"). Featuring Bill Nolan as an animator (and later director), the Lantz-produced Oswalds had a decidedly different tone and aesthetic than the Disney shorts, with more slapstick and surreal visual gags, some contributed by a young Tex Avery. Over the next decade, Lantz produced 142 Oswald cartoons, for a total of 194 films featuring the character, spanning the work of all three producers. After Lantz took over production in 1929, Oswald's look changed to some degree over the following years: Oswald got white gloves on his hands, shoes on his feet, a shirt, a \"cuter\" face with larger eyes, a bigger head, and shorter ears. With 1935's \"Case of the Lost Sheep\", an even more major makeover took place: the character was drawn more realistically now, with white fur rather than black, shoes are removed, plus wearing suspenders instead of a shirt and shorts. Both redesigns were done by Manuel Moreno, who recalled that in the 1935 redesign that Lantz said to make Oswald cute and to get rid of the black on him, because Disney was also changing his characters.\nThe cartoons containing the new, white-furred Oswald seemed different from their predecessors in more than one way, as the stories themselves became softer. Minor changes in the drawing style would continue, too. With \"Happy Scouts\" (1938), the second-to-last Oswald film produced, the rabbit's fur went from being all-white to a combination of white and gray.\nUnlike the Disney shorts, in which Oswald did not speak, Lantz's cartoons began to feature actual dialogue for Oswald, although most of the cartoons were still silent to begin with. Animator Bill Nolan performed the voice of Oswald in \"Cold Turkey\", the first Lantz cartoon with dialogue, and the following year Pinto Colvig, who was working as an animator and gag man at the studio, started voicing Oswald. When Colvig left the studio in 1931, Mickey Rooney took over the voicing of Oswald until early in the following year. Starting in 1932, Lantz ceased to use a regular voice actor for Oswald, and many studio staff members (including Lantz himself) would take turns in voicing the character over the years. June Foray provided Oswald's voice in \"The Egg Cracker Suite\", which was the final theatrical short to feature him. She later voiced him again for an unaired radio pilot, \"Sally in Hollywoodland\" (1947).\nOswald made a cameo appearance in the first animated sequence with both sound and color (two-strip Technicolor), a 2\u00bd-minute animated sequence of the live action movie \"The King of Jazz\" (1930), produced by Laemmle for Universal. It was not until 1934 that Oswald got his own color sound cartoons in two-strip Technicolor, \"Toyland Premiere\" and \"Springtime Serenade\". The Oswald cartoons then returned to black-and-white, except for the last one, \"The Egg Cracker Suite\" (1943), released as a part of the Swing Symphonies series. \"Egg Cracker\" was also the only Oswald cartoon to use three-strip Technicolor. Oswald's last cartoon appearance was a cameo in \"The Woody Woodpecker Polka\" (1951), also in Technicolor, which by then had become the norm in the cartoon industry. He also appeared in a 1952 theatrical commercial for the Electric Autolite Company, with his voice being provided by Dick Beals.\nComic books.\nOswald's first appearance in comics was in a series of comic strips titled \"Oswald the Rabbit\", which ran from February 1935 to January 1936. They were drawn by Al Stahl and published by National Allied Publications. The comics were serialized on one page of every issue of \"New Fun\" and the first issue of \"More Fun\".\nOswald's second run in comics began in Dell Comics' \"New Funnies\", which ran from 1942 to 1962. Following the typical development seen in most new comics, the New Funnies stories slowly morphed the character in their own direction.\nAt the start of the \"New Funnies\" feature, Oswald existed in a milieu reminiscent of Winnie-the-Pooh: he was portrayed as a live stuffed animal, living in a forest together with other anthropomorphized toys. These included Toby Bear, Maggie Lou the wooden doll, Hi-Yah Wahoo the turtle-faced Indian, and Woody Woodpecker\u2014depicted as a mechanical doll filled with nuts and bolts (hence his \"nutty\" behavior). In 1944, with the addition of writer John Stanley, the stuffed animal motif was dropped, as were Maggie Lou, Woody, and Wahoo. Oswald and Toby became flesh and blood characters living as roommates in \"Lantzville\". Initially drawn by Dan Gormley, the series was later drawn by the likes of Dan Noonan and Lloyd White.\nIn 1948, Toby adopted two orphan rabbits for Oswald to raise. Floyd and Lloyd, \"Poppa Oswald's\" new sons, stuck around; Toby was relegated to the sidelines, disappearing for good in 1953. Later stories focused on Oswald adventuring with his sons, seeking odd jobs, or simply protecting the boys from the likes of rabbit-eating Reddy Fox and (from 1961) con man Gabby Gator\u2014a character adapted from contemporary Woody Woodpecker cartoon shorts. This era of Oswald comics typically featured the art of Jack Bradbury, known also for his Mickey Mouse work.\nAfter the assassination of John F. Kennedy by Lee Harvey Oswald, the name \"Oswald\" came to have negative connotations.\nHe made brief appearances in the \"Woody Woodpecker\" comics series until it ended in the 1970s. Through the end of the 20th century, the comics produced outside the U.S. carried on the look and story style of the Dell Oswald stories.\nIn 2010, Oswald starred in the digi-comic series \"Epic Mickey: Tales of the Wasteland\", a prequel to the \"Epic Mickey\" video game, sharing what the Wasteland was like before Mickey arrived there.\nIn 2011, Oswald starred in the Norwegian Disney comic story \"En magisk jul!\", written by David Gerstein and drawn by Mark Kausler. It is based on and takes place in the times of the classic Oswald shorts from 1927 to 1928. The story was later reprinted, as \"Just Like Magic!\", in the American Disney comic \"Walt Disney's Comics and Stories\" #726 (2015).\nDisney acquires Oswald trademark.\nIn February 2006, Disney CEO Bob Iger initiated a trade with NBCUniversal in which a number of minor assets, including the rights to Oswald and the 27 shorts that Walt Disney had worked on, were acquired by The Walt Disney Company in exchange for sending sportscaster Al Michaels from Disney's ABC and ESPN to NBC Sports. At the time, ABC had lost its contract for NFL broadcast rights, and despite recently signing a long-term contract with ESPN, Michaels was interested in rejoining broadcast partner John Madden at NBC for the Sunday night package. Universal transferred the trademark of the character to Disney, and in exchange, Disney released Michaels from his employment contract, allowing him to sign with NBC.\nThe deal included the trademark rights to the character and the 27 Disney-produced Oswald shorts along with the handover of any physical Disney-produced Oswald material Universal still had in their possession. Iger had been interested in the property because of an internal design document for a video game, which became \"Epic Mickey\". Walt Disney's daughter, Diane Disney Miller, issued the following statement after the deal was announced:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAround the same time, the Kansas City Chiefs and New York Jets made a similar deal, the Chiefs giving the Jets a draft pick as compensation for releasing coach Herm Edwards from his contract. Referring to this trade, Michaels said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oswald is definitely worth more than a fourth-round draft choice. I'm going to be a trivia answer someday.\nIn January 2007, a T-shirt line from Comme des Gar\u00e7ons seems to have constituted the first new Disney Oswald merchandise. Following in December was a two-disc DVD set, \"The Adventures of Oswald the Lucky Rabbit\", included in of the \"Walt Disney Treasures\" DVD series. Several Oswald collectors' figurines and a limited edition grayscale plush toy appeared shortly after the DVD set's release. The Disney Store also began to introduce Oswald into its merchandise lines, starting with a canvas print and Christmas ornament that became available in Fall 2007. A standard-issue color plush toy matching Oswald's appearance in \"Epic Mickey\" appeared in late 2010. This was followed by an ongoing roll-out of clothing and other products at the Disney Store, various chain stores, and the Disney California Adventure theme park.\nIn 2012, the newly redesigned Buena Vista Street at Disney California Adventure included Oswald's Filling Station, an Oswald merchandise stand themed as a 1920s gas station. The shop exclusively sells \"Oswald the Lucky Rabbit\" merchandise such as \"Oswald Ears\" hats (a similar style to the popular Mickey Mouse Club black mouse-eared caps), as well as shirts, t-shirts, plush toys, pins, mugs, and other special Oswald items. In 2014, Oswald began making appearances in the area near the shop.\nVideo games.\nIn 1995, Oswald briefly appeared in \"F\u00e9rias Frustradas do Pica-Pau\", a Woody Woodpecker video game released for the Master System and the Mega Drive in Brazil only.\nIn 2006, Oswald made a cameo in the Intro of a Panchiko Machine game called \"Woody Woodpecker CR 2\".\nOswald is one of the main characters in the 2010 video game \"Epic Mickey\" and its 2024 remake, \"Epic Mickey: Rebrushed\". The world of \"Epic Mickey\" takes place in \"Wasteland\", a setting that mirrors elements of Disneyland but as a home for \"forgotten\" Disney characters, including Oswald, who rules over the environment. Oswald fashioned Wasteland after Disneyland, although it is darker and distorted. He implements his likeness into areas Mickey Mouse normally appears, such as the iconic Partners statue with Walt Disney and other imagery throughout the town. Oswald was the first cartoon character to be \"forgotten\" and eventually lose his relevance, now inhabiting Wasteland. Oswald also dislikes Mickey for stealing his popularity that he felt he deserved. Despite his resentment, Oswald tries to maintain peace and make Wasteland a better place for forgotten characters, especially his \"bunny children\" and his wife Ortensia.\n\"\" is a video game that was released on November 18, 2012. Unlike the previous game, \"Epic Mickey 2\" features full voiced cut-scenes with Frank Welker (Welker had also provided Oswald's vocal effects in the previous game) as Oswald's first voice actor in an \"Oswald the Lucky Rabbit\" production from Disney. Bill Nolan was Oswald's first voice actor in 1929, when Walter Lantz produced the Oswald cartoons.\nTetsuya Nomura, creator and lead producer of the \"Kingdom Hearts\" franchise, had requested for Oswald's use in \"Kingdom Hearts III\", but the response from Disney was that the character would be \"too difficult\" to use, with no further clarification or details from Disney. Nomura cites Oswald as one of his favorite Disney characters.\nOn November 30, 2023, Oswald was added as a playable racer in \"Disney Speedstorm\" during its fifth season alongside Ortensia, while he appears in \"Disney Dreamlight Valley\" as part of its \"Eternity Isle\" expansion. He is voiced by David Errigo Jr. in both appearances.\nDisney projects.\nIn 2012, sketch animation from a lost 1928 cartoon, \"Harem Scarem\", was compiled by archivists at Disney and released to help celebrate Oswald's 85th Anniversary. He made an appearance in a 2013 throwback-style Mickey Mouse cartoon, \"Get a Horse!\"\nWhile only 19 of 26 cartoons were previously known to have survived, a couple of Oswald's lost cartoons were found in the 2010s. In 2015, the British Film Institute's National Archives were found to hold his \"Sleigh Bells\" (1928) footage. The BFI and Walt Disney Animation Studios worked to restore the short. Long-term Disney animator David Bossert wrote a book, \"Oswald the Lucky Rabbit: The Search for the Lost Disney Cartoons\" which was released in 2017. A Japanese man, Yasushi Watanabe, read the book and discovered that he had a missing 1928 Oswald cartoon, \"Neck &amp; Neck\", since he was a teenager.\nA series centered on Oswald was in development with the project announced in 2019 for a potential release on Disney+. Disney Television Animation veteran Matt Danner revealed that a series was in development as a follow-up for the team behind \"Legend of the Three Caballeros\", but that they \"got broken up and scattered to the wind\". He expressed hope that the series could still be revived in the future and further hinted that another team would develop it, because Disney was still heavily invested in wanting to revive the character.\nOn December 1, 2022, an online hand-drawn animated Oswald short by Walt Disney Animation Studios was released. The short was directed by Eric Goldberg, scored by Dean McClure, and produced by Dorothy McKim, with Mark Henn and Randy Haycock working on the animation alongside Goldberg. It marked Oswald's first short produced by Disney, as well as his first short ever since \"Feed the Kitty\" (1938). A few weeks later, a hand-drawn animation piece by Disney Animation featuring Oswald was released, meant to promote a line of products developed by Disney and Givenchy. Restored public domain versions of the shorts \"Trolley Troubles\" and \"All Wet\" (both 1927) were released on Disney+ in September 2023.\nIn March 2025, it was reported that Jon Favreau was developing a live-action animation hybrid series based on the character for Disney+ from Walt Disney Studios. In June 2025, it was announced Ravi Cabot-Conyers, Mykal-Michelle Harris and Ryder Allen were cast in leading roles. It was later announced that Amy Sedaris was cast as main character Allen's mother. Filming started at Disneyland in late July with Kathryn Hahn joining the cast of the series. In August, 2025 Steve Martin and Al Madrigal joined the cast.\nMerchandise.\nShortly after the rabbit starred in his black-and-white animated silent shorts between 1927 and 1928, he sold merchandise for Universal: a chocolate-covered marshmallow candy bar, a stencil set, and a pin-backed button. In 2004 and 2005, Oswald products became popular in Japan and were primarily made available as prizes in UFO catchers and as official merchandise in Universal Studios Japan, manufactured by Taito and/or Medicom, these products included puppets, inflatable dolls, keyrings, and watches. Oswald made his first Disneyland appearance at Tokyo Disneyland on March 31, 2010, as an Easter float. As of October 2017, Oswald has a Service Station at Disney's California Adventure (near the entrance) that only sells exclusive \"Oswald The Lucky Rabbit\" merchandise including Oswald ears, hats (baseball caps), shirts, t-shirts, plates, coats, cups, mugs, plush toys, key-chains, and much more.\nTheme park appearances.\nThe Oswald character showed up at the parks in Florida and California on the day Disney reacquired Oswald and made further appearances at the time.\nIn 2010, Tokyo Disneyland produced a float featuring Oswald for their first Easter holiday event.\nIn 2011, Oswald appeared with other vintage Disney characters on the construction walls for Disney California Adventure Park's new entrance. Oswald also appeared on a poster as a magician's rabbit in Town Square Theater in Magic Kingdom park. Oswald appeared on various items of clothing available for purchase at Disneyland Paris in the shops on Main Street USA.\nIn 2012, Disney California Adventure park at the Disneyland Resort reopened with a new entry area called Buena Vista Street, themed to 1920s Los Angeles. Oswald's Service Station is a 1920s gas station (housing a gift shop) located at the north end of the street and features Oswald prominently in its logo. Oswald has been spotted making appearances near his station. In the same year, Oswald ear hats appeared at the Emporium at Walt Disney World in Florida.\nAs of May 2014, Oswald can be spotted on the exit of \"The Seven Dwarves\" ride at Magic Kingdom, Orlando. He is carved into a tree near the exit door. During the same year a new Oswald costumed character began meet-and-greets at Tokyo DisneySea on April 1; on September 14 of the same year, Oswald began making appearances on Buena Vista Street at Disney California Adventure.\nOn June 2, 2018, at the FanDaze event Oswald's spouse, Ortensia accompanied him as a VIP guest in Disneyland Paris. They also performed in the show, \"Oh My, Ortensia\".\nOswald was featured on the medal of the Walt Disney World Marathon Weekend 10K. The event took place on January 7, 2022, as part of runDisney's WDW Marathon Weekend.\nOswald made a debut in Hong Kong Disneyland in January 2023 as part of the celebration for the 100th anniversary of The Walt Disney Company.\nFrom January 20 to February 15, 2023, at Disney California Adventure, Oswald and his wife Ortensia appeared to celebrate Chinese New Year, which marks Ortensia's debut in an American theme park.\nReception.\nDuring the 1920s, the Oswald shorts, as well as Oswald himself, were extremely popular and had received substantial critical acclaim. \"The Film Daily\" noted that the series was \"one of the best sellers of the 'U[niversal]' short subject program\". According to \"The Moving Picture World\", Oswald had \"accomplished the astounding feat of jumping into the first-run favor overnight\".\nWith the release of \"Trolley Troubles\", \"The Film Daily\" wrote: \"As conductor on a 'Toonerville' trolley, Oswald is a riot. This ... you can book on pure faith, and our solemn word that they have the goods\".\n\"The Moving Picture World\" noted that Oswald was \"good for a lot of smiles and real laughs. \"Trolley Troubles\" presents Oswald as the skipper of a dinky little trolley on a wild ride over mountains\".\nAccording to \"The Moving Picture World\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If the first of these new cartoon comedies for Universal release is an indication of what is to come, then this series is destined to win much popular favor. They are cleverly drawn, well executed, brimful of action, and fairly abounding in humorous situations. Oswald the Lucky Rabbit is all of that. Some of his experiences are hilarious and breathtaking.\nWith the release of \"Oh, Teacher\", \"Moving Picture World\" wrote that it \"lives up to the promise of the first ... as a clever, peppy, and amusing series of cartoons that should prove popular in any type of house. This one deals with Oswald as a school kid and introduces a cat as his rival. It contains some of the best gags we have seen in cartoons\".\nWith the release of \"The Mechanical Cow\", \"Moving Picture World\" wrote that Oswald \"has a wild and amusing time with his ingenuous milk producer\".\nWith the release of \"Great Guns\", \"Moving Picture World\" wrote that Oswald is a \"hero in action in the trenches and [in] a situation where two planes fight each other like pugilists\". They found that \"Great Guns\" was \"chock full of humor\" and wrote that \"this series is bound to be popular in all types of houses if the present standard is maintained\".\n\"Moving Picture World\" also wrote of the series:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In addition to striking a new note in cartoon characters by featuring a rabbit, these Disney creations are bright, speedy and genuinely amusing ... The animation is good and the clever way in which Disney makes his creations simulate the gestures and expressions of human beings adds to the enjoyment. They should provide worthwhile attractions in any type of house.\nIn addition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oswald looks like a real contender. Walt Disney is doing this new series. Funny how the cartoon artists never hit on a rabbit before. Oswald with his long ears has a chance for a lot of new comedy gags and makes the most of them. Universal has been looking for a good animated subject for the last year. They've found it.\nIn the modern era, animation historian David Gerstein notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Disney has done some new projects with Oswald since recovering him. He's co-starred with Mickey in a video game series [...] called \"Epic Mickey\". Kids who have discovered those games have discovered the Oswald films, and it's fascinating to see that Oswald is a genuinely popular character with kids today. If you ask a high schooler if they know Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, a surprising number will say yes. [There] is just something vital about these characters that, when presented the right way, [connects] with all ages.\nOswald won Best New Character in both Readers' Choice and Editors' Choice in \"Nintendo Power\"'s Best of 2010 awards.\nTetsuya Nomura, creator and lead producer of the \"Kingdom Hearts\" franchise, lists Oswald as one of his favorite Disney characters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70980", "revid": "50618219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70980", "title": "Appendicitis", "text": "Inflammation of the appendix\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAppendicitis is inflammation of the appendix. Symptoms commonly include right lower abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fever and decreased appetite. However, approximately 40% of people do not have these typical symptoms. Severe complications of a ruptured appendix include widespread, painful inflammation of the inner lining of the abdominal wall and sepsis.\nAppendicitis is primarily caused by a blockage of the hollow portion in the appendix. This blockage typically results from a faecolith, a calcified \"stone\" made of feces. Some studies show a correlation between appendicoliths and disease severity. Other factors such as inflamed lymphoid tissue from a viral infection, intestinal parasites, gallstone, or tumors may also lead to this blockage. When the appendix becomes blocked, it experiences increased pressure, reduced blood flow, and bacterial growth, resulting in inflammation. This combination of factors causes tissue injury and, ultimately, tissue death. If this process is left untreated, it can lead to the appendix rupturing, which releases bacteria into the abdominal cavity, potentially leading to severe complications.\nThe diagnosis of appendicitis is largely based on the person's signs and symptoms. In cases where the diagnosis is unclear, close observation, medical imaging, and laboratory tests can be helpful. The two most commonly used imaging tests for diagnosing appendicitis are ultrasound and computed tomography (CT scan). CT scan is more accurate than ultrasound in detecting acute appendicitis. However, ultrasound may be preferred as the first imaging test in children and pregnant women because of the risks associated with radiation exposure from CT scans. Although ultrasound may aid in diagnosis, its main role is in identifying important differentials, such as ovarian pathology in females or mesenteric adenitis in children.\nThe standard treatment for acute appendicitis involves the surgical removal of the inflamed appendix. This procedure can be performed either through an open incision in the abdomen (laparotomy) or using minimally invasive techniques with small incisions and cameras (laparoscopy). Surgery is essential to reduce the risk of complications or potential death associated with the rupture of the appendix. Antibiotics may be equally effective in certain cases of non-ruptured appendicitis, but 31% will undergo appendectomy within one year. It is one of the most common and significant causes of sudden abdominal pain. In 2015, approximately 11.6 million cases of appendicitis were reported, resulting in around 50,100 deaths worldwide. In the United States, appendicitis is one of the most common causes of sudden abdominal pain requiring surgery. Annually, more than 300,000 individuals in the United States undergo surgical removal of their appendix.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe presentation of acute appendicitis includes acute abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and fever. As the appendix becomes more swollen and inflamed, it begins to irritate the adjoining abdominal wall. This leads the pain to localize at the right lower quadrant. This classic migration of pain may not appear in children under three years. This pain can be triggered by a sharp pain feeling. Pain from appendicitis may begin as dull pain around the navel. After several hours, the pain usually migrates towards the right lower quadrant, where it becomes localized. Symptoms include localized findings in the right iliac fossa. The abdominal wall becomes very sensitive to gentle pressure (palpation). There is pain in the sudden release of deep tension in the lower abdomen (Blumberg's sign). If the appendix is retrocecal (localized behind the cecum), even deep pressure in the right lower quadrant may fail to elicit tenderness (silent appendix). This is because the cecum, distended with gas, protects the inflamed appendix from pressure. Similarly, if the appendix lies entirely within the pelvis, there is typically a complete absence of abdominal rigidity. In such cases, a digital rectal examination elicits tenderness in the rectovesical pouch. Coughing causes point tenderness in this area (McBurney's point), called Dunphy's sign.\nCauses.\nAcute appendicitis seems to be the result of a primary obstruction of the appendix. Once this obstruction occurs, the appendix becomes filled with mucus and swells. This continued production of mucus leads to increased pressures within the lumen and the walls of the appendix. The increased pressure results in thrombosis and occlusion of the small vessels, and stasis of lymphatic flow. At this point, spontaneous recovery rarely occurs. As the occlusion of blood vessels progresses, the appendix becomes ischemic and then necrotic. As bacteria begin to leak out through the dying walls, pus forms within and around the appendix (suppuration). The result is appendiceal rupture (a 'burst appendix') causing peritonitis, which may lead to sepsis and in rare cases, death. These events are responsible for the slowly evolving abdominal pain and other commonly associated symptoms.\nThe causative agents include bezoars, foreign bodies, trauma, lymphadenitis and, most commonly, calcified fecal deposits that are known as appendicoliths or fecaliths. The occurrence of obstructing fecaliths has attracted attention since their presence in people with appendicitis is higher in developed than in developing countries. In addition, an appendiceal fecalith is commonly associated with complicated appendicitis. Fecal stasis and arrest may play a role, as demonstrated by people with acute appendicitis having fewer bowel movements per week compared with healthy controls.\nThe occurrence of a fecalith in the appendix was thought to be attributed to a right-sided fecal retention reservoir in the colon and a prolonged transit time. However, a prolonged transit time was not observed in subsequent studies. Diverticular disease and adenomatous polyps were historically unknown and colon cancer was exceedingly rare in communities where appendicitis itself was rare or absent, such as various African communities. Studies have implicated a transition to a Western diet lower in fiber in rising frequencies of appendicitis as well as the other aforementioned colonic diseases in these communities. And acute appendicitis has been shown to occur antecedent to cancer in the colon and rectum. Several studies offer evidence that a low fiber intake is involved in the pathogenesis of appendicitis. This low intake of dietary fiber is in accordance with the occurrence of a right-sided fecal reservoir and the fact that dietary fiber reduces transit time.\nDiagnosis.\nThe physician will ask questions to get the health history, assess the patient's symptoms, do a complete physical exam, and order both laboratory and imaging tests. Appendicitis symptoms fall into two categories, typical and atypical.\nTypical appendicitis is characterized by a migratory right iliac fossa pain associated with nausea, and anorexia, which can occur with or without vomiting and localized muscle stiffness/ generalized guarding. It is possible the pain could localize to the left lower quadrant in people with situs inversus totalis. The combination of migrated umbilical pain to the right lower quadrant, loss of appetite for food, nausea, unsustained vomiting, and mild fever is classic.\nAtypical histories lack this typical progression and may include pain in the right lower quadrant as an initial symptom. Irritation of the peritoneum (inside lining of the abdominal wall) can lead to increased pain on movement, or jolting, for example going over speed bumps. Atypical histories often require imaging with ultrasound or CT scanning.\nSigns.\nDuring the early stages of appendicitis diagnosis, it is common for physical exams to present inconspicuous findings. Signs of inflammation become noticeable as the disease progresses. These signs may include\nLaboratory tests.\nWhile there is no laboratory test specific for appendicitis, a complete blood count (CBC) is done to check for signs of infection or inflammation. Although 70\u201390 percent of people with appendicitis may have an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, many other abdominal and pelvic conditions can cause the WBC count to be elevated. However, a high WBC count may not alone represent a solid indicator of appendicitis but rather an inflammation but the neutrophil ratio was more sensitive and specific for acute appendicitis. Several routine and non-routine laboratory tests have been investigated for discriminating simple and complicated appendicitis, but their diagnostic accuracy is uncertain.\nIn children, neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) demonstrates a high degree of accuracy in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis and distinguishes complicated appendicitis from simple appendicitis. 75\u201378 percent of the patients have neutrophilia. Delta-neutrophil index (DNI) is a valuable parameter\u00a0that helps in the diagnosis of histologically normal appendicitis and distinguishing\u00a0between simple and complicated appendicitis.\nA https:// will be ordered by the doctor to find out if there are any further causes of inflammation. The C-reactive protein/albumin (CRP/ALB) ratio can be a reliable predictor of complicated appendicitis.\nThe urinalysis is important for ruling out a urinary tract infection as the cause of abdominal pain. The presence of more than 20 WBC per high-power field in the urine is more suggestive of a urinary tract disorder.\nIf the patient is a female, a pregnancy test will be ordered.\nImaging.\nIn children, the clinical examination is important to determine which children with abdominal pain should receive immediate surgical consultation and which should receive diagnostic imaging. Because of the health risks of exposing children to radiation, ultrasound is the preferred first choice with CT scan being a legitimate follow-up if the ultrasound is inconclusive. CT scan is more accurate than ultrasound for the diagnosis of appendicitis in adults and adolescents. CT scan has a sensitivity of 94%, specificity of 95%. Ultrasonography had an overall sensitivity of 86%, a specificity of 81%.\nUltrasound.\nAbdominal ultrasonography, preferably with doppler sonography, is useful to detect appendicitis, especially in children. Ultrasound can show the free fluid collection in the right iliac fossa, along with a visible appendix with increased blood flow when using color Doppler, and noncompressibility of the appendix, as it is essentially a walled-off abscess. Other secondary sonographic signs of acute appendicitis include the presence of echogenic mesenteric fat surrounding the appendix and the acoustic shadowing of an appendicolith. In some cases (approximately 5%), ultrasonography of the iliac fossa does not reveal any abnormalities despite the presence of appendicitis. This false-negative finding is especially true of early appendicitis before the appendix has become significantly distended. Also, false-negative findings are more common in adults where larger amounts of fat and bowel gas make visualizing the appendix technically difficult. Despite these limitations, sonographic imaging with experienced hands can often distinguish between appendicitis and other diseases with similar symptoms. Some of these conditions include inflammation of lymph nodes near the appendix or pain originating from other pelvic organs such as the ovaries or Fallopian tubes. Ultrasounds may be either done by the radiology department or by the emergency physician.\nComputed tomography.\nWhere it is readily available, computed tomography (CT) has become frequently used, especially in people whose diagnosis is not obvious on history and physical examination. Although some concerns about interpretation are identified, a 2019 Cochrane review found that the sensitivity and specificity of CT for the diagnosis of acute appendicitis in adults was high. Concerns about radiation tend to limit use of CT in pregnant women and in children, especially with the increasingly widespread usage of MRI.\nThe accurate diagnosis of appendicitis is multi-tiered, with the size of the appendix having the strongest positive predictive value, while indirect features can either increase or decrease sensitivity and specificity. A size of over 6\u00a0mm is both 95% sensitive and specific for appendicitis.\nHowever, because the appendix can be filled with fecal material, causing intraluminal distention, this criterion has shown limited utility in more recent meta-analyses. This is as opposed to ultrasound, in which the wall of the appendix can be more easily distinguished from intraluminal feces. In such scenarios, ancillary features such as increased wall enhancement as compared to adjacent bowel and inflammation of the surrounding fat, or fat stranding, can be supportive of the diagnosis. However, their absence does not preclude it. In severe cases with perforation, an adjacent phlegmon or abscess can be seen. Dense fluid layering in the pelvis can also result, related to either pus or enteric spillage. When patients are thin or younger, the relative absence of fat can make the appendix and surrounding fat stranding difficult to see.\nMagnetic resonance imaging.\nMagnetic resonance imaging (MRI) use has become increasingly common for diagnosis of appendicitis in children and pregnant patients due to the radiation dosage that, while of nearly negligible risk in healthy adults, can be harmful to children or the developing baby. In pregnancy, it is more useful during the second and third trimester, particularly as the enlargening uterus displaces the appendix, making it difficult to find by ultrasound. The periappendiceal stranding that is reflected on CT by fat stranding on MRI appears as an increased fluid signal on T2 weighted sequences. First-trimester pregnancies are usually not candidates for MRI, as the fetus is still undergoing organogenesis, and there are no long-term studies to date regarding its potential risks or side effects.\nX-ray.\nIn general, plain abdominal radiography (PAR) is not useful in making the diagnosis of appendicitis and should not be routinely obtained from a person being evaluated for appendicitis. Plain abdominal films may be useful for the detection of ureteral calculi, small bowel obstruction, or perforated ulcer, but these conditions are rarely confused with appendicitis. An opaque fecalith can be identified in the right lower quadrant in fewer than 5% of people being evaluated for appendicitis. A barium enema has proven to be a poor diagnostic tool for appendicitis. While failure of the appendix to fill during a barium enema has been associated with appendicitis, up to 20% of normal appendices do not fill.\nScoring systems.\nSeveral scoring systems have been developed to try to identify people who are likely to have appendicitis. The performance of scores such as the Alvarado score and the Pediatric Appendicitis Score, however, are variable.\nThe Alvarado score is the most known scoring system. A score below 5 suggests against a diagnosis of appendicitis, whereas a score of 7 or more is predictive of acute appendicitis. In a person with an equivocal score of 5 or 6, a CT scan or ultrasound exam may be used to reduce the rate of negative appendectomy.\nPathology.\nEven for clinically certain appendicitis, routine histopathology examination of appendectomy specimens is of value for identifying unsuspected pathologies requiring further postoperative management. No sign of appendicitis in specimens, negative appendectomy, varies but has been estimated to occur in 13% of specimens. Notably, appendix cancer is found incidentally in about 1% of appendectomy specimens.\nPathology diagnosis of appendicitis can be made by detecting a neutrophilic infiltrate of the muscularis propria.\nPeriappendicitis (inflammation of tissues around the appendix) is often found in conjunction with other abdominal pathology.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nChildren: Gastroenteritis, mesenteric adenitis, Meckel's diverticulitis, intussusception, Henoch\u2013Sch\u00f6nlein purpura, lobar pneumonia, urinary tract infection (abdominal pain in the absence of other symptoms can occur in children with UTI), new-onset Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis, pancreatitis, and abdominal trauma from child abuse; distal intestinal obstruction syndrome in children with cystic fibrosis; typhlitis in children with leukemia.\nWomen: A pregnancy test is important for all women of childbearing age since an ectopic pregnancy can have signs and symptoms similar to those of appendicitis. Other obstetrical/ gynecological causes of similar abdominal pain in women include pelvic inflammatory disease, ovarian torsion, menarche, dysmenorrhea, endometriosis, and Mittelschmerz (the passing of an egg in the ovaries approximately two weeks before menstruation).\nMen: testicular torsion\nAdults: new-onset Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, regional enteritis, cholecystitis, renal colic, perforated peptic ulcer, pancreatitis, rectus sheath hematoma and epiploic appendagitis.\nElderly: diverticulitis, intestinal obstruction, colonic carcinoma, mesenteric ischemia, leaking aortic aneurysm.\nThe term \"&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;pseudoappendicitis\" is used to describe a condition mimicking appendicitis. It can be associated with \"Yersinia enterocolitica\".\nManagement.\nAcute appendicitis is typically managed by surgery. While antibiotics are safe and effective for treating uncomplicated appendicitis, 31% of people had a recurrence within a year and required an eventual appendectomy. Antibiotics are less effective if an appendicolith is present. While 51% of patients who were treated with antibiotics did not need an appendectomy three years after treatment, the cost effectiveness of surgery versus antibiotics is unclear\nUsing antibiotics to prevent potential postoperative complications in emergency appendectomy procedures is recommended, and the antibiotics are effective when given to a person before, during, or after surgery.\nPain.\nPain medications (such as morphine) do not appear to affect the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of appendicitis and therefore should be given early in the patient's care. Historically there were concerns among some general surgeons that analgesics would affect the clinical exam in children, and some recommended that they not be given until the surgeon was able to examine the person.\nSurgery.\nThe surgical procedure for the removal of the appendix is called an appendectomy. A negative appendectomy constitutes the removal of a normal appendix with no sign of inflammation in histopathology examination. The prevalence of negative appendectomy varies but has been estimated to 13%. Appendectomy can be performed through open or laparoscopic surgery. Laparoscopic appendectomy has several advantages over open appendectomy as an intervention for acute appendicitis.\nOpen appendectomy.\nFor over a century, laparotomy (open appendectomy) was the standard treatment for acute appendicitis. This procedure consists of the removal of the infected appendix through a single large incision in the lower right area of the abdomen. The incision in a laparotomy is usually long.\nDuring an open appendectomy, the person with suspected appendicitis is placed under general anesthesia to keep the muscles completely relaxed and to keep the person unconscious. The incision is two to three inches (76\u00a0mm) long, and it is made in the right lower abdomen, several inches above the hip bone. Once the incision opens the abdomen cavity, and the appendix is identified, the surgeon removes the infected tissue and cuts the appendix from the surrounding tissue. After careful and close inspection of the infected area, and ensuring there are no signs that surrounding tissues are damaged or infected. In case of complicated appendicitis managed by an emergency open appendectomy, abdominal drainage (a temporary tube from the abdomen to the outside to avoid abscess formation) may be inserted, but this may increase the hospital stay. The surgeon will start closing the incision. This means sewing the muscles and using surgical staples or stitches to close the skin up. To prevent infections, the incision is covered with a sterile bandage or surgical adhesive.\nLaparoscopic appendectomy.\nLaparoscopic appendectomy was introduced in 1983 and has become an increasingly prevalent intervention for acute appendicitis. This surgical procedure consists of making three to four incisions in the abdomen, each long. This type of appendectomy is made by inserting a special surgical tool called a laparoscope into one of the incisions. The laparoscope is connected to a monitor outside the person's body, and it is designed to help the surgeon inspect the infected area in the abdomen. The other two incisions are made for the specific removal of the appendix by using surgical instruments. Laparoscopic surgery requires general anesthesia, and it can last up to two hours. Laparoscopic appendectomy has several advantages over open appendectomy, including a shorter post-operative recovery, less post-operative pain, and a lower superficial surgical site infection rate. However, the occurrence of an intra-abdominal abscess is almost three times more prevalent in laparoscopic appendectomy than open appendectomy.\nLaparoscopic-assisted transumbilical appendectomy.\nIn pediatric patients, the high mobility of the cecum allows externalization of the appendix through the umbilicus, and the entire procedure can be performed with a single incision. Laparoscopic-assisted transumbilical appendectomy is a relatively recent technique but with a long published series and very good surgical and aesthetic results.\nPre-surgery.\nThe treatment begins by keeping the person who will be having surgery from eating or drinking for a given period, usually overnight. An intravenous drip is used to hydrate the person who will be having surgery. Antibiotics given intravenously such as cefuroxime and metronidazole may be administered early to help kill bacteria and thus reduce the spread of infection in the abdomen and postoperative complications in the abdomen or wound. Equivocal cases may become more difficult to assess with antibiotic treatment and benefit from serial examinations. If the stomach is empty (no food in the past six hours), general anaesthesia is usually used. Otherwise, spinal anaesthesia may be used.\nOnce the decision to perform an appendectomy has been made, the preparation procedure takes approximately one to two hours. Meanwhile, the surgeon will explain the surgery procedure and will present the risks that must be considered when performing an appendectomy. (With all surgeries there are risks that must be evaluated before performing the procedures.) The risks are different depending on the state of the appendix. If the appendix has not ruptured, the complication rate is only about 3% but if the appendix has ruptured, the complication rate rises to almost 59%. The most usual complications that can occur are pneumonia, hernia of the incision, thrombophlebitis, bleeding and adhesions. Evidence indicates that a delay in obtaining surgery after admission results in no measurable difference in outcomes to the person with appendicitis. Most patients undergo emergency surgery, but delayed surgery (interval appendectomy) has been investigated for certain patients. Delaying surgery for weeks may increase the risk of intra-abdominal abscess in patients suffering from appendicitis and presenting with an appendiceal mass (e.g., phlegmon or abscess). The harms and benefits of delaying surgery for other complications are uncertain. \nThe surgeon will explain how long the recovery process should take. Abdomen hair is usually removed to avoid complications that may appear regarding the incision.\nIn most cases, patients going in for surgery experience nausea or vomiting that require medication before surgery. Antibiotics, along with pain medication, may be administered before appendectomies.\nAfter surgery.\nHospital lengths of stay typically range from a few hours to a few days but can be a few weeks if complications occur. The recovery process may vary depending on the severity of the condition: if the appendix had ruptured or not before surgery. Appendix surgery recovery is generally much faster if the appendix does not rupture. It is important that people undergoing surgery respect their doctor's advice and limit their physical activity so the tissues can heal. Recovery after an appendectomy may not require diet changes or a lifestyle change.\nThe length of hospital stays for appendicitis varies on the severity of the condition. A study from the United States found that in 2010, the average appendicitis hospital stay was 1.8 days. For stays where the person's appendix had ruptured, the average length of stay was 5.2 days.\nAfter surgery, the patient will be transferred to a postanesthesia care unit, so their vital signs can be closely monitored to detect anesthesia- or surgery-related complications. Pain medication may be administered if necessary. After patients are completely awake, they are moved to a hospital room to recover. Most individuals will be offered clear liquids the day after the surgery, then progress to a regular diet when the intestines start to function correctly. Patients are recommended to sit on the edge of the bed and walk short distances several times a day. Moving is mandatory, and pain medication may be given if necessary. Full recovery from appendectomies takes about four to six weeks but can be prolonged to up to eight weeks if the appendix has ruptured.\nPrognosis.\nMost people with appendicitis recover quickly after surgical treatment, but complications can occur if treatment is delayed or if peritonitis occurs. Recovery time depends on age, condition, complications, and other circumstances, including the amount of alcohol consumption, but usually is between 10 and 28 days. For young children (around ten years old), the recovery takes three weeks.\nThe possibility of peritonitis is the reason why acute appendicitis warrants rapid evaluation and treatment. People with suspected appendicitis may have to undergo a medical evacuation. Appendectomies have occasionally been performed in emergency conditions (i.e., not in a proper hospital) when a timely medical evacuation was impossible.\nTypical acute appendicitis responds quickly to appendectomy and occasionally will resolve spontaneously. If appendicitis resolves spontaneously, it remains controversial whether an elective interval appendectomy should be performed to prevent a recurrent episode of appendicitis. Atypical appendicitis (associated with suppurative appendicitis) is more challenging to diagnose and is more apt to be complicated even when operated early. In either condition, prompt diagnosis and appendectomy yield the best results with full recovery in two to four weeks usually. Mortality and severe complications are unusual but do occur, especially if peritonitis persists and is untreated.\nAnother entity known as the appendicular lump is talked about. It happens when the appendix is not removed early during infection, and the omentum and intestine adhere to it, forming a palpable lump. During this period, surgery is risky unless there is pus formation evident by fever and toxicity or by ultrasound. Medical management treats the condition.\nAn unusual complication of an appendectomy is \"stump appendicitis\": inflammation occurs in the remnant appendiceal stump left after a prior incomplete appendectomy. Stump appendicitis can occur months to years after initial appendectomy and can be identified with imaging modalities such as ultrasound.\nHistory.\nThe history of appendicitis traces back to ancient medical texts, though its clear clinical understanding emerged in the 19th century. Berengario da Carpi provided the first recorded description of the appendix in the 16th century, followed by Andreas Vesalius and Gabriele Falloppio. Clinical understanding progressed in the 18th and 19th centuries, marked by Lorenz Heister's autopsy findings, Claudius Aymand's surgical intervention, and J. Mestivier's operation for appendicitis. Prior to the use of the term \"appendicitis\", it was described with terms including \"perityphlitis\", \"typhlitis\", \"paratyphlitis\", and \"extra-peritoneal abscess of the right iliac fossa\". The term \"appendicitis\" was coined by the American physician Reginald Heber Fitz in 1886, leading to standardized diagnosis and treatment, including Charles McBurney's identification of McBurney's point. Modern appendectomy techniques evolved in the early 20th century, coinciding with advancements in pathology, notably demonstrated by Ludwig Aschoff in 1908.\nEpidemiology.\nAppendicitis is most common between the ages of 5 and 40. In 2013, it resulted in 72,000 deaths globally, down from 88,000 in 1990.\nIn the United States, there were nearly 293,000 hospitalizations involving appendicitis in 2010. Appendicitis is one of the most frequent diagnoses for emergency department visits resulting in hospitalization among children ages 5\u201317 years in the United States.\nAdults presenting to the emergency department with a known family history of appendicitis are more likely to have this disease than those without.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70983", "revid": "49604565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70983", "title": "Great Barrier Reef", "text": "Coral reef system in Queensland, Australia\nThe Great Barrier Reef is the world's largest coral reef system, composed of over 2,900 individual reefs and 900 islands stretching for over over an area of approximately . The reef is located in the Coral Sea, off the coast of Queensland, Australia, separated from the coast by a channel wide in places and over deep. The Great Barrier Reef can be seen from outer space and is the world's biggest single structure made by living organisms. This reef structure is composed of and built by billions of tiny organisms, known as coral polyps. It supports a wide diversity of life and was selected as a World Heritage Site in 1981. CNN labelled it one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World in 1997. Australian World Heritage places included it in its list in 2007. The Queensland National Trust named it a state icon of Queensland in 2006.\nA large part of the reef is protected by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, which helps to limit the impact of human use, such as fishing and tourism. Other environmental pressures on the reef and its ecosystem include runoff of humanmade pollutants, climate change accompanied by mass coral bleaching, dumping of dredging sludge and cyclic population outbreaks of the crown-of-thorns starfish. According to a study published in October 2012 by the \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\", the reef has lost more than half its coral cover since 1985, a finding reaffirmed by a 2020 study which found over half of the reef's coral cover to have been lost between 1995 and 2017, with the effects of a widespread 2020 bleaching event not yet quantified.\nThe Great Barrier Reef has long been known to and used by the Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and is an important part of local groups' cultures and spirituality. The reef is a very popular destination for tourists, especially in the Whitsunday Islands and Cairns regions. Tourism is an important economic activity for the region, generating over AUD$3\u00a0billion per year. In November 2014, Google launched Google Underwater Street View in 3D of the Great Barrier Reef.\nA March 2016 report stated that coral bleaching was more widespread than previously thought, seriously affecting the northern parts of the reef as a result of warming ocean temperatures. In October 2016, \"Outside\" published an obituary for the reef; the article was criticised for being premature and hindering efforts to bolster the resilience of the reef. In March 2017, the journal \"Nature\" published a paper showing that huge sections of an stretch in the northern part of the reef had died in the course of 2016 of high water temperatures, an event that the authors put down to the effects of global climate change. The percentage of baby corals being born on the Great Barrier Reef dropped drastically in 2018 and scientists are describing it as the early stage of a \"huge natural selection event unfolding\". Many of the mature breeding adults died in the bleaching events of 2016\u201317, leading to low coral birth rates. The types of corals that reproduced also changed, leading to a \"long-term reorganisation of the reef ecosystem if the trend continues.\"\nThe Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975 (section 54) stipulates an Outlook Report on the Reef's health, pressures, and future every five years. The last report was published in 2019. In March 2022, another mass bleaching event has been confirmed, which raised further concerns about the future of this reef system, especially when considering the possible effects of El Ni\u00f1o weather phenomenon.\nThe Australian Institute of Marine Science conducts annual surveys of the Great Barrier Reef's status, and the 2022 report showed the greatest recovery in 36 years. It is mainly due to the regrowth of two-thirds of the reef by the fast-growing Acropora coral, which is the dominant coral there.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Discovery\" and naming.\nThe Great Barrier Reef has long been known to and used by the Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and is an important part of local groups' cultures and spirituality.\nThe first European to sight the Great Barrier Reef was James Cook in 1770, who sailed and mapped the east coast of Australia. On 11 June 1770, Cook's ship, , ran aground on a shoal south of the present-day location of Cooktown, requiring seven weeks to repair.\nIt was Matthew Flinders who named the Great Barrier Reef, after his more detailed mapping of it in 1802. Flinders used various terms to describe the reefs comprising what we now call the Great Barrier Reef including \"great reef\", for one such reef, \"barrier reef\", for any reef preventing a sailing vessel in, or waves from, the open sea, from reaching the coast, and \"Barrier Reefs\", for the collection of such reefs.\nGeology and geography.\nThe Great Barrier Reef is a distinct feature of the East Australian Cordillera division. It reaches from Torres Strait (between Bramble Cay, its northernmost island, and the south coast of Papua New Guinea) in the north to the unnamed passage between Lady Elliot Island (its southernmost island) and Fraser Island in the south. Lady Elliot Island is located southeast of Bramble Cay as the crow flies. It includes the smaller Murray Islands.\nThe plate tectonic theory indicates Australia has moved northwards at a rate of per year, starting during the Cenozoic. Eastern Australia experienced a period of tectonic uplift, which moved the drainage divide in Queensland inland. Also during this time, Queensland experienced volcanic eruptions leading to central and shield volcanoes and basalt flows. Some of these became volcanic islands. After the Coral Sea Basin formed, coral reefs began to grow in the Basin, but until about 25 million years ago, northern Queensland was still in temperate waters south of the tropics\u00a0\u2013 too cool to support coral growth. The Great Barrier Reef's development history is complex; after Queensland drifted into tropical waters, it was largely influenced by reef growth and decline as sea level changed.\nReefs can increase in diameter by per year, and grow vertically anywhere from per year; however, they grow only above a depth of due to their need for sunlight, and cannot grow above sea level. When Queensland edged into tropical waters 24 million years ago, some coral grew, but a sedimentation regime quickly developed with erosion of the Great Dividing Range; creating river deltas, oozes and turbidites, unsuitable conditions for coral growth. 10 million years ago, the sea level significantly lowered, which further enabled sedimentation. The reef's substrate may have needed to build up from the sediment until its edge was too far away for suspended sediments to inhibit coral growth. In addition, approximately 400,000 years ago there was a particularly warm Interglacial period with higher sea levels and a water temperature change.\nThe land that formed the substrate of the current Great Barrier Reef was a coastal plain formed from the eroded sediments of the Great Dividing Range with some larger hills (most of which were themselves remnants of older reefs or, in rare cases, volcanoes).\nThe Reef Research Centre, a Cooperative Research Centre, has found coral 'skeleton' deposits that date back half a million years. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) considers the earliest evidence of complete reef structures to have been 600,000 years ago. According to the GBRMPA, the current, living reef structure is believed to have begun growing on the older platform about 9,000 years ago. The Australian Institute of Marine Science agrees, placing the beginning of the growth of the current reef at the time of the Last Glacial Maximum. At around that time, sea level was lower than it is today.\nFrom 20,000 years ago until 6,000 years ago, sea level rose steadily around the world. As it rose, the corals could then grow higher on the newly submerged maritime margins of the hills of the coastal plain. By around 13,000 years ago the sea level was only lower than the present day, and corals began to surround the hills of the coastal plain, which were, by then, continental islands. As the sea level rose further still, most of the continental islands were submerged. The corals could then overgrow the submerged hills, to form the present cays and reefs. Sea level here has not risen significantly in the last 6,000 years. The CRC Reef Research Centre estimates the age of the present, living reef structure at 6,000 to 8,000 years old. The shallow water reefs that can be seen in air-photographs and satellite images cover an area of 20,679\u00a0km2, most (about 80%) of which has grown on top of limestone platforms that are relics of past (Pleistocene) phases of reef growth.\nThe remains of an ancient barrier reef similar to the Great Barrier Reef can be found in The Kimberley, Western Australia.\nThe Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area has been divided into 70 bioregions, of which 30 are reef bioregions. In the northern part of the Great Barrier Reef, ribbon reefs and deltaic reefs have formed; these structures are not found in the rest of the reef system. A previously undiscovered reef, 500 metres tall and 1.5\u00a0km wide at the base, was found in the northern area in 2020. There are no atolls in the system, and reefs attached to the mainland are rare.\nFringing reefs are distributed widely, but are most common towards the southern part of the Great Barrier Reef, attached to high islands, for example, the Whitsunday Islands. Lagoonal reefs are found in the southern Great Barrier Reef, and further north, off the coast of Princess Charlotte Bay. Crescentic reefs are the most common shape of reef in the middle of the system, for example the reefs surrounding Lizard Island. Crescentic reefs are also found in the far north of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, and in the Swain Reefs (20\u201322 degrees south). Planar reefs are found in the northern and southern parts, near Cape York Peninsula, Princess Charlotte Bay, and Cairns. Most of the islands on the reef are found on planar reefs.\nWonky holes can have localised impact on the reef, providing upwellings of fresh water, sometimes rich in nutrients contributing to eutrophication.\nNavigation through and around the reefs is a major challenge. More than 20 ships were recorded lost in the region between 1791 and 1850, Surveys between 1815 and 1860 by Phillip Parker King in the Mermaid, Francis Price Blackwood in HMS \"Fly\", Owen Stanley in the \"Rattlesnake,\" and Henry Mangles Denham in the Herald led to considerable navigational improvements, as they outlined the contrasting advantages and perils of the Inner Route (between Australia's east coast and the western edge of the reefs) and the Outer Route, in the open sea.\nEcology.\nThe Great Barrier Reef supports an extraordinary diversity of life, including many vulnerable or endangered species, some of which may be endemic to the reef system.\nThirty species of cetaceans have been recorded in the Great Barrier Reef, including the dwarf minke whale, Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, and the humpback whale. Large populations of dugongs live there. More than 1,500 fish species live on the reef, including the clownfish, red bass, red-throat emperor, and several species of snapper and coral trout. Forty-nine species mass spawn, while eighty-four other species spawn elsewhere in their range. Seventeen species of sea snake live on the Great Barrier Reef in warm waters up to deep and are more common in the southern than in the northern section. None found in the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area are endemic, nor are any endangered.\nSix species of sea turtles come to the reef to breed: the green sea turtle, leatherback sea turtle, hawksbill turtle, loggerhead sea turtle, flatback turtle, and the olive ridley. The green sea turtles on the Great Barrier Reef have two genetically distinct populations, one in the northern part of the reef and the other in the southern part. Fifteen species of seagrass in beds attract the dugongs and turtles, and provide fish habitat. The most common genera of seagrasses are \"Halophila\" and \"Halodule\".\nSaltwater crocodiles live in mangrove and salt marshes on the coast near the reef. Nesting has not been reported, and the salt water crocodile population in the GBRWHA is wide-ranging but low density. Around 125 species of shark, stingray, skates or chimaera live on the reef. Close to 5,000 species of mollusc have been recorded on the reef, including the giant clam and various nudibranchs and cone snails. Forty-nine species of pipefish and nine species of seahorse have been recorded. At least seven species of frog inhabit the islands.\n215 species of birds (including 22 species of seabirds and 32 species of shorebirds) visit the reef or nest or roost on the islands, including the white-bellied sea eagle and roseate tern. Most nesting sites are on islands in the northern and southern regions of the Great Barrier Reef, with 1.4 to 1.7\u00a0million birds using the sites to breed. The islands of the Great Barrier Reef also support 2,195 known plant species; three of these are endemic. The northern islands have 300\u2013350 plant species which tend to be woody, whereas the southern islands have 200 which tend to be herbaceous; the Whitsunday region is the most diverse, supporting 1,141 species. The plants are propagated by birds.\nThere are at least 330 species of ascidians on the reef system with the diameter of . Between 300 and 500 species of bryozoans live on the reef. Four hundred coral species, both hard corals and soft corals inhabit the reef. The majority of these spawn gametes, breeding in mass spawning events that are triggered by the rising sea temperatures of spring and summer, the lunar cycle, and the diurnal cycle. Reefs in the inner Great Barrier Reef spawn during the week after the full moon in October, while the outer reefs spawn in November and December. Its common soft corals belong to 36 genera. Five hundred species of marine algae or seaweed live on the reef, including thirteen species of genus \"Halimeda\", which deposit calcareous mounds up to wide, creating mini-ecosystems on their surface which have been compared to rainforest cover.\nEnvironmental threats.\nClimate change, pollution, crown-of-thorns starfish and fishing are the primary threats to the health of this reef system. Other threats include shipping accidents, oil spills, and tropical cyclones. Skeletal Eroding Band, a disease of bony corals caused by the protozoan \"Halofolliculina corallasia\", affects 31 coral species. According to a 2012 study by the National Academy of Sciences, since 1985, the Great Barrier Reef has lost more than half of its corals with two-thirds of the loss occurring from 1998 due to the factors listed before. In 2022, the northern and central parts of the reef had the highest amount of coral cover since monitoring began, but the cover in the southern part had decreased and bleaching events occurred more frequently.\nClimate change.\nThe Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority considers the greatest threat to the Great Barrier Reef to be climate change, causing ocean warming which increases coral bleaching. Mass coral bleaching events due to marine heatwaves occurred in the summers of 1998, 2002, 2006, 2016, 2017 and 2020, and coral bleaching is expected to become an annual occurrence. In 2020, a study found that the Great Barrier Reef has lost more than half of its corals since 1995 due to warmer seas driven by climate change. As global warming continues, corals will not be able to keep up with increasing ocean temperatures. Coral bleaching events lead to increased disease susceptibility, which causes detrimental ecological effects for reef communities.\nIn July 2017 UNESCO published in a draft decision, expressing serious concern about the impact of coral bleaching on the Great Barrier Reef. The draft decision also warned Australia that it will not meet the targets of the Reef 2050 report without considerable work to improve water quality.\nClimate change has implications for other forms of reef life\u00a0\u2013 some fish's preferred temperature range leads them to seek new habitat, thus increasing chick mortality in predatory seabirds. Climate change will also affect the sea turtle's population and available habitat.\nBleaching events in benthic coral communities (deeper than ) in the Great Barrier reef are not as well documented as those at shallower depths, but recent research has shown that benthic communities are just as negatively impacted in the face of rising ocean temperatures. Five Great Barrier Reef species of large benthic corals were found bleached under elevated temperatures, affirming that benthic corals are vulnerable to thermal stress.\nOcean Acidification.\nA threat for the Great Barrier Reef is the rising levels of ocean acidification. Ocean acidification occurs when excess atmospheric carbon dioxide gets absorbed into the ocean. This causes a decrease in the pH and this alters the chemistry of the ocean's water. This reduces the amount of aragonite, a key mineral for coral to grow, in the water. The Great Barrier Reef is predicted to lose aragonite at a rate of about 0.1 per decade this century. The acidic water breaks down the materials that coral and shell building creatures need to grow.\nPollution.\nAnother key threat faced by the Great Barrier Reef is pollution and declining water quality. The rivers of north-eastern Australia pollute the Reef during tropical flood events. Over 90% of this pollution comes from farm runoff. 80% of the land adjacent to the Great Barrier Reef is used for farming including intensive cropping of sugar cane, and major beef cattle grazing. Farming practices damage the reef due to overgrazing, increased run-off of agricultural sediments, nutrients and chemicals including fertilisers, herbicides and pesticides representing a major health risk for the coral and biodiversity of the reefs.\nAccording to a 2016 report, while higher regulation contributes to less overall pollution from \"other land uses, such as industrial, mining, port development, dredging and urban development\", these can still be locally significant. Sediments containing high levels of copper and other heavy metals sourced from the Ok Tedi Mine in Papua New Guinea are a potential pollution risk for the far northern Great Barrier Reef and Torres Strait regions. Some 67% of corals died in the reef's worst-hit northern section, the ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies report said.\nLoss of coastal wetland.\nThe runoff problem is exacerbated by the loss of coastal wetlands which act as a natural filter for toxins and help deposit sediment. It is thought that the poor water quality is due to increased light and oxygen competition from algae.\nEutrophication.\nFarming fertiliser runoff release nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium into the oceanic ecosystem, and these limiting nutrients cause massive algal growth which eventually leads to a reduction in oxygen available for other creatures in a process called eutrophication. This decreases the biodiversity in the affected areas, altering the species composition. A study by Katharina Fabricius and Glen Death of Australian Institute of Marine Science found that hard corals numbers were almost double on reefs that were far from agricultural areas.\nFertilizers also increase the amount of phytoplankton available for the crown-of-thorns starfish larvae to consume. A study showed that a doubling of the chlorophyll in the water leads to a tenfold increase in the crown-of-thorns starfish larvae's survival rate.\nSediment runoff.\nSediment runoff from farming carries chemicals into the reef environment also reduces the amount of light available to the corals decreasing their ability to extract energy from their environment.\nPesticides.\nPesticides used in farming are made up of heavy metals such as lead, mercury, arsenic and other toxins are released into the wider environment due to erosion of farm soil, which has a detrimental effect on the coral.\nPollution from mining.\nMining company Queensland Nickel discharged nitrate-laden water into the Great Barrier Reef in 2009 and 2011 \u2013 on the later occasion releasing of waste water. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) stated \"We have strongly encouraged the company to investigate options that do not entail releasing the material to the environment and to develop a management plan to eliminate this potential hazard; however, GBRMPA does not have legislative control over how the Yabulu tailings dam is managed\".\nCrown of thorns.\nThe crown-of-thorns starfish preys on coral polyps. Large outbreaks of these starfish can devastate reefs. In 2000, an outbreak contributed to a loss of 66% of live coral cover on sampled reefs in a study by the Reef Research Centre (RRC). Outbreaks are believed to occur in natural cycles, worsened by poor water quality and overfishing of the starfish's predators.\nOverfishing.\nThe unsustainable overfishing of keystone species, such as the giant Triton, can disrupt food chains vital to reef life. Fishing also impacts the reef through increased water pollution from boats, by-catch of unwanted species (such as dolphins and turtles) and habitat destruction from trawling, anchors and nets. As of the middle of 2004, approximately one-third of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park is protected from species removal of any kind, including fishing, without written permission.\nShipping.\nShipping accidents are a pressing concern, as several commercial shipping routes pass through the Great Barrier Reef.\nAlthough the route through the Great Barrier Reef is not easy, reef pilots consider it safer than outside the reef in the event of mechanical failure, since a ship can sit safely while being repaired. There have been over 1,600\u00a0known shipwrecks in the Great Barrier Reef region.\nOn 3 April 2010, the bulk coal carrier ran aground on Douglas Shoals, spilling up to four tonnes of oil into the water and causing extensive damage to the reef.\nShark culling.\nThe government of Queensland has a \"shark control\" program (shark culling) that deliberately kills sharks throughout Queensland, including in the Great Barrier Reef. Environmentalists and scientists say that this program harms the marine ecosystem; they also say it is \"outdated, cruel and ineffective\". The Queensland \"shark control\" program uses shark nets and drum lines with baited hooks to kill sharks in the Great Barrier Reef \u2013 there are 173 lethal drum lines in the Great Barrier Reef. In Queensland, sharks found alive on the baited hooks are shot. Queensland's \"shark control\" program killed about 50,000 sharks from 1962 to 2018. Also, Queensland's \"shark control\" program has also killed many other animals (such as dolphins and turtles)\u00a0\u2013 the program killed 84,000 marine animals from 1962 to 2015, including in the Great Barrier Reef. In 2018, Humane Society International filed a lawsuit against the government of Queensland to stop shark culling in the Great Barrier Reef.\nProtection and preservation: Reef 2050 plan.\nIn March 2015, the Australian and Queensland's governments formed a plan for the protection and preservation of the reef's universal heritage until 2050. This 35-year plan, titled \"Reef 2050 Plan\" is a document proposing possible measures for the long-term management of the pollution, climate change and other issues that threaten the life-span and value of this global heritage. The plan contains all the elements for measurement and improvements, including long-term sustainability plan, water quality improvement plan and the investment plan for the protection and preservation of The Reef until 2050.\nHowever, whereas the 2050 plan aims to incorporate protective measures such as improving water quality, reef restoration and killing predatory starfish, it does not incorporate additional measures to address what may be the root cause of the problem \u2013 climate change, which is caused by greenhouse gas emissions. As such, experts doubted whether it would be enough to save the fragile environment. Another issue is that the time left to the 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C warming threshold (the temperature limit that coral reefs can still cope with) is very limited.\nAs part of the Reef 2050 plan, an AUD$443\u00a0million grant was given to the Great Barrier Reef Foundation in 2018. The announcement of the grant was subject to backlash as the grant had avoided proper tender and transparency processes.\nConservation Policy: Reef 2050 Water Quality Improvement Plan.\nThe Great Barrier Reef contributes to the overall wellbeing of the marine biome. Numerous species of aquatic plants, fish and megafauna use the reef for feeding, shelter and mating. Threats such as ocean acidification, pollution runoff and outbreaks of destructive species like the crown-of-thorns starfish have brought about the decline of this ecosystem. These threats to the reef are not only a danger to the organisms inhabiting it, but also the economy of this region, a large part of which relies on revenue from ecotourism of the Great Barrier Reef.\nThe Australian government has had the goal of protecting this World Heritage Site since 1972 when they created The Australian Institute of Marine Science. The Australian and Queensland governments have contributed about $142.5 million to their National Environmental Science Program which is how they've collected much of their data regarding threats to the Great Barrier Reef. In addition, the Reef 2050 Water Quality Improvement Plan was announced in 2018 in order to help transition local communities, agricultural organizations and industries to more sustainable practices. This plan will join the Queensland government and the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to manage the amounts of runoff that reach the Great Barrier Reef as well as mitigating crown-of-thorns starfish population flare-ups.\nHuman use.\nThe Great Barrier Reef has long been known to and used by the Aboriginal Australian and Torres Strait Islander peoples. Aboriginal Australians have been living in the area for at least 40,000 years, and Torres Strait Islanders since about 10,000 years ago. For these 70 or so clan groups, the reef is also an important cultural feature.\nIn 1768, Louis de Bougainville encountered the reef, but did not explore it. On 11 June 1770, , captained by explorer James Cook, ran aground on the Great Barrier Reef, sustaining considerable damage. Lightening the ship and re-floating it during an incoming tide eventually saved it. One of the most famous wrecks was , which sank on 29 August 1791, killing 35 men. The Queensland Museum has led archaeological digs to wreck of \"Pandora\" since 1983. Because the reef had no atolls, it was largely unstudied in the 19th century. During this time, some of the reef's islands were mined for deposits of guano, and lighthouses were built as beacons throughout the system. as in Raine Island, the earliest example. In 1922, the Great Barrier Reef Committee began carrying out much of the early research on the reef.\nManagement.\nRoyal Commissions disallowed oil drilling in the Great Barrier Reef, in 1975 the Government of Australia created the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park and prohibited various activities. The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park does not include the entire Great Barrier Reef Province. The park is managed, in partnership with the Government of Queensland, through the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to ensure that it is used in a sustainable manner. A combination of zoning, management plans, permits, education and incentives (such as eco-tourism certification) are employed in the effort to conserve the reef.\nIn 1999, the Australian Parliament passed the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act, which improved the operation of national environmental law by providing guidance about regional biodiversity conservation priorities. The marine bioregional planning process came from the implementation of this law. This process conserves marine biodiversity by considering the whole ecosystem a species is in and how different species interact in the marine environment.\nThere are two steps to this process. The first step is to identify regional conservation priorities in the five (currently) different marine regions. The second step is to identify marine reserves (protected areas or marine parks) to be added to Australia's National Representative System of Marine Protected Areas. Like protected areas on land, marine reserves are created to protect biodiversity for generations to come. Marine reserves are identified based on criteria written in a document created by Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council called \"Guidelines for establishing the national representative system of marine protected areas\", also known as just \"the Guidelines\". These guidelines are nationally recognised and implemented at the local level based on the Australian policy for implementation outlined in the \"Goals and Principles for the Establishment of the National Representative System of Marine Protected Areas in Commonwealth Waters\". These policies are in place to make sure that a marine reserve is only added to the NRSMPA after careful evaluation of different data.\nThe priorities for each region are created based on human and environmental threats and the Marine Bioregional Plans are drafted to address these priorities. To assess different region's priorities, three steps are taken, first, a bioregional profile is created, second, a bioregional plan is drafted, and third, the plan is finalised. After the plan is finalised, activity in different bioregions may become limited based on particular threats an activity may pose.\nIn 2001, the GBRMPA released a report about the declining water quality in the Great Barrier Reef and detailed the importance of this issue. In response to this report, in 2003, the Australian and Queensland governments launched a joint initiative to improve the quality of water entering the Great Barrier Reef. The decline in the quality of water over the past 150 years (due to development) has contributed to coral bleaching, algal blooms, and pesticide pollution. These forms of pollution have made the reef less resilient to climate change.\nWhen the plan was introduced in October 2003, it originally contained 65 actions built on previous legislation. Their immediate goal was to halt and reverse the decline in water quality entering the reef by 2013. By 2020, they hope that the quality of the water entering in the reef improves enough so that it doesn't have a detrimental impact on the health of the Great Barrier Reef. To achieve these goals they decided to reduce pollutants in the water entering the reef and to rehabilitate and conserve areas of the reef that naturally help reduce water pollutants. To achieve the objectives described above, this plan focuses on non-point sources of pollution, which cannot be traced to a single source such as a waste outlet.\nThe plan specifically targets nutrients, pesticides and sediment that make their way into the reef as a result of agricultural activities. Other non-point sources of pollution that are attributed to urban areas are covered under different legislation. In 2009, the plan was updated. The updated version states that to date, none of the efforts undertaken to improve the quality of water entering the reef has been successful. The new plan attempts to address this issue by \"targeting priority outcomes, integrating industry and community initiatives and incorporating new policy and regulatory frameworks (Reef Plan\u00a05)\". This updated version has improved the clarity of the previous plan and targets set by that plan, have improved accountability and further improved monitoring and assessment. The 2009 report found that 41 out of the 65 actions met their original goals, however, 18 were not progressing well according to evaluation criteria as well as 6 were rated as having unsatisfactory levels of progress.\nSome key achievements made since the plan's initial passing in 2003 were the establishment of the Reef Quality Partnership to set targets, report findings and monitor progress towards targets, improved land condition by landowners was rewarded with extended leases, Water Quality Improvement Plans were created to identify regional targets and identified management changes that needed to be made to reach those targets, Nutrient Management Zones have been created to combat sediment loss in particular areas, education programs have been started to help gather support for sustainable agriculture, changes to land management practices have taken place through the implementation of the Farm Management Systems and codes of practice, the creation of the Queensland Wetland program and other achievements were made to help improve the water quality flowing into the coral reefs.\nA taskforce of scientists was also created to assess the impact of different parts of the plan on the quality of water flowing into the coral reefs. They found that many of the goals have yet to be reached but found more evidence that states that improving the water quality of the Great Barrier Reef will improve its resilience to climate change. The Reefocus summit in 2008, which is also detailed in the report, came to similar conclusions. After this, a stakeholder working group was formed that worked between several groups as well as the Australian and Queensland governments to update reef goals and objectives. The updated version of the plan focuses on strategic priority areas and actions to achieve 2013 goals. Also quantitative targets have been made to critically assess whether targets are being met.\nSome examples of the water quality goals outlined by this plan are that by 2013, there will be a 50% reduction in nitrogen and phosphorus loads at the end of catchments and that by 2020, there will be a reduction in sediment load by 20%. The plan also outlines a number of steps that must be taken by landholders to help improve grazing, soil, nutrient, and chemical management practices. There are also a number of supporting initiatives to take place outlined in the plan to help create a framework to improve land use practices which will in turn improve water quality.\nThrough these means the governments of Australia and Queensland hope to improve water quality by 2013. The 2013 outlook report and revised water quality plan will assess what needs to be done in the future to improve water quality and the livelihoods of the wildlife that resides there.\nIn July 2004, a new zoning plan took effect for the entire Marine Park, and has been widely acclaimed as a new global benchmark for marine ecosystem conservation. The rezoning was based on the application of systematic conservation planning techniques, using marxan software. While protection across the Marine Park was improved, the highly protected zones increased from 4.5% to over 33.3%. At the time, it was the largest Marine Protected Area in the world, although in 2006, the new Northwestern Hawaiian Islands National Monument became the largest.\nIn 2006, a review of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act of 1975 recommended that there should be no further zoning plan changes until 2013, and that every five years, a peer-reviewed outlook report should be published, examining the reef's health, management, and environmental pressures. In each outlook report, several assessments are required. Each assessment has a set of assessment criteria that allows for better presentation of available evidence. Each assessment is judged by these criteria and given a grade. Every outlook report follows the same judging and grading process so that information can be tracked over time. No new research is done to produce the report. Only readily available information goes into the report so little of what is known about the Reef is actually featured in each outlook report.\nAbbot Point coal port dredge dumping controversy.\nIn December 2013, Greg Hunt, the Australian environment minister, approved a plan for dredging to create three shipping terminals as part of the construction of a coalport. According to corresponding approval documents, the process will create around 3\u00a0million cubic metres of dredged seabed that will be dumped within the Great Barrier Reef marine park area.\nOn 31 January 2014, the GBRMPA issued a dumping permit that will allow three million cubic metres of sea bed from Abbot Point, north of Bowen, to be transported and unloaded in the waters of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. Potential significant harms have been identified in relation to dredge spoil and the process of churning up the sea floor in the area and exposing it to air: firstly, new research shows the finer particles of dredge spoil can cloud the water and block sunlight, thereby starving sea grass and coral up to distances of 80\u00a0km away from the point of origin due to the actions of wind and currents. Furthermore, dredge spoil can literally smother reef or sea grass to death, while storms can repeatedly resuspend these particles so that the harm caused is ongoing; secondly, disturbed sea floor can release toxic substances into the surrounding environment.\nThe dredge spoil from the Abbot Point port project is to be dumped away, near Bowen in north Queensland, and the approval from the Authority will result in the production of an extra 70 million tonnes of coal annually, worth between A$1.4\u00a0billion and $2.8\u00a0billion. Authority chairman, Dr Russell Reichelt, stated after the confirmation of the approval:\nThis approval is in line with the agency's view that port development along the Great Barrier Reef coastline should be limited to existing ports. As a deepwater port that has been in operation for nearly 30 years, Abbot Point is better placed than other ports along the Great Barrier Reef coastline to undertake expansion as the capital and maintenance dredging required will be significantly less than what would be required in other areas. It's important to note the seafloor of the approved disposal area consists of sand, silt and clay and does not contain coral reefs or seagrass beds.\nThe approval was provided with a corresponding set of 47 new environmental conditions that include the following:\nThe Australian Federal Government announced on 13 November that there would now be a ban on the dumping of dredge spoil in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. The World Heritage Committee asked Environment Minister Greg Hunt to investigate alternative options to dump on land instead. The Queensland government and the Commonwealth have now accepted the alternative option and advice from The World Heritage Committee and will now commence dumping on land.\nTourism.\nDue to its vast biodiversity, warm clear waters and accessibility from the tourist boats called \"live aboards\", the reef is a very popular destination, especially for scuba divers. Tourism on the Great Barrier Reef is concentrated in Cairns and also The Whitsundays due to their accessibility. These areas make up 7\u20138% of the park's area. The Whitsundays and Cairns have their own Plans of Management. Many cities along the Queensland coast offer daily boat trips. Several continental and coral cay islands are now resorts, including Green Island and Lady Elliot Island. As of 1996, 27 islands on the Great Barrier Reef supported resorts.\nIn 1996, most of the tourism in the region was domestically generated and the most popular visiting times were during the Australian winter. At this time, it was estimated that tourists to the Great Barrier Reef contributed A$776\u00a0million per annum. As the largest commercial activity in the region, it was estimated in 2003 that tourism generated over A$4\u00a0billion annually, and the 2005 estimate increased to A$5.1\u00a0billion. A Deloitte report published by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority in March 2013 states that the Reef's 2,000 kilometres of coastline attracts tourism worth A$6.4\u00a0billion annually and employs more than 64,000 people.\nApproximately two million people visit the Great Barrier Reef each year. Although most of these visits are managed in partnership with the marine Tourism industry, there is a concern among the general public that tourism is harmful to the Great Barrier Reef.\nA variety of boat tours and cruises are offered, from single day trips, to longer voyages. Boat sizes range from dinghies to superyachts. Glass-bottomed boats and underwater observatories are also popular, as are helicopter flights. By far, the most popular tourist activities on the Great Barrier Reef are snorkelling and diving, for which pontoons are often used, and the area is often enclosed by nets. The outer part of the Great Barrier Reef is favoured for such activities, due to water quality.\nManagement of tourism in the Great Barrier Reef is geared towards making tourism ecologically sustainable. A daily fee is levied that goes towards research of the Great Barrier Reef. This fee ends up being 20% of the GBRMPA's income.\nPolicies on cruise ships, bareboat charters, and anchorages limit the traffic on the Great Barrier Reef.\nThe problems that surround ecotourism in the Great Barrier Reef revolve around permanent tourism platforms. Platforms are large, ship-like vessels that act as a base for tourists while scuba diving and snorkelling in the Great Barrier Reef. Seabirds will land on the platforms and defecate which will eventually be washed into the sea. The feces carry nitrogen, phosphorus and often DDT and mercury, which cause aspergillosis, yellow-band disease, and black band disease. Areas without tourism platforms have 14 out of 9,468 (1.1%) diseased corals versus areas with tourism platforms that have 172 out of 7,043 (12%) diseased corals. Tourism is a major economic activity for the region. Thus, while non-permanent platforms could be possible in some areas, overall, permanent platforms are likely a necessity. Solutions have been suggested to siphon bird waste into gutters connecting to tanks helping lower runoff that causes coral disease.\nThe Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority has also placed many permanent anchorage points around the general use areas. These act to reduce damage to the reef due to anchoring destroying soft coral, chipping hard coral, and disturbing sediment as it is dragged across the bottom. Tourism operators also must comply with speed limits when travelling to or from tourist destinations, to prevent excessive wake from the boats disturbing the reef ecosystem.\nFishing.\nThe fishing industry in the Great Barrier Reef, controlled by the Queensland Government, is worth A$1\u00a0billion annually. It employs approximately 2000 people, and fishing in the Great Barrier Reef is pursued commercially, for recreation, and as a traditional means for feeding one's family.\nDugong hunting.\nUnder the Native Title Act 1993, native title holders retain the right to legally hunt dugongs and green turtles for \"personal, domestic or non-commercial communal needs\".\nFour traditional owners groups agreed to cease the hunting of dugongs in the area in 2011 due to their declining numbers, partially accelerated by seagrass damage from Cyclone Yasi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70985", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70985", "title": "Great Barrier Reef Marine Park", "text": "Protected area of Queensland, Australia\nThe Great Barrier Reef Marine Park protects a large part of Australia's Great Barrier Reef from damaging activities. It is a vast multiple-use Marine Park which supports a wide range of uses, including commercial marine tourism, fishing, ports and shipping, recreation, scientific research and Indigenous traditional use. Fishing and the removal of artefacts or wildlife (fish, coral, seashells, etc.) is strictly regulated, and commercial shipping traffic must stick to certain specific defined shipping routes that avoid the most sensitive areas of the park. The Great Barrier Reef is the largest and best known coral reef ecosystem in the world. Its reefs, almost 3000 in total, represent about 10 per cent of all the coral reef areas in the world. It supports an amazing variety of biodiversity, providing a home to thousands of coral and other invertebrate species, bony fish, sharks, rays, marine mammals, marine turtles, sea snakes, as well as algae and other marine plants.\nManaging authority.\nThe Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) is responsible for the care and protection of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. It uses a range of tools to manage the marine park including Acts and Regulations, zoning plan, plans of management, traditional owner agreements, partnerships, stewardship and best practice, education, research and monitoring and reporting. It issues permits for various forms of use of the marine park, and monitors usage in the park to ensure compliance with rules and regulations associated with the park. GBRMPA is funded by Commonwealth Government appropriations and an environmental management charge levied on the permit-holders' passengers. Currently this is A$6.00 per day per passenger (to a maximum of $16.50 per trip).\nIn May 2022 the Darumbal people were officially recognised as the traditional custodians of an expanse of ocean covering off the Central Queensland Coast, making it the largest Traditional Use of Marine Resources Agreement (TUMRA) on the reef. The agreement created a partnership with GBRMPA and Queensland's Department of Environment and Science. The occasion was marked by a ceremony on the beach at Emu Park.\nDescription.\nExtent.\nThe marine park lies east of the mainland coast of Queensland, starting in the north at Cape York. Its northern boundary is the circle of latitude 10\u00b041'S (running east up to the eastern edge of the Great Barrier Reef at 145\u00ba19'33\"E), thereby encompassing those few uninhabited Torres Strait Islands that are east of Cape York, south of 10\u00b041'S and north of 11\u00b000'S. The largest of those island are Albany Island (), Turtle Head Island and Trochus Island . Further islands are Mai Island , Bush Island , Tree Islet , Brewis Island , and a few unnamed islets.\nIts southern boundary lies south of Gladstone and north of Bundaberg, taking in Lady Elliot Island.\nProtected area designation.\nAs of 2016, zones within the marine park has been categorized into the following IUCN protected area categories: \nHistory.\nIn 1975, the Government of Australia enacted the \"Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975\", which created the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, and defined what acts were prohibited on the Reef. Joe Baker, who was involved in the bid to make the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage-listed in 1981, was a founding member of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority.\nThe Australian Government also has recognised the ecological significance of this Park by its inclusion in the nation's Biodiversity Action Plan. The Government of Australia manages the reef through the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority and in partnership with the Government of Queensland, to ensure that it is widely understood and used in a sustainable manner. A combination of zoning, management plans, permits, education and incentives (such as eco-tourism certification) is used in the effort to conserve the Great Barrier Reef.\nAs many species of the Great Barrier Reef are migratory, many international, national, and interstate conventions or pieces of legislation must be taken into account when strategies for conservation are made.\nSome international conventions that the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park must follow are: the Bonn Convention, Ramsar Site (for the Bowling Green Bay National Park site), CITES, JAMBA and CAMBA.\nSome national legislation that the Park must follow are: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975,\nEnvironment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, National Strategy for Ecologically Sustainable Development, National Strategy for the Conservation of Australia's Biological Diversity, Australia's Oceans Policy, National Strategy for the Conservation of Australian Species and Communities Threatened with Extinction.\nSome state legislation that the Park must follow are: Nature Conservation Act 1992, Marine Parks Act 1982, Fisheries Act 1994, Queensland Nature Conservation (Wildlife) Regulation 1994.\nFor example, the Queensland Government has enacted several plans attempting to regulate fishing. The \"East Coast Trawl Management Plan 1999\" aimed to regulate trawling through limiting the times when trawling is permitted and restricting gear used. The \"Fisheries (Coral Reef Fin Fish Fishery) Management Plan 2003\" aimed at reducing the annual commercial catch to 1996 levels, disallowing fishing when the fish are spawning and increasing the minimum legal size of fish.\nThe Great Barrier Reef was selected as a World Heritage Site in 1981. \nUp until 1999, there were four main zones in the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. They were the \"Far Northern\", \"Cairns\", \"Central\" and \"Mackay/Capricorn\" sections. These zoning sections were created between 1983 and 1987. Another section, the \"Gumoo Woojabuddee\" section was declared in 1998. Each section had its own zoning plan. The \"Great Barrier Marine Park Zoning Plan 2003\" superseded all previous zoning plans, coming into effect on 1 July 2004.\nIn July 2004, a new zoning plan was brought into effect for the entire Marine Park, and has been widely acclaimed as a new global benchmark for the conservation of marine ecosystems. The rezoning was based on the application of systematic conservation planning techniques, using the MARXAN software. On 1 July 2004 the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park became the largest protected sea area in the world when the Australian Government increased the areas protected from extractive activities (such as fishing) from 4.6% to 33.3% of the park. As of 2006[ [update]], the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands National Monument is the largest protected marine area in the world. The management committee draws inspiration from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority's management strategies.\nThe current method of zoning is called the \"Representative Areas Program\", which chooses \"typical\" areas of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. They can then be protected in \"Green Zones\" (no-take zones). The Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area has been divided into 70 bioregions, of which 30 are reef bioregions, and 40 are non-reef bioregions.\nIn 2006, a review was undertaken of the \"Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975\". Some recommendations of the review are that there should be no further zoning plan changes until 2013, and that every five years, a peer-reviewed Outlook Report should be published, examining the health of the Great Barrier Reef, the management of the Reef, and environmental pressures.\nIn early 2007, GBRMPA was one of three nominees for the Destination Award in the World Travel and Tourism Council's Tourism for Tomorrow Awards.\nOn 3 April 2010, the \"Shen Neng 1\", a Chinese ship carrying 950 tonnes of oil, ran aground, causing the 2010 Great Barrier Reef oil spill.\nIn 2012, legislation was introduced which compelled developers to deposit money into the Reef Trust. Professor Tiffany Morrison argues that this has made it easier for developments to be approved in the region.\nThe week before 21 July 2013, on the second day of the biennial joint training exercise Talisman Saber, two American AV-8B Harrier fighter jets launched from aircraft carrier USS \"Bonhomme Richard\" (LHD-6) dropped four bombs, weighing a total 1.8 tonnes (4,000 pounds), into more than 50 metres (164\u00a0ft) of water. None exploded and no coral was damaged.\nPeople such as scientists, conservationists, developers, managers, tourism entrepreneurs and politicians have had major influences on the history of the reef In 2015, the Australian Government and Reef Ecologic Pty Ltd conducted a coral reef training course to build capacity to protect coral reefs\nThreats.\nCrown-of-thorns starfish.\nThe crown-of-thorns starfish (\"Acanthaster planci\"), while native to the reef, poses one of its greatest threats when outbreaks occur. Several efforts have been made to identify and control these outbreaks, including the COTSBot developed by Queensland University of Technology.\nThese outbreaks and subsequent threats have led to an increase in awareness and appearances in mainstream media, as industry and conservation groups try to control the COTS and protect the reef. An infographic explaining the process of identifying and targeting this threat can be seen https://.\nOutlook for the Reef.\nThe Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2014, published every five years, examines the Great Barrier Reef's health, pressures, and likely future.\nThe report is required under \"Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975\" (section 54) and aims to provide a regular and reliable means of assessing reef health and management in an accountable and transparent way.\nThe report finds the greatest risks to the Reef are still climate change, land-based run-off, coastal development, some fishing impacts, illegal fishing and poaching.\nAssociated protected areas.\nThe Great Barrier Reef Coast Marine Park is a marine protected area located in Queensland waters adjoining the Great Barrier Reef. It was created on 5 November 2004 by the amalgamation of the following former marine parks \u2013 the Mackay/Capricorn Marine Park, the Townville/Whitsunday Marine Park, the Trinity Inlet/ Marlin Coast Marine Park and the Cairns Marine Park, along with the addition of previously unprotected area of coastal water that adjoined the former marine parks listed above. The marine park is intended to complement the adjoining GBRMP by the use of \"similar zone objectives, and entry and use provisions\". It is managed by the Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70986", "revid": "50549226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70986", "title": "Art Garfunkel", "text": "American singer (born 1941)\nArthur Ira Garfunkel (born November 5, 1941) is an American singer, actor and poet who is best known for his partnership with Paul Simon in the folk rock duo Simon &amp; Garfunkel.\nBorn in Forest Hills, Queens, New York, Garfunkel became acquainted with Simon through an elementary school play, a production of \"Alice in Wonderland\". Their combined presence in music began in the 1950s, and throughout the 1960s the duo of Simon &amp; Garfunkel achieved great chart success with tracks such as \"The Sound of Silence\", \"Mrs. Robinson\" (written for the 1967 film \"The Graduate\"), \"Scarborough Fair\", \"The Boxer\" and \"Bridge over Troubled Water\". The last song's title also served as the name of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's final album in 1970. Simon &amp; Garfunkel split for personal reasons, but the pair have occasionally reunited in the years since. Both men experienced success in solo careers in the years following the duo's breakup.\nHighlights of Garfunkel's solo music career include one top 10 hit, three top 20 hits, six top 40 hits, 14 Adult Contemporary top 30 singles, five Adult Contemporary number ones, two UK number ones and a People's Choice Award. Through his solo and collaborative work, Garfunkel has earned eight Grammy Awards, including a Lifetime Achievement Award. In 1990, he and Simon were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2008, Garfunkel was ranked 86th in \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"100 Greatest Singers of All Time\".\nEarly life.\nGarfunkel was born in Forest Hills, Queens, New York City, to Rose (n\u00e9e Pearlman) and Jacob \"Jack\" Garfunkel, a traveling salesman. Art was a middle child with two brothers, the older Jules and the younger Jerome. Jacob's parents had immigrated to the United States at the beginning of the twentieth century and settled in Manhattan. Before his career in sales, Jacob worked as an actor in Dayton, Ohio. Garfunkel is of Jewish-Romanian descent, his paternal grandparents having emigrated from the city of Ia\u0219i. When he was young, he often sang in synagogue. His maternal cousin was Lou Pearlman, who ran one of the biggest Ponzi scams in history, and was founder of the Backstreet Boys and NSYNC.\nAccording to the \"Across America\" DVD, Garfunkel's love of singing originated in the first grade. \"When we were lined up in size order, and after everyone else had left, I'd stay behind and enjoy the echo sound of the stairwell tiles and sing 'Unchained Melody' and 'You'll Never Walk Alone', learning to love this goosebumps song from the tender age of five.\" Later, Garfunkel's father bought him a wire recorder, and from then on, Garfunkel spent his afternoons singing, recording, and playing it back, so he could listen for flaws and learn how to improve.\nAt his bar mitzvah in 1954 in the Jewish Center of Kew Gardens Hills, Garfunkel performed as a cantor, singing over four hours of his repertoire for his family. As a young teen, Garfunkel became ill with a lung infection, leading to a love for basketball. He explained in a 1998 interview: \"In the summer of '55, I had a lung infection. I couldn't run around, but I loved basketball and there was a hoop nearby. Much of the summer I spent methodically hitting 96, 98 foul shots out of 100. Then 102! I never played on a team after junior high school. Just 3 against 3, half court pick up games in the schoolyard.\" He met future singing partner Paul Simon in the sixth grade at PS 164, when they were both cast in the elementary school graduation play, \"Alice in Wonderland\". It has been said by Garfunkel that Simon first became interested in singing after hearing Garfunkel sing a rendition of Nat King Cole's \"Too Young\" in a school talent show.\nBetween 1956 and 1962, the two performed together as \"Tom &amp; Jerry\", a moniker coined by their label Big Records, occasionally performing at school dances. Their idols were The Everly Brothers, whom they imitated in their use of close two-part vocal harmony. In 1957, Simon &amp; Garfunkel recorded the song \"Hey, Schoolgirl\" under the name Tom &amp; Jerry. The single reached number 49 on the pop charts. After Tom &amp; Jerry came to a close, Garfunkel released two singles under the name Artie Garr: \"Dream Alone\"/\"Beat Love\" and \"Forgive Me\"/\"Private World\" with Warwick and Octavia Records respectively. Both singles would fail to chart.\nAfter graduating from Forest Hills High School alongside Simon, Garfunkel initially majored in architecture at Columbia University, where he was a brother in the Alpha Epsilon Pi fraternity and lived in Carman Hall. Garfunkel was a team member in tennis, skiing, fencing, and bowling at the college and also joined the all-male a cappella group on campus, the Columbia Kingsmen. While at Columbia his roommate, Sanford Greenberg, developed glaucoma and went blind. Garfunkel assisted him in his homework by reading his textbooks to Greenberg, who went on to graduate with honors. Another roommate of his was Tishman Speyer founder Jerry Speyer. Greenberg later gave Garfunkel $500 to go and record a demo of \"The Sound of Silence\". Garfunkel ultimately earned a BA in art history in 1965, followed by an MA in mathematics education from Teachers College, Columbia University in 1967. He also completed coursework toward a doctorate in the latter discipline at Teachers College, Columbia University during the peak of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's commercial success; however, he later dropped out.\nCareer.\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel.\nIn 1963, Garfunkel and Simon (who graduated from Queens College before dropping out of Brooklyn Law School) reformed their duo under their own names as \"Simon and Garfunkel\". They released their first album, \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\" on Columbia Records in October 1964. It was not a critical or commercial success, and the duo split. The next year, producer Tom Wilson lifted the song \"The Sound of Silence\" from the record, dubbed an electric backing onto it, and released it as a single that went to number one on the \"Billboard\" pop charts.\nSimon had gone to the United Kingdom in 1965 after the initial failure of \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\", to pursue a solo career. He briefly teamed with songwriter Bruce Woodley of The Seekers. After \"The Sound of Silence\" had started to enjoy commercial success, he returned to the US to reunite with Garfunkel. The duo recorded four more influential albums: \"Sounds of Silence\"; \"Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme\"; \"Bookends\"; and the hugely successful \"Bridge over Troubled Water\".\nThey contributed to the soundtrack of the 1967 Mike Nichols' Academy Award-winning film \"The Graduate\" (starring Dustin Hoffman and Anne Bancroft). While writing \"Mrs. Robinson\", Simon originally considered the title \"Mrs. Roosevelt\". When Garfunkel reported this indecision over the song's name to the director, Nichols replied, \"Don't be ridiculous! We're making a movie here! It's Mrs. Robinson!\"\nSimon &amp; Garfunkel traveled together to England in the fall of 1968. They made a concert appearance at Kraft Hall, which was broadcast on the BBC and featured Garfunkel's solo performance of \"For Emily, Whenever I May Find Her\". He received a standing ovation.\nWhile Garfunkel was not a songwriter, he did write the poem \"Canticle\" as a re-write of Simon's \"Side of A Hill\" from his debut album, for \"Scarborough Fair/Canticle\". He worked as the vocal arranger for the duo, working out by whom the songs would be sung and how each song was produced. He is also credited as having written the arrangement on \"The Boxer\" and creating \"Voices of Old People\" (an audio montage) on \"Bookends\".\nCiting personal differences and divergence in career interests, they split following the release of their most critically acclaimed album, \"Bridge over Troubled Water\", in 1970. Each pursued solo projects after 1970. They occasionally reunited, as in 1975 for their Top Ten single \"My Little Town\", which Simon originally wrote for Garfunkel, claiming Garfunkel's solo output was lacking \"bite\". The song was included on their respective solo albums: Simon's \"Still Crazy After All These Years\" and Garfunkel's \"Breakaway\". Contrary to popular belief, the song is not autobiographical of Simon's early life but of Garfunkel's childhood in Queens. In 1981, they got together again for a concert in Central Park, followed by a world tour and an aborted reunion album \"Think Too Much\", which was eventually released, by Simon without Garfunkel, as \"Hearts and Bones\". They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1990.\nIn 2003, they reunited when they received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, leading to a US tour: the acclaimed \"Old Friends\" concert series. It was followed by another in 2004, which culminated in a free concert at the Colosseum in Rome. The concert drew 600,000 people.\n1970\u20131975: Hiatus and first album.\nDuring a three-year hiatus after Simon &amp; Garfunkel's breakup, Garfunkel starred in two Mike Nichols films, \"Catch-22\" (1970) and \"Carnal Knowledge\" (1971). He also spent late 1971 to early 1972 working as a mathematics teacher teaching geometry to high school sophomores at the short-lived Litchfield Academy in Connecticut.\nIn late 1972, with Simon &amp; Garfunkel having released their \"Greatest Hits\" album and briefly reuniting to perform a benefit concert for presidential candidate George McGovern, Garfunkel felt ready to return to his musical career. His first album was 1973's \"Angel Clare\", which contained \"All I Know\", \"I Shall Sing\" and \"Travelling Boy\" as singles. The album was received with mixed reviews, reaching number 5 in the U.S. In 1974, Garfunkel released the hit single \"Second Avenue\".\nOn his next album, 1975's \"Breakaway\", Garfunkel briefly reunited with Simon for the 1975 hit \"My Little Town\". The album also included the singles \"Break Away\" (B-Side: \"Disney Girls\") and \"I Only Have Eyes for You\" (a 1934 song written by Harry Warren), which is noted as Garfunkel's first UK number one.\n1976\u20131979: Solo efforts.\nIn 1976, Garfunkel recorded both background and duet vocals for several artists, including Stephen Bishop's \"Careless\" album, James Taylor's \"In The Pocket\" album and JD Souther's \"Black Rose\" album. From December 1976 to September 1977, Garfunkel worked on his next album.\nGarfunkel's next release was the 1977 album \"Watermark\" (US No. 19, UK No. 26). It failed to make an impression on the public upon release. Its main single, \"Crying in My Sleep\" (\"Mr. Shuck 'N' Jive\") (UK No. 25) didn't reach the US Top 40. After a two-month hiatus, it was re-released in January 1978, with Garfunkel's cover of Sam Cooke's \"(What a) Wonderful World\" (B-Side: \"Wooden Planes\"), reaching number one on the Adult Contemporary chart and seventeen on the pop chart. Paul Simon and mutual friend James Taylor had contributed backing vocals to the song, which was a huge hit on the US A.C. charts. In 1978, Garfunkel toured the U.S. and Canada extensively with noted guitarist Arlen Roth, John Barlow Jarvis on piano, and Leah Kunkel on second vocals.\nGarfunkel's last release of the 1970s was the 1979 album \"Fate for Breakfast\" (US No. 67, UK No. 2). It was his first US flop. The album's first single, \"In A Little While (I'll Be on My Way)\" (B-Side: \"And I Know\") (US AC No. 12) failed to break the top forty, as did his second single, \"Since I Don't Have You\" (B-Side: \"When Someone Doesn't Want You\") (US No. 53, US AC No. 5, UK No. 38). The album was a huge success in the UK, scoring a number one hit with \"Bright Eyes\" (B-Side: \"Sail on a Rainbow\") (US AC No. 29, UK No. 1) (a song written by Mike Batt). A version of \"Bright Eyes\" also appeared in the movie \"Watership Down\".\nGarfunkel's girlfriend since 1974, Laurie Bird, died by suicide in June 1979 at their Manhattan apartment, three months after the album's release in March. Garfunkel later admitted that the incident left him in a deep depression.\n1980\u20131995: Depression and withdrawal.\nIn 1980, he sang on the Crosby, Stills, Nash &amp; Young song \"Daylight Again\", featured on the album of the same name.\nGarfunkel's next album was a low point in his career. The 1981 album, \"Scissors Cut\" (US No. 113, UK No. 51) (dedicated to Bird), contained three singles, \"A Heart in New York\" (B-Side: \"Is This Love\") (US No. 66, US AC No. 10), \"Scissors Cut\", and \"Hang On In\". The latter two failed to chart.\nFollowing disappointing sales of \"Scissors Cut\", Garfunkel reunited with Simon for \"The Concert in Central Park\" and a world tour. They had significant disagreements during the tour. In 1984, \"Stereo Review Magazine\" reported that Simon mixed out Garfunkel's voice from a new album. It was initially slated to be a Simon &amp; Garfunkel studio reunion, but was ultimately released as a Simon solo album (\"Hearts and Bones\"). In 1986, Garfunkel played the part of the butcher on the Mike Batt concept album \"The Hunting of the Snark\".\nGarfunkel released his first compilation album in 1984, \"The Art Garfunkel Album\" (UK No. 12), never released in the US, which contained the minor hit \"Sometimes When I'm Dreaming\" (UK No. 77, US AC No. 25).\nGarfunkel again left the music scene when his father died. In the fall of 1985, he met his future wife, Kathryn \"Kim\" Cermak; they were married in September 1988. Garfunkel's retirement lasted until his 1988 album, \"Lefty\" (US, No. 134), which produced three singles, \"So Much in Love\" (US No. 76, US AC No. 11), \"When a Man Loves a Woman\", and \"This Is the Moment\".\n1996\u20132006: Resurgence.\nGarfunkel's live 1996 concert \"Across America\" (UK No. 35), recorded at the registry hall on Ellis Island, featured musical guests James Taylor, Garfunkel's wife, Kim, and their son James.\nGarfunkel performed the theme song for the 1991 television series \"Brooklyn Bridge\" and \"The Ballad of Buster Baxter\" for a 1998 episode of the children's educational television series \"Arthur\", where he was depicted as a singing moose. Garfunkel's performance of Monty Python member Eric Idle's \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" was used in the end credits of the 1997 film \"As Good as It Gets\".\nIn 2002, Garfunkel made his debut as a songwriter on his \"Everything Waits to Be Noticed\" album. Teaming up with singer-songwriters Maia Sharp and Buddy Mondlock, the album contained several songs which were originally poems written by Garfunkel.\nIn 2003, Simon and Garfunkel reunited again for a successful world tour that extended into 2004. That same year, his song \"Sometimes When I'm Dreaming\" from \"The Art Garfunkel Album\" (1984) (written by Mike Batt) was re-recorded by ABBA singer Agnetha F\u00e4ltskog on her album \"My Colouring Book\".\nIn 2006, Garfunkel signed with Rhino Records (revived Atco Records), releasing his first Rhino/Atco album \"Some Enchanted Evening\" in the United States on January 30, 2007. The album was a dedicated celebration of pop standards of Garfunkel's childhood.\n2008\u2013present: Recent events and vocal problems.\nIn 2009, Garfunkel appeared as himself on the HBO television show \"Flight of the Conchords\" episode entitled \"Prime Minister\".\nGarfunkel continued to tour in 2009 with four musicians and his son.\nOn February 13, 2009, Simon and his band re-opened New York's Beacon Theatre, which had been closed for seven months for renovation. As an encore, Simon brought out \"my old friend, Art Garfunkel\". They sang three songs: \"Sound of Silence\", \"The Boxer\", and \"Old Friends\".\nOn April 2, 2009, the duo announced a tour of Australia, New Zealand, and Japan for summer 2009. In late October, they participated together in the 25th anniversary of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame concerts at New York's Madison Square Garden. Other artists on the bill included Bruce Springsteen &amp; The E Street Band, U2, Metallica, Aretha Franklin, Stevie Wonder, and Crosby, Stills, &amp; Nash.\nIn January 2010, Garfunkel developed vocal problems following damage to his vocal cords as the result of an incident in which he had briefly choked on a piece of lobster. In March 2010, Simon &amp; Garfunkel announced a 13-date tour. According to a press release, the set list would focus on their classic catalog as well as songs from each of their solo careers. The first date in the tour was on April 24, a headlining set at the 2010 New Orleans Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival. Due to his vocal cord injury, singing proved difficult for Garfunkel. \"I was terrible, and crazy nervous. I leaned on Paul Simon and the affection of the crowd\", he told \"Rolling Stone\" several years later. Several months later on June 10, they performed \"Mrs. Robinson\" at an AFI Life Achievement Award tribute to director Mike Nichols, in what proved to be their last performance together to date. On June 17, Simon &amp; Garfunkel canceled the tour, previously rescheduled for July 2010, which was postponed indefinitely while Garfunkel attempted to recover from a vocal cord paresis.\nIn November 2010, Garfunkel said that because of quitting smoking he was recovering from paresis and would be touring in 2011.\nHe tried to resume touring in August 2012 just after releasing a 34-song retrospective, \"The Singer\". Garfunkel scheduled 19 solo shows in the United States and Sweden between August and December 2012. 16 of the shows were canceled. Garfunkel was due to perform at Night of The Proms in Gothenburg and Malm\u00f6, Sweden, on September 28 and 29, 2012, but canceled at the last minute due to an \"unforeseen vocal issue\". Speaking about his voice in February 2013, Garfunkel said \"It's getting mostly better; I'm pretty much there\" and that he was starting to book small shows again. In 2014, he resumed touring, with Tab Laven accompanying him on acoustic guitar, his voice restored.\nOn the September 30, 2015, episode of \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\", Garfunkel took part in the spoof \"Black Simon &amp; Garfunkel\" skit with members of The Roots.\nThe Simon and Garfunkel song \"America\" was used by Bernie Sanders during his 2016 presidential campaign; Garfunkel appreciated Sanders' fight against wealth inequality.\nOn September 26, 2017, Knopf Doubleday published in hardcover Garfunkel's memoir \"What Is It All but Luminous: Notes from an Underground Man\". Penguin Random House has published it in softcover and audiobook.\nOn April 10, 2023, Garfunkel canceled his remaining concert dates and his management announced \"that he has decided not to return to touring for the foreseeable future.\"\nIn the fall of 2024, Garfunkel announced the release of a new studio album, \"Father And Son\", a duets album with his son, Art Garfunkel Jr. \"Father And Son\" was released on November 8, 2024. The album features twelve cover songs, including \"Blackbird\", \"Blue Moon\", \"Vincent\", and one Simon &amp; Garfunkel song, a new recording of \"Old Friends\".\nPoetry.\nGarfunkel, an avid reader and bibliophile, has said that while growing up the Garfunkel household was not a literary family and that it was not until entering Columbia University in 1959 that he began to \"read a million books and became a reader.\" Thus began his interest in poetry.\nGarfunkel's poetic career began in 1981 while on the Simon &amp; Garfunkel 1981\u20131982 tour in Switzerland. He was riding a motorcycle and began writing a poem describing the countryside. In 1989, \"Still Water\", Garfunkel's collection of prose poetry, was released to acclaim. Topics included his depression over the loss of his father; Laurie Bird, his companion who committed suicide; his friendship with Paul Simon; and the joy of returning to music.\nGarfunkel's website contains a year-by-year listing of every book he has read since 1968. Currently the list contains more than 1,000 books. He has also read the entire Random House Dictionary. Garfunkel has an interest in the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau, having read his book \"Confessions\" at least three times (according to Garfunkel's website, the book was the 1st, 252nd, and 1,000th book he read).\nActing.\nGarfunkel pursued an acting career in the early 1970s, appearing in two Mike Nichols films: \"Catch-22\" (1970), in which he played a supporting role as the 19-year-old naive Lieutenant Nately, and \"Carnal Knowledge\" (1971), a co-starring role in which he played the idealistic character Sandy. His role as Sandy secured him a nomination for Best Supporting Actor at the 1972 Golden Globe Awards.\nHe later appeared in Nicolas Roeg's \"Bad Timing\" (1980) as Alex Linden, an American psychiatrist who serves as the film's main antagonist. The film received the Toronto Festival of Festivals' highest honor, the People's Choice Award, and the London Film Critics' Circle Award for Best Director.\nHe appeared in \"Good to Go\" (1986), directed by Blain Novak, starring as a Washington, D.C., journalist who struggles to clear his name after being framed for rape and murder. Garfunkel then appeared in the medical crime drama \"Boxing Helena\" (1993), directed by Jennifer Lynch, as Lawrence Augustine.\nGarfunkel's most recent film is \"The Rebound\" (2009), directed by Bart Freundlich. He played Harry Finklestein, the slightly senile and comic-relief father of the film's main character.\nVoice classification.\nGarfunkel is a tenor who usually sang the higher parts in Simon &amp; Garfunkel's harmonies. His voice changed almost imperceptibly until his late fifties, when it began to lower after years of smoking. He quit smoking around 2010 to aid his recovery from vocal cord paresis.\nPersonal life.\nGarfunkel married Linda Marie Grossman (b. 1944), an architect, in Nashville on October 1, 1972, and they divorced in 1975. He has claimed that not only did he not love her, he did not even like her much.\nHe was romantically involved with actress and photographer Laurie Bird from March 1974 until her suicide in 1979 from an overdose of Valium in the New York apartment they shared. Garfunkel was deeply affected by her death, and said: \"She was beautiful, in a lonesome, haunted way, and I adored her. But I wasn't ready for marriage and she was not very comfortable being Laurie. She wasn't happy with herself. Her mother committed suicide at 26, and so did she.\"\nIn late 1985, Garfunkel met former model Kathryn (Kim) Cermak (b. 1958; Czech spelling \"\u010cerm\u00e1k\") while shooting \"Good to Go\". They married on September 18, 1988, and have two sons born in 1990 and 2005, via surrogate mother. Arthur Jr. is also a singer, and released two German-language tribute albums with Simon &amp; Garfunkel's greatest hits. Garfunkel and his namesake collaborated on \"Father and Son\" in 2024; \"My dad chose more of the songs from the 1940s,\" the younger singer explained, \"and I was more of the 1980s selection. The 'Father and Son' recording was my suggestion, and my father did a great job with it.\"\nGarfunkel has undertaken several long walks in his lifetime, writing poetry along the way. In the early 1980s, he walked across Japan in a number of weeks. From 1983 to 1997, Garfunkel walked across the United States, taking 40 excursions to complete the route from New York City to the Pacific coast of Oregon. In May 1998, Garfunkel launched an instalment walk across Europe, from a start in Ireland to his final stop in Istanbul in 2015.\nDespite being a native New Yorker, Garfunkel is a lifelong Philadelphia Phillies fan, having written on his website: \"I never followed the crowd. So as a Queens kid, I didn't want to be a Dodger, a Yankee, or Giant fan. One day when I was 8 I went to Ebbets Field and saw the Phillies with their red pinstripes, Robin Roberts, Pudinhead Jones. Somehow this was for me. The rest is loyalty. Decades of pain.\"\nIn 2017, Garfunkel came out with his memoir \"What Is It All but Luminous: Notes from an Underground Man\", saying \"I was an angel singer, a homework nut; an underground lover of all beautiful faces, beautiful bodies, boys and girls.\"\nGarfunkel has been arrested twice for the possession of marijuana: once in early 2004 and again in August 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70987", "revid": "29840718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70987", "title": "Decay mode", "text": ""}
{"id": "70989", "revid": "5641591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70989", "title": "Molar volume", "text": "Volume occupied by one mole of a substance\nIn chemistry and related fields, the molar volume, symbol \"V\"m, or formula_1 of a substance is the ratio of the volume (\"V\") occupied by a substance to the amount of substance (\"n\"), usually at a given temperature and pressure. It is also equal to the molar mass (\"M\") divided by the mass density (\"\u03c1\"):\nformula_2\nThe molar volume has the SI unit of cubic metres per mole (m3/mol), although it is more typical to use the units cubic decimetres per mole (dm3/mol) for gases, and cubic centimetres per mole (cm3/mol) for liquids and solids.\nDefinition.\nThe molar volume of a substance \"i\" is defined as its molar mass divided by its density \"\u03c1\"\"i\"0:\nformula_3\nFor an ideal mixture containing \"N\" components, the molar volume of the mixture is the weighted sum of the molar volumes of its individual components. For a real mixture the molar volume cannot be calculated without knowing the density:\nformula_4\nThere are many liquid\u2013liquid mixtures, for instance mixing pure ethanol and pure water, which may experience contraction or expansion upon mixing. This effect is represented by the quantity excess volume of the mixture, an example of excess property.\nRelation to specific volume.\nMolar volume is related to specific volume by the product with molar mass. This follows from above where the specific volume is the reciprocal of the density of a substance:\nformula_5\nIdeal gases.\nFor ideal gases, the molar volume is given by the ideal gas equation; this is a good approximation for many common gases at standard temperature and pressure.\nThe ideal gas equation can be rearranged to give an expression for the molar volume of an ideal gas:\nformula_6\nHence, for a given temperature and pressure, the molar volume is the same for all ideal gases and is based on the gas constant: \"R\"\u00a0= , or about .\nThe molar volume of an ideal gas at 100\u00a0kPa (1\u00a0bar) is\n at 0\u00a0\u00b0C,\n at 25\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe molar volume of an ideal gas at 1 atmosphere of pressure is\n at 0\u00a0\u00b0C,\n at 25\u00a0\u00b0C.\nCrystalline solids.\nFor crystalline solids, the molar volume can be measured by X-ray crystallography.\nThe unit cell volume (\"V\"cell) may be calculated from the unit cell parameters, whose determination is the first step in an X-ray crystallography experiment (the calculation is performed automatically by the structure determination software). This is related to the molar volume by\nformula_7\nwhere \"N\"A is the Avogadro constant and \"Z\" is the number of formula units in the unit cell. The result is normally reported as the \"crystallographic density\".\nMolar volume of silicon.\nUltra-pure silicon is routinely made for the electronics industry, and the measurement of the molar volume of silicon, both by X-ray crystallography and by the ratio of molar mass to mass density, has attracted much attention since the pioneering work at NIST in 1974. The interest stems from that accurate measurements of the unit cell volume, atomic weight and mass density of a pure crystalline solid provide a direct determination of the Avogadro constant.\nThe CODATA recommended value for the molar volume of silicon is , with a relative standard uncertainty of .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70992", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70992", "title": "Kalmar Municipality", "text": "Kalmar Municipality () is a municipality in Kalmar County, southeastern Sweden. The city of Kalmar is the municipal seat.\nThe present municipality was created in 1971, when the \"City of Kalmar\" was amalgamated with five surrounding rural municipalities. The municipality consists of fifteen original local government units.\nLocalities.\nThere are 16 urban areas (also called a T\u00e4tort or locality) in Kalmar Municipality.\nIn the table the localities are listed according to the size of the population as of December 31, 2019. The municipal seat is in bold characters.\nDemographics.\nThis is a demographic table based on Kalmar Municipality's electoral districts in the 2022 Swedish general election sourced from SVT's election platform, in turn taken from SCB official statistics.\nIn total there were 54,430 Swedish citizens of voting age resident in the municipality. 48.4 % voted for the left coalition and 50.5 % for the right coalition. Indicators are in percentage points except population totals and income.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2014 sister cities.\nKalmar is twinned with:"}
{"id": "70994", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70994", "title": "Hydra (island)", "text": "One of the Saronic Islands of Greece\nHydra, or Ydra or Idra (; , in Modern Greek), and in antiquity Hydrea, is one of the Saronic Islands of Greece, located in the Aegean Sea between the Myrtoan Sea and the Argolic Gulf. It is separated from the Peloponnese by a narrow strip of water. In ancient times, the island was known as (\u1f59\u03b4\u03c1\u03ad\u03b1, derived from the Greek word for \"water\"), a reference to the natural springs on the island.\nThe municipality of Hydra consists of the islands Hydra (area ), Dokos (area ), and a few uninhabited islets, with a total area of . The province of Hydra () was one of the provinces of the Argolis and Corinthia Prefecture from 1833 to 1942, of Attica prefecture from 1942 to 1964, of Piraeus prefecture from 1964 to 1972, and of Attica again as part of the newly established Piraeus prefecture of Attica. Its territory corresponded with that of the current municipality. It was abolished in 2006. Today the municipality of Hydra is part of the Islands regional unit of Attica region.\nThere is one main town, known simply as \"Hydra port\" (population 1,900 as of 2011[ [update]]). It consists of a crescent-shaped harbor, around which is centered a strand of restaurants, shops, markets, and galleries that cater to tourists and to locals (Hydriots or Hydriotes). Steep stone streets lead up and outward from the harbor area. Most of the local residences, as well as the hostelries on the island, are located on these streets. Other small villages or hamlets on the island include Mandraki, Kamini, Vlychos, Palamidas, Episkopi, and Molos. Wheeled vehicles are not permitted on the island, including but not limited to cars, motorcycles, scooters, bicycles, and e-bikes.\nName.\nThe name Hydra comes from ancient Greek \u1f55\u03b4\u03c1\u03b1 (hydra), derived from the Greek word for \"water\", a reference to the natural springs on the island. The local Arvanite name is attested in two variants: the common variant \"N\u03cd\u03b4\u03c1\u03b1/Nidhra\" and the rare form \"Nidhriza\" or \"Hydriza\".\nTransport, tourism and leisure.\nHydra depends on tourism, and Athenians account for a sizable segment of its visitors. High-speed hydrofoils and catamarans from Piraeus, some away, serve Hydra, stopping first at Poros before going on to Spetses. There is a passenger ferry service providing an alternative to hydrofoils that operates between Hydra Harbor to Metochi on the Peloponnese coast. Many Athenians drive to Metochi, leave their car in the secure car park, and take the 20-minute passenger ferry across to Hydra.\nRubbish trucks are the only motor vehicles on the island, since by law, cars and motorcycles are not allowed. Horses, mules and donkeys, and water taxis provide public transportation. The inhabited area, however, is so compact that most people walk everywhere.\nIn 2007, a \"National Geographic Traveler\" panel of 522 experts rated Hydra the highest of any Greek island (11th out of 111 islands worldwide), as a unique destination preserving its \"integrity of place\".\nCaptains' mansions.\nThe Tsamadou mansion, on the left side as one enters the harbor, is now a Maritime Academy. The Tsamados family donated the mansion for the purpose of hosting the Greek Maritime Academy on their island. Another house, originally built for the Tsamados family on the hill overlooking the port was donated to the church to be used as a weaving school and production facility of textiles and carpets. The house now belongs to the Colloredo-Mansfeld family and became known as the Old Carpet Factory.\nThe Tombazis mansion is now part of the Athens School of Fine Arts, owned by University of Athens.\nThe mansions of Lazaros and George Kountouriotis, Boudouris, Kriezis, Voulgaris, Sachinis, and Miaoulis all contain collections of 18th-century island furniture. The descendants of Lazarus Kountouriotis donated his mansion to the Historic-Ethnologic Institute of Greece. Today, it operates as an extension branch of the National Museum of History.\nMonasteries and the Cathedral.\nThere are numerous churches and six Orthodox monasteries on the island. Two particularly noteworthy monasteries are Profitis Ilias, founded in the 10th century, and Ayia Efpraxia. Both are on a hill overlooking the main harbor.\nThe island's cathedral is the old Monastery of the Dormition of the Virgin and sits on the quayside in the town. The monastery contains the tomb of Lazaros Kountouriotis, the richest sea captain on Hydra, who gave his entire fortune to support the Greek War of Independence.\nHistory.\nPre-history, antiquity, Byzantine and Venetian era.\nThere is evidence of farmers and herders from the second half of the third millennium BCE on the small, flat areas that are not visible from the sea. Obsidian from Milos has also been found. During the Helladic period, Hydra probably served as a maritime base for the kingdoms on the Greek peninsula. Fragments of vases, tools, and the head of an idol have been found on Mount Chorissa. There is also evidence of Mycenean-era aqueducts, supplying ships with water.\nThe large-scale Dorian invasion of Greece around the 12th century BCE appears to have depopulated the island. Hydra was repopulated by farmers and herders, perhaps sailing from the mainland port of Ermioni, in the 8th century BCE. Herodotus reports that toward the 6th century BCE, the island belonged to Ermioni, which sold it to Samos. Samos, in turn, ceded it to Troizina.\nFor much of its existence, Hydra stayed on the margins of history. The population was very small in ancient times and, except for the brief mentions in Herodotus and Pausanias, left little or no record in the history of those times.\nIt is clear that Hydra was populated during the Byzantine era, as vases and coins have been discovered in the area of Episkopi. However, it appears that the island again lost its population during the Latin Empire of Constantinople as its inhabitants fled the pirate depredations. On other islands, inhabitants moved inland, something that was essentially impossible on Hydra.\nArvanite community.\nAmong local Arvanites, the first account about their settlement was written by Antonis Miaoulis, son of admiral Andreas Miaoulis, after the end of the Greek war of independence (1830). According to this local narrative, the Arvanite Hydriots descend from the Albanians who directly left Albania as refugees in the 1460s due to persecution by the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II. Historiographical research shows that the Albanians didn't settle in Hydra directly from Albania in the 15th century, but from the Peloponnese (Ermionida) due to conflicts in the region with the Venetians and the Ottomans. This first Albanian settlement occurred in the early 16th century and likely involved members of the same 1-2 clans. They created the modern town port and their presence was evident until the mid-20th century, when, according to T. Jochalas, the majority of the island's population was composed of immigrants from outside of Peloponnesus. In the 16th century, the island began to be settled also by refugees from the warfare between the Ottomans and Venetians. In the early 18th century, a last Arvanite movement from nearby areas settled in the island. Arvanitika was a language spoken by all Hydriotes. By the 19th century, men had learned to speak Greek too, while women and children often didn't speak Greek. One of the reasons why Arvanitika was so enduring in Hydra as opposed to other islands which were part of the Arvanite Aegean settlements was that the language was spoken and favored by the newly emerging Hydriot urban-merchant class. Even in the 20th century families of the local magnates like the Koundouriotis spoke Arvanitika in Hydra. Hydra was also an island where church liturgy was often held in local Arvanitika, which is a rare case as in most Orthodox Albanian communities Greek was the language of liturgy even up to the early 20th century. The Arvanite community is still found on the island. Nowadays they are fully assimilated.\nOttoman era: period of commercial and naval strength.\nHydra was relatively unimportant during much of the period of Ottoman rule. At the end of the sixteenth century, there was a wave of migration consisting of big families from the Hellenic and Asia Minor regions to the island. Due to the infertile ground, the inhabitants turned to the sea. Its naval and commercial development began in the 17th century, and its first school for mariners was established in 1645. Apparently, the first truly Hydriot vessel was launched in 1657. However, the conflict between the Republic of Venice and the Ottoman Empire limited the island's maritime development until after 1718 and the Treaty of Passarowitz. From the 17th century on, Hydra began to take on a greater importance because of its trading strength.\nDuring the first half of the 18th century, Hydra built the same kind of vessels as were built in the other Aegean Islands: the \"sachtouri\" of 15 to 20 tons, and the \"latinadiko\" of 40 to 50 tons. The Hydriots contented themselves with trading in the Aegean, going as far as Constantinople. A great change occurred in 1757 after they launched a vessel of 250 tons. The larger boats enabled Hydra to become an important commercial port. By 1771, there were up to 50 vessels from throughout Greece in the roads. Ten years later, the island had fitted out 100 vessels.\nHowever, the Ottoman Empire and its policies constrained Hydra's economic success. Heavy tariffs and taxes limited the speed of development. The Ottoman administration limited free trade, permitting only Ottoman vessels to navigate the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus, and hence to have access to the Black Sea, its ports, and the trade in grain from their hinterlands. The Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca changed all this. Russia gained from the Ottoman Empire the right to protect the Empire's Orthodox Christians. The religious protection had a commercial corollary: the Hydriots began to sail under the Russian flag. The treaty also provided for free passage between the Aegean and the Black Sea. Hydra entered its commercial era. Hydriot vessels carried goods between Southern Russia in the east and the Italian ports of Ancona and Livorno in the west. From 1785 on, the Hydriot shippers began to engage in commerce, not just transport. Each vessel became its own small commercial enterprise, and trade with the Levant quickly began to depend on Hydra's vessels, though not without competition from those of Spetses and Psara.\nThe plague of 1792 killed a large part of the population, and many people moved away. As a result, the town was almost completely abandoned for a while. By the end of the 18th century, Hydra had again become quite prosperous, with its vessels trading as far as France, Spain, and even the Americas. Napoleon presented the island with the huge silver chandelier in the cathedral as a gesture of gratitude for the Hydriots' role in running the British blockade and so bringing food to France.\nGreek War of Independence.\nIn the 19th century, Hydra was home to some 125 boats and 10,000 sailors. The mansions of the sea captains that ring the harbor are a testament to the prosperity that shipping brought to the island, which, at the time of the Greek Revolution, had 16,000 inhabitants.\nTo begin with, Hydriots were far from unanimous in joining the Greek War of Independence. In April 1821, when Antonis Oikonomou expelled the Ottoman governor Nikolao Kokovila and proclaimed Hydra's adherence to the independence struggle, he met strong opposition from island leaders who were reluctant to lose the relatively privileged position they had under Ottoman rule. Oikonomou was imprisoned, hounded off the island and eventually his opponents sent assassins to chase and kill him in December 1821.\nStill, Hydra eventually did join the cause of independence, and Hydra's contribution of some 150 ships, plus supplies, to fight against the Turks played a critical role. The Greek admiral Andreas Miaoulis, himself a settler on Hydra, used Hydriot fire ships to inflict heavy losses on the Ottoman fleet. Eventually the fleet of Hydra \u2013 along with those of the other two naval islands of Psara and Spetses \u2013 were able to wrest control of the eastern Aegean Sea from the Ottoman Empire.\nThe Albanian-speaking seamen of Hydra and Spetses provided the core of the Greek fleet and leading members of the Greek government, among them a one wartime president. They in some cases used Albanian with each other to prevent others on their side from reading their correspondence.\nModern history.\nWith the end of the revolution and the creation of the Greek state, the island gradually lost its maritime position in the Eastern Mediterranean, igniting an economic crisis that led to a period of hardship and unemployment. The main reason was that with the creation of the Greek state, Hydra's fleet lost the privileges that the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca and the use of the Russian flag had given it. Another reason was that the traditional families who owned the majority of the fleet failed to foresee the benefits of participating in the steam ship revolution, which significantly cut shipping operational costs through reduced crew and independence of the winds, putting them at a disadvantage vis-\u00e1-vis the new shipping companies of Piraeus, Patras, and Syros. A third reason was that the new conditions made illegal activities such as piracy impossible. Once again, many inhabitants abandoned Hydra, leaving behind their large mansions and beautiful residences, which fell into ruin. The mainstay of the island's economy became fishing for sponge. This brought prosperity again until 1932, when Egypt forbade fishing along its coast.\nBetween 1941 and 1943, during the Axis occupation of Greece during World War II, there was famine on Hydra. It is estimated that some eight per cent of the population died of starvation. By the end of the World War II, the Hydriots were again leaving the island; many of them went abroad.\nOn 21 June 2024, the only pine forest on the island was burned. The fire was caused by fireworks launched from a yacht. The Greek authorities arrested thirteen people in relation to the incident, all of whom were crew members of the yacht.\nTopography and ecology.\nThe dominant geographic features of Hydra are its rocky hillsides, which are bare, and pine-forested valleys with the occasional farmhouse. The island was subject to a modern geologic study by Renz in 1955. Some of the later Permian limestone strata are rich in well-preserved fossils.\nThere are many types of wildflowers, including rare \"spentzes\" or cyclamen and poppies. As well as pine trees, there are cypress and olive trees. Birds species include partridges, quails, and many migratory birds, which are subject to local hunting. Mammals include rabbits, feral cats, and goats.\nAlthough the island's name is derived from ancient springs known to the Ancient Greeks, it is now almost dry. Hydra previously had wells, and three new wells have been found. Today, the island imports its water by boat from the Greek mainland. A desalination plant was opened in 2014. Many local people store winter rainfall in cisterns beneath their houses to use later as drinking water.\nA fire during the 2007 European heat wave destroyed much of the pine forest to the east of Hydra Port. However, the fire left some forest untouched above Kamini and at the west end of Hydra. The forest around Molos, Bisti, and Agios Nikolaos was also unaffected.\nClimate.\nHydra island has a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"BSh\") with an average annual temperature of around 20.4\u00a0\u00b0C and an average annual precipitation of around 390\u00a0mm. Hydra falls in 11a hardiness zone.\nMunicipality of Hydra.\nThe municipality of Hydra includes the following islands:\nThe total area of the municipality is , and its population is 2,070 (2021), most in Hydra town.\nCultural life.\nThe Miaoulia Festival provides a series of cultural events in the last week in June and commemorates the victory of naval battles led by Admiral Miaouli during the Greek War of Independence. The festival culminates with a fictionalised re-enactment at sea of the burning of an Ottoman armada followed by a spectacular firework display.\nhttp:// showcases free theatre and dance productions during the Hydra Performing Arts Festival every summer. Hydrama has hosted drama and dance activities for the local community and international visitors since 2001.\nIn June 2009, the art collector Dakis Joannou opened the Hydra branch of a private art museum, the Deste Foundation, to show the work of established young artists.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s Hydra was the adopted home of a community of expatriate artists that included celebrated Norwegian novelist Axel Jensen, Australian writers Charmian Clift and George Johnston, and Canadian singer-songwriter Leonard Cohen. Cohen wrote several of his better-known songs on Hydra, including \"Bird on the Wire\" and \"So Long, Marianne\", while living with Jensen's ex-wife, Marianne Ihlen. This period was depicted in the 2019 documentary film \"\", and Polly Samson's 2020 novel \"A Theatre for Dreamers\".\nAt Mandraki, Wilhelmina's Art Gallery holds contemporary art exhibitions including works by artists such as Toguo and Bea Bonafini.\nNear Leonard Cohen's house is the Panagiotis Tetsis house which now operates as a museum.\nThe island used to host an annual conference on Rebetiko, a type of Greek urban folk music, in mid-October.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nThe municipality of Hydra is twinned with:"}
{"id": "70996", "revid": "1317002730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70996", "title": "Rolf Hochhuth", "text": "German author and playwright (1931\u20132020)\nRolf Hochhuth (; 1 April 1931 \u2013 13 May 2020) was a German author and playwright, best known for his 1963 drama \"The Deputy\", which insinuates Pope Pius XII's indifference to Hitler's extermination of the Jews, and he remained a controversial figure both for his plays and other public comments and for his 2005 defense of British Holocaust denier David Irving.\nLife and career.\nYouth.\nHochhuth was born in Eschwege, and was descended from a Protestant Hessian middle class family. His father was the owner of a shoe\u2010factory, which became bankrupt in the Depression. During World War II, he was a member of the Deutsches Jungvolk, a junior subdivision of the Hitler Youth; membership in the group had become legally compulsory in 1939. In 1948 he did an apprenticeship as a bookseller. Between 1950 and 1955 he worked in bookshops in Marburg, Kassel and Munich. At the same time he attended university lectures as a guest student and began with early attempts at writing fiction. Between 1955 and 1963 he was an editor at a major West-German publishing house.\n\"The Deputy\".\nHochhuth's drama, \"The Deputy\" (1963), was originally entitled \"Der Stellvertreter. Ein christliches Trauerspiel\" (\"The Deputy, a Christian Tragedy\", translated by Richard and Clara Winston, 1964), the play caused a great deal of controversy because of its criticism of Pope Pius XII's role in World War II. The play was subsequently published in the UK in Robert David MacDonald's translation as \"The Representative\" (1965).\nIts publisher Ed Keating and journalist Warren Hinckle, who themselves considered it \"dramaturgically flawed,\" organized a committee to defend the play as a matter of free speech. In 2007, Ion Mihai Pacepa, a former Romanian spymaster, alleged that the play was part of a KGB campaign to discredit Pius XII. A leading German newspaper opined \"that Hochhuth did not require any KGB assistance for his one-sided presentation of history.\"\nThe unedited version of the play would have run some eight or nine hours. As a result, each production adapted the text in its own way. No audience saw it in its original form. It includes the true story of Kurt Gerstein. Gerstein, a devout Protestant and later a member of the SS, wrote an eyewitness report about the gas chambers and, after the war, died as a POW.\nThe play was first performed in Berlin on 20 February 1963 under the direction of Erwin Piscator. It received its first English production in London by the Royal Shakespeare Company at the Aldwych Theatre in 1963 in a translation by Robert David MacDonald. It was directed by Clifford Williams with Alan Webb or Eric Porter as Pius XII, Alec McCowen as Father Fontana and Ian Richardson. In the United Kingdom it has since been revived at the Citizens Theatre, Glasgow, in 1986, and at the Finborough Theatre, London, in 2006.\nAn abridged version opened on Broadway on 26 February 1964 at the Brooks Atkinson Theatre, with Emlyn Williams as Pius XII and Jeremy Brett as Father Fontana. The play ran for 316 performances.\n\"The Deputy\" was made into a film \"Amen\" by Costa Gavras in 2002, which focused more on the story of Kurt Gerstein.\n\"Soldiers\" and Sikorski crash conspiracy theories.\nHochhuth's next play, \"Soldiers: An Obituary for Geneva\" (1967), claimed that Winston Churchill was responsible for the death of Polish statesman W\u0142adys\u0142aw Sikorski in the 1943 Gibraltar B-24 crash, contradicting the official version of events as an accident; the play implied that Sikorski had been murdered on Churchill's orders. Unbeknownst to Hochhuth, the pilot of the B-24, Eduard Prchal, was still alive and won a libel case against Hochhuth that seriously affected the London theater which staged the play.\nThat aspect of the play has overshadowed Hochhuth's conceit that the play would contribute to a debate on the ethics of the area bombardment of German cities by the Royal Air Force (RAF) during World War II, with particular reference to Operation Gomorrah, the Anglo-American air raid on Hamburg in 1943, and culminating in a fictional debate between Winston Churchill and the pacifist George Bell. The play partially drew on the work of English author David Irving, later known as a Holocaust denier. Irving and Hochhuth remained long-standing friends.\nControversy arose in Britain in 1967 when the intended premiere of the play at the National Theatre Company was cancelled due to an intervention from the theatre's board, despite the support for the play by literary manager Kenneth Tynan and Laurence Olivier, under pressure from Joan Plowright, his wife. At the time of the controversy, Irving was the only figure who gave his \"unequivocal\" support for Hochhuth's allegations towards Churchill; others consulted by Tynan considered it highly improbable. The play was produced shortly afterwards in the West End with John Colicos in the cast. The English translation was again by Robert David MacDonald. In the UK, the play was seen on tour in the early 1990s and was revived most recently at the Finborough Theatre, London, in 2004.\n\"Sommer 14 - A Dance of Death\".\n\"Sommer 14 - A Dance of Death\" had its UK premiere (and world premiere in English) in August 2014 at the Finborough Theatre in London. It was directed by Christopher Loscher and Mike Lees (who also designed) for Cerberus Theatre in a translation and adaptation by Mhairi Grealis\n\"A Love in Germany\" and the Filbinger Affaire.\nIn 1978, his novel \"A Love in Germany\" about an affair between a Polish POW and a German woman in World War II stirred up a debate about the past of Hans Filbinger, Minister-President of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, who had been a Navy lawyer and judge at the end of World War II. The affair culminated in Filbinger's resignation.\nFor \"A Love in Germany\", Hochhuth was awarded the Geschwister-Scholl-Preis in 1980.\nIn 1983 Andrzej Wajda, who would later win an Honorary Oscar for Lifetime Achievement, made the story into the film \"Eine Liebe in Deutschland\".\n\"Alan Turing\".\nHis 1987 drama \"Alan Turing\" featured one of the fathers of modern computer science, who had made significant contributions to breaking German ciphers during World War II. The play also covered Turing's homosexuality, discovery of which resulted in his loss of career, court-ordered chemical castration, depression, and suicide.\nMcKinsey controversy.\nIn 2004, he again caused controversy with the play \"McKinsey is Coming\", which raises the questions of unemployment, social justice and the \"right to work\". A passage in which he put the chairman of the Deutsche Bank in one line with leading businessmen who had been murdered by left-wing terrorists and also with Gessler, the villainous bailiff killed by William Tell, was widely seen as advocating, or at least excusing, violence against leading economic figures. Hochhuth vigorously denied this.\nAnti-Semitism allegations.\nIn March 2005, Hochhuth became embroiled in controversy when, during an interview with the German weekly \"Junge Freiheit\", he defended Holocaust denier David Irving, describing him as a \"pioneer of modern history who has written magnificent books\" and an \"historian to equal someone like Joachim Fest\". When asked about Irving's statement that \"more women died on the back seat of Edward Kennedy's car at Chappaquiddick than ever died in a gas chamber in Auschwitz\", Hochhuth dismissed it as provocative black humour.\nPaul Spiegel, President of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, argued that with these statements Hochhuth himself was denying the Holocaust. After weeks of uproar, Hochhuth issued an apology.\nCasual allegations.\nOn opening of the archives of the Stasi, the East German Security Service, a report emerged according to which Hochhuth had casually made the allegation that Timothy Garton Ash, at that time working on a history dissertation in East Berlin, was a \"British spy\". The book by Garton Ash about how he himself had been surveilled details how such allegations in other cases had major consequences for the involved individuals.\nWorks.\nHochhuth also collaborated with scripts for cinema and television:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70997", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70997", "title": "Miletus", "text": "Ancient Greek city in Asia-Minor\nMiletus () was an influential ancient Greek city on the western coast of Anatolia, near the mouth of the Maeander River in present day Turkey. Renowned in antiquity for its wealth, maritime power, and extensive network of colonies, Miletus was a major center of trade, culture, and innovation from the Bronze Age through the Roman period. The city played a foundational role in the development of early Greek philosophy and science, serving as the home of the Milesian school with thinkers such as Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes.\nMiletus's prosperity was closely linked to its strategic coastal location and the productivity of its surrounding rural hinterland, which supported thriving agriculture and facilitated wide-ranging commercial activity. The city established dozens of colonies around the Mediterranean and Black Sea, significantly shaping the Greek world\u2019s expansion.\nArchaeological investigations have revealed a rich material culture, including the sanctuary of Apollo at Didyma, remnants of the city's distinctive grid plan, and evidence of long-term agricultural and rural management. Throughout its history, Miletus experienced periods of autonomy and foreign rule, serving as a cultural crossroads between Greek, Anatolian, and later Persian and Roman spheres. The city\u2019s enduring legacy is reflected in its contributions to philosophy, urban planning, and the spread of Greek civilization.\nHistory.\nNeolithic.\nThe earliest available archaeological evidence indicates that the islands on which Miletus was originally placed were inhabited by a Neolithic population in 3500\u20133000 BC. Pollen in core samples from Lake Bafa in the Latmus region inland of Miletus suggests that a lightly grazed climax forest prevailed in the Maeander valley, otherwise untenanted. Sparse Neolithic settlements were made at springs, numerous and sometimes geothermal in this karst, rift valley topography. The islands offshore were settled perhaps for their strategic significance at the mouth of the Maeander, a route inland protected by escarpments. The graziers in the valley may have belonged to them, but the location looked to the sea.\nMiddle Bronze Age.\nThe prehistoric archaeology of the Early and Middle Bronze Age portrays a city heavily influenced by society and events elsewhere in the Aegean, rather than inland.\nMinoan period.\nThe earliest Minoan settlement of Miletus dates to 2000 BC. Beginning at about 1900 BC artifacts of the Minoan civilization acquired by trade arrived at the site. For some centuries the location received a strong impulse from that civilization, an archaeological fact that tends to support but not necessarily confirm the founding legend\u2014that is, a population influx from Crete. According to Strabo:Ephorus says: Miletus was first founded and fortified above the sea by Cretans, where the Miletus of olden times is now situated, being settled by Sarpedon, who brought colonists from the Cretan Miletus and named the city after that Miletus, the place formerly being in possession of the Leleges.According to Pausanias, however, Miletus was a friend of Sarpedon from Crete, after whom the city was named. Miletus had a son named Kelados, and the heroon of Kelados has been found at Panormos, a port of Miletus near Didyma.\nThe legends recounted as history by the ancient historians and geographers are perhaps the strongest; the late mythographers have nothing historically significant to relate.\nLate Bronze Age.\nRecorded history at Miletus begins with the records of the Hittite Empire and the Mycenaean records of Pylos and Knossos, in the Late Bronze Age.\nMycenaean period.\nMiletus was a Mycenaean stronghold on the coast of Asia Minor from c.\u20091450 to 1100 BC. In c.\u20091320 BC, the city supported an anti-Hittite rebellion of Uhha-Ziti of nearby Arzawa. Mur\u0161ili ordered his generals Mala-Ziti and Gulla to raid Millawanda, and they proceeded to burn parts of it; damage from LHIIIA found on-site has been associated with this raid. In addition the town was fortified according to a Hittite plan.\nMiletus is then mentioned in the \"Tawagalawa letter\", part of a series including the Manapa-Tarhunta letter and the Milawata letter, all of which are less securely dated. The Tawagalawa letter notes that Milawata had a governor, Atpa, who was under the jurisdiction of \"Ahhiyawa\" (a growing state probably in LHIIIB Mycenaean Greece); and that the town of Atriya was under Milesian jurisdiction. The Manapa-Tarhunta letter also mentions Atpa. Together the two letters tell that the adventurer Piyama-Radu had humiliated Manapa-Tarhunta before Atpa (in addition to other misadventures); a Hittite king then chased Piyama-Radu into Millawanda and, in the Tawagalawa letter, requested Piyama-Radu's extradition to Hatti.\nThe Milawata letter mentions a joint expedition by the Hittite king and a Luwian vassal (probably Kupanta-Kurunta of Mira) against Miletus, and notes that the city (together with Atriya) was now under Hittite control.\nHomer mentions that during the time of the Trojan War, Miletus was an ally of Troy and was city of the Carians, under Nastes and Amphimachus.\nIn the last stage of LHIIIB, the citadel of Bronze Age Pylos counted among its female slaves a \" mi-ra-ti-ja\", Mycenaean Greek for \"women from Miletus\", written in Linear B syllabic script.\nFall of Miletus.\nDuring the collapse of Bronze Age civilization, Miletus was burnt again, presumably by the Sea Peoples.\nDark Age.\nMythographers told that Neleus, a son of Codrus the last King of Athens, had come to Miletus after the \"Return of the Heraclids\" (so, during the Greek Dark Ages). A heroon for Neleus was allegedly located outside of the city wall of Roman Miletus, which probably marks the former city center contemporary to Neleus. The Ionians killed the men of Miletus and married their Carian widows. This is the mythical commencement of the enduring alliance between Athens and Miletus, which played an important role in the subsequent Persian Wars.\nArchaic period.\nThe city of Miletus became one of the twelve Ionian city-states of Asia Minor to form the Ionian League.\nMiletus was one of the cities involved in the Lelantine War of the 8th century BC.\nTies with Megara.\nMiletus is known to have early ties with Megara in Greece. According to some scholars, these two cities had built up a \"colonisation alliance\". In the 7th/6th century BC they acted in accordance with each other.\nBoth cities acted under the leadership and sanction of an Apollo oracle. Megara cooperated with that of Delphi. Miletus had her own oracle of Apollo \"Didymeus Milesios\" in Didyma. Also, there are many parallels in the political organisation of both cities.\nAccording to Pausanias, the Megarians said that their town owed its origin to Car, the son of Phoroneus, who built the city citadel called 'Caria'. This 'Car of Megara' may or may not be one and the same as the 'Car of the Carians', also known as Car (King of Caria).\nIn the late 7th century BC, the tyrant Thrasybulus preserved the independence of Miletus during a 12-year war fought against the Lydian Empire. Thrasybulus was an ally of the famous Corinthian tyrant Periander.\nMiletus was an important center of philosophy and science, producing such men as Thales, Anaximander and Anaximenes. Referring to this period, religious studies professor F. E. Peters described \"pan-deism\" as \"the legacy of the Milesians\". As well as being a philosopher, Thales was also suggested to have initiated the famous grid plan of the city. An archaic orthogonal street system at Miletus has been confirmed by archaeological survey, but this system would not cover the entire urban center of Miletus until the classical period. \nBy the 6th century BC, Miletus had earned a maritime empire with many colonies, mainly scattered around the Black Sea. Miletus and its numerous colonies were culturally tied by, for example, the cult of Aphrodite, a deity associated with seafaring in the cultural context of Miletus. However, its maritime hegemony declined as a result of the Persian occupation in the early fourth century BC, and the vacuum of power was later filled by Athens.\nFirst Achaemenid period.\nWhen Cyrus of Persia defeated Croesus of Lydia in the middle of the 6th century BC, Miletus fell under Persian rule. In 499 BC, Miletus's tyrant Aristagoras became the leader of the Ionian Revolt against the Persians, who, under Darius the Great, quashed this rebellion in the Battle of Lade in 494 BC and punished Miletus by selling all of the women and children into slavery, killing the men, and expelling all of the young men as eunuchs, thereby assuring that no Miletus citizen would ever be born again. A year afterward, Phrynicus produced the tragedy \"The Capture of Miletus\" in Athens. The Athenians fined him for reminding them of their loss. \nClassical Greek period.\nIn 479 BC, the Greeks decisively defeated the Persians on the Greek mainland at the Battle of Plataea, and Miletus was freed from Persian rule. Although many sanctuaries of Miletus had been destroyed by the Persians, the restoration of them was prohibited by the \"Oath of the Ionians\", which aimed to retain the ruins as memorials. However, this oath was only partially observed by the Milesians, with some sanctuaries being restored back to their Archaic appearances. The city's gridlike layout was also constructed across all the area within the city wall, designed by Hippodamus of Miletus. It later became famous and was known as the \"Hippodamian plan\", serving as the basic layout for the new foundations of Hellenistic and Roman cities.\nSecond Achaemenid period.\nIn 387 BC, the Peace of Antalcidas gave the Persian Achaemenid Empire under king Artaxerxes II control of the Greek city-states of Ionia, including Miletus.\nIn 358 BC, Artaxerxes II died and was succeeded by his son Artaxerxes III, who, in 355 BC, forced Athens to conclude a peace, which required its forces to leave Asia Minor (Anatolia) and acknowledge the independence of its rebellious allies.\nMacedonian period.\nIn 334 BC, the Siege of Miletus by the forces of Alexander the Great of Macedonia conquered the city. The conquest of most of the rest of Asia Minor soon followed. In this period, the city reached its greatest extent, occupying within its walls an area of approximately .\nWhen Alexander died in 323 BC, Miletus came under the control of Ptolemy, governor of Caria, and his satrap of Lydia, Asander, who had become autonomous. In 312 BC, Macedonian general Antigonus I Monophthalmus sent Docimus and Medeius to free the city and grant autonomy, restoring the democratic patrimonial regime. In 301 BC, after Antigonus I was killed in the Battle of Ipsus by the coalition of Lysimachus, Cassander, and Seleucus I Nicator, founder of the Seleucid Empire, Miletus maintained good relations with all the successors after Seleucus I Nicator made substantial donations to the sanctuary of Didyma and returned the statue of Apollo that had been stolen by the Persians in 494 BC.\nIn 295 BC, Antigonus I's son Demetrius Poliorcetes was the eponymous archon (stephanephorus) in the city, which allied with Ptolemy I Soter of Egypt, while Lysimachus assumed power in the region, enforcing a strict policy towards the Greek cities by imposing high taxes, forcing Miletus to resort to lending.\nSeleucid period.\nAround 287/286 BC Demetrius Poliorcetes returned, but failed to maintain his possessions and was imprisoned in Syria. Nicocles of Sidon, the commander of Demetrius' fleet surrendered the city. Lysimachus dominated until 281 BC, when he was defeated by the Seleucids at the Battle of Corupedium. In 280/279 BC the Milesians adopted a new chronological system based on the Seleucids.\nEgyptian period.\nIn 279 BC, the city was taken from Seleucid king Antiochus II by Egyptian king Ptolemy II Philadelphus, who donated a large area of land to cement their friendship, and it remained under Egyptian sway until the end of the century.\nAristides of Miletus, founder of the bawdy Miletian school of literature, flourished in the 2nd century BC.\nRoman period.\nAfter an alliance with Rome, in 133 BC the city became part of the province of Asia.\nMiletus benefited from Roman rule and most of the present monuments date to this period.\nThe New Testament mentions Miletus as the site where the Apostle Paul in 57 AD met the elders of the church of Ephesus near the close of his Third Missionary Journey, as recorded in Acts of the Apostles (Acts 20:15\u201338). It is believed that Paul stopped by the Great Harbour Monument and sat on its steps. He might have met the Ephesian elders there and then bade them farewell on the nearby beach. Miletus is also the city where Paul left Trophimus, one of his travelling companions, to recover from an illness (2 Timothy 4:20). Because this cannot be the same visit as Acts 20 (in which Trophimus accompanied Paul all the way to Jerusalem, according to Acts 21:29), Paul must have made at least one additional visit to Miletus, perhaps as late as 65 or 66 AD. Paul's previous successful three-year ministry in nearby Ephesus resulted in the evangelization of the entire province of Asia (see Acts 19:10, 20; 1 Corinthians 16:9). It is safe to assume that at least by the time of the apostle's second visit to Miletus, a fledgling Christian community was established in Miletus.\nIn 262 new city walls were built.\nHowever the harbour was silting up and the economy was in decline. In 538 emperor Justinian rebuilt the walls but it had become a small town.\nByzantine period.\nDuring the Byzantine age the see of Miletus was raised to an archbishopric and later a metropolitan bishopric. The small Byzantine castle called Palation located on the hill beside the city, was built at this time. Miletus was headed by a curator.\nTurkish rule.\nSeljuk Turks conquered the city in the 14th century and used Miletus as a port to trade with Venice.\nIn the 15th century, the Ottomans utilized the city as a harbour during their rule in Anatolia. As the harbour became silted up, the city was abandoned. Due to ancient and subsequent deforestation, overgrazing (mostly by goat herds), erosion and soil degradation, the ruins of the city lie some from the sea with sediments filling the plain and bare hill ridges without soils and trees, a maquis shrubland remaining.\nThe Ilyas Bey Complex from 1403 with its mosque is a Europa Nostra awarded cultural heritage site in Miletus.\nArchaeological excavations.\nThe first excavations in Miletus were conducted by the French archaeologist Olivier Rayet in 1873, followed by the German archaeologists Julius H\u00fclsen and Theodor Wiegand between 1899 and 1931.\nExcavations, however, were interrupted several times by wars and various other events.\nCarl Weickart excavated for a short season in 1938 and again between 1955 and 1957.\nHe was followed by Gerhard Kleiner and then by Wolfgang Muller-Wiener.\nToday, excavations are organized by the Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany.\nOne remarkable artifact recovered from the city during the first excavations of the 19th century, the Market Gate of Miletus, was transported piece by piece to Germany and reassembled. It is currently exhibited at the Pergamon Museum in Berlin. The main collection of artifacts resides in the \"Miletus Museum\" in Didim, Ayd\u0131n, serving since 1973.\nArchaeologists discovered a cave under the city's theatre and believe that it is a \"sacred\" cave which belonged to the cult of Asklepius.\nGeography.\nThe ruins appear on satellite maps at 37\u00b031.8'N 27\u00b016.7'E, about 3\u00a0km north of Balat and 3\u00a0km east of Bat\u0131k\u00f6y in Ayd\u0131n Province, Turkey.\nIn antiquity the city possessed a harbor at the southern entry of a large bay, on which two more of the traditional twelve Ionian cities stood: Priene and Myus. The harbor of Miletus was additionally protected by the nearby small island of Lade. Over the centuries the gulf silted up with alluvium carried by the Meander River. Priene and Myus had lost their harbors by the Roman era, and Miletus itself became an inland town in the early Christian era; all three were abandoned to ruin as their economies were strangled by the lack of access to the sea. There is a Great Harbor Monument where, according to the New Testament account, the apostle Paul stopped on his way back to Jerusalem by boat. He met the Ephesian Elders and then headed out to the beach to bid them farewell, recorded in the book of Acts 20:17-38.\nGeology.\nDuring the Pleistocene epoch the Miletus region was submerged in the Aegean Sea. It subsequently emerged slowly, the sea reaching a low level of about below present level at about 18,000\u00a0BP. The site of Miletus was part of the mainland.\nA gradual rise brought a level of about below present at about 5500\u00a0BP, creating several karst block islands of limestone, the location of the first settlements at Miletus. At about 1500 BC the karst shifted due to small crustal movements and the islands consolidated into a peninsula. Since then the sea has risen 1.75\u00a0m but the peninsula has been surrounded by sediment from the Maeander river and is now land-locked. Sedimentation of the harbor began at about 1000 BC, and by 300 AD Lake Bafa had been created.\nEconomy and Land Use.\nThe economic prosperity of Miletus during the Archaic and Classical periods depended heavily on its rural hinterland. Archaeological surveys and remote sensing analyses have revealed systems of terraces, field boundaries, and enclosures across the Milesian peninsula. These are interpreted as evidence of long-standing agro-pastoral activity, possibly dating as far back as the Archaic period and extending into Late Antiquity.\nHerodotus, describing the tactics of Alyattes against the Milesian countryside, writes: \"He sent his army, marching to the sound of pipes and harps and bass and treble flutes, to invade when the crops in the land were ripe; and whenever he came to the Milesian territory, he neither demolished nor burnt nor tore the doors off the country dwellings, but let them stand unharmed; but he destroyed the trees and the crops of the land, and so returned to where he came from; for as the Milesians had command of the sea, it was of no use for his army to besiege their city. The reason that the Lydian did not destroy the houses was this: that the Milesians might have homes from which to plant and cultivate their land, and that there might be the fruit of their toil for his invading army to lay waste.\"\nThese rural systems supported olive cultivation, animal herding, and small-scale farming. Faunal remains suggest that herding was a major component of the rural economy. Excavations have shown a predominance of goat bones over sheep, possibly reflecting the influence of Cretan animal husbandry techniques adopted in early Miletus.\nStrabo, citing Ephorus, relates: \"Miletus was first founded and fortified by the Cretans on the spot above the sea-coast where at present the ancient Miletus is situated, and that Sarpedon conducted thither settlers from the Miletus in Crete, and gave it the same name; that Leleges were the former occupiers of the country, and that afterwards Neleus built the present city.\"\nFarmsteads, oil presses, cisterns, and possible pastoral installations such as shepherding stations have been identified in the countryside, suggesting a decentralized but productive economy. The northern plains and Maeander valley, both under Milesian control, were especially fertile, providing grain and supporting livestock crucial to the city\u2019s sustenance and export economy.\nIn addition to grain and wool, Miletus likely exported surplus olive oil during favorable years. Archaic Milesian amphorae, widely distributed and characterized by thickened rims, may have been used for oil transport.\nBotanical evidence from the Milesian countryside also reveals the cultivation of figs and lentils. Carbonized fig remains have been found in large numbers, and fig trees were likely common along field margins, significantly influencing the diet in the region.\nBoth literary and archaeological evidence demonstrate that Miletus\u2019 agricultural base was essential for sustaining its urban population, supporting rural life, and providing the surpluses that underpinned Milesian colonization and trade.\nColonies.\nMiletus became known for the great number of colonies it founded. It was considered the greatest Greek metropolis and founded more colonies than any other Greek city. Pliny the Elder (\"Natural History\", 5.31) says that Miletus founded over 90 colonies.\nThe extent of Milesian colonization was shaped by a convergence of economic, social, and political factors. Like other Greek poleis, Miletus faced pressures from population growth and competition for arable land, which drove many citizens to seek new opportunities overseas. Economic motivations included expanding trade networks and accessing new resources, especially along the Black Sea coast, which offered grain, fish, and raw materials not easily available in Ionia. Political factors, such as stasis (internal conflict) and the impact of foreign powers like Lydia and Persia, also contributed, sometimes prompting groups or exiles to establish new settlements abroad. Scholars note that Milesian colonization was characterized both by \u201cproactive\u201d ventures seeking commercial gain and \u201creactive\u201d migrations resulting from disruptions at home.\nThe Black Sea region became a primary focus of Milesian colonial expansion from the seventh century BCE onward. Milesian foundations such as Sinope, Olbia, and Panticapaeum quickly grew into major trading hubs and centers for the exchange of goods between Greeks and indigenous populations. These colonies enabled Miletus to dominate regional commerce in grain, fish, and slaves, contributing significantly to the city\u2019s wealth. The choice of the Black Sea also reflected both strategies to exploit new resources and responses to population and political pressures in Ionia.\nSinope, located on the southern coast of the Black Sea, was one of the earliest and most prosperous Milesian colonies, traditionally founded in the late seventh century BCE.\nOlbia, on the northwestern Black Sea coast, likewise became a major economic center, especially for grain exports to the Greek world.\nMilesian colonization not only expanded the city\u2019s economic and political reach, but also established enduring cultural connections across the Mediterranean and Black Sea, with many settlements continuing to thrive and influence local societies for centuries.\nWhile some Milesian colonies ultimately declined or were absorbed by neighboring powers, many\u2014such as Sinope and Olbia\u2014remained prominent centers of trade and Hellenic culture well into the Hellenistic and Roman periods. The archaeological remains and historical records of these colonies continue to shed light on the reach and legacy of Milesian influence throughout antiquity.\nSome colonies founded include:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhilosophy.\nMiletus played a foundational role in the origins of Western philosophical inquiry. In the 6th century BCE, thinkers such as Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes\u2014collectively known as the Milesian school\u2014began to investigate the material basis of the cosmos through rational, systematic inquiry rather than mythological narrative.\nAristotle records that, \u201cThales, the founder of this kind of philosophy, stated it to be water. (This is why he declared that the earth rests on water.) \u2026water is the principle of the nature of moist things.\u201d Aristotle further notes, \u201cSome say [the earth] rests on water. This is the oldest account that we have inherited, and they say that Thales of Miletus said this. It rests because it floats like wood or some other such thing\u2026for nothing is by nature such as to rest on air, but on water.\u201d\nThales\u2019 student Anaximander introduced the concept of the apeiron (the infinite or indefinite) as a more abstract source of existence. According to Aristotle (via Simplicius): \u201cAnaximander\u2026 said that the apeiron was the arkh\u0113 and element of things that are, and he was the first to introduce this name for the arkh\u0113. \u2026He says that the arkh\u0113 is neither water nor any of the other things called elements, but some other nature which is apeiron, out of which come to be all the heavens and the worlds in them. The things that are perish into the things from which they come to be, according to necessity, for they pay penalty and retribution to each other for their injustice in accordance with the ordering of time, as he says in rather poetical language.\u201d Aristotle also states that for Anaximander, the apeiron \u201cis deathless and indestructible\u2026for it is divine.\u201d\nAnaximenes, in turn, posited air (\"a\u0113r\") as the basic element, suggesting it could transform into other forms of matter through rarefaction and condensation: \u201cAnaximenes\u2026 declared that air is the underlying principle and that all the rest come to be from it by rarefaction and condensation. Fire, when air is rarefied; wind, then cloud, when condensed; water, then earth, then stones, and the rest come into being from these.\u201d\nThe emergence of this rational mode of thinking was likely influenced by Miletus\u2019s cosmopolitanism and its contact with the ancient cultures of the Near East. These intellectual foundations laid the groundwork for later developments in Greek philosophy and science.\nReligion and the Sacred Way.\nMiletus had several significant religious institutions, the most important of which was the sanctuary of Apollo at Didyma, located roughly 18 kilometers south of the city. The sanctuary was connected to the city by a ceremonial road known as the Sacred Way, which served as a route for ritual processions and pilgrimage festivals.\nDidyma was renowned for its oracle, second in prestige only to that of Delphi. Prophecies were delivered by a priestess within a richly adorned temple complex. Archaeological discoveries along the Sacred Way have uncovered rows of consecrated statues and inscriptions, often commissioned by Milesian elites and foreign notables.\nThe sanctuary was a hub for both religion and politics, reinforcing Miletus\u2019 influence within Ionia and the wider Aegean. Religious practices at Didyma, including oracular consultation and ritual dedication, reflected and shaped the city\u2019s cultural identity and its connections with other Ionian communities.\nApollo Delphinion.\nThe Delphinion, sanctuary of Apollo Delphinios, was one of the most important civic\u2013religious institutions of ancient Miletus. Constructed along the eastern edge of the Lions\u2019 Harbour, the sanctuary originated in the 6th century BCE and remained in use through the Roman period. Its Archaic form was destroyed in the Persian sack of 494 BCE but was rebuilt swiftly, highlighting its importance in Milesian political and ritual life.\nThe sanctuary functioned both as a religious center and a civic archive. Inscriptions recording citizenship scrutiny, ephebic oaths, lists of eponymous officials, decrees, and treaties attest to its administrative role. Ritual duties of the Molpoi, the guild responsible for musical and ceremonial functions, were administered from the site. Their responsibilities included offerings at designated stations along the Sacred Way, the ca. 18 km processional route leading from the Delphinion to the oracle of Apollo at Didyma. The sanctuary\u2019s shoreline placement, the presence of Kosmoi magistrates (a Cretan institutional title), and cultic implements described in inscriptions reflect its Cretan-linked origins within Milesian identity formation.\nArchitecturally, the Delphinion consisted of a large rectangular peristyle courtyard lined with colonnades and enclosed by exterior masonry walls, partially roofed with fired-clay imbrex and tegula tiles. Excavation reports and inscriptions indicate the presence of internal altars, statue bases, and cult installations distributed across the courtyard. The complex measured approximately 60 \u00d7 50 m. A published plan by the Foundation of the Hellenic World documents the arrangement of columns, entrances, and interior monuments.\nModern archaeological understanding of the Delphinion derives primarily from late 19th-century French excavations and early 20th-century German investigations. Contemporary digital reconstructions, informed by these excavation plans and inscriptions, illustrate the sanctuary\u2019s architectural organization and its role as a central institution in Milesian civic and ritual practices.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences and sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "70998", "revid": "1316362473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70998", "title": "Ni\u00f0avellir", "text": "Home of the Dwarves in Norse Mythology\nIn Norse cosmology, Ni\u00f0avellir (anglic. as Nidavellir; probable compound of O.N. \"Ni\u00f0\" \u2013 \"new moon\", \"the wane of the moon\" (perhaps related to \"ni\u00f0r\" \u2013 \"down\") + \"Vellir\" (pl. of \"v\u00f6llr\") \u2013 \"fields\": \"Dark Fields\", \"Downward Fields\"), also called Myrkheimr (\"Myrkheimr\", O.N. compd. of \"myrkr\" \u2013 \"darkness\" + \"heimr\" \u2013 \"home\": \"the world of darkness\", \"Dark Abode\"), is the home of the Dwarves.\n\"V\u00f6lusp\u00e1\".\nIt is mentioned in the V\u00f6lusp\u00e1:\n\"St\u00f3\u00f0 fyr nor\u00f0an, / \u00e1 Ni\u00f0av\u00f6llom / salr \u00far gulli / Sindra \u00e6ttar\"\n(Stood to the north, a dark field, Halls of gold, Sindri's Clan\").\nOne interpretation of the above verse would read like this:\nBefore you reach the north (Niflheim being the world furthest to the north), A dark dwelling stands (The dwarf world), In halls of gold, Sindri's bloodline lives.\nSindri was a famous dwarf. And \u00e6ttar means bloodline, or in this case most likely kin or tribe.\nNi\u00f0avellir has often been interpreted as one of the Nine Worlds of Norse legend. Nidavellir is also referred to as Svartalfheim, and was home to dwarfs or 'Dark elves' called D\u00f6kk\u00e1lfar.\nThe dwarfs' world is mentioned in the \"Prose Edda\" by Snorri Sturluson as \"Svart\u00e1lfaheimr\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71003", "revid": "56299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71003", "title": "Eddas", "text": ""}
{"id": "71004", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71004", "title": "Crohn's Disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "71007", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71007", "title": "Maui (island)", "text": ""}
{"id": "71009", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71009", "title": "Ausi\u00e0s March", "text": "Valencian poet and knight\nAusi\u00e0s March (; 1400\u00a0\u2013 March 3, 1459) was a Valencian poet and knight from Gandia, Valencia. He is considered one of the most important poets of the \"Golden Century\" (\"Segle d'or\") of Catalan literature.\nBiography.\nNot much is known of March's life. He was born in approximately 1400 to a Valencian noble family. His father, Pere March, was himself a poet and served at the court of the younger brother of King Alfonso IV, Peter. His uncle, Jaume March II, was also a poet. March was one of the two children of Pere's second wife, Lionor of Ripoll; he had a younger sister, Peirona.\nIn 1413, the still-young March became head of his family\u2014part of the Valencian petty nobility\u2014upon the death of his father. From a very young age he took part in the expeditions that King Alfons el Magn\u00e0nim carried out in the Mediterranean. After returning from these expeditions in 1427, he settled in Gandia. After his return, he would never again leave the region where he was born. March was twice married: first to Isabel Martorell (sister of the writer Joanot Martorell), and later to Joana Escorna.\nIn 1450, he moved from Gandia to Valencia. It was there that he died on March 3, 1459. While March himself was buried in his family's chapel at the Valencia Cathedral, his two wives and family are buried in the Monastery of Sant Jeroni de Cotalba. Five illegitimate children but no legitimate heirs have been attributed to him.\nPoetry.\nInheriting an easy fortune from his father, Pere March\u2014the treasurer to the Duke of Gandia\u2014and enjoying the powerful patronage of Charles of Viana, prince of Aragon, March was able to devote himself to poetical composition. He was an undisguised follower of Petrarch, carrying the imitation to such a point that he addressed his \"Cants d'amor\" (love songs) to a lady whom he professed to have seen first in church on Good Friday. So far as the difference of language allows, he reproduced the rhythmical cadences of his model, but this should be qualified as the medieval tradition of \"locus communis\" requested this following. This is something Petrarch himself did and it need not to be stressed. March is a very original and idiosyncratic poet. In the \"Cants de mort\" (death hymns) he touches a note of brooding sentiment peculiar to himself. It can be said that he developed Petrarch's rhetoric and used it for more inner psychological meditations, as other major poets such a Cam\u00f5es and Shakespeare would.\nMarch was one of the first poets to use the local vernacular, Valencian, instead of the troubadour language, Occitan. \nHis poems are marked by obscurity, a sometimes monotonous morbidity, and a conflicting battle between desire and morality, achieved at its apex in the great \"Cant Spiritual\". \nHe was fully entitled to the supremacy which he enjoyed among his contemporaries, and the success of his innovation no doubt encouraged Bosc\u00e1n to introduce the Italian metres into Castilian.\nHis verses were transmitted in manuscript tradition until its first print edition in Valencian in 1543, but they had already become known through the Spanish translation in 1539.\nMarch's poetry has been set to music by Raimon, Joan Brudieu and other composers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71011", "revid": "1300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71011", "title": "Tutenkhamen", "text": ""}
{"id": "71012", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71012", "title": "King Tut", "text": ""}
{"id": "71015", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71015", "title": "Gladstone, Oregon", "text": "Gladstone is a city located in Clackamas County, Oregon, United States. The population was 12,017 at the 2020 United States census. Gladstone is an approximately suburban community, Located south of Portland at the confluence of the Clackamas and Willamette rivers.\nGladstone has held several important cultural and social events, hosting both the inaugural Clackamas County Fair and the Oregon State Fair, before both were moved to more spacious locations. \nBoth Secretary of State William Jennings Bryan and presidential candidate Theodore Roosevelt gave public speeches in the city.\nHistory.\nClackamas Indians.\nPrior to European settlement, there were several Native American groups living in the area that was to become Gladstone.\nIn 1804, President Thomas Jefferson commissioned the Lewis and Clark Expedition to explore the Louisiana Territory and beyond. Although the expedition passed only near the Gladstone \u2013 Oregon City locality on their way to and from the Pacific Ocean, via the Columbia River, natives such as the Kalapuya and the Clackamas people told them about the area.\nIn the subsequent years, successive waves of explorers and traders would introduce epidemics of cholera and smallpox, which would take a heavy toll on the native peoples and contributed to a substantial reduction in population.\nAs Oregon City was founded and European settlers began moving to the area, they petitioned their governments to remove the local natives from the land, so that the settlers could use it for farming and housing. The government allocated a reservation for the natives and re-appropriated Gladstone for redevelopment.\n As of 2014[ [update]], the only extant remnant of the bygone natives is a large maple tree called the \"Pow Wow Tree\", which is listed as an Oregon Heritage Tree. The tree still stands at Clackamas Boulevard, and is said to have marked the place where the different native tribes, mainly Clackamas and Multnomahs, met to make trading agreements, settle community affairs, and conduct wedding ceremonies. In 1860, the Pow-Wow Tree was the location set for the first Clackamas County Fair. The following year, it was used as a parade ring for the first Oregon State Fair and marked the entrance. In 1937, the tree itself was celebrated with the Gladstone Pow-Wow Festival.\nEarly homesteaders.\nThe earliest homesteads in the area were recipients of the Donation Land Claim Act. The Cason and the Rinearson families were the first settlers to receive their donation land claims in Gladstone. Peter M. Rinearson and his family owned the land between Jennings Lodge and the Clackamas River, and between the Willamette River and Portland Avenue. Fendal Cason, who came to Oregon in 1843 and would go on to serve on in the Oregon Territorial Legislature, owned an area of equal size east of Portland Avenue.\nUnsuccessful early townships.\nBefore Gladstone was formally founded, several small settlements were established in its vicinity. However, due to various natural disasters, such as fires and floods, few survived to become incorporated cities of today.\nOne such community was Linn City (originally named \"Robin's Nest\"). Settled in 1843 by Robert Moore, Robert himself built four flour and lumber mills along the banks of the Willamette. Warehouses, homes, and mills were steadily added until 1861, when a fire destroyed several of the buildings. Efforts at rebuilding the small town entirely ceased when the Great Flood of 1862 struck, wiping out the remaining buildings.\nAnother such ill-fated settlement was Canemah, located near the Willamette Falls. Canemah prospered until 1861, when the same great flood swept most of the town over the falls. Even after reconstruction, much of the town's importance to river commerce ended in 1873 with completion of the Willamette Falls Locks. Ships no longer needed to dock and unload goods and passengers for portage around the falls. The remaining town officially survived until 1929, when it was annexed to Oregon City.\nFounding.\nGladstone was founded by Judge Harvey Cross in 1889, and formally incorporated on January 10, 1911. It was named after the UK Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone.\nJudge Cross laid out the city's first streets. Cross' home was built in the late 1840s by Fendal Cason, and Cross purchased it in 1862. The Cason-Cross House later became Cochran Mortuary. Currently, Mr. Rooter, a plumbing service, occupies the space. There is also a small park named after Cross, located at the same place one of the Indian tribes made its camp.\nChautauqua movement.\nIn 1894, the Chautauqua movement made its way to Gladstone. Judge Cross established a fifty-year lease of Gladstone Park for this event after he was convinced by Oregon City author Eva Emery Dye that doing so would be a boon to the city and its people. Beginning on July 24\u201326, 1894, the newly formed Willamette Valley Chautauqua Association held an annual summer assembly that offered performances, lectures, and concerts. This event would recur annually, until Gladstone's Chautauqua Park grew to be the third-largest permanent Chautauqua assembly park in the United States.\nIn 1896, William Jennings Bryan drew a crowd of 6,000 to Gladstone's then Chautauqua park to hear him give his popular lecture \"The Prince of Peace\", which stressed that Christian theology, through both individual and group morality, was a solid foundation for peace and equality.\nWith the advent of radio, improved transportation and the appearance of traveling vaudeville acts in Portland, attendance at the Chautauqua began to dwindle. In 1927, the Willamette Valley Chautauqua Association went bankrupt. Judge Cross died on August 7, 1927, and shortly thereafter, Gladstone Park, including its buildings and Chautauqua Lake, were sold to the Western Oregon Conference of Seventh-day Adventists.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an official area of .\nAdjacent communities.\nThe city of Gladstone is immediately bordered by the following communities, listed in descending order of population:\nAlthough the above cities are generally considered part of the much larger Portland metropolitan area, Gladstone, Oregon City, West Linn, and Milwaukie each possess the population and production of a micropolis in their own right and this relatively dense sub-region contains a combined population exceeding 100,000 people.\nDespite Gladstone's proximity to the city of Milwaukie, at no point do the two share political boundaries.\nMajor thoroughfares and street grid.\nBeing bordered by rivers on two sides, there are only two primary thoroughfares to and from the city. Interstate 205 runs north\u2013south along the eastern edge of the city, while McLoughlin Boulevard (Oregon Route 99E) runs north\u2013south through the western side.\nTaken at the suggestion of surveyor Sidney Smyth, Judge Harvey Cross decided to name a number of Gladstone streets after American colleges (e.g., University of California, Berkeley, Cornell University) and a number of United Kingdom dukes, earls, and universities (e.g., University of Exeter, Earl of Dartmouth, Earl of Clarendon). Portland Avenue, Gladstone's main street, is the only divergence from this naming convention. Named for the 1893 Interurban Electric Streetcar line that once traversed the street, it once transported passengers between Gladstone and Portland.\nClimate.\nThe annual average temperature for Gladstone is , while the annual average precipitation is . According to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Gladstone has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate, abbreviated \"Csb\" on climate maps.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 11,497 people, 4,540 households, and 3,009 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,779 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 89.2% White, 0.9% African American, 1.0% Native American, 1.6% Asian, 0.4% Pacific Islander, 3.4% from other races, and 3.6% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.7% of the population.\nArts and culture.\nThe annual Gladstone Community Festival and parade, held the first weekend of August, commemorates Gladstone's former status as a popular Chautauqua destination. The festival is held in Max Patterson Memorial City Park. KRYP is a Spanish-language FM radio station that broadcasts from the city.\nPublic services.\nPublic safety and quality of life.\nSome polling data suggests that Gladstone citizens are satisfied with city services they receive and a large majority consider Gladstone a particularly \"good/excellent\" place to live. Perhaps reflecting this support, the police, fire, and medical services levy renewal measures were overwhelmingly approved by voters in November 2012.\nSchools.\nGladstone is served by the Gladstone School District, which includes John Wetten Elementary School, Kraxberger Middle School, and Gladstone High School. In 2006, a bond was passed to allow approximately $40\u00a0million worth of construction work on the three schools. The majority (approx. $26\u00a0million) of the money was applied towards a remodel of the high school. The district later refinanced the bond, saving taxpayers over 5 percent on its total ($805,040), with savings to begin in the 2024 tax year.\nLibrary.\nThe county operates a library in Gladstone that is part of the Library Information Network of Clackamas County. In 2012, the city council approved plans for a new $10\u00a0million library, but ballot measures backed by the group Save Gladstone blocked the financing and construction pending specific voter approval. The city then placed a new measure on the November 2014 ballot for a $6.4\u00a0million option. Plans were put on hold when supply shortages during the COVID-19 pandemic increased the cost of materials beyond budget constraints.\nParks.\nDespite its relatively small geographic size, the City of Gladstone recognizes 14 parks and recreational areas. Parks include: Abernethy Lane Trail, Cross Park, Dahl Beach, Dierickx Field, Gladstone Nature Park, Glen Echo Wetland, High Rocks Park, Max Patterson Memorial City Park, Meldrum Bar Park (controversial for being the only city park in the region to impose a day use fee.), Nick Shannon Park, Ridgegate Tracts, Robin Hood Park, Salty Acres Wetlands and Stocker Park.\nPublic transit.\nGladstone is within the TriMet transportation district, and transit service in the city is provided by TriMet bus routes 32-Oatfield, 33-McLoughlin/King Road, 34-Linwood/River Road, and 79-Clackamas/Oregon City, as well as the 99-Macadam/McLoughlin rush-hour express route.\nNotable people.\nAmerican labor activist Liz Shuler grew up in Gladstone. She went on to become Secretary-Treasurer of the AFL\u2013CIO. She is the first woman and (as of 2009) the youngest person to hold the position of Secretary-Treasurer. Actor Clifton James grew up in the city and died there as well. James had roles in the James Bond films \"Live and Let Die\" (1973) and \"The Man with the Golden Gun\" (1974), as well as \"Cool Hand Luke\" (1967).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71016", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71016", "title": "Vasteras", "text": ""}
{"id": "71018", "revid": "3072399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71018", "title": "Vibrational spectroscopy", "text": ""}
{"id": "71019", "revid": "49821786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71019", "title": "ARA General Belgrano", "text": "Argentine cruiser sunk during the Falklands War\nARA \"General Belgrano\" (C-4) was an Argentine Navy light cruiser in service from 1951 until 1982. Originally commissioned by the U.S. Navy as , she saw action in the Pacific theatre of World War II before being sold to Argentina. The vessel was the second to have been named after the Argentine founding father Manuel Belgrano (1770\u20131820). The first vessel was a 7,069-ton armoured cruiser completed in 1896.\nShe was sunk on 2 May 1982 during the Falklands War by the Royal Navy submarine with the loss of 323 lives. Losses from \"General Belgrano\" totalled just under half of Argentine military deaths in the war.\nShe is the only ship to have been sunk during military operations by a nuclear-powered submarine and the second sunk in action by any type of submarine since World War II (the first being the Indian frigate , which was sunk by the Pakistani submarine during the 1971 Indo-Pakistani War).\nEarly career.\nThe warship was built as , the sixth ship of the design, in Camden, New Jersey, by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation starting in 1935, and launched in March 1938. She survived the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 undamaged, and went on to earn nine battle stars for World War II service. At the end of the war, she was placed in reserve at Philadelphia on 28 February 1946, decommissioned on 3 July that year and remained laid up at Philadelphia.\n\"Phoenix\" was sold to Argentina in October 1951 and renamed \"17 de Octubre\" after the \"Loyalty day\", an important symbolic date for the political party of president Juan Per\u00f3n. Sold with her was another of her class, the , renamed , which was withdrawn in 1977.\n\"17 de Octubre\" was one of the main naval units that joined the 1955 coup which overthrew Per\u00f3n, and was afterwards renamed \"General Belgrano\" after Manuel Belgrano, a lawyer who had founded the \"Escuela de N\u00e1utica\" (School of Navigation) in 1799 and with the rank of general fought for Argentine independence from 1811 to 1819. \"General Belgrano\" accidentally rammed her sister ship \"Nueve de Julio\" on exercises in 1956, causing damage to both. \"General Belgrano\" was outfitted with the Sea Cat anti-aircraft missile system between 1967 and 1968.\nSinking.\nOn 12 April 1982, following the 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands, the United Kingdom declared a Maritime Exclusion Zone (MEZ) around the Falkland Islands within which any Argentine warship or naval auxiliary entering the MEZ might be attacked by British forces. On 23 April, the British Government clarified in a message that was passed via the Swiss Embassy in Buenos Aires to the Argentine government that any Argentine ship or aircraft that was considered to pose a threat to British forces would be attacked.\nOn 30 April this was upgraded to the total exclusion zone, within which any sea vessel or aircraft from any country entering the zone might be fired upon without further warning. The zone was stated to be \"...without prejudice to the right of the United Kingdom to take whatever additional measures may be needed in exercise of its right of self-defence, under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.\" The concept of a total exclusion zone was a novelty in maritime law; the Law of the Sea Convention had no provision for such an instrument. Its purpose seems to have been to increase the time available to ascertain whether any vessel in the zone was hostile or not. Regardless of the uncertainty of the zone's legal status, it was widely respected by the shipping of neutral nations.\nThe Argentine military junta began to reinforce the islands in late April when it was realised that the British Task Force was heading south. As part of these movements, Argentine naval units were ordered to take positions around the islands. Two Task Groups designated 79.1, which included the aircraft carrier plus two Type 42 destroyers, and 79.2, which included three Exocet missile-armed s, sailed to the north. \"General Belgrano\" had left Ushuaia in Tierra del Fuego on 26 April. Two destroyers, ARA \"Piedra Buena\" and ARA \"Hip\u00f3lito Bouchard\" (also ex-USN vessels) were detached from Task Group 79.2 and together with the tanker YPF \"Puerto Rosales\", joined \"General Belgrano\" to form Task Group 79.3.\nBy 29 April, the ships were patrolling the Burdwood Bank, south of the islands. On 30 April, \"General Belgrano\" was detected by the British nuclear-powered hunter-killer submarine . The submarine approached over the following day. On 1 May 1982, Admiral Juan Lombardo ordered all Argentine naval units to seek out the British task force around the Falklands and launch a \"massive attack\" the following day. \"General Belgrano\", which was outside and to the south-west of the exclusion zone, was ordered south-east.\nLombardo's signal was intercepted by British Intelligence. As a result, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and her War Cabinet, meeting at Chequers the following day, agreed to a request from Admiral Terence Lewin, the Chief of the Defence Staff, to alter the rules of engagement and allow an attack on \"General Belgrano\" outside the exclusion zone. Although the group was outside the British-declared total exclusion zone of 370\u00a0km (200 nautical miles) radius from the islands, the British decided that it was a threat. After consultation at Cabinet level, Thatcher agreed that Commander Chris Wreford-Brown should attack \"General Belgrano\".\nAt 14:57 (Falkland Islands Time) on 2 May, \"Conqueror\" fired three 21-inch Mk 8 mod 4 torpedoes (conventional, non-guided, torpedoes in service from 1927), each with an 805-pound (363\u00a0kg) Torpex warhead. While \"Conqueror\" was also equipped with the newer Mark 24 Tigerfish homing torpedo, there were doubts about its reliability. Initial reports from Argentina claimed that \"Conqueror\" fired two Tigerfish torpedoes on \"General Belgrano\". Two of the three torpedoes hit \"General Belgrano\". According to the Argentine government, \"General Belgrano\"'s position was .\nOne of the torpedoes struck aft of the bow, outside the area protected by either the ship's side armour or the internal anti-torpedo bulge. This blew off the ship's bow, but the internal torpedo bulkheads held and the forward powder magazine for the 40\u00a0mm gun did not detonate. It is believed that none of the ship's company were in that part of the ship at the time of the explosion.\nThe second torpedo struck about three-quarters of the way along the ship, just outside the rear limit of the side armour plating. The torpedo punched through the side of the ship before exploding in the aft machine room. The explosion tore upward through two messes and a relaxation area called \"the Soda Fountain\" before finally ripping a hole in the main deck. Later reports put the number of deaths in the area around the explosion at 275 men. After the explosion, the ship rapidly filled with smoke. The explosion also damaged \"General Belgrano\"'s electrical power system, preventing her from putting out a radio distress call. Though the forward bulkheads held, water was rushing in through the hole created by the second torpedo and could not be pumped out because of the electrical power failure. In addition, although the ship should have been \"at action stations\", she was sailing with the water-tight doors open.\nThe ship began to list to port and to sink towards the bow. Twenty minutes after the attack, at 16:24, Captain Bonzo ordered the crew to abandon ship. Inflatable life rafts were deployed, and the evacuation began without panic.\nThe two escort ships were unaware of what was happening to \"General Belgrano\", as they were out of touch with her in the gloom and had not seen the distress rockets or lamp signals. Adding to the confusion, the crew of \"Bouchard\" felt an impact that was possibly the third torpedo striking at the end of its run (an examination of the ship later showed an impact mark consistent with a torpedo). The two ships continued on their course westward. By the time the ships realised that something had happened to \"General Belgrano\", it was already dark and the weather had worsened, scattering the life rafts.\nArgentine and Chilean ships rescued 772 men from 3 to 5 May. In total, 323 were killed in the attack: 321 members of the crew and two civilians who were on board at the time.\nNaval outcome.\nFollowing the loss of \"General Belgrano\", the Argentine fleet returned to its bases and played no major role in the rest of the conflict. British nuclear submarines continued to operate in the sea areas between Argentina and the Falkland Islands, gathering intelligence, providing early warning of air raids and effectively imposing sea denial. With the withdrawal of the aircraft carrier, all Argentine aircraft had to operate from land bases at the limit of their range. The minimal role of the Navy in the rest of the campaign led to a considerable loss of credibility and influence within the Junta.\nControversy over the sinking.\nThe legality of the sinking of \"General Belgrano\" has been disputed due to disagreement on the exact nature of the Maritime Exclusion Zone (MEZ) and whether \"General Belgrano\" had been returning to port at the time of the sinking. Through a message passed via the Swiss Embassy in Buenos Aires to the Argentine government nine days before the sinking, the UK made clear that it no longer considered the 200 mile exclusion zone as the limit of its military action. On 1 May 1982, Admiral Juan Lombardo ordered all Argentine naval units to seek out the British task force around the Falklands and launch a \"massive attack\" the following day.\nIn 2003, the ship's captain Hector Bonzo confirmed that \"General Belgrano\" had actually been manoeuvering, not \"sailing away\" from the exclusion zone. Captain Bonzo stated that any suggestion that HMS \"Conqueror\"'s actions were a \"betrayal\" was utterly wrong; rather, the submarine carried out its duties according to the accepted rules of war. In an interview two years before his death in 2009, he further stated that: \"It was absolutely not a war crime. It was an act of war, lamentably legal.\"\nThe sinking became a \"cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre\" for British anti-war campaigners such as Labour MP Tam Dalyell. Early reports suggested that more than 1,000 Argentine sailors might have been killed in the sinking; it was around a third of that number.\nThe sinking occurred 14 hours after President of Peru Fernando Bela\u00fande proposed a comprehensive peace plan and called for regional unity, although Margaret Thatcher and diplomats in London did not see this document until after the sinking of \"General Belgrano\". Diplomatic efforts to that point had failed completely. After the sinking, Argentina rejected the plan but the UK indicated its acceptance on 5 May. The news was subsequently dominated by military action and the British continued to offer ceasefire terms until 1 June that were rejected by the Junta.\nArgentine response.\nOn 3 May 1982, Argentina's Chancellery released a statement in the name of the Argentinian government that read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Government of Argentina, broadening what was reported by the Joint Staff in its statement No. 15, states:\nLegal situation.\nNeither the United Kingdom nor Argentina declared war during the conflict. Combat was confined to the Falkland Islands, South Georgia, and the surrounding area. \"General Belgrano\" was sunk outside the total exclusion zone around the Falklands, delimited by the UK. Through a message passed via the Swiss Embassy in Buenos Aires to the Argentine government on 23 April, the UK had made clear that it no longer considered the 200-mile (370\u00a0km) exclusion zone as the limit of its military action. The message read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In announcing the establishment of a Maritime Exclusion Zone around the Falkland Islands, Her Majesty's Government made it clear that this measure was without prejudice to the right of the United Kingdom to take whatever additional measures may be needed in the exercise of its right of self-defence under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. In this connection Her Majesty's Government now wishes to make clear that any approach on the part of Argentine warships, including submarines, naval auxiliaries or military aircraft, which could amount to a threat to interfere with the mission of British Forces in the South Atlantic will encounter the appropriate response. All Argentine aircraft, including civil aircraft engaged in surveillance of these British forces, will be regarded as hostile and are liable to be dealt with accordingly.\nInterviews conducted by Martin Middlebrook for his book \"Argentine Fight for the Falklands\" indicated that Argentine naval officers understood that the intent of the message was to indicate that any ships operating near the exclusion zone could be attacked. Argentine Rear Admiral Allara, who was in charge of the task force of which \"General Belgrano\" was part, said: \"After that message of 23 April, the entire South Atlantic was an operational theatre for both sides. We, as professionals, said it was just too bad that we lost the \"Belgrano\"\". Captain Bonzo also told Middlebrook that he was not angry about the attack on his ship and that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAdmiral Sandy Woodward, who commanded the British task force during the war, wrote in his 1997 book \"One Hundred Days\" that HMS \"Conqueror\" received a signal changing the rules of engagement and that \"The change said quite clearly he may now attack the Belgrano, outside the TEZ\".\nLater political controversy.\nSome details of the action were leaked to a British Member of Parliament, Tam Dalyell, in 1985 by the senior civil servant Clive Ponting, resulting in the unsuccessful prosecution of the latter under the Official Secrets Act 1911. According to the documents \" General Belgrano\" was sailing away from the exclusion zone when she was attacked and sunk.\nIn May 1983, Thatcher appeared on \"Nationwide\", a live television programme on BBC1, where a teacher, Diana Gould, questioned her about the sinking, saying that the ship was already west of the Falklands and heading towards the Argentine mainland to the west. Gould also said that the Peruvian peace proposal must have reached London in the 14 hours between its publication and the sinking of \"General Belgrano\", and the escalation of the war could have thus been prevented. In the emotional exchange that followed, Thatcher answered that the vessel was a threat to British ships and lives and denied that the peace proposal had reached her. She added that \"One day, all of the facts, in about 30 years time, will be published\", apparently a reference to a classified report prepared by intelligence officer Major David Thorp for Thatcher after the incident.\nAfter the programme, Thatcher's husband Denis lashed out at its producer in the entertainment suite, saying that his wife had been \"stitched up by bloody BBC poofs and Trots\". Thatcher herself commented during the interview: \"I think it could only be in Britain that a prime minister was accused of sinking an enemy ship that was a danger to our navy, when my main motive was to protect the boys in our navy.\"\nAccording to the British historian Sir Lawrence Freedman, neither Thatcher nor the Cabinet was aware of \"General Belgrano\"'s change of course before the cruiser was attacked. In his book \"One Hundred Days\", Admiral Woodward claims that \"General Belgrano\" was part of the southern part of a pincer movement aimed at the task force, and had to be sunk quickly. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The speed and direction of an enemy ship can be irrelevant, because both can change quickly. What counts is his position, his capability and what I believe to be his intention.\n\"Gotcha\" headline.\nOn 4 May, the British tabloid newspaper \"The Sun\" ran the controversial headline \"Gotcha\" in reference to the sinking of \"General Belgrano\". Kelvin MacKenzie, the newspaper's editor, was reported to have used an impromptu exclamation by \"The Sun\"'s features editor, Wendy Henry, as the inspiration for the headline. The accompanying text reported that \"General Belgrano\" had only been hit and damaged and not sunk, while a \"gunboat\" (actually the armed tug ARA \"Alf\u00e9rez Sobral\") had sunk, when in fact the reverse was the case. After early editions went to press, further reports suggested a major loss of life, and Mackenzie toned down the headline to read \"Did 1,200 Argies drown?\" in later editions.\nFew readers in the UK saw the headline at first hand as it was only used on copies of the first northern editions, while southern editions and later editions in the North carried the toned-down headline, but the \"Gotcha\" headline was widely publicised.\nAftermath.\nIn August 1994, an official Argentine Defence Ministry report written by armed forces auditor Eugenio Miari was released which described the sinking of \"General Belgrano\" as \"a legal act of war\", explaining that \"acts of war can be carried out in all of the enemy's territory\" and \"they can also take place in those areas over which no state can claim sovereignty, in international waters\". Argentinian veterans were said to be dismayed at the conclusion about \"General Belgrano\", and the President of the Federation of Argentine War Veterans Luis Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez hoped to produce more witnesses to show that the sinking was a war crime.\nIn 1999 Sir Michael Boyce, First Sea Lord of the Royal Navy, visited the Puerto Belgrano naval base and paid tribute to those who died. In 2003 a search team aboard \"Seacor Lenga\", crewed by Argentine and British veterans, was sponsored by National Geographic to find the sunken cruiser but failed to locate it. The area where \"General Belgrano\" sank, though not found, is classified as a war grave under Argentine Congress law 25.546.\nIn 2000, lawyers representing the families of the sailors killed onboard \"General Belgrano\" attempted to sue the British government in the European Court of Human Rights on the grounds that the attack took place outside the exclusion zone. It was an attempt to pressure the Argentine government to lodge an action against the UK in the International Court of Justice, but was ruled inadmissible by the Court of Human Rights on the grounds that it had been submitted too late.\n\"La Naci\u00f3n\" in 2005 published a reader's letter from admiral Enrique Molina Pico, who had been head of the Argentine Navy in the 1990s, saying that \"General Belgrano\" was part of an operation that posed a real threat to the British task force, but was holding off for tactical reasons. Molina Pico added that \"To leave the exclusion zone was not to leave the combat zone to enter a protected area\". Molina Pico explicitly stated that the sinking was not a war crime, but a combat action.\n\"General Belgrano\"'s captain, H\u00e9ctor Bonzo, died on 22 April 2009, aged 76. He had spent his last years working for an association called \"Amigos del Crucero General Belgrano\" (Friends of the Cruiser General Belgrano) whose purpose was to help those affected by the sinking. Bonzo also wrote his memories about the sinking in the book \"1093 Tripulantes del Crucero ARA General Belgrano\", published in 1992. In this book he wrote that it is \"improper to accept that (...) the attack by HMS \"Conqueror\" was a betrayal\". During an interview in 2003 he had stated that \"General Belgrano\" was only temporarily sailing to the west at the time of the attack, and his orders were to attack any British ships that came within range.\nIn late 2011, major David Thorp, a former British military intelligence officer who led the signals interception team aboard , released the book \"The Silent Listener\" detailing the role of intelligence in the Falklands War. In the book he said that, although \"General Belgrano\" was observed by \"Conqueror\" to be sailing away from the Falklands at the time of the attack, she had actually been ordered to proceed to a rendezvous point within the exclusion zone. A report prepared by Thorp for Thatcher several months after the incident stated the destination of the vessel was not to her home port as the Argentine junta stated; the report was not released because the prime minister did not want to compromise British signals intelligence capabilities.\nIn 2012 the president of Argentina, Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner, referred to the sinking of \"General Belgrano\" as a \"war crime\". However, the Argentine Navy has held the view that the sinking was a legitimate act of war, a position that was asserted by the Argentine Navy before various courts in 1995, and by the vessel's captain Hector Bonzo in 2003.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Works related to at Wikisource"}
{"id": "71020", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71020", "title": "Ultraviolet\u2013visible spectroscopy", "text": "Range of spectroscopic analysis\nUltraviolet\u2013visible spectrophotometry (UV\u2013Vis or UV-VIS) refers to absorption spectroscopy or reflectance spectroscopy in part of the ultraviolet and the full, adjacent visible regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. Being relatively inexpensive and easily implemented, this methodology is widely used in diverse applied and fundamental applications. The only requirement is that the sample absorb in the UV\u2013Vis region, i.e. be a chromophore. Absorption spectroscopy is complementary to fluorescence spectroscopy. Parameters of interest, besides the wavelength of measurement, are absorbance (A) or transmittance (%T) or reflectance (%R), and its change with time.\nA UV\u2013Vis spectrophotometer is an analytical instrument that measures the amount of ultraviolet (UV) and visible light that is absorbed by a sample. It is a widely used technique in chemistry, biochemistry, and other fields, to identify and quantify compounds in a variety of samples.\nUV\u2013Vis spectrophotometers work by passing a beam of light through the sample and measuring the amount of light that is absorbed at each wavelength. The amount of light absorbed is proportional to the concentration of the absorbing compound in the sample.\nOptical transitions.\nMost molecules and ions absorb energy in the ultraviolet or visible range, i.e., they are chromophores. The absorbed photon excites an electron in the chromophore to higher energy molecular orbitals, giving rise to an excited state. For organic chromophores, four possible types of transitions are assumed: \u03c0\u2013\u03c0*, n\u2013\u03c0*, \u03c3\u2013\u03c3*, and n\u2013\u03c3*. Transition metal complexes are often colored (i.e., absorb visible light) owing to the presence of multiple electronic states associated with incompletely filled d orbitals.\nApplications.\nUV\u2013Vis can be used to monitor structural changes in DNA. \nUV\u2013Vis spectroscopy is routinely used in analytical chemistry for the quantitative determination of diverse analytes or sample, such as transition metal ions, highly conjugated organic compounds, and biological macromolecules. Spectroscopic analysis is commonly carried out in solutions but solids and gases may also be studied.\nThe Beer\u2013Lambert law states that the absorbance of a solution is directly proportional to the concentration of the absorbing species in the solution and the path length. Thus, for a fixed path length, UV\u2013Vis spectroscopy can be used to determine the concentration of the absorber in a solution. It is necessary to know how quickly the absorbance changes with concentration. This can be taken from references (tables of molar extinction coefficients), or more accurately, determined from a calibration curve.\nA UV\u2013Vis spectrophotometer may be used as a detector for HPLC. The presence of an analyte gives a response assumed to be proportional to the concentration. For accurate results, the instrument's response to the analyte in the unknown should be compared with the response to a standard; this is very similar to the use of calibration curves. The response (e.g., peak height) for a particular concentration is known as the response factor.\nThe wavelengths of absorption peaks can be correlated with the types of bonds in a given molecule and are valuable in determining the functional groups within a molecule. The Woodward\u2013Fieser rules, for instance, are a set of empirical observations used to predict \u03bbmax, the wavelength of the most intense UV\u2013Vis absorption, for conjugated organic compounds such as dienes and ketones. The spectrum alone is not, however, a specific test for any given sample. The nature of the solvent, the pH of the solution, temperature, high electrolyte concentrations, and the presence of interfering substances can influence the absorption spectrum. Experimental variations such as the slit width (effective bandwidth) of the spectrophotometer will also alter the spectrum. To apply UV\u2013Vis spectroscopy to analysis, these variables must be controlled or accounted for in order to identify the substances present.\nThe method is most often used in a quantitative way to determine concentrations of an absorbing species in solution, using the Beer\u2013Lambert law:\nformula_1,\nwhere \"A\" is the measured absorbance (formally dimensionless but generally reported in absorbance units (AU)), formula_2 is the intensity of the incident light at a given wavelength, formula_3 is the transmitted intensity, \"L\" the path length through the sample, and \"c\" the concentration of the absorbing species. For each species and wavelength, \u03b5 is a constant known as the molar absorptivity or extinction coefficient. This constant is a fundamental molecular property in a given solvent, at a particular temperature and pressure, and has units of formula_4.\nThe absorbance and extinction \"\u03b5\" are sometimes defined in terms of the natural logarithm instead of the base-10 logarithm.\nThe Beer\u2013Lambert law is useful for characterizing many compounds but does not hold as a universal relationship for the concentration and absorption of all substances. A 2nd order polynomial relationship between absorption and concentration is sometimes encountered for very large, complex molecules such as organic dyes (xylenol orange or neutral red, for example).\nUV\u2013Vis spectroscopy is also used in the semiconductor industry to measure the thickness and optical properties of thin films on a wafer. UV\u2013Vis spectrometers are used to measure the reflectance of light, and can be analyzed via the Forouhi\u2013Bloomer dispersion equations to determine the index of refraction (formula_5) and the extinction coefficient (formula_6) of a given film across the measured spectral range.\nPractical considerations.\nThe Beer\u2013Lambert law has implicit assumptions that must be met experimentally for it to apply; otherwise there is a possibility of deviations from the law. For instance, the chemical makeup and physical environment of the sample can alter its extinction coefficient. The chemical and physical conditions of a test sample therefore must match reference measurements for conclusions to be valid. Worldwide, pharmacopoeias such as the American (USP) and European (Ph. Eur.) pharmacopeias demand that spectrophotometers perform according to strict regulatory requirements encompassing factors such as stray light and wavelength accuracy.\nSpectral bandwidth.\nSpectral bandwidth of a spectrophotometer is the range of wavelengths that the instrument transmits through a sample at a given time. It is determined by the light source, the monochromator, its physical slit-width and optical dispersion and the detector of the spectrophotometer. The spectral bandwidth affects the resolution and accuracy of the measurement. A narrower spectral bandwidth provides higher resolution and accuracy, but also requires more time and energy to scan the entire spectrum. A wider spectral bandwidth allows for faster and easier scanning, but may result in lower resolution and accuracy, especially for samples with overlapping absorption peaks. Therefore, choosing an appropriate spectral bandwidth is important for obtaining reliable and precise results.\nIt is important to have a monochromatic source of radiation for the light incident on the sample cell to enhance the linearity of the response. The closer the bandwidth is to be monochromatic (transmitting unit of wavelength) the more linear will be the response. The spectral bandwidth is measured as the number of wavelengths transmitted at half the maximum intensity of the light leaving the monochromator. \nThe best spectral bandwidth achievable is a specification of the UV spectrophotometer, and it characterizes how monochromatic the incident light can be. If this bandwidth is comparable to (or more than) the width of the absorption peak of the sample component, then the measured extinction coefficient will not be accurate. In reference measurements, the instrument bandwidth (bandwidth of the incident light) is kept below the width of the spectral peaks. When a test material is being measured, the bandwidth of the incident light should also be sufficiently narrow. Reducing the spectral bandwidth reduces the energy passed to the detector and will, therefore, require a longer measurement time to achieve the same signal to noise ratio.\nWavelength error.\nThe extinction coefficient of an analyte in solution changes gradually with wavelength. A peak (a wavelength where the absorbance reaches a maximum) in the absorbance curve vs wavelength, i.e. the UV\u2013VIS spectrum, is where the rate of change of absorbance with wavelength is the lowest. Therefore, quantitative measurements of a solute are usually conducted, using a wavelength around the absorbance peak, to minimize inaccuracies produced by errors in wavelength, due to the change of extinction coefficient with wavelength.\nStray light.\nStray light in a UV spectrophotometer is any light that reaches its detector that is not of the wavelength selected by the monochromator. This can be caused, for instance, by scattering of light within the instrument, or by reflections from optical surfaces.\nStray light can cause significant errors in absorbance measurements, especially at high absorbances, because the stray light will be added to the signal detected by the detector, even though it is not part of the actually selected wavelength. The result is that the measured and reported absorbance will be lower than the actual absorbance of the sample.\nThe stray light is an important factor, as it determines the \"purity\" of the light used for the analysis. The most important factor affecting it is the \"stray light\" level of the monochromator.\nTypically a detector used in a UV\u2013VIS spectrophotometer is broadband; it responds to all the light that reaches it. If a significant amount of the light passed through the sample contains wavelengths that have much lower extinction coefficients than the nominal one, the instrument will report an incorrectly low absorbance. Any instrument will reach a point where an increase in sample concentration will not result in an increase in the reported absorbance, because the detector is simply responding to the stray light. In practice the concentration of the sample or the optical path length must be adjusted to place the unknown absorbance within a range that is valid for the instrument. Sometimes an empirical calibration function is developed, using known concentrations of the sample, to allow measurements into the region where the instrument is becoming non-linear.\nAs a rough guide, an instrument with a single monochromator would typically have a stray light level corresponding to about 3 Absorbance Units (AU), which would make measurements above about 2\u00a0AU problematic. A more complex instrument with a double monochromator would have a stray light level corresponding to about 6\u00a0AU, which would therefore allow measuring a much wider absorbance range.\nDeviations from the Beer\u2013Lambert law.\nAt sufficiently high concentrations, the absorption bands will saturate and show absorption flattening. The absorption peak appears to flatten because close to 100% of the light is already being absorbed. The concentration at which this occurs depends on the particular compound being measured. One test that can be used to test for this effect is to vary the path length of the measurement. In the Beer\u2013Lambert law, varying concentration and path length has an equivalent effect\u2014diluting a solution by a factor of 10 has the same effect as shortening the path length by a factor of 10. If cells of different path lengths are available, testing if this relationship holds true is one way to judge if absorption flattening is occurring.\nSolutions that are not homogeneous can show deviations from the Beer\u2013Lambert law because of the phenomenon of absorption flattening. This can happen, for instance, where the absorbing substance is located within suspended particles. The deviations will be most noticeable under conditions of low concentration and high absorbance. The last reference describes a way to correct for this deviation.\nSome solutions, like copper(II) chloride in water, change visually at a certain concentration because of changed conditions around the colored ion (the divalent copper ion). For copper(II) chloride it means a shift from blue to green, which would mean that monochromatic measurements would deviate from the Beer\u2013Lambert law.\nMeasurement uncertainty sources.\nThe above factors contribute to the measurement uncertainty of the results obtained with UV\u2013Vis spectrophotometry. If UV\u2013Vis spectrophotometry is used in quantitative chemical analysis then the results are additionally affected by uncertainty sources arising from the nature of the compounds and/or solutions that are measured. These include spectral interferences caused by absorption band overlap, fading of the color of the absorbing species (caused by decomposition or reaction) and possible composition mismatch between the sample and the calibration solution.\nUltraviolet\u2013visible spectrophotometer.\nThe instrument used in ultraviolet\u2013visible spectroscopy is called a UV\u2013Vis spectrophotometer. It measures the intensity of light after passing through a sample (formula_3), and compares it to the intensity of light before it passes through the sample (formula_8). The ratio formula_9 is called the \"transmittance\", and is usually expressed as a percentage (%T). The absorbance, formula_10, is based on the transmittance:\nformula_11\nThe UV\u2013visible spectrophotometer can also be configured to measure reflectance. In this case, the spectrophotometer measures the intensity of light reflected from a sample (formula_3), and compares it to the intensity of light reflected from a reference material (formula_8) (such as a white tile). The ratio formula_9 is called the \"reflectance\", and is usually expressed as a percentage (%R).\nThe basic parts of a spectrophotometer are a light source, a holder for the sample, a diffraction grating or a prism as a monochromator to separate the different wavelengths of light, and a detector. The radiation source is often a tungsten filament (300\u20132500\u00a0nm), a deuterium arc lamp, which is continuous over the ultraviolet region (190\u2013400\u00a0nm), a xenon arc lamp, which is continuous from 160 to 2,000\u00a0nm; or more recently, light emitting diodes (LED) for the visible wavelengths. The detector is typically a photomultiplier tube, a photodiode, a photodiode array or a charge-coupled device (CCD). Single photodiode detectors and photomultiplier tubes are used with scanning monochromators, which filter the light so that only light of a single wavelength reaches the detector at one time. The scanning monochromator moves the diffraction grating to \"step-through\" each wavelength so that its intensity may be measured as a function of wavelength. Fixed monochromators are used with CCDs and photodiode arrays. As both of these devices consist of many detectors grouped into one or two dimensional arrays, they are able to collect light of different wavelengths on different pixels or groups of pixels simultaneously.\nA spectrophotometer can be either \"single beam\" or \"double beam\". In a single beam instrument (such as the Spectronic 20), all of the light passes through the sample cell. formula_8 must be measured by removing the sample. This was the earliest design and is still in common use in both teaching and industrial labs.\nIn a double-beam instrument, the light is split into two beams before it reaches the sample. One beam is used as the reference; the other beam passes through the sample. The reference beam intensity is taken as 100% Transmission (or 0 Absorbance), and the measurement displayed is the ratio of the two beam intensities. Some double-beam instruments have two detectors (photodiodes), and the sample and reference beam are measured at the same time. In other instruments, the two beams pass through a beam chopper, which blocks one beam at a time. The detector alternates between measuring the sample beam and the reference beam in synchronism with the chopper. There may also be one or more dark intervals in the chopper cycle. In this case, the measured beam intensities may be corrected by subtracting the intensity measured in the dark interval before the ratio is taken.\nIn a single-beam instrument, the cuvette containing only a solvent has to be measured first. Mettler Toledo developed a single beam array spectrophotometer that allows fast and accurate measurements over the UV\u2013Vis range. The light source consists of a Xenon flash lamp for the ultraviolet (UV) as well as for the visible (VIS) and near-infrared wavelength regions covering a spectral range from 190 up to 1100\u00a0nm. The lamp flashes are focused on a glass fiber which drives the beam of light onto a cuvette containing the sample solution. The beam passes through the sample and specific wavelengths are absorbed by the sample components. The remaining light is collected after the cuvette by a glass fiber and driven into a spectrograph. The spectrograph consists of a diffraction grating that separates the light into the different wavelengths, and a CCD sensor to record the data, respectively. The whole spectrum is thus simultaneously measured, allowing for fast recording. \nSamples for UV\u2013Vis spectrophotometry are most often liquids, although the absorbance of gases and even of solids can also be measured. Samples are typically placed in a transparent cell, known as a cuvette. Cuvettes are typically rectangular in shape, commonly with an internal width of 1\u00a0cm. (This width becomes the path length, formula_16, in the Beer\u2013Lambert law.) Test tubes can also be used as cuvettes in some instruments. The type of sample container used must allow radiation to pass over the spectral region of interest. The most widely applicable cuvettes are made of high-quality fused silica or quartz glass because these are transparent throughout the UV, visible and near infrared regions. Glass and plastic cuvettes are also common, although glass and most plastics absorb in the UV, which limits their usefulness to visible wavelengths.\nSpecialized instruments have also been made. These include attaching spectrophotometers to telescopes to measure the spectra of astronomical features. UV\u2013visible microspectrophotometers consist of a UV\u2013visible microscope integrated with a UV\u2013visible spectrophotometer.\nA complete spectrum of the absorption at all wavelengths of interest can often be produced directly by a more sophisticated spectrophotometer. In simpler instruments the absorption is determined one wavelength at a time and then compiled into a spectrum by the operator. By removing the concentration dependence, the extinction coefficient (\u03b5) can be determined as a function of wavelength.\nMicrospectrophotometry.\nUV\u2013visible spectroscopy of microscopic samples is done by integrating an optical microscope with UV\u2013visible optics, white light sources, a monochromator, and a sensitive detector such as a charge-coupled device (CCD) or photomultiplier tube (PMT). As only a single optical path is available, these are single beam instruments. Modern instruments are capable of measuring UV\u2013visible spectra in both reflectance and transmission of micron-scale sampling areas. The advantages of using such instruments is that they are able to measure microscopic samples but are also able to measure the spectra of larger samples with high spatial resolution. As such, they are used in the forensic laboratory to analyze the dyes and pigments in individual textile fibers, microscopic paint chips and the color of glass fragments. They are also used in materials science and biological research and for determining the energy content of coal and petroleum source rock by measuring the vitrinite reflectance. Microspectrophotometers are used in the semiconductor and micro-optics industries for monitoring the thickness of thin films after they have been deposited. In the semiconductor industry, they are used because the critical dimensions of circuitry is microscopic. A typical test of a semiconductor wafer would entail the acquisition of spectra from many points on a patterned or unpatterned wafer. The thickness of the deposited films may be calculated from the interference pattern of the spectra. In addition, ultraviolet\u2013visible spectrophotometry can be used to determine the thickness, along with the refractive index and extinction coefficient of thin films. A map of the film thickness across the entire wafer can then be generated and used for quality control purposes.\nAdditional applications.\nUV\u2013Vis can be applied to characterize the rate of a chemical reaction. Illustrative is the conversion of the yellow-orange and blue isomers of mercury dithizonate. This method of analysis relies on the fact that concentration is linearly proportional to concentration. In the same approach allows determination of equilibria between chromophores. \nFrom the spectrum of burning gases, it is possible to determine a chemical composition of a fuel, temperature of gases, and air-fuel ratio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71021", "revid": "1315695415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71021", "title": "Gymnasium", "text": "Gymnasium may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71022", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71022", "title": "Kim Il-Sung", "text": ""}
{"id": "71023", "revid": "3158744", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71023", "title": "Egypt of History 3rd Dynasty", "text": ""}
{"id": "71025", "revid": "46807820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71025", "title": "Exotic Shorthair", "text": "Breed of cat\nBreed of cat\nThe Exotic Shorthair is a breed of cat developed as a short-haired version of the Persian. The Exotic is similar to the Persian in appearance with the exception of the short dense coat.\nHistory.\nIn the late 1950s, the Persian was used as an outcross by some American Shorthair breeders. This was done in secret in order to improve their body type, and crosses were also made with the Russian Blue and the Burmese. The crossbreed look gained recognition in the show ring, but unhappy American Shorthair breeders successfully produced a new breed standard that would disqualify American Shorthairs that showed signs of crossbreeding. One American Shorthair breeder who saw the potential of the Persian/American Shorthair cross proposed and eventually got the Cat Fanciers' Association judge and American Shorthair breeder Jane Martinke to recognize them as a new breed in 1966, under the name Exotic Shorthair. In 1987, the Cat Fanciers' Association closed the Exotic to shorthair outcrosses, leaving Persian as the only allowable outcross breed.\nDescription.\nAppearance.\nThe Exotic Shorthair is a medium to large-sized breed, closely resembling the Persian in overall build. It has a large, round head with prominent full cheeks and large round eyes that contribute to its distinctive expression. The ears are small, rounded at the tips, and set low on the head, enhancing the breed's broad, rounded appearance. The tail is relatively short in proportion to the body, maintaining the breed's compact and balanced silhouette. Just like the British Shorthair and the Persian the Exotic Shorthair comes in all different colour variations.\nLonghair Exotics.\nBecause of the regular use of Persian as outcrosses, some Exotics may carry a copy of the recessive longhair gene. When two such cats mate, there is a 1 in 4 chance of each offspring being longhaired. Longhaired Exotics are not considered Persians by the Cat Fanciers' Association, although The International Cat Association accepts them as Persians. Other associations like the American Cat Fanciers Association register them as a separate Exotic Longhair breed.\nHealth.\nLike the Persian the Exotic Shorthair is a brachycephalic breed, meaning that it has problems as a result of having the nose and eyes in close proximity to each other, giving the appearance of a pushed-in face. Some conditions common in the Exotic Shorthair are listed below.\nIn a review of over 5,000 cases of urate urolithiasis the Exotic Shorthair was significantly under-represented, with only one of the recorded cases belonging to an Exotic Shorthair.\nRecognition.\nThe Exotic has steadily gained popularity among cat fanciers with the help of the devoted advocates of the breed who saw the value in a Persian and Shorthair crossbreed. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71026", "revid": "50855125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71026", "title": "Gutka", "text": "Tobacco preparation chewed in South Asia\nGutka is a type of betel quid and chewing tobacco preparation made of crushed areca nut (also called betel nut), tobacco, catechu, paraffin wax, slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) and sweet or savory flavourings, in India, Pakistan, other Asian countries, and North America.\nUsing gutka is highly addictive and can cause various harmful effects such as head and neck cancer, oral and oropharyngeal cancers, coronary heart disease, as well as negative reproductive effects including stillbirth, premature birth and low birth weight.\nGutka is manufactured in the sub-continent and exported to a few other countries, often marketed under the guise of a \"safer\" product than cigarettes and tobacco. Reported to have both stimulant and relaxation effects, it is sold throughout South Asia and some Pacific regions in small, individual-sized foil packets/sachets and tins that cost between 2 and 10 rupees each. It is widely consumed in India, Especially in the Northern India, Pakistan and the Madhesh region of Nepal. Gutka is consumed by placing a pinch of it between the gum and cheek and gently sucking and chewing, similar to chewing tobacco. Due to containing cancer-causing substances, it is subjected in India to the same restrictions and warnings as cigarettes. Highly addictive and a known carcinogen, gutkha is the subject of much controversy in India. Many states have sought to curb its immense popularity by taxing sales of gutkha heavily or by banning it.\nCharacteristics.\nGutka is a commercially produced form of smokeless tobacco. Manufacturers add sweet or savory flavors, making it more appealing to women and young people in some locations. The combinations of gutka ingredients vary according to local preferences. Spices may include mustard, turmeric, anise seeds, cardamom, saffron and cloves.\nIn addition to areca nut, nicotine, slaked lime, paraffin and catechu, it can be laced with thousands of chemicals. It is a powdery, granular, light brownish to white substance. Within moments of chewing mixing with saliva, the gutkha begins to dissolve and turn deep red in colour. It may impart upon its user a \"buzz\" somewhat more intense than that of tobacco chewing, snuffing and smoking.\nGutka turns saliva bright red, and when it is chewed long and often enough it will stain a user's teeth bright red too. Saliva is generally spat onto a wall or at the ground, causing a red stain that is quite resistant to the elements. Some building owners have taken to combating this by painting murals of gods on their walls, with the idea that gutkha chewers would not spit on a god.\n\"Quid chewing has claimed to produce a sense of well being, euphoria, warm sensations of the body, sweating, salivation, palpitation and heightened alertness, tolerance to hunger, and increased capacity and stamina to work.\"\nHealth effects.\nGutka is highly addictive, represents a major health risk, has no safe level use and is not a safe substitute for smoking. Globally smokeless tobacco products like gutka contribute to 650,000 deaths each year with a significant proportion of them in Southeast Asia.\nUsing gutka can cause a number of adverse health effects such as head and neck cancer, oral cancer, oral submucous fibrosis, oesophagus cancer, and pancreatic cancer, cardiovascular disease, and asthma. It also raises the risk of fatal coronary artery disease, fatal stroke and non-fatal ischaemic heart disease When a person chews gutka, the mixture directly enters the system through the oral cavity, which absorbs 28 cancer-causing chemicals.\nGutka can cause adverse reproductive effects including stillbirth, premature birth, low birth weight. Nicotine in gutka that are used during pregnancy can affect how a baby's brain develops before birth.\nGutka use causes the production of various reactive free radicals that induce oxidative stress, particularly in oral tissues. Gutka exposure can lead to the oxidation of guanine bases in DNA to form 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG or its tautomer 8-oxo-dG) as a major byproduct. Exposure to Gutka tends to be highest in saliva and urine as evaluated by measuring 8-OHdG in DNA.\nCreative advertising by tobacco companies and lack of accessible information for the public leads to many gutka users being unaware of the dangers it can bring. Often users believe that gutka can act as a digestion aid, kill germs, and generally give a sense of well-being. In fact 34.4% of smokers have switched to smokeless tobacco use as way to quit but there is no scientific evidence that using gutka can help a person quit smoking. As of 2015 it was the fourth most common addictive product worldwide.\nUsage.\nUse of gutka and other forms of tobacco are culturally ingrained and use can begin at a young age. Smokeless tobacco use is most common in India where oral cancer accounts for 30 to 40% of cancer cases. Its use has been reported in Thailand, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Malaysia, Cambodia, China, Indonesia and New Guinea. Immigrants to the United Kingdom, parts of Africa, Australia, North America have brought their habits with them.\nGutka is readily available in these locations, especially in neighborhood Asian markets in highly populated areas. Immigrants to the United States where spitting in public is not as socially acceptable, learn to be discreet. Those in the lower socioeconomic populations are especially at risk. It is here that access to education and treatment is limited. Easy access and extremely low cost lead to early addiction and the prevalence of gutka use. Precancerous lesions have been observed in young children and symptoms of cancer often appear by high school or college age.\nSmoking is not allowed in many places, and when done by children, is disapproved of. In contrast gutka use, being all but invisible to others, is the method of choice. A \"New York Times\" article reported in 2002 that sales of gutka and the tobaccoless version, paan masala, reached $1 billion a year.\nIndia.\nOver 25% of India's population use tobacco products including cigarettes and multiple forms of smokeless tobacco. India has the largest number of smokeless tobacco users in the world. The poorest populations are greatly affected due to the detrimental effects of its use and the subsequent costs of medical care. Many Indian states have sought to curb the use and spread of gutka by taxing sales heavily or by banning it.\nThey have banned the sale, manufacture, distribution and storage of gutka and all its variants. As of May 2013, gutka is banned in 24 states and 3 union territories. The federal Food Safety and Regulation (Prohibition) Act 2011 allows harmful products such as gutka to be banned for a year. This can be renewed annually, resulting in a permanent ban. The ban is enforced by the state public health ministry, the state Food and Drug Administration, and the local police. Enforcement of the law is generally lax and many shops still sell gutka, although it may not be displayed. Enforcemnent is stricter in some regions like Mumbai and Delhi, but illegal sale of gutka still occurs.\nIn 2019, the Delhi government extended the ban for one more year on Gutka, Pan Masala, Flavoured/Scented Tobacco,\u00a0Kharra\u00a0and similar products containing tobacco. In September 2012, State of Delhi banned Gutka and Pan Masala containing tobacco and/or nicotine. After the notification, Gutka manufacturers separated the components like tobacco from Gutka and Pan Masala. Since the term 'Gutka and Pan Masala Containing Tobacco' was used in the notification. The components like tobacco were manufactured and sold in separate pouches after the ban. The notification was revised in March 2015 to make it more strict and banned all smokeless tobacco (SLT) products including twin-pack. Offenders can be fined or receive prison sentences. The law has provisions of imposing fines up to on the sale of products that are injurious to health.\nResearch firm Edelweiss estimates the gutka ban will cause the industry \u20b9 in losses.\nAdvertising.\nLike alcohol and tobacco products, there is a ban on advertisement of gutka. Often tobacco companies advertise gutka as pan masala in order to skirt the ban on advertising tobacco products. Surrogate advertisements often use pan masala ads to promote gutka products with similar name and packaging.\nAccording to the Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction on Sales) Regulations, 2011 of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, misleading advertisement of such products invites a fine of \u20b9.\nAccording to StraitsResearch, The India pan masala market is expected to reach US$ by 2026 at the CAGR of 10.4% during the forecast period 2019\u20132026. The India pan masala market is driven by significant switching of consumers from tobacco products to pan masala, aggressive advertising and convenient packaging, and Maharashtra State's revocation of the ban over pan masala products.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71027", "revid": "22651524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71027", "title": "Flavouring", "text": ""}
{"id": "71029", "revid": "9021902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71029", "title": "The Tie That Binds (novel)", "text": "1984 novel by Kent Haruf\nThe Tie That Binds is a novel by Kent Haruf. Written in 1984, the novel is Haruf's first major work, receiving a Whiting Award and a special Hemingway Foundation/PEN citation. It is the story of 80-year-old Edith Goodnough of Holt County, Colorado, as told to an unnamed inquirer on a Sunday afternoon in the spring of 1977 by her 50-year-old neighbor.\nPlot summary.\nThe story opens with the narrator, Sanders Roscoe, defending his neighbor Edith Goodnough to a reporter trying to dig up dirt on her. She has been accused of murdering her brother Lyman. Sanders seems disappointed in the sheriff for caving in to the reporter, saying that to understand what happened you would have had to know Edith's story, which he begins to tell.\nIn 1896, newlyweds Roy and Ada Goodnough leave Iowa and settle down in northeastern Colorado under the Homestead Act. Roy eventually succeeds in growing wheat. Ada bears him two children: Edith, who is born in 1897, and Lyman, born two years later. \nVery soon Ada regrets leaving Iowa. Her husband turns out to be a bully, an angry and violent man who makes her and their children work very hard on the farm. When she dies in 1914, aged only 42, Edith has to take over all of Ada's chores and duties. Then, in 1915, Roy's hands get entangled in a machine, and nine of his fingers are chopped off. He treats Edith and Lyman as his \"self-sired farmhands\", bossing them around and making all decisions himself.\nAs the two siblings grow up, they soon realize that they are stuck on their father's farm. For the next 37 years, Edith performs the duties of farmer, housewife and nurse without ever complaining, and refusing to get involved with men except for a brief romance with the narrator's father, who Edith loves but refuses to marry. Despite her rejection, he never gets over her. Lyman finally sees his chance of escape when in 1941 the United States is attacked by Japan. In the middle of the night and with the help of the Roscoes, he leaves the farm and goes to the city to join the armed forces. At 42 he is too old to enlist and instead embarks on a 20-year tour of the United States. During those years, Edith never doubts that brother will return. He does in the early 1960s, almost ten years after their father's death at 82.\nFor six years Edith and Lyman, now both in their sixties, live happily together in their farm house. Then in 1967, the Goodnoughs, Sanders and his wife Mavis, now eight months pregnant, decide to go to the county fair together. Lyman crashes his car, causing Mavis to miscarry and giving himself a head injury from which he never truly recovers. Edith looks after her brother, who becomes more and more reclusive, eventually refusing to leave the house.\nAs they grow older and frailer, Edith decides to move everything downstairs and close off the second story, and enlists Sanders' help. In the following years, Edith draws some pleasure from spending afternoons with Rena, Sanders' daughter, who is born in 1969. But soon it becomes too dangerous for Rena to go to the Goodnoughs on her own, as Lyman, who has regressed to infancy, is prone to unprompted outbursts of violence. Eventually, on New Year's Eve 1976, Edith, is unable to care for Lyman but unwilling to put him in a home. She has Lyman put on his best clothes, cooks a three-course dinner for him, waits for him to fall asleep and then sets fire to their house. The fire is detected and the two siblings are evacuated. However, Lyman never recovers from injuries inflicted by the fire and dies soon afterwards.\nIn the spring of 1977 Edith is still lying in a hospital bed with a policeman stationed outside her room and facing charges of attempted murder. The Roscoes visit every day.\nReception and adaptations.\nCharles Michaud, in the \"Library Journal\", wrote that the book was \"in the tradition of Hamlin Garland and Willa Cather\" and praised the \"simple, engaging style.\" Perry Glasser, reviewing the book for the \"New York Times\", commented on the \"rhythmic, evocative language\", summarizing the work as a \"fine first novel\". In a less positive retrospective review, Joyce Carol Oates described the book as \"both touching and exasperating\", adding that Haruf \"shrinks from assessing, still less questioning\" Edith's choices. The \"Christian Science Monitor\" also reviewed the novel positively, commenting that \"the voice of his narrator reverberates after the last page.\"\nIn 2019, a dramatization of \"The Tie That Binds\", adapted by Carol Samson, was featured in that year's Kent Haruf Literary Celebration, performed in his hometown of Salida.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71030", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71030", "title": "Pa amb tom\u00e0quet", "text": "Traditional food of Catalonia\n' (), also known as pa amb tomata or pa amb tomaca\"\"' (all meaning \"bread with tomato\" in Catalan), is a traditional food of Valencian, Catalan, Aragonese and Balearic cuisine. is considered a staple of Catalan cuisine and identity.\nIt consists of bread, which may or may not be toasted, with optional garlic rubbed over the surface, seasoned with olive oil and salt and topped with fresh rubbed-in tomato. It is sometimes used as a vessel for cured ham and other types of cured meats.\nIt is considered one of the typical examples that define the Mediterranean diet, extended as a traditional recipe throughout the Catalan Countries, and its preparation has become an iconic ritual of Western Mediterranean culture.\nIt is popularly consumed on its own as a snack, as sandwich or a tapa with any meal, from breakfast to dinner.\nPreparation.\nIn some restaurants, the tomato is spread on the bread, while others provide the guests with the ingredients to do the work themselves. The dish is served accompanied with any sorts of sausages (such as cured botifarres, xori\u00e7o, fuet, Iberian ham, or others), ham, cheeses, omelettes, anchovies or other marinated fish, or grilled vegetables like escalivada.\nIn Majorca, (\"bread with oil\") is prepared with tomato called , a specific variety of vine tomatoes, smaller and with a taste that is slightly more intense and sour than normal tomatoes due to the loss of acidity in the tomato.\nThe original base used to be made with toasted slices of (\"farmer's bread\"), a typical round loaf of wheat bread of a fair size (from , from some in diameter).\nIf the mixture is not pre-made, there is said to be an ideal order in which the ingredients are integrated to yield the best flavour. First, if used, the garlic is rubbed on the bread. Then the same is done with the tomato. Next comes the salt, and lastly the olive oil.\nHistory.\nThe origin of this dish is disputed, as tomato is relatively new to Catalan cuisine (it came from America only after the 15th century). Widely regarded as the epitome of Catalan cuisine and identity, some sources claim it is actually a relatively recent (mid to late 19th century) in all the Mediterranean coast of Spain.\nCatalan chef Josep Lladonosa i Gir\u00f3 says it was first documented in the 18th century. The cook, born in 1938, remembers his grandmother explaining that her parents used to eat a dish called . With better precision, Catalan cooking historian N\u00e8stor Luj\u00e1n says that the first written reference is from 1884 and, according to his thesis, the recipe would have been created in the rural world during an abundant tomato harvest. People would have used the tomatoes to soften hard and dry bread.\nThe dish shares some similarities with the tomato and olive oil-rubbed \"\u0127ob\u017c biz-Zejt\" of Malta, with the \"pan-bagnat\" of Nice, in the Provence region of France, the tomato-topped version of Italian \"bruschetta\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71034", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71034", "title": "Vafthruthnismal", "text": ""}
{"id": "71035", "revid": "42630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71035", "title": "Centimeter", "text": ""}
{"id": "71036", "revid": "15963937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71036", "title": "Flavius Josephus", "text": ""}
{"id": "71037", "revid": "29678", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71037", "title": "Cornelius Tacitus", "text": ""}
{"id": "71040", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71040", "title": "Carbon County", "text": "Carbon County may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "71043", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71043", "title": "Davis County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nDavis County is a county in northern Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 362,679, making it Utah's third-most populous county. Its county seat is Farmington, and its largest city by both population and area is Layton.\nDavis County is part of the Ogden-Clearfield, UT Metropolitan Statistical Area as well as the Salt Lake City-Provo-Orem, UT Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe legislature of the provisional State of Deseret defined the county in an October 5, 1850, act, which also designated Farmington as the seat due to its location midway between boundaries at the Weber River on the north and the Jordan River on the south. It was named for Daniel C. Davis, a captain in the Mormon Battalion. The county boundaries were altered in 1852, 1854, 1855, and in 1862. In 1880 the county gained part of the islands and waters of Great Salt Lake that had previously been attached to Salt Lake County. The county boundary has remained unchanged since that time.\nDuring its first 50 years, Davis County grew slowly. With the advent of the Utah Central Rail Road in 1870, a transition to mechanized agriculture and a surge of commerce, banking, improved roads, new water systems, and electrification of homes began. However, by 1940, the population was barely 16,000.\nWith the establishment of Hill Air Force Base in northern Davis County and southern Weber County, there was a surge in civilian employment after World War II. The county doubled in population between 1940 and 1950 and doubled again between 1950 and 1960 as part of the nationwide suburb boom that was occurring at the time. By 1990 there were 188,000 residents, and in 2000, there were 239,000. As of 2020, the county population is above 360,000.\nGeography.\nDavis County has an area of , of which is land and (53%) is water. It is Utah's smallest county by land area and second smallest by total area.\nThe county lies generally between the Great Salt Lake on the west and the Wasatch Range on the east, which rises to a height of in the county at Thurston Peak.\nThe Great Salt Lake is surrounded by marshland and mudflats, and lies at an average elevation of approximately , varying depending on the water level, which can lead to drastic changes in the lake size due to its shallowness. Davis County includes Antelope Island, the lake's largest island. The entire island is a state park, designated to protect natural scenery and especially wildlife on the island, which includes bighorn sheep, pronghorn, and a bison herd.\nThe inhabited portion of Davis County between the lake and the mountain range is called the Wasatch Front, a narrow stretch of land that restricts north\u2013south transportation in the county.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nEastern parts of Davis County experience a humid continental climate (\"Dsa\"), while western parts may experience a mediterranean climate (\"Csa\"). Summers are dry and hot and winters are cold and wet, but rarely frigid. Snow is frequent during winter, with up to annually on high bench areas in the east and at least on the valley floor. Annual precipitation averages between in the county, with spring being the wettest season and summer the driest. Summers are hot, with several days each year averaging above . However, the humidity is low, making for comparatively comfortable temperatures. In winter, temperatures sometimes drop below , but rarely for extended periods of time. Compared to Salt Lake County to the south, the weather in Davis County is extreme. Lake-effect snows hit the southern portion of the county harder, and even in non-lake-effect storms, the lack of a rain shadow in Davis County (much of Salt Lake County lies in the rain shadow of the Oquirrh Mountains) means that storms often hit Davis County harder. In addition, canyon winds from the east can sometimes cause devastating wind damage, and wind gusts above have been reported. This occurs when a powerful high pressure system is over Wyoming, and is a frequent occurrence. Extreme wind events, however, seem to have declined in frequency in recent years.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 362,679 people in Davis County with a population density of 1,116.9 people per square mile (431.2/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 292,458 (80.6%) White, 4,008 (1.1%) African American, 1,464 (0.4%) Native American, 6,907 (1.9%) Asian, 3,204 (0.9%) Pacific Islander, 1,244 (0.3%) from other races, and 14,099 (3.9%) from two or more races. 39,295 (10.8%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 182,251 (50.25%) males and 180,428 (49.75%) females, and the population distribution by age was 116,295 (32.1%) under the age of 18, 207,510 (57.2%) from 18 to 64, and 38,874 (10.7%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 31.4 years.\nThere were 111,552 households in Davis County with an average size of 3.25 of which 88,909 (79.7%) were families and 22,643 (20.3%) were non-families. Among all families, 72,995 (65.4%) were married couples, 5,369 (4.8%) were male householders with no spouse, and 10,545 (9.5%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 18,004 (16.1%) were a single person living alone and 4,639 (4.2%) were two or more people living together. 50,193 (45.0%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 84,985 (76.2%) of households were owner-occupied while 26,567 (23.8%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Davis County household was $87,570 and the median family income was $96,482, with a per-capita income of $32,819. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $63,558 and for females $42,136. 5.3% of the population and 4.2% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 205,899 people in Davis County 25 years or older, 8,458 (4.1%) had not completed high school, 43,575 (21.2%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 75,283 (36.6%) had some college or associate degree, 53,067 (25.8%) had a bachelor's degree, and 25,516 (12.4%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 306,479 people, 93,545 households, and 76,205 families in the county. The population density was . There were 97,570 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.04% White, 1.21% Black or African American, 0.46% Native American, 1.77% Asian, 0.59% Pacific Islander, 3.24% from other races, and 2.69% from two or more races. 8.42% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 93,545 households, out of which 45.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 67.99% were married couples living together, 9.59% had a female householder with no husband present, and 18.54% were non-families. 15.23% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.27% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.24 and the average family size was 3.63.\nThe county population contained 37.23% under the age of 20, 6.56% from 20 to 24, 28.13% from 25 to 44, 19.92% from 45 to 64, and 8.15% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29.2 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.85 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.09 males.\nLaw and government.\nA three-member board of commissioners is the county's governing body. The commissioners are elected to staggered four-year terms. They are responsible for all county services and operations. They approve, adopt, and amend the budget; they also serve as the legislative body and regulate business licensing in the county's unincorporated areas. The county commissioners (as of 2021) are:\nOther elected offices include the County Attorney, Assessor, Clerk/Auditor, Sheriff, Recorder, Surveyor, and Treasurer.\nDavis County voters are traditionally Republican. In no national election since 1948 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nEconomy.\nDavis County is often characterized as a bedroom community. According to the Census Bureau's 2004 American Community Survey, 42.3% of the population work in another county. South Davis County commuters who work in Salt Lake County frequently encounter commuting time traffic bottlenecks between Davis and Salt Lake Counties. The Legacy Parkway and the \"FrontRunner\" commuter rail project were built to alleviate this problem.\nThe commuter rail stations in the county have spurred plans for extensive transit-oriented development (TOD), including the Station Park development in Farmington. Farmington is also the home of the Lagoon Amusement Park, the primary amusement park on the Wasatch Front.\nDavis County's largest employer is Hill Air Force Base. Earnings of civilians at Hill AFB are almost double the state average. Hill AFB accounts for about 12% of the economy of Davis County and about 2.6% of the economy of Utah. Hill AFB provides employment for nearly 23,000 military and civilian personnel (approximately 4,500 active duty, 1,200 reservists, 13,000 federal civil servants, and 4,000 civilian contractors). Other large employers include Davis School District, Lagoon Amusement Park, and Lifetime Products.\nEducation.\nPublic education in Davis County is provided by the Davis School District. There are currently 59 elementary schools, 16 junior high schools, 9 high schools, and 3 alternative schools in the school district. The high schools are as follows, showing where they are located:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe campus of Davis Technical College is in Kaysville.\nUtah State University owns and operates the Utah Botanical Center in Kaysville, which includes an education center. Weber State University also operates campuses in Layton and Farmington.\nTransportation.\nThe most important road in the county is Interstate 15, which runs north\u2013south through the center of the county. US-89 enters parallel to I-15 from Salt Lake County to the south and runs north through North Salt Lake and Bountiful as a city road before merging with I-15. It re-emerges in Farmington near the Lagoon Amusement Park, heading along the eastern benches on the slopes of the Wasatch Range, entering Weber County near South Weber. The Utah Department of Transportation is currently (2019) upgrading US-89 to a freeway through eastern Layton north to its interchange with I-84 near the Weber County border. Congestion is a significant problem in the county, as east\u2013west transportation is restricted by the narrow urban corridor and many of its citizens commute south to Salt Lake County.\nTo relieve congestion in the county, the Legacy Parkway began construction in 2006. Construction began near the US-89/I-15 interchange in Farmington in 2004, but was soon halted due to a lawsuit filed by environmentalists, who were concerned that the road would harm marshlands along the eastern edge of the Great Salt Lake. They requested an independent evaluation for completeness of the environmental impact statement. A settlement was reached in 2005 and the final injunction was lifted in 2006. The Legacy Parkway opened in 2008, running from the US-89/I-15 interchange in Farmington southward to connect with I-215 near the border with Salt Lake County. An extensive trail system, wetland protection measures, and landscaping were implemented along the highway in response to the environmentalist's concerns, in addition to a lower speed limit and a ban of semi-trailer trucks on the highway. However, this compromise will expire in 2020, and the roadway is expected to begin functioning under normal Interstate System regulations (i.e. trucks and higher speed limits allowed).\nIn 2008, the Utah Transit Authority opened the \"FrontRunner\" commuter rail line from Salt Lake City north to Ogden, serving the length of Davis County with stations in Woods Cross, Farmington, Layton, and Clearfield.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71044", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71044", "title": "Daggett County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nDaggett County ( ) is a county in the northeastern corner of the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States Census, the population was 935, making it the least populous county in Utah. Its county seat is Manila. The county was named for Ellsworth Daggett (1845\u20131923), the first surveyor-general of Utah. The small community of Dutch John, located near the state line with Colorado and Wyoming, became an incorporated town in January 2016.\nHistory.\nDue to dangerous roads, mountainous terrain, and frequent bad weather preventing travel via a direct route, 19th century residents in the north portion of Uintah County had to travel on both stagecoach and rail to conduct business in Vernal, the county seat, a mere away. The journey involved overland travel to a train station in Wyoming, to either Mack, Colorado, Price, or Salt Lake City, then a stagecoach to Vernal. In the fall 1917 election, the Uintah county voters voted to establish a separate county on the northern slope of the Uinta Mountains. The act establishing the county was approved on January 7, 1918, naming Manila as the county seat.\nThe boundary between Daggett and Uintah counties was adjusted in 1919, with some territory being returned to Uintah. Daggett County boundaries have remained unchanged since 1919.\nGeography.\nDaggett County lies at the lower northeastern corner of Utah. Its northern border abuts the south border of the state of Wyoming, and its eastern boundary abuts the western border of the state of Colorado. Its main geographical features are the Uinta Mountains, which comprise its southwestern portion and delineate part of its southern border, and the Green River, which has carved a deep gorge through the east-central part of the county. In 1958, the United States Bureau of Reclamation took advantage of this natural feature to construct the Flaming Gorge Dam, creating the Flaming Gorge Reservoir, which began filling in 1964.\nThe county terrain slopes to the north and east on the northern flank of the Uintas. The county's highest point is on a mountain crest along its south border, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.3%) is water. It is the fourth-smallest county in Utah by area. Over 90% of the land of Daggett County is under federal ownership.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 935 people in Daggett County with a population density of 1.3 people per square mile (0.5/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 881 (94.2%) White, 1 (0.1%) African American, 0 (0.0%) Native American, 1 (0.1%) Asian, 2 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 2 (0.2%) from other races, and 19 (2.0%) from two or more races. 29 (3.1%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 510 (54.55%) males and 425 (45.45%) females, and the population distribution by age was 219 (23.4%) under the age of 18, 455 (48.7%) from 18 to 64, and 261 (27.9%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 47.6 years.\nThere were 392 households in Daggett County with an average size of 2.39 of which 282 (71.9%) were families and 110 (28.1%) were non-families. Among all families, 227 (57.9%) were married couples, 29 (7.4%) were male householders with no spouse, and 26 (6.6%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 99 (25.3%) were a single person living alone and 11 (2.8%) were two or more people living together. 115 (29.3%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 323 (82.4%) of households were owner-occupied while 69 (17.6%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Daggett County household was $74,911 and the median family income was $100,833, with a per-capita income of $27,568. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $69,375 and for females $35,313. 3.3% of the population and 0.0% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 381 people in Daggett County 25 years or older, 15 (3.9%) had not completed high school, 162 (42.5%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 148 (38.8%) had some college or associate degree, 39 (10.2%) had a bachelor's degree, and 17 (4.5%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2016, the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Daggett County, Utah, were:\nPolitics and government.\nDaggett County is governed by three commissioners, an auditor/HR director, a recorder/treasurer, a clerk, an assessor, and a sheriff, all elected for four-year terms in partisan elections. Judges stand for a non-partisan retention election every four years. Current officeholders and the year the current term began:https://\nDaggett County has traditionally voted Republican. In no national election since 1964 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nCommerce and transportation.\nThe few commercial establishments in Daggett County exist to service tourists and users of the Flaming Gorge National Recreation Area. Throughout the county, there is one small general store, several gas stations, five cafes or restaurants, five inns/motels, and a few miscellaneous businesses that offer raft rentals. Some businesses offer guided fishing trips on the Flaming Gorge Reservoir and the Green River. The economy is primarily related to recreation, management of government land, and ranching. There are no railroads within Daggett County.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThere is one school district in the county: Daggett School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71045", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71045", "title": "Carbon County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nCarbon County is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 20,412. Its county seat and largest city is Price.\nThe Price, UT Micropolitan Statistical Area includes all of Carbon County.\nHistory.\nCarbon County was part of Emery County, founded in 1880. The demographics along the Price River changed with the construction of the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad in 1883 and the development of coal mines, largely in upper Emery, to fuel the railroad. The Utah Territory Legislature was petitioned to split off the north part, and thus it established Carbon County effective March 8, 1894. It was named for the element Carbon, to emphasize the industrial nature of the area.\nCarbon County is the second-largest natural gas producer in Utah (after Uintah County), with 94 billion cubic feet produced in 2008.\nGeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Green River flows south-southeastward along the county's eastern border. The lower central part of Carbon County is a continuation of Castle Valley in Emery County, but in Carbon, the valley is ringed with mountains - the Wasatch Range to the west and northwest, and the Book Cliffs to the north and northeast. The county generally slopes to the south and east; its highest point is Monument Peak on the crest of the Wasatch Mountains near the midpoint of the county's western border, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.4%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 20,412 people in Carbon County with a population density of 13.8 people per square mile (5.3/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 16,645 (81.5%) White, 50 (0.2%) African American, 199 (1.0%) Native American, 63 (0.3%) Asian, 29 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 58 (0.3%) from other races, and 691 (3.4%) from two or more races. 2,677 (13.1%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 10,228 (50.11%) males and 10,184 (49.89%) females, and the population distribution by age was 5,227 (25.6%) under the age of 18, 11,372 (55.7%) from 18 to 64, and 3,813 (18.7%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 38.6 years.\nThere were 7,950 households in Carbon County with an average size of 2.57 of which 5,279 (66.4%) were families and 2,671 (33.6%) were non-families. Among all families, 3,994 (50.2%) were married couples, 433 (5.4%) were male householders with no spouse, and 852 (10.7%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 2,231 (28.1%) were a single person living alone and 440 (5.5%) were two or more people living together. 2,500 (31.4%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 5,665 (71.3%) of households were owner-occupied while 2,285 (28.7%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Carbon County household was $50,328 and the median family income was $63,902, with a per-capita income of $23,613. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $54,063 and for females $32,545. 15.9% of the population and 13.1% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 13,262 people in Carbon County 25 years or older, 1,040 (7.8%) had not completed high school, 3,897 (29.4%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 6,102 (46.0%) had some college or associate degree, 1,471 (11.1%) had a bachelor's degree, and 752 (5.7%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 21,403 people, 7,978 households, and 5,587 families in the county. The population density was . There were 9,551 housing units, with an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 92.31% White, 0.43% Black or African American, 1.18% Native American, 0.58% Asian, 0.01% Pacific Islander, 3.03% from other races, and 2.36% from two or more races. 12.42% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,978 households, of which 30.16% had children under 18. 54.50% were married couples living together, 10.65% had a female householder with no husband present, and 29.97% were non-families. 25.50% of all households were made up of individuals (one person), and 11.07% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.61, and the average family size was 3.14.\nThe population contained 30.41% under the age of 20, 6.82% aged 20 to 24, 23.73% aged 25 to 44, 25.48% aged 45 to 64, and 13.56% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34.4. For every 100 females, there were 98.40 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 96.88 males.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2015 the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Carbon County, Utah are:\nPolitics and government.\nCarbon County historically was the base of Democratic Party support in strongly Republican Utah with its sizable unionized mining population. In 1964, Lyndon Johnson carried 72.7% of votes in the county. Notably, however, Ronald Reagan won just three votes more than did Jimmy Carter in 1980. Nonetheless, it voted for Bill Clinton in 1992 and 1996 by wide margins. At the state level, it was no less Democratic; in the 1992 gubernatorial election, it was one of two counties (the other being Summit County) that voted for Democrat Stewart Hanson over Republican Michael Leavitt.\nSince the turn of the millennium, however, Carbon County has trended Republican. It voted for George W. Bush in 2000 and 2004 while voting for the Democratic gubernatorial candidates. In 2008, John McCain won Carbon County with 52.60% of the vote, versus 44.59% for Barack Obama, making him the last Democratic nominee to win more than forty percent of the county's vote. In 2012, the county's Democratic vote fell further as Mitt Romney carried 67.3% over Obama's 30.1%. In 2016, despite Utah's strong swing against the Republicans due to the presence of conservative independent Evan McMullin, Carbon County was the only county in the state to swing more Republican, as Donald Trump won 66% to Hillary Clinton's 21.5% percent. In 2020, Trump again carried the county with the largest percentage (71.4%) of any Republican to date. Despite its rightward shift, Carbon County supported 2018 Utah Proposition 4, a ballot measure to create an independent redistricting commission in the state.\nNotes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGhost towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThere are five public elementary schools in Carbon County (Bruin Point, Castle Heights, Creekview, Sally Mauro, and Wellington); two middle schools (Helper and Mont Harmon); one high school (Carbon High School). It is also the location of the charter Pinnacle Canyon Academy, which serves grades K-12, as well as the Castle Valley Center for disabled children.\nPrice is the location of Utah State University Eastern, which has an enrollment of approximately 1,525.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71046", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71046", "title": "Cache County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nCache County ( ) is a county located in the northern region of Utah bordering Idaho. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 133,154, with an estimated 145,487 in 2024. Its county seat and largest city is Logan. Cache County is one of two counties included in the Logan metropolitan area, alongside Franklin County, Idaho.\nHistory.\nIndigenous peoples occupied the valleys of present Cache County as much as 10,000 BCE. Near the present epoch, the valley served the Plains Indians and the Shoshone. Trappers and explorers visited the area in the late 18th and early 19th centuries. John Henry Weber and Jim Bridger came through in 1824; Peter Skene Ogden and James Beckwourth passed through in 1825.\nIn July 1855, a group of settlers from the LDS Church drove a herd of cattle into the valley and camped at Haw Bush Spring (present Elkhorn Ranch). However, the cold winter drove the settlers back to the Salt Lake Valley. Peter Maughan, who had requested better land for agriculture for the families of his settlement in Lake Point, Utah, was called by President Brigham Young to establish a new settlement in the Cache Valley. On September 15, 1856, he established Maughan's Fort, which grew into present day Wellsville. More settlers arrived in the valley, and by 1859 the settlements of Providence, Mendon, Logan, Richmond, and Smithfield had been established.\nIn preparation for this influx, the Utah Territory legislature created a county, effective January 5, 1856, with seats and government incomplete. By April 4, 1857, the organization was completed, and Logan became the seat. It was named for the fur stashes, known in French as \"Caches\", made by many of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company trappers. The county gained area in 1862 when its boundary lines with adjacent counties were adjusted. In 1863, the federal government enacted the Idaho Territory, which administratively removed the described portions of Cache County that lay north of the territorial border. Then in 1864, the east part of the county was partitioned to become Rich County. The borders of Cache County have remained in their present state since 1864.\nA rail line between Brigham City and Logan was completed in 1873 (Utah and Northern Railway). The line was extended into Idaho, and a connection was made to the transcontinental railroad, which opened the world to Cache County; their crops (especially grain and dairy) began moving to broader markets. The county's sheep population also burgeoned, from 10,000 in 1880 to 300,000 by 1900. By 1900 the Forest Service began regulating grazing practices, which brought the sheep population under control.\nThere were 16,000 dairy cows in Cache County in 1910. Commercial creameries, flour mills, woolen mills, and knitting factories developed around the farm-based economy. Cache presently continues as the state's leader in dairy products and as a major producer of hay, alfalfa, and grain.\nGeography.\nCache County lies on the north edge of Utah. Its north border abuts the south border of the state of Idaho. On the western edge of the county are the Wellsville Mountains and on the eastern edge are the Bear River Mountains, both northern branches of the Wasatch Range. The Cache Valley reaches north to the state border. The Bear River Mountains, the northernmost extension of the Wasatch Range, cover the eastern half of the county. The county's highest elevation is Naomi Peak in the northeast part of the county, at above sea level. The Bear River flows through Cache Valley. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.7%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment and politics.\nCache County is governed by a seven-member County Council which exercises legislative authority, while the county additionally elects a County Executive who oversees the day-to-day operations of the County. Various other offices in the Cache County government are filled by election. At the state-level, the county elects eight officials at large. As of 2025, all county elected officials were members of the Republican Party.\nLike most of Utah, Cache County is strongly Republican in presidential elections. The last time it voted for a Democratic presidential candidate was 1944. Unlike most counties dominated by a major college town, Cache County is solidly Republican.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 133,154 people in Cache County with a population density of 114.3 people per square mile (44.1/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 109,376 (82.1%) White, 1,045 (0.8%) African American, 620 (0.5%) Native American, 2,303 (1.7%) Asian, 660 (0.5%) Pacific Islander, 422 (0.3%) from other races, and 3,652 (2.7%) from two or more races. 15,076 (11.3%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 66,362 (49.84%) males and 66,792 (50.16%) females, and the population distribution by age was 38,993 (29.3%) under the age of 18, 80,630 (60.6%) from 18 to 64, and 13,531 (10.2%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 26.3 years.\nThere were 41,658 households in Cache County with an average size of 3.20 of which 30,904 (74.2%) were families and 10,754 (25.8%) were non-families. Among all families, 25,928 (62.2%) were married couples, 1,688 (4.1%) were male householders with no spouse, and 3,288 (7.9%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 7,130 (17.1%) were a single person living alone and 3,624 (8.7%) were two or more people living together. 16,542 (39.7%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 26,427 (63.4%) of households were owner-occupied while 15,231 (36.6%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Cache County household was $60,530 and the median family income was $69,109, with a per-capita income of $24,221. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $50,178 and for females $33,997. 14.6% of the population and 9.3% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 64,162 people in Cache County 25 years or older, 4,146 (6.5%) had not completed high school, 12,940 (20.2%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 22,386 (34.9%) had some college or associate degree, 16,272 (25.4%) had a bachelor's degree, and 8,418 (13.1%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 112,655 people, 34,722 households, and 26,464 families in the county. The population density was . There were 37,024 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 89.12% White, 0.62% Black or African American, 0.61% Native American, 1.88% Asian, 0.39% Pacific Islander, 5.48% from other races, and 1.90% from two or more races. 9.96% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 34,722 households, out of which 41.34% had children under 18 living with them, 76.22% were married couples living together, 7.73% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.78% were non-families. 16.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 5.54% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.14, and the average family size was 3.55.\nThe county population contained 36.3% under the age of 20, 12.59% from 20 to 24, 26.97% from 25 to 44, 16.41% from 45 to 64, and 7.72% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 25.5 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.84 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 99.53 males.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2016, the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Cache County were:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCommunities.\nCache County has 13 incorporated cities, six incorporated towns, one township, five unincorporated areas, and at least two former communities. Millville was the first area to be incorporated in April 1864. Logan was incorporated on January 17, 1866, with Wellsville incorporated two days later. The most recent area to be incorporated was Amalga in 1938.\nAlmost every city and area of Cache County has an annual celebration. Millville's \"May Day\" has been celebrated since 1862, the oldest in the valley. Richmond's \"Black &amp; White Days\" includes the nation's longest-running dairy show, which started in 1912. The county government celebrates the Cache County Fair and Rodeo. Logan has an average of 24 annual events, including food festivals, historic home tours, and baby animal days.\nCities (13).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns (6).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places (5).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71047", "revid": "50952973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71047", "title": "Escalivada", "text": "Catalan traditional smoky grilled vegetable dish\nEscalivada (; ), also sometimes transcribed in French as 'escalibade' and in Spanish as escalibada, is a traditional dish from Roussillon, Catalonia, Val\u00e8ncia, Murcia and Arag\u00f3n of smoky grilled vegetables. It typically consists of roasted eggplant and bell peppers with olive oil and sometimes onion, tomato, minced garlic, and salt.\nThe name comes from the Catalan verb , \"to cook in ashes\", referencing the dish's traditional preparation in the embers of a wood fire.\nThe dish can be grilled outdoors on a grate until charred and soft or may be cooked whole directly on glowing coals and then peeled. Indoors, the eggplant may be charred on a gas burner and the rest of the vegetables may be broiled. Escalivada is often seen as a relish for grilled meats or fish such as tuna, with anchovies or olives in a salad, or as a topping for \"coca\" (Catalan flat bread, somewhat similar to a pizza). It is also a common side for pa amb tom\u00e0quet (bread with tomato) or truita de patates (potato omelette), often served in typical Catalan households.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71048", "revid": "1315500116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71048", "title": "Box Elder County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nBox Elder County is a county at the northwestern corner of Utah, United States. At the 2020 United States census, the population was 57,666, up from the 2010 figure of 49,975. Its county seat and largest city is Brigham City. The county was named for the box elder trees that abound in the county.\nBox Elder County is part of the Ogden-Clearfield, UT Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Salt Lake City-Provo-Orem, UT Combined Statistical Area. \nBox Elder County is home to two regional campuses of Utah State University (located in Brigham City and Tremonton).\nHistory.\nThe county was created by the Utah Territory legislature on January 5, 1856, with the territory partitioned from Weber County. Its boundaries were altered in 1862 by adjustments between counties and in 1866 when all its area in the now-existent state of Nevada (which had gained territorial status in 1861 and statehood in 1864) was formally partitioned. The county boundaries were finally altered in 1880 by adjustments between Salt Lake and Weber counties. Its boundary has remained unchanged since 1880.\nThe California Trail followed Goose Creek from a point just north of the Idaho/Utah border southwest across northwestern Box Elder County to Little Goose Creek in northeastern Elko County, Nevada.\nThe link-up of the first transcontinental railroad occurred at Promontory Summit, Utah in 1869.\nThe Spiral Jetty, an earthwork sculpture by Robert Smithson, was built on the north shore of the Great Salt Lake in Box Elder County in 1970.\nOn November 19, 2005, sculptor Zaq Landsberg declared his plot to be independent from the United States, creating the Republic of Zaqistan.\nGeography.\nBox Elder County lies at the northwest corner of Utah. Its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada and its north border abuts the south border of the state of Idaho. Its territory includes large tracts of barren desert, contrasted by high, forested mountains. The Wasatch Front lies along the south-eastern border, where the main cities are found. The terrain generally slopes to the south (toward the Great Salt Lake), although the NW corner of the county slopes to the north, allowing runoff from that area to flow to the Snake River drainage. The county's highest point is a mountain ridge near the NW corner, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (15%) is water. It is the fourth-largest county in Utah by area.\nIn the east lie the Wellsville Mountains, a branch of the Wasatch Range. In the west is a large, mostly uninhabited desert area. The Great Salt Lake lies in the southeastern corner of the county. The combined Interstate 15/Interstate 84 runs northward in the eastern part of the county. The two routes diverge at Tremonton, with I-84 heading northwest past Snowville into central and western Idaho and I-15 heading north past Plymouth and Portage into eastern Idaho.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNational protected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 57,666 people in Box Elder County with a population density of 10.0 people per square mile (3.9/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 49,361 (85.6%) White, 161 (0.3%) African American, 383 (0.7%) Native American, 438 (0.8%) Asian, 98 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 102 (0.2%) from other races, and 1,586 (2.8%) from two or more races. 5,537 (9.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 29,190 (50.62%) males and 28,476 (49.38%) females, and the population distribution by age was 18,255 (31.7%) under the age of 18, 31,620 (54.8%) from 18 to 64, and 7,791 (13.5%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 33.0 years.\nThere were 18,678 households in Box Elder County with an average size of 3.09 of which 14,609 (78.2%) were families and 4,069 (21.8%) were non-families. Among all families, 11,985 (64.2%) were married couples, 969 (5.2%) were male householders with no spouse, and 1,655 (8.9%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 3,482 (18.6%) were a single person living alone and 587 (3.1%) were two or more people living together. 7,722 (41.3%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 14,543 (77.9%) of households were owner-occupied while 4,135 (22.1%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Box Elder County household was $63,573 and the median family income was $73,446, with a per-capita income of $25,835. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $52,960 and for females $36,673. 7.9% of the population and 6.4% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 32,717 people in Box Elder County 25 years or older, 2,325 (7.1%) had not completed high school, 9,937 (30.4%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 12,701 (38.8%) had some college or associate degree, 5,656 (17.3%) had a bachelor's degree, and 2,098 (6.4%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 census, there were 49,975 people, 16,058 households, and 12,891 families in the county. The population density was . There were 17,326 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 91.77% White, 0.34% Black or African American, 0.82% Native American, 0.89% Asian, 0.17% Pacific Islander, 3.77% from other races, and 2.24% from two or more races. 8.31% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 16,058 households, out of which 41.32% had children under 18 living with them, 67.44% were married couples living together, 8.69% had a female householder with no husband present, and 19.72% were non-families. 17.16% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.39% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.09, and the average family size was 3.50.\nThe county population contained 36.60% under the age of 20, 5.55% from 20 to 24, 25.37% from 25 to 44, 21.35% from 45 to 64, and 11.13% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30.6 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.59 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 96.61 males.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2015, the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Box Elder County were:\nPolitics and government.\nBox Elder voters are overwhelmingly Republican. In no national election since 1944 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate, and the last Democrat to obtain one-quarter of the county's vote was Hubert Humphrey in 1968.\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGhost towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71051", "revid": "48513189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71051", "title": "Burton L. Mack", "text": "American biblical scholar (1931\u20132022)\nBurton L. Mack (1931 \u2013 March 9, 2022) was an American author and scholar of early Christian history and the New Testament. He was John Wesley Professor emeritus in early Christianity at the Claremont School of Theology in Claremont, California. Mack was primarily a scholar of Christian origins, approaching it from the angle of social group formation. Mack's approach was skeptical, and he saw traditional Christian documents like the Gospels as myth as opposed to history. He viewed the gospels more as charter documents of the early Christian movements, not as reliable accounts of the life of Jesus.\nIn the field of religious studies more generally, Mack was known for popularizing the term \"Social Formation,\" originally coming from the work of Louis Althusser, as a descriptive category for religion. This stems from his development of a theory of religion as \"social interests.\" Along with his close friend Jonathan Z. Smith, Mack was active in the Redescribing Christian Origins Group of the Society of Biblical Literature.\nMack died on March 9, 2022, at the age of 90.\nWorks.\nThough he did not regard himself as a Historical Jesus scholar, he suggested that Jesus was a wandering sage, similar in style to the Greco-Roman Cynics, and that the earliest \"Jesus Movements\" followed a similar model. He was a noted scholar of the hypothetical \"Q Document\", and is confident that it can be sifted into three layers: one containing primarily wisdom sayings, another giving details on how the community ought to behave, and another containing apocalyptic pronouncements.\n\"The Lost Gospel\".\n\"The Lost Gospel\" develops the hypothesis of the \"Q\" source for the common material of Luke and Matthew not found in Mark. Mack develops the thesis that this was the earliest writing about Jesus, developed over decades by a community which he describes with unwavering confidence. Following John S. Kloppenborg, he believes that there are three major layers to it, each of which coincides with a stage in this community's life. The layers are significantly structured - the earliest material is spaced out and bracketed by later material, the later material showing awareness of the earlier sayings, but not vice versa.\nReception.\nMack's hypothesis presenting Jesus and the earliest Christians within the frame of Greco-Roman Cynicism is controversial. While most scholars have recognised finding Jesus within the context of 1st century Judaism, Mack and other proponents go against the majority and argue that Jesus be understood in a Hellenistic context. Evangelical-scholar Craig A. Evans dismisses this theory in \"The Misplaced Jesus: Interpreting Jesus in a Judaic Context\", saying: \"The Cynic hypothesis will in time assuredly be consigned to the dustbin of ill-conceived hypotheses, but it will be useful nonetheless to appeal to it as our point of departure.\" Other scholars, such as John Dominic Crossan, affirms the confluence of Hellenistic and Judaic cultures in 1st-century Galilee as a potential source for the similarities between Christ and the Cynic philosophers-peasants of antiquity. Crossan and Marcus Borg also agree with Mack's view that the original teachings of Jesus of Nazareth were non-eschatological.\nMack follows the lead of Kloppenborg in reconstructing Q in layers, focusing on Q communities. This sort of reconstruction has been criticised by a number of scholars such as Maurice Casey. On Jesus as a Cynic, Casey states that \"When all the evidence is taken into account, supposed parallels of this kind show that Jesus was quite different from a Cynic philosopher, not that he was like one.\" Leif E. Vaage of Emmanuel College notes the similarities between the Q document and the texts of the Cynics, namely the Cynic epistles, which contains the wisdom and ethical anecdotes used by Cynic preachers and illustrates their ascetic way of life focused on purity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71052", "revid": "33277453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71052", "title": "Beaver County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nBeaver County is a county in west central Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 7,072, up from the 2010 figure of 6,629. Its county seat and largest city is Beaver. The county was named for the abundance of beaver in the area.\nHistory.\nExplorers of European descent first visited present-day Beaver County in the 1776 Dom\u00ednguez-Escalante Expedition. The proposed territory of Deseret (soon changed to Utah Territory) began with the arrival of Mormon pioneers in 1847. After the immediate Great Salt Lake City area was settled, settlers moved into more outlying areas, including the future Beaver County area. The county was created by the Utah territorial legislature from a section of Iron County on January 5, 1856, before the settlement of Beaver town was founded later that year. The county was named for the animal, which was plentiful there. The county boundary as delineated by that act included areas in present-day Colorado and Nevada. The defined boundary was altered on January 16, 1861, by the creation of two counties in present Nevada. The county area was effectively reduced on February 28, 1861, by the US Congress when it created Colorado Territory, taking all of the Beaver County areas east of 109 degrees longitude. The county's boundary was enlarged on January 17, 1861, by the addition of parcels from Millard, Sanpete, and St. Mary's counties. However, its west area was reduced by the creation of the Nevada Territory on July 14, 1862 (this adjustment was altered on May 5, 1866, by the action of the US Congress, effectively ceding all Beaver County area west of 114 degrees longitude to Nevada counties). The county area was also reduced on January 16, 1865, when Piute County was created from Beaver territory.\nA quarter of the county's workers are employed by hog processor Smithfield Foods.\nGeography.\nBeaver County lies on the west side of Utah. Its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada. The west part of the county consists of low rolling hills punctuated by isolated mountains. The east edge of the county runs to the crest of a north\u2013south-running mountain ridge. The terrain slopes to the west and north; its highest point is a mountain crest on its east border, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.08%) is water.\nThe Tushar Mountains lies on the eastern boundary of the county, reaching to in elevation and providing water for the farming communities of Beaver and Manderfield. To the west, barren desert valleys typify the scenery, separated by mountains lightly forested with junipers. \nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 7,072 people in Beaver County with a population density of 2.7 people per square mile (1.1/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 5,717 (80.8%) White, 23 (0.3%) African American, 70 (1.0%) Native American, 32 (0.5%) Asian, 21 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 8 (0.1%) from other races, and 135 (1.9%) from two or more races. 1,066 (15.1%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 3,758 (53.14%) males and 3,314 (46.86%) females, and the population distribution by age was 2,162 (30.6%) under the age of 18, 3,862 (54.6%) from 18 to 64, and 1,048 (14.8%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 34.4 years.\nThere were 2,276 households in Beaver County with an average size of 3.11 of which 1,692 (74.3%) were families and 584 (25.7%) were non-families. Among all families, 1,368 (60.1%) were married couples, 140 (6.2%) were male householders with no spouse, and 184 (8.1%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 497 (21.8%) were a single person living alone and 87 (3.8%) were two or more people living together. 900 (39.5%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 1,719 (75.5%) of households were owner-occupied while 557 (24.5%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Beaver County household was $66,705 and the median family income was $75,066, with a per-capita income of $24,540. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $53,514 and for females $36,696. 4.1% of the population and 2.9% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 3,871 people in Beaver County 25 years or older, 334 (8.6%) had not completed high school, 1,046 (27.0%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 1,492 (38.5%) had some college or associate degree, 862 (22.3%) had a bachelor's degree, and 137 (3.5%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nPolitics and government.\nBeaver County voters have traditionally voted Republican. In no national election since 1964 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate. Jimmy Carter in 1976 was the last Democrat to even come within ten points of winning Beaver County.\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThere is one school district, Beaver School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71054", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71054", "title": "Plague", "text": "Plague or The Plague may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71055", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71055", "title": "Duchesne County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nDuchesne County ( ) is a county in the northeast part of the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 19,596. Its county seat is Duchesne, and the largest city is Roosevelt.\nHistory.\nMuch of Duchesne County was part of the Uintah Reservation, created 1861 by US President Abraham Lincoln as a permanent home of the Uintah and White River Utes. Later the Uncompahgre Utes were moved to the Uintah and newly created Uncompahgre Indian reservations from western Colorado. At the turn of the century, under the Dawes Act, both Indian reservations were thrown open to homesteaders. This was done after allotments of land were made to Indians of the three tribes. The homesteading process was opened on the Uintah on August 27, 1905.\nUnlike much of the rest of Utah Territory, settlement of the future Duchesne County area did not occur due to LDS Church pressures. It was settled by individuals who obtained 160 acres under the federal Homestead Act. Homesteaders were required to prove that they intended to farm the land. After five years of living on the land, making improvements, and paying $1.25 per acre, homesteaders were given title to their homesteads.\nOn July 13, 1914, a referendum was presented to voters of Wasatch County to partition the eastern part into a separate county. The referendum passed, so Utah Governor William Spry proclaimed on January 4, 1915. The county seat was decided by county vote on November 5, 1914, election. The new county was named for its county seat, which in turn was called for the Duchesne River, which flows southward and then eastward through the central part of the county near the city. Its name is of uncertain origin, but the holding theory is that fur trappers named it in the 1820s in honor of Mother Rose Philippine Duchesne, founder of the School of the Sacred Heart near St. Louis, Missouri, although other theories as to the name exist. The county boundary with Uintah County was adjusted by legislative act on March 5, 1917; Duchesne County boundaries have remained in their current configuration since that date.\nGeography.\nDuchesne County's terrain is semi-arid, rough, and scarred with drainages. The Duchesne River drains the central part of the county. The county generally slopes to the south and east. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water. The northern part of the county contains much of the east\u2013west oriented Uinta Mountains. The highest natural point in Utah, Kings Peak at , is located in Duchesne County.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 19,596 people in Duchesne County with a population density of 6.1 people per square mile (2.3/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 16,736 (85.4%) White, 21 (0.1%) African American, 875 (4.5%) Native American, 60 (0.3%) Asian, 39 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 47 (0.2%) from other races, and 533 (2.7%) from two or more races. 1,285 (6.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 9,933 (50.69%) males and 9,663 (49.31%) females, and the population distribution by age was 6,328 (32.3%) under the age of 18, 10,598 (54.1%) from 18 to 64, and 2,670 (13.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 33.3 years.\nThere were 6,511 households in Duchesne County with an average size of 3.01 of which 4,937 (75.8%) were families and 1,574 (24.2%) were non-families. Among all families, 3,986 (61.2%) were married couples, 363 (5.6%) were male householders with no spouse, and 588 (9.0%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 1,312 (20.2%) were a single person living alone and 262 (4.0%) were two or more people living together. 2,748 (42.2%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 5,124 (78.7%) of households were owner-occupied while 1,387 (21.3%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Duchesne County household was $61,655 and the median family income was $69,216, with a per-capita income of $25,086. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $62,929 and for females $35,847. 13.9% of the population and 11.0% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 11,755 people in Duchesne County 25 years or older, 1,270 (10.8%) had not completed high school, 4,510 (38.4%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 4,362 (37.1%) had some college or associate degree, 1,159 (9.9%) had a bachelor's degree, and 454 (3.9%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 18,607 people, 6,003 households, and 4,703 families in the county. The population density was . There were 6,988 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 89.15% White, 0.24% Black or African American, 4.53% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.27% Pacific Islander, 2.64% from other races, and 2.89% from two or more races. 6.00% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 6,003 households, of which 40.23% had children under 18 living with them, 64.72% were married couples living together, 8.65% had a female householder with no husband present, and 21.66% were non-families. 45.0% of all households had individuals under 18, and 22.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.05, and the average family size was 3.47.\nThe county population contained 33.91% under the age of 18, 6.56% from 20 to 24, 25.38% from 25 to 44, 20.92% from 45 to 64, and 10.66% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29.7 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.80 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 100.00 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $31,298, and the median income for a family was $35,350. Males had a median income of $31,988 versus $19,692 for females. The per capita income for the county was $12,326. About 14.20% of families and 16.80% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.60% of those under age 18 and 12.40% of those aged 65 or over.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2015 the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Duchesne County, Utah are:\nPolitics and government.\nDuchesne County voters are traditionally Republican. In no national election since 1964 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nCommunities.\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nAll areas in the county are in the Duchesne School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71056", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71056", "title": "Emery County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nEmery County is a county in east-central Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 9,825. Its county seat is Castle Dale, and the largest city is Huntington.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nOccupation of the San Rafael region dates back thousands of years to include people of the Desert Archaic Culture who were followed by those of the Fremont culture who inhabited present-day Emery County through the sixth through thirteenth centuries AD. Evidence of these civilizations is extant in numerous pictograph and petroglyph panels, such as those in Temple Mountain Wash, Muddy Creek, Ferron Box, Black Dragon Canyon, and Buckhorn Wash - all sites listed in the National Register of Historic Places. Indigenous Ute people also occupied sites in Castle Valley.\nOld Spanish Trail.\nThe first non-indigenous persons to view Castle Valley were Spanish Traders and Explorers. The first of record was Silvestre V\u00e9lez de Escalante; in 1776, he crossed northern Utah through the Uintah Basin. Spanish traders and explorers soon found a more southerly route, and their path became known as the Old Spanish Trail. It began at Santa Fe, to Durango, Colorado, crossed the Colorado River (then known as Grand River) near present-day Moab, then to the Green River-crossing where Green River is now located, thence westerly to Cedar Mountain. It went on the South side of Cedar Mountain, across Buckhorn Flat, passed the Red Seeps to Huntington Creek, crossing about a mile below where the present bridge crosses; thence to Cottonwood Creek. It crossed the Ferron Creek where Molen now stands. It passed through the Rochester Flats about east of present-day Moore and crossed the Muddy Creek about due east of the present town of Emery. \nIt then went over Salina (Salt Creek) Canyon. It then turned south and went through Parowan, Mountain Meadows, Las Vegas Nevada, Barstow California, and to the coast. This Trail had to traverse Castle Valley to skirt the steep-walled canyons of the San Juan, Colorado, Green, Dirty Devil, and San Rafael Rivers.\nSlavery was the principal trade between Santa Fe and the Utah region. The trading of Indian women and children to the Spanish, although illegal, was the purpose of the Spanish coming into the area to become Utah. The other use of the trail was to herd livestock, mostly horses, from California to Santa Fe. Since the slave trade was illegal, the traders kept neither records of their activities nor the extent of their travels and explorations. Travelers along the Old Spanish Trail gave Castle Valley its names, as the travelers marveled at the imposing rock formations.\nEarly explorers.\nThe first Americans to come to Castle Valley were fur trappers, including the \"lost trappers\", James Workman and William Spencer, who had been separated from their trapping party by Comanche Indians and had wandered to the Moab crossing of the Colorado River hoping that they would find Santa Fe. They met a Spanish caravan of forty or fifty people going to California. They joined the caravan and traveled through Castle Valley in 1809 and went on to California. In 1830, William Wilfskill came to Castle Valley along the Spanish Trail. He and his party were fur trappers but found little in the area to keep them here.\nFollowing the trappers in the late 1840s and early 1850s, government explorers came to the valley seeking usable overland routes across the continent. Kit Carson was the first of these famous men. He was looking for a direct route for the mail to be carried overland from St. Louis to California. Carson carried through Castle Valley to the nation the news of gold being found in the Sierra Nevada in 1848.\nIn 1853 John W. Gunnison, an Army Topographical Engineer came through Castle Valley, plotting a railroad route. He was commissioned for this assignment by the US Secretary of War Jefferson Davis. He left detailed descriptions of his travels and carefully laid out his route through Castle Valley. Gunnison's route first met the Spanish Trail at the Green River crossing. He followed this trail for a short distance west of the Green River, but when the Spanish Trail entered a rugged rocky region (Sinbad Reef) he charted a route around this feature.\nThe third government explorer was John C. Fremont, in the winter of 1853\u201354. The cold weather heavily impacted his trip. They suffered from a lack of food and from the inhospitable landscape. There was no relief from their difficulties until they left Castle Valley and made their way to the small Mormon settlement of Parowan.\nArrival of pioneers.\nIn 1875 livestock growers from Sanpete County brought cattle and sheep into Castle Valley to graze, and several recognized the settlement potential of the region. With a shortage of sufficient land and water in Sanpete County and a strong desire by LDS Church leaders to acquire unoccupied land in the region before non-Mormons did, young families began moving into Castle Valley in the fall of 1877 to homestead in the future sites of Huntington, Ferron, Castle Dale, and Orangeville.\nIn late August 1877, Brigham Young, president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), issued an order to the Sanpete LDS Stake president seeking \"... at least fifty families [to] locate in Castle Valley this fall.\" The order led to the last Mormon colony settled under the direction of Brigham Young. One week later on August 29, Young, the Great Colonizer, died. During his 30 years as leader of the LDS Church, Young had overseen and directed the establishment of almost 400 towns and villages. The settlement of Emery County was his last.\nSoon after the issuance of Young's order, several bands of settlers moved out from the Sanpete region and headed for Castle Valley (Emery County). They settled along Huntington Creek, Cottonwood Creek, and Ferron Creek. The following spring (1878), several more families arrived. In the spring of 1878, Elias Cox and Charles Hollingshead set up a sawmill in Huntington Canyon to support the colony. On Ferron Creek, settlers plowed lands and began the construction of a ditch for irrigation. Most early settlers in Castle Valley claimed easily watered bottom lands along the creeks and rivers, and by 1879, most of the best lands had been taken up.\nThe Utah Territorial Legislature created Emery County on February 12, 1880. The description included the future Carbon County area. It was named for George W. Emery, the Utah Territory governor whose term was ending as the act was being debated. The 1880 census showed 556 people and 84 farms in Emery County, but this figure is likely short as many prominent settlers were inadvertently left off the county rolls. By 1890, the population of Emery County had risen to 2,866. Between 1880 and 1900, many significant canals were constructed, including the Huntington Canal (1884), Emery Canal (1885), Cleveland Canal (1885), and the Wakefield Ditch (1880). Many of the early canals are still in service. The county boundaries were altered in 1880 and 1890. In 1894 the north portion of the county was partitioned off to create Carbon County. The county boundaries remained intact after that, except for a small adjustment in the city of Green River in 2003.\nIn the early 1880s, the Denver and Rio Grande Western Railroad contemplated possible routings through the Emery County region. Early plans to locate the railroad through the heart of Emery County were thwarted when the route over the Wasatch Range was too steep. The route was moved to the NE part of the county, bypassing most settlements. Most of the county thus missed on economic opportunities brought by the railroad, but Green River, on the east county border, quickly boomed after the rails arrived.\nTwentieth century.\nEmery County population passed 4,600 by 1900, with 450+ farms and under cultivation. Irrigation systems were being expanded to bring new lands into production, bringing problems that would plague the region for several decades. Water rights conflicts frequently arose, and water theft, known as \"midnight irrigation,\" became common. Most disputes were settled by decree, but a few were contested by violence.\nThe underlying soils in Emery County consist of ancient seabeds which contain high levels of salts. Poor drainage and over-irrigation cause the salts to collect on the surface, rendering large land areas unsuitable for agriculture. The problem first appeared in the 1890s, and in 1903, a Department of Agriculture report stated that over 30% of the developed farmland in Emery County had been abandoned due to degradation.\nWith expanded irrigation development came expanded settlement as several new towns were established. In addition, the coal industry, which had consisted of small mines to cover local demand, had significantly expanded, with several large-scale operations starting in the county. The US entry into The Great War created a minor boom in Emery County as agricultural prices rose and manpower shortages caused wages at the mines to rise. Following the war, prices dropped significantly, leading to hard times throughout much of the 1920s. Things improved somewhat during the later years of the decade, but an even more significant collapse came with the onset of the Great Depression in the early 1930s. In addition, severe drought in 1931 and 1934 intensified the economic hardship in the county.\nThe 1930s were difficult for Emery County residents. The county population dropped by 5% from 1920 to 1930, although it remained somewhat steady after that. Agricultural prices dropped 40% from their 1929 level, and coal production dropped by half. Water shortages and land degradation continued to be problems. In 1935, only out of produced crops.\nThe residents did benefit from several depression-relief programs, including the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which established several CCC camps in the county. Company 959 established a camp in Joes Valley in May 1933. The camp moved several times in the following years before establishing a permanent camp near Ferron in 1935. A second camp was established at Castle Dale in 1935, and another camp was established at Green River in 1938. During its tenure in Emery County, the CCC built roads, bridges, and trails, as well as building ranger stations and other projects on public lands. Many enrollees settled in Emery County after their discharge from the Corps.\nFollowing the end of World War II, Emery County veterans returned to find relative economic prosperity. County farm income in 1946 was double that of 1940, and the coal mines were operating at fairly high levels. During the post-war years, the county matured and modernized as modern water and sanitation systems were constructed, roads were improved, and many of the luxuries enjoyed by people in less rural areas, like telephones, reached Emery County. While many things in Emery County improved, some things did not. The agricultural sector still suffered from inconsistent water supplies and a lack of significant long-term water storage. And in the mid-1950s, the region again experienced near-drought conditions. It was during this period that a water reservoir in Joes Valley was completed.\nRiding the crest of national economic growth during the 1970s, Emery County's population grew significantly as a result of the construction of large coal-fired power plants in Castle Dale and Huntington by Utah Power &amp; Light Company (PacifiCorp) and the expansion of coal mines to fuel them.\nRecent.\nOn August 6, 2007, at 2:48 A.M., UtahAmerican Energy's Crandall Canyon Mine, west north-west of Huntington collapsed, trapping 6 workers inside. The mine, located just off State Route 31, is about southeast of Fairview, and south of Salt Lake City (). The workers were approximately from the mine entrance and underground. The collapse registered recorded seismic waves in magnitude 3.9 to 4.0, by seismograph stations of the University of Utah. \nEmery County, the state's No. 2 coal-producing county, was also the site of a fire that killed 27 people in the Wilberg Mine in December 1984.\nGeography.\nThe Green River flows southward along the east side of the county. The Price River flows southeastward through the northeastern corner of the county to its discharge point into the Green on the county's eastern border. The San Rafael River rises in the northwestern part of the county and cuts its way across the county's central areas before discharging into the Green, several miles south of the city of Green River. The county terrain is rough flat areas broken by mountain ranges and ridges and carved by water erosion, generally sloping to the south and east. The county's highest point is ASL, in the Central Utah Plateaus on the county's main north border. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water. The Wasatch Plateau, a mountainous area, sits along the western boundary. The main population of the county lives along the base of these mountains. The San Rafael Swell occupies most of the area to the east.\nThe western side of the county is the most populated and contains numerous small communities residing in an agricultural valley that roughly parallels the Manti National Forest to the west. Streams originate in the Wasatch Plateau in the forest, and their headwaters are stored in several reservoirs. Agricultural areas depend on these reservoirs and waterways for survival, and some farmland communities struggle with excess salinity. The east side of the county is dry with rough terrain. Green River, the largest community on this side of the county, is more closely tied to the communities and economy of Grand County. Emery County's maps show the importance of the forest lands to the local communities as there are few significant groundwater aquifers in the area.\nEmery County contains three areas: the mountainous Wasatch Plateau to the west; Castle Valley, where the major settlements are located; and the desert of the San Rafael Swell, the San Rafael Reef, Cedar Mountain, and the remote stretches on the east.\nThe San Rafael River, the lifeblood of the county, originates in the Wasatch Plateau, where the headwaters are stored in several reservoirs for agricultural and industrial use. It flows into Castle Valley in three branches\u2014Huntington Creek, Cottonwood Creek, and Ferron Creek\u2014which unite to form the San Rafael River after they pass the communities and adjacent farmland. It then twists its way through the rock and desert to its junction with the Green River.\nGeographical names feature Native American, Spanish and English influences. Two Ute Indian names: Wasatch, a gap in the mountains; Quitchupah, a place where animals fare poorly. Wasatch is the name of the plateau between the Sanpete Valley and the Castle Valley. Quitchupah is a small creek south of Emery. The Spanish name is still used in San Rafael, which means Saint Ralph. During Spanish times, the name Rafael was also given to the present Ferron Creek. In 1873, A.D. Ferron, the surveyor sent by Washington to perform cadastral surveys of eastern Utah, named this creek, but before this time, it was the Rafael. The Ute Indians called it the Cabulla, which refers to the small edible part of cactus pear. Huntington Creek was originally called San Marcus; Ute Indians called it Sivareeche, and the Spanish called it Mateo. The Indians called Castle Valley Tompin-con-tu or rock house land, which relates to the present Castle Valley. The Spanish named the valley St. Joseph's Valley.\nArchaeology.\nRange Creek rises in Emery County and has recently been shown to have pristine remains of the Fremont culture. The State of Utah owns the site and is currently identifying the remains and developing a long-term conservation plan.\nMajor highways.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 9,825 people in Emery County with a population density of 2.2 people per square mile (0.9/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 8,811 (89.7%) White, 2 (0.0%) African American, 55 (0.6%) Native American, 36 (0.4%) Asian, 7 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 16 (0.2%) from other races, and 193 (2.0%) from two or more races. 705 (7.2%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 4,965 (50.53%) males and 4,860 (49.47%) females, and the population distribution by age was 2,869 (29.2%) under the age of 18, 5,187 (52.8%) from 18 to 64, and 1,769 (18.0%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 38.3 years.\nThere were 3,535 households in Emery County with an average size of 2.78 of which 2,625 (74.3%) were families and 910 (25.7%) were non-families. Among all families, 2,168 (61.3%) were married couples, 165 (4.7%) were male householders with no spouse, and 292 (8.3%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 779 (22.0%) were a single person living alone and 131 (3.7%) were two or more people living together. 1,257 (35.6%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 2,833 (80.1%) of households were owner-occupied while 702 (19.9%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for an Emery County household was $57,772 and the median family income was $71,556, with a per-capita income of $24,372. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $62,786 and for females $33,143. 12.0% of the population and 7.8% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 6,350 people in Emery County 25 years or older, 358 (5.6%) had not completed high school, 1,909 (30.1%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 3,081 (48.5%) had some college or associate degree, 687 (10.8%) had a bachelor's degree, and 315 (5.0%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2015, the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Emery County, Utah are:\nEconomy.\nLivestock and farming were the mainstays of Emery County's economy for much of its history. The opening of large coal mines and the construction of large power plants in Castle Dale and Huntington in the 1970s changed the economy, and the population grew sharply. High wages in this sector initially created high average incomes, but depressed markets for coal and coalbed methane, along with improvements in mining technology, have slowed or postponed this sector for some time.\nAs a result, unemployment has remained higher than that of the State since 1990. The County still contains extensive natural resources that could be tapped, but the jobs produced from new mining activity may be at a similar level as those replaced by technology.\nA proposed nuclear power plant, the Blue Castle Project, is set to begin construction near Green River in 2023.\nEducation.\nEmery County School District operates public schools in the county.\nEvents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAttractions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics and government.\nLike most of Utah, Emery County is reliably Republican. In only one national election since 1964, the county selected the Democratic Party candidate.\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71057", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71057", "title": "Garfield County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nGarfield County is a county in south central Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census the population was 5,083, making it the fifth-least populous county in Utah; with about one inhabitant per square mile, it is also the least densely populated county in Utah. Its county seat and largest city is Panguitch.\nHistory.\nThe Utah Territory legislature created the county on March 9, 1882, with areas partitioned from Iron County. It was named for James A. Garfield, the twentieth President of the United States, who had died six months earlier. The border with Iron County was adjusted in 1884, and Garfield County's boundaries have remained intact since then.\nGeography.\nThe Colorado River, flowing southwestward through a deep gorge, forms the eastern boundary. The Dirty Devil River flows southward through the east end of the county to discharge into Colorado at the county's border. Westward, the cliffs of tributary canyons give way to the barren stretches of the San Rafael Desert, beyond which a variety of mountains, plateaus, and canyons make up the terrain. Most of Bryce Canyon National Park lies in the southwestern part of the county, and the northern half of the Grand Staircase\u2013Escalante National Monument occupies the middle of the county. A large portion of Capitol Reef National Park lies in the east-central part of the county. A very small part of Canyonlands National Park lies in the northeast corner of the county. The terrain of Garfield County is arid, rough, and carved with erosion. \nThe county terrain generally slopes to the south and to the east. The county's highest point is Mount Ellen, in the Henry Mountains, near the county's north border, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water. \nIt is the fifth-largest county in Utah by area, and is about the same size as the state of Connecticut.\nAirports.\nSource:\nMajor highways.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nSource:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 5,083 people in Garfield County with a population density of 1.0 people per square mile (0.4/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 4,446 (87.5%) White, 5 (0.1%) African American, 90 (1.8%) Native American, 30 (0.6%) Asian, 7 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 3 (0.1%) from other races, and 118 (2.3%) from two or more races. 384 (7.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 2,619 (51.52%) males and 2,464 (48.48%) females, and the population distribution by age was 1,202 (23.6%) under the age of 18, 2,682 (52.8%) from 18 to 64, and 1,199 (23.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 43.3 years.\nThere were 1,881 households in Garfield County with an average size of 2.70 of which 1,323 (70.3%) were families and 558 (29.7%) were non-families. Among all families, 1,100 (58.5%) were married couples, 83 (4.4%) were male householders with no spouse, and 140 (7.4%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 479 (25.5%) were a single person living alone and 79 (4.2%) were two or more people living together. 528 (28.1%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 1,504 (80.0%) of households were owner-occupied while 377 (20.0%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Garfield County household was $44,279 and the median family income was $65,266, with a per-capita income of $23,926. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $49,904 and for females $34,773. 16.4% of the population and 11.3% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 3,484 people in Garfield County 25 years or older, 221 (6.3%) had not completed high school, 1,067 (30.6%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 1,312 (37.7%) had some college or associate degree, 648 (18.6%) had a bachelor's degree, and 236 (6.8%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2010[ [update]] the largest self-identified ancestry groups in Garfield County are:\nPolitics and government.\nGarfield County has traditionally voted Republican. In no national election since 1936 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nCommunities.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nAll portions of the county are in the Garfield School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71058", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71058", "title": "Catalan cuisine", "text": "Mediterranean style of cuisine from Catalonia\nCatalan cuisine is the cooking traditions and practices from Catalonia. It may also refer to the shared cuisine of Northern Catalonia and Andorra, the second of which has a similar cuisine to that of the neighbouring Alt Urgell and Cerdanya \"comarques\", often referred to as \"Catalan mountain cuisine\". It is considered a part of western Mediterranean cuisine.\nHistory.\nThere are several Catalan language cookbooks from the Middle Ages that are known to modern scholars. The \"Llibre del Coch\" (1520) was one of the most influential cookbooks of Renaissance Spain. It includes several sauce recipes made with ingredients such as ginger, mace powder ('), cinnamon, saffron, cloves ('), wine and honey. \"Salsa de pag\u00f3\" took its name from the peacock () that it was intended to be served with, but could accompany any type of poultry, and was part of the medieval Christmas meal. ' (or ' as it's called in the \"Cuoco Napoletano\") was half-roasted (\"\") poultry that was finished in a \"salsa\" thickened with egg yolks, toasted almonds and breadcrumbs. In the version of the recipe from the 14th-century \"Llibre de Sent Sov\u00ed\", the sauce is thickened with mashed poultry liver instead of egg yolks.\nHippocras (') was spiced wine made with cinnamon, cloves, ginger, pepper, honey and wine pressed through a ', a pastry bag-shaped cloth that was originally designed by Hippocrates to filter water.\nThe 17th century manuscript \"El llibre de la Cuina de Scala-Dei\", written at the Cartoixa d'Escaladei, contains austere recipes such as cereal porridges that go back to Roman times.\nBasic ingredients.\nCatalan cuisine relies heavily on ingredients popular along the Mediterranean coast, including fresh vegetables (especially tomato, garlic, eggplant (aubergine), capsicum, and artichoke), wheat products (bread, pasta), Arbequina olive oils, wines, legumes (beans, chickpeas), mushrooms (particularly wild mushrooms), nuts (pine nuts, hazelnuts and almonds), all sorts of pork preparations (sausage from Vic, ham), sheep and goats' cheese, poultry, lamb, many types of fish like sardine, anchovy, tuna, and cod and other seafood like prawns, squid, sea snails and sea urchins.\nTraditional Catalan cuisine is quite diverse, ranging from pork-intensive dishes cooked in the inland part of the region (Catalonia is one of the main producers of swine products in Spain) to fish-based recipes along the coast. These meat and seafood elements are frequently fused together in the Catalan version of surf and turf, known as \"mar i muntanya\". Examples include chicken with lobster (\"pollastre amb llagosta\"), chicken with crayfish (\"pollastre amb escarmalans\"), rice with meat and seafood (\"arr\u00f2s mar i muntanya\") and cuttlefish with meatballs (\"sipia amb mandonguilles\").\nThe cuisine includes many preparations that mix sweet and savoury and stews with sauces based upon \"botifarra\" (pork sausage) and the characteristic \"picada\" (ground almonds, hazelnuts, pine nuts, etc. sometimes with garlic, herbs, and biscuits).\nWines.\nThere are 11 Catalan wine-growing regions qualified by the INCAVI (The Catalan Institute of Wine): Priorat, Pened\u00e8s, Catalunya, Costers del Segre, Conca de Barber\u00e0, Montsant, Alella, Tarragona, Empord\u00e0, Pla del Bages and Terra Alta.\nThe sparkling wine cava, made mainly in the Pened\u00e8s and Anoia regions, is the Catalan equivalent to champagne. It is widely exported.\n\"Moscatell\" (Empord\u00e0), is a sweet Catalan wine which have similar varieties in other countries such as France, Italy, Portugal, Albania, Slovenia, Greece, Romania and Turkey, as well as other regions of Spain. However, Catalan \"moscatell\" is thicker than French\" muscat\" and is not drunk before the meal (\"aperitiu\") but after it, either with or after dessert.\nAlternative views.\nSome Catalan authors, such as Josep Pla, Jaume F\u00e0brega or Eliana Thibaut i Comalada, and others like Colman Andrews, have suggested that, besides Catalonia proper, this cuisine takes in the Balearic and Valencian cuisines, but this opinion is challenged as politicised, and is not widespread, nor is it supported by either the Balearic or the Valencian government, while the Catalan government itself provides divergent points of view. In any case, mutual ties do exist between Catalan gastronomy and other western Mediterranean gastronomies, such as Balearic cuisine, Valencian cuisine, Southern French cuisine, Aragonese cuisine or Murcian cuisine.\nChefs and restaurants.\nCatalan cooks and chefs are widely renowned and critically acclaimed all over the world. Three of The World's 50 Best Restaurants are in Catalonia, and four restaurants have three Michelin stars. The Michelin Guide Spain and Portugal 2022 edition awarded 49 restaurants across Catalonia with a total of 64 Michelin stars. Barcelona has 28 Michelin stars across 18 restaurants including Cinc Sentits and has been chosen as the best gastronomical city by the American TV network MSNBC in 2009, topping the list of the ten best gastronomical cities in the world.\nIn Province of Girona are two of the best restaurants of the world, El Celler de Can Roca, the best of the world in 2014 and 2015, and elBulli, in Roses, the best one in 2002, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2nd in 2010, before its closure in 2011.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71059", "revid": "22132037", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71059", "title": "Grand County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nGrand County is a county on the east central edge of the U.S. state of Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 9,669. Its county seat and largest city is Moab.\nGrand County is home to one of the nine statewide regional campuses of Utah State University (located in the city of Moab) and serves as a gateway to both Arches and Canyonlands National Parks.\nHistory.\nEvidence of indigenous occupation up to 10,000 BCE has been previously discovered in Grand County. The present city of Moab is the site of pueblo farming communities of the 11th and 12th centuries. These groups had already vanished from the area when the first European explorers entered the country, with nomadic Ute tribes inhabiting the area at the time of contact.\nThe European-based settlement of the area began with the arrival of Mormon pioneers in 1847. By 1855 they had sent missionary settlers into eastern Utah Territory. An Elk Mountain Mission was established but closed after a few months due to Indian raids. For several decades after that, the future Moab area (known as \"Spanish Valley\") was visited only by trappers and prospectors. Permanent settlement began in 1877. These early settlers, coming in from the north, encountered the deep canyon walls of the Grand River and could not take wagons over or around the steep canyon walls.\nThey unloaded their supplies, dismantled the wagons, and lowered them by rope to the river valley. They then drove their oxen over a canyon rim, down deep sand dunes. After the wagons were reassembled and supplies reloaded, they made their way through the deep sand to the river. They found a place to ford the river below the present bridge in north Moab. They later established a ferry at the crossing site, which remained in use until the first bridge was built in 1921.\nIn 1881 the area was known as Grand Valley, and Moab was a \"wild west\" town. A 1991 visitor to Moab later said it was the toughest town in Utah because the area and surrounding country have many deep canyons, rivers, mountains, and wilderness areas, becoming a hideout for outlaws. The local economy was initially based on farming and livestock. Mining came in at the end of the 19th century, and the railroad arrived. The first school in the county was started in 1881. Mormon settlers began planting fruit trees by 1879, and by 1910 Moab was a significant fruit-production center.\nDue to the distances involved, the settlers of eastern Emery County found it difficult to conduct county business in that county's seat. By March 13, 1890, their petitions caused the Utah Territory legislature to designate the eastern portion of the county as a separate entity, to be named Grand County, named for the Grand River (whose name was changed to Colorado River in 1921). The county boundaries were adjusted in 1892 and in 2003.\nExploration for deep petroleum deposits began in the 1920s, and this industry has significantly contributed to the economy since that time. Other significant industries include uranium mining and filmmaking.\nGeography.\nGrand County lies on the east side of Utah. Its east border abuts the west border of the state of Colorado. The Green River flows southward through the eastern part of central Utah, and its meandering course defines the western border of Grand County. The Colorado River enters the east side of Grand County from Colorado, flowing southwestward toward its confluence with the Green in San Juan County, south of Grand. The Dolores River also enters Grand County from Colorado, flowing westward to its confluence with the Colorado River near Dewey.\nGrand County terrain is arid, rough, and spectacularly carved by water and wind erosion, exposing red rock formations that have created a solid tourist industry. The area is little used for agriculture unless irrigation is available. The terrain is filled with hills and protuberances, but generally slopes to the south and to the west. Its highest point is Mount Waas in the SE part of the county, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.3%) is water. Deserts, cliffs and plateaus make up the scenery, with few settlements apart from the city of Moab, a Colorado River oasis. Arches National Park lies in the southern part of the county, just north of Moab. A northern portion of Canyonlands National Park lies in the southwest corner of the county.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 9,669 people in Grand County with a population density of 2.6 people per square mile (1.0/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 7,481 (77.4%) White, 65 (0.7%) African American, 330 (3.4%) Native American, 80 (0.8%) Asian, 11 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 62 (0.6%) from other races, and 414 (4.3%) from two or more races. 1,226 (12.7%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 4,810 (49.75%) males and 4,859 (50.25%) females, and the population distribution by age was 2,047 (21.2%) under the age of 18, 5,823 (60.2%) from 18 to 64, and 1,799 (18.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 40.5 years.\nThere were 4,006 households in Grand County with an average size of 2.41 of which 2,416 (60.3%) were families and 1,590 (39.7%) were non-families. Among all families, 1,676 (41.8%) were married couples, 260 (6.5%) were male householders with no spouse, and 480 (12.0%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 1,206 (30.1%) were a single person living alone and 384 (9.6%) were two or more people living together. 1,123 (28.0%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 2,632 (65.7%) of households were owner-occupied while 1,374 (34.3%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Grand County household was $56,639 and the median family income was $68,216, with a per-capita income of $30,948. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $47,736 and for females $36,180. 14.0% of the population and 11.5% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 7,137 people in Grand County 25 years or older, 442 (6.2%) had not completed high school, 1,931 (27.1%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 2,576 (36.1%) had some college or associate degree, 1,233 (17.3%) had a bachelor's degree, and 955 (13.4%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nReligion.\nGrand County has the lowest percentage of members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) among all Utah counties. About 26% of Grand County residents identify as Latter-day Saints, significantly lower than the 62% of Utah as a whole.\nPolitics and government.\nHistorically, following the period of William Jennings Bryan and Woodrow Wilson, Grand County has generally voted Republican. Between 1920 and 1988 (inclusive), it voted Democratic only four times: thrice for Franklin Roosevelt, and once for Lyndon Johnson. However, it has become a swing county in recent years, voting Democratic four times in the last nine presidential elections (for Bill Clinton in 1992, Barack Obama in 2008, Joe Biden in 2020, and Kamala Harris in 2024). The highest vote share any Republican has received in the county in the last nine elections was 51.1% (by George W. Bush in 2004); Joe Biden's 53.9% was the highest vote share for any nominee of either party since 1988, as well as the highest for a Democrat in the county since 1936. In 2024, Kamala Harris became the first Democratic presidential nominee to win Grand County despite losing the presidential election since 1900.\nGrand County is one of only thirteen counties to have voted for Obama in 2008, Romney in 2012, Trump in 2016, and Biden in 2020.\nMoab has a significant environmentalist population due to nearby Arches National Park and Canyonlands National Park.\nSagebrush Rebellion.\nGrand County was an epicenter of the Sagebrush Rebellion, which took place during the late 1970s and early 1980s when residents protested what they saw as overreaching Federal control of Western US land.\nAn early event in the Rebellion was July 4, 1980, when 300 Grand County residents gathered behind a flag-decorated bulldozer in protest of the inclusion of Mill Creek Canyon as part of a Bureau of Land Management wilderness study area. Despite plowing nearly 200 yards up the canyon, the group did not reach the study area's boundary.\nPaleontology.\nThe Denver Museum of Natural History opened a small Cedar Mountain Formation quarry that has produced diverse dinosaur fossils including theropod, sauropod and ornithopod. An adult sauropod was designated the type specimen of the genus \"Venenosaurus\".\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71060", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71060", "title": "Iron County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nIron County is a county in southwestern Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 57,289. Its county seat is Parowan, and the largest city is Cedar City. The Cedar City, UT Micropolitan Statistical Area includes all of Iron County.\nHistory.\nEvidence of Fremont culture habitation ranging from 750 to 1250 AD exists in present Iron County. Petroglyphs of differing periods were carved into the walls of Parowan Gap NW of Parowan. Paiutes roamed the Parowan Valley in the centuries before Euro-American exploration; their descendants are now represented by the Southern Paiute Indian Reservation, which is headquartered in Cedar City.\nThe Dom\u00ednguez\u2013Escalante expedition traveled through the Iron County area on October 12, 1776. Fur trapper Jedediah Smith is the first recorded Anglo-American to pass through the area (1826). Settlement of the area began in 1851, when LDS President Brigham Young directed members from the northern colonies to move into the area. A settlement, Coal Creek, sprang up in 1851; it later became Cedar City. To provide a local government structure, the State of Deseret legislature created the county on January 31, 1850, although it was not organized until January 17, 1851, with description stretching from the future Colorado, across Utah, and into the future Nevada. It was named \"Little Salt Lake County\" at creation, but on December 3, 1850, a legislative act changed its name to Iron County. Its borders were altered in 1850, 1852, 1854, 1856, and 1861. Also, in 1861, the federal government created the Colorado Territory, which administratively removed Iron County areas east of 109 degrees longitude.\nThe county borders were altered in 1862. Also, in 1862, the federal government created the Nevada Territory, which administratively removed Iron County areas west of 114 degrees longitude. Further boundary adjustments were passed in 1866, 1880, 1882, 1883, and 1884. The final adjustment was made in 1892; the county borders have remained in their current arrangement.\nGeography.\nIron County lies on the west edge of Utah. Its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada. The Iron County terrain is a study in contrast to its arid western reaches of the Escalante Desert and Great Basin ranges to the meadows and forests of the High Plateau on the east. The Markagunt Plateau is creased by the colorful formations of Cedar Breaks National Monument. Brian Head is the county's highest point, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.1%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 57,289 people in Iron County with a population density of 17.4 people per square mile (6.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 47,620 (83.1%) White, 375 (0.7%) African American, 948 (1.7%) Native American, 621 (1.1%) Asian, 237 (0.4%) Pacific Islander, 154 (0.3%) from other races, and 1,852 (3.2%) from two or more races. 5,482 (9.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 28,404 (49.58%) males and 28,885 (50.42%) females, and the population distribution by age was 16,259 (28.4%) under the age of 18, 33,214 (58.0%) from 18 to 64, and 7,816 (13.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 28.9 years.\nThere were 18,731 households in Iron County with an average size of 3.06 of which 13,596 (72.6%) were families and 5,135 (27.4%) were non-families. Among all families, 10,799 (57.7%) were married couples, 978 (5.2%) were male householders with no spouse, and 1,819 (9.7%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 3,592 (19.2%) were a single person living alone and 1,543 (8.2%) were two or more people living together. 6,906 (36.9%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 12,133 (64.8%) of households were owner-occupied while 6,598 (35.2%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for an Iron County household was $52,045 and the median family income was $63,633, with a per-capita income of $22,409. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $45,178 and for females $33,841. 16.4% of the population and 10.2% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 29,881 people in Iron County 25 years or older, 1,977 (6.6%) had not completed high school, 6,903 (23.1%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 12,374 (41.4%) had some college or associate degree, 6,205 (20.8%) had a bachelor's degree, and 2,422 (8.1%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry.\nThe top 5 ethnic groups in Iron County are:\nPolitics and government.\nIron County is an overwhelmingly Republican county in presidential elections, having not voted Democratic since 1936. Indeed, in no national election since the 1964 Lyndon B. Johnson landslide has the county given any Democratic presidential candidate 25 percent of its ballots.\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThere is one school district, Iron School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71061", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71061", "title": "Juab County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nJuab County ( ) is a county in western Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 11,786. Its county seat and largest city is Nephi. Juab County is part of the Provo\u2013Orem, Utah Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Salt Lake City\u2013Provo\u2013Orem, Utah Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe area of future Juab County was inhabited by nomadic indigenous peoples before the Mormon settlement of Utah beginning in 1847. Soon after, Mormons and others traveling through the area had established a road to California, leading SSW from Great Salt Lake City. It passed Salt Creek, flowing westward through a slough in the Wasatch Mountains. The area around this creek was often used as a stopping or camping spot by travelers, and by 1851 Mormon settlers had begun a settlement in the area. When the Utah Territory legislature created a county (by partitioning territory from Utah County) to oversee the growth and organization of the largely uninhabited and unbearable area, this settlement (called Salt Creek) was the only real settlement worthy of the name, and it was designated as the county seat in a March 3, 1852, legislative act. The new county's description included considerable territory falling in present-day Nevada. The county name reportedly derived from a Native American word meaning \"thirsty valley\", or possibly only \"valley\".\nThe county's boundaries were altered in 1854, 1855, and 1856. Also, in 1856 the Territory legislature, acknowledging the upcoming establishment of Nevada Territory, removed from the boundary description of Juab county all territories west of 114 degrees longitude. Further boundary adjustments were made in 1861, 1862, 1866, 1870, in 1888, and 1913. A small adjustment between Juab and Sanpete counties on March 8, 1919, created the current Juab County configuration.\nEarly settlers in Salt Creek devoted themselves to agriculture and livestock. However, by 1869 mining of precious metals had begun in the Tintic region. Mining towns, including Diamond, Silver City, and Eureka, appeared. By 1889 it was considered one of the nation's most productive mining areas. Mining continued as the dominant economic driver through the mid-twentieth century, then subsided. Salt Creek grew apace, although in 1882 the town name (and US Post Office designation) was changed to \"Nephi\".\nPolitics and government.\nJuab has traditionally voted Republican. In only one national election since 1948 the county selected the Democratic Party candidate.\nGeography.\nJuab County lies on the west side of Utah. Its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada. Its planar areas consist of rugged, arid semi-arable fine-grain soil, with hills and low mountains. Its eastern border is loosely defined by the ridgeline of an arm of the Wasatch Mountains. The terrain generally slopes to the north, with its highest point on Mount Ibapah, a crest of the East Central Great Basin Range in northwest Juab County. The listed elevation of Mt. Ibapah is ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.4%) is water. The county's shape bears resemblance to the shape of Massachusetts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHighways.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 Census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 11,786 people in Juab County with a population density of 3.5 people per square mile (1.3/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 10,781 (91.5%) White, 11 (0.1%) African American, 89 (0.8%) Native American, 32 (0.3%) Asian, 41 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 10 (0.1%) from other races, and 248 (2.1%) from two or more races. 574 (4.9%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 6,068 (51.48%) males and 5,718 (48.52%) females, and the population distribution by age was 4,030 (34.2%) under the age of 18, 6,203 (52.6%) from 18 to 64, and 1,553 (13.2%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 30.7 years.\nThere were 3,529 households in Juab County with an average size of 3.34 of which 2,857 (81.0%) were families and 672 (19.0%) were non-families. Among all families, 2,387 (67.6%) were married couples, 176 (5.0%) were male householders with no spouse, and 294 (8.3%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 584 (16.5%) were a single person living alone and 88 (2.5%) were two or more people living together. 1,583 (44.9%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 2,862 (81.1%) of households were owner-occupied while 667 (18.9%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Juab County household was $68,333 and the median family income was $76,736, with a per-capita income of $23,467. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $55,954 and for females $39,457. 11.7% of the population and 9.9% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 6,540 people in Juab County 25 years or older, 494 (7.6%) had not completed high school, 2,475 (37.8%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 2,347 (35.9%) had some college or associate degree, 762 (11.7%) had a bachelor's degree, and 462 (7.1%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nEducation.\nTwo school districts serve the county:\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "71062", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71062", "title": "Kane County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nKane County is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 7,667. Its county seat and largest city is Kanab.\nHistory.\nThe county was created on January 16, 1864, by the old federal Utah Territory (1850\u20131896) territorial legislature, with areas partitioned off from earlier Washington County. It was named for Col. Thomas L. Kane (1822\u20131883), a friend of the Latter Day Saint (Mormons) settlers when they first arrived westward, led by patriarch Brigham Young (1801\u20131877), in the 1840s and 1850s. The county boundary was readjusted later, first in 1869, when a portion was returned back to Washington County; second in 1880, when San Juan County was partitioned off and created; and third, in 1883, when additional portions were partitioned from Kane and added to Iron and back to Washington counties.\nGeography.\nKane County lies on the south line of the state of Utah. Its south border abuts the northern border of the state of Arizona. The Colorado River, reformed as Lake Powell, forms its eastern border. Grand Staircase\u2013Escalante National Monument covers much of the county. A rugged and inhospitable country of deserts, mountains, and cliffs make up the terrain, with breathtaking scenery in every area. Parts of Bryce Canyon National Park and Zion National Park extend into the northern and western portions of the county. The eastern part of the county is part of the Glen Canyon National Recreation Area. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (2.9%) is water.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nSource:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 7,667 people in Kane County with a population density of 1.9 people per square mile (0.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 6,924 (90.3%) White, 27 (0.4%) African American, 119 (1.6%) Native American, 59 (0.8%) Asian, 1 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 18 (0.2%) from other races, and 197 (2.6%) from two or more races. 322 (4.2%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 3,808 (49.67%) males and 3,859 (50.33%) females, and the population distribution by age was 1,752 (22.9%) under the age of 18, 3,950 (51.5%) from 18 to 64, and 1,965 (25.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 44.9 years.\nThere were 3,081 households in Kane County with an average size of 2.49 of which 1,987 (64.5%) were families and 1,094 (35.5%) were non-families. Among all families, 1,663 (54.0%) were married couples, 110 (3.6%) were male householders with no spouse, and 214 (6.9%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 932 (30.2%) were a single person living alone and 162 (5.3%) were two or more people living together. 784 (25.4%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 2,409 (78.2%) of households were owner-occupied while 672 (21.8%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Kane County household was $49,486 and the median family income was $69,722, with a per-capita income of $28,142. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $41,368 and for females $34,986. 13.1% of the population and 6.0% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 5,600 people in Kane County 25 years or older, 480 (8.6%) had not completed high school, 1,391 (24.8%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 2,066 (36.9%) had some college or associate degree, 1,114 (19.9%) had a bachelor's degree, and 549 (9.8%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry.\nThe top 5 ethnic groups in Kane County are:\nPolitics and government.\nKane is one of the most reliably Republican counties in the nation. Of \"straight-ticket\" voters in the 2008 election, there were 992 Republicans and 326 Democrats. In the Utah gubernatorial election, 2004 nearly 70% of the county's vote went for Jon Huntsman, Jr. and in the 2008 election he received around 75% of the vote. Kane County is part of Utah's 2nd congressional district and thus was represented by moderate Democrat Jim Matheson for several years until 2013. The second district is now represented by Republican Celeste Maloy.\nIn Presidential elections, Kane County has only been won once by a Democratic candidate when Woodrow Wilson carried the county in 1916. It was the only county in Utah carried by Alf Landon, the Republican opponent who lost to Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the 1936 Presidential election in the most lopsided Presidential election in over a century. It has solidly favored the Republican candidate since at least 1956, when Dwight D. Eisenhower received approximately 90% of the vote. In 1964, by over thirty-nine percent, the county went for Barry Goldwater, who lost the overall in the state by over nine percent. Since 1920, only in the Democratic landslides of 1936, 1940, and 1964 did the Democratic candidate for president receive even 30% of the county's vote.\nEducation.\nThere is one school district, Kane School District.\nUtah State University also has a local campus in Kanab.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71063", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71063", "title": "Millard County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nMillard County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 12,975. Its county seat is Fillmore, and the largest city is Delta.\nHistory.\nThe Utah Territory legislature created the county on October 4, 1851, with territory not previously covered by county creations and including some area in the future state of Nevada. It was named for the thirteenth US President Millard Fillmore, who was in office then. Fillmore was designated as the county seat. The county boundaries were altered in 1852 and again in 1854. On March 2, 1861, the US government created the Nevada Territory, which effectively de-annexed the described portion of Millard County falling in that Territorial Proclamation. The county boundary was further altered in 1862, 1866, 1888, and in 1919. In 1921 a boundary adjustment with Sevier brought Millard to its present configuration.\nFillmore, located near the geographic center of the territory, was originally built as the capital of Utah Territory. The Utah Territorial Legislature approved a plan to locate the capital in the Pahvant Valley. On October 28, 1851, Utah Governor Brigham Young traveled to the valley and chose the specific site for Fillmore. The town was surveyed that same day. A colonizing company soon followed; they built houses, a grist mill, and a sawmill. Construction of the Territorial Statehouse was initiated in 1852. The Territorial legislature met in Fillmore for the first (and only time) in 1855. The following year they voted to keep the capital in Great Salt Lake City.\nGeography.\nMillard County lies on the west side of Utah. Its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada. The county terrain consists of arid, rough undulating flatlands interrupted by numerous hills and mountain ridges. The highest point in the county is Mine Camp Peak in the Central Utah Plateaus, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (3.7%) is water. It is the third-largest county in Utah by area.\nThe Sevier Desert covers much of Millard County, being the seafloor of ancient Lake Bonneville. Sevier Lake, a mostly dry remnant of Lake Bonneville, is in central Millard County. The Pahvant Mountains form the county's eastern boundary. Fillmore and other farming communities lie at the base of the Pahvant Mountains. Delta sits several miles from the banks of the Sevier River in the middle of the basin.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGreat Stone Face.\nPahvant Valley in Millard County has several ancient lava flows and extinct volcanoes, known as the Black Rock Desert volcanic field, including the \"Black Rock\" lava flow. About southwest of Delta, near Black Rock's northwest perimeter is a feature named the \"Great Stone Face\", which protrudes about four stories above the general elevation. Locals claim that this rock formation, when viewed at the correct angle, appears similar to a profile of Joseph Smith. At ground level, within view of the \"Great Stone Face\", is a large, smooth-faced rock covered in Native American petroglyphs.\nNotch Peak.\nNotch Peak is west of Delta. The skyline appears to have a notch taken out of it when viewed from Delta.\nLittle Sahara Sand Dunes.\nLittle Sahara Recreation Area, north of Delta, is a popular area for ATV riders.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 12,975 people in Millard County with a population density of 1.9 people per square mile (0.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 10,636 (82.0%) White, 15 (0.1%) African American, 100 (0.8%) Native American, 141 (1.1%) Asian, 13 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 27 (0.2%) from other races, and 269 (2.1%) from two or more races. 1,774 (13.7%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 6,581 (50.72%) males and 6,394 (49.28%) females, and the population distribution by age was 4,040 (31.1%) under the age of 18, 6,659 (51.3%) from 18 to 64, and 2,276 (17.5%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 36.1 years.\nThere were 4,299 households in Millard County with an average size of 3.02 of which 3,316 (77.1%) were families and 983 (22.9%) were non-families. Among all families, 2,801 (65.2%) were married couples, 196 (4.6%) were male householders with no spouse, and 319 (7.4%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 848 (19.7%) were a single person living alone and 135 (3.1%) were two or more people living together. 1,665 (38.7%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 3,385 (78.7%) of households were owner-occupied while 914 (21.3%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Millard County household was $63,221 and the median family income was $67,981, with a per-capita income of $25,479. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $50,906 and for females $34,875. 12.3% of the population and 10.9% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 7,920 people in Millard County 25 years or older, 820 (10.4%) had not completed high school, 2,565 (32.4%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 2,763 (34.9%) had some college or associate degree, 1,374 (17.3%) had a bachelor's degree, and 398 (5.0%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nEconomy.\nMillard County is working hard to make it easier to build Earthships, straw bale homes, and other ecological and sustainable housing.\nMillard County is the home of the Telescope Array Project ultra-high-energy cosmic ray observatory. The Lon and Mary Watson Millard County Cosmic Ray Center was dedicated on March 20, 2006.\nJapanese internment camp.\nThe Topaz War Relocation Center was a World War II Japanese internment camp located in Millard County west of Delta. The location is open to the public, with a memorial at the northwest corner.\nPolitics and government.\nMillard County has traditionally voted Republican. In no national election since 1944 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThe school district is Millard School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71064", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71064", "title": "Pneumonic plague", "text": "Severe lung infection\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPneumonic plague is a severe lung infection caused by the bacterium \"Yersinia pestis\". Symptoms include fever, headache, shortness of breath, chest pain, coughing, and coughing up blood. They typically start about three to seven days after exposure. It is one of three forms of plague, the other two being septicemic plague and bubonic plague.\nThe pneumonic form may occur following an initial bubonic or septicemic plague infection. It may also result from breathing in airborne droplets from another person or animal infected with pneumonic plague. The difference between the forms of plague is the location of infection; in pneumonic plague the infection is in the lungs, in bubonic plague the lymph nodes, and in septicemic plague within the blood. Diagnosis is by testing the blood, sputum, or fluid from a lymph node.\nWhile vaccines are being developed, in most countries they are not yet commercially available. Prevention is by avoiding contact with infected rodents, people, or cats. It is recommended that those infected be isolated from others. Treatment of pneumonic plague consists of antibiotics.\nPlague is present among rodents in Africa, the Americas, and Asia. Pneumonic plague is more serious and less common than bubonic plague. The total reported number of cases of all types of plague in 2013 was 783. Left untreated, pneumonic plague is almost always fatal. Some hypothesize that the pneumonic version of the plague was mainly responsible for the Black Death that resulted in approximately 25 million deaths in the 1300s.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe most apparent symptom of pneumonic plague is coughing, often with hemoptysis (coughing up blood). With pneumonic plague, the first signs of illness are fever, headache, weakness and rapidly developing pneumonia with shortness of breath, chest pain, cough and sometimes bloody or watery sputum.\nThe pneumonia progresses for two to four days and may cause respiratory failure and shock. Patients will die without early treatment, some within 36 hours.\nInitial pneumonic plague symptoms can often include the following:\nRapidly developing pneumonia with:\nCauses.\nPneumonic plague can be caused in two ways: primary, which results from the inhalation of aerosolized plague bacteria, or secondary, when septicemic plague spreads into lung tissue from the bloodstream. Pneumonic plague is \"not\" exclusively vector-borne like bubonic plague; instead, it can be spread from person to person. There have been cases of pneumonic plague resulting from the dissection or handling of contaminated animal tissue. This is one of the types of plague formerly known as the Black Death.\nTreatment.\nPneumonic plague is a very aggressive infection requiring early treatment, which must be given within 24 hours of first symptoms to reduce the risk of death. Streptomycin, gentamicin, tetracyclines and chloramphenicol are all able to kill the causative bacterium.\nAntibiotic treatment for seven days will protect people who have had direct, close contact with infected patients. Wearing a close-fitting surgical mask also protects against infection.\nThe mortality rate from untreated pneumonic plague approaches 100% although victims of the Black Death who vomited blood occasionally survived, such as the chronicler Marcha di Marco Battagli.\nModern outbreaks.\nSince 2002, the World Health Organization (WHO) has reported seven plague outbreaks, though some may go unreported because they often happen in remote areas. Between 1998 and 2009, nearly 24,000 cases were reported, including about 2,000 deaths, in Africa, Asia, the Americas, and Eastern Europe. Ninety-eight percent of the world's cases occur in Africa.\nDemocratic Republic of the Congo.\nTwo outbreaks occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2005 and 2006. The outbreak in 2005 was only detected by looking back at blood samples.\nThe total death toll was 111.\nIndia.\nIn September 1994, India experienced an outbreak of plague that killed 50 and caused travel to New Delhi by air to be suspended until the outbreak was brought under control. The outbreak was feared to be much worse because the plague superficially resembles other common diseases such as influenza and bronchitis; over 200 people who had been quarantined were released when they did not test positive for the plague. All but three of the deaths occurred around the city of Surat.\nChina.\nA major outbreak of the pneumonic plague occurred in Manchuria from 1910 to 1911, in what became known as the Manchurian plague, killing around 60,000 people. The Qing court dispatched Wu Lien-teh, a doctor educated at Cambridge University, to oversee disease control and treatment efforts. He made the novel observation that the disease was transmitted by air, and developed prototypical respirators to help prevent its spread. A second, less deadly outbreak occurred in 1920\u201321, killing approximately 9,300 people.\nThe People's Republic of China has eradicated pneumonic plague from most parts of the country, but still reports occasional cases in remote western areas, where the disease is carried by rats and the marmots that live across the Himalayan plateau. Outbreaks can be caused when a person eats an infected marmot or comes into contact with fleas carried by rats. A 2006 WHO report from an international meeting on plague cited a Chinese government disease expert as saying that most cases of the plague in China's northwest occur when hunters are contaminated while skinning infected animals.\nThe expert said at the time that, due to the region's remoteness, the disease killed more than half the infected people. The report also said that since the 1990s, there was a rise in plague cases in humans, from fewer than 10 in the 1980s to nearly 100 cases in 1996 and 254 in 2000. In September 2008, two people in East Tibet died of pneumonic plague.\nAn outbreak of the disease in China began in August 2009 in Ziketan Town located in Qinghai Province. The town was sealed off, and several people died as a result of the disease. According to spokesperson Vivian Tan of the WHO office in Beijing, \"In cases like this [in August 2009], we encourage the authorities to identify cases, to investigate any suspicious symptoms among close contacts, and to treat confirmed cases as soon as possible. So far, they have done exactly that. There have been sporadic cases reported around the country in the last few years so the authorities do have the experience to deal with this.\"\nIn September 2010, five cases of pneumonic plague were reported in Tibet.\nIn July 2014, Chinese media reported one case found in Gansu.\nOn 12 November 2019, it was announced that two people from the Chinese province of Inner Mongolia were diagnosed with pneumonic plague. They received treatment in Chaoyang District, Beijing, and authorities implemented preventative control measures. Later in November, a third case of plague was confirmed. A 55-year-old man was diagnosed with bubonic plague after eating wild rabbit in Inner Mongolia. The region's health commission says it has no evidence to suggest that this case is linked to the previous two. By the end of November, a fourth case was confirmed. Chinese health authorities reported a fresh case of bubonic plague in the country's northern Inner Mongolia region, bringing the total number of reported plague cases originating from Inner Mongolia to four.\nPeru.\nIn August 2010, Peru's health minister, Oscar Ugarte, announced that an outbreak of plague had killed a 14-year-old boy and had infected at least 31 people in a northern coastal province. The boy died of bubonic plague on 26 July 2010. Ugarte stated that authorities were screening sugar and fish meal exports from Ascope Province, located about 325 miles (520\u00a0km) northwest of Lima, not far from the popular Chicama beach. Most of the infections in Peru were bubonic plague, with four cases of pneumonic plague.\nThe first recorded plague outbreak in Peru was in 1903. Before the above case, the last known outbreak was in 1994, killing 35 people.\nMadagascar.\nIn November 2013, an outbreak of plague occurred in the African island nation of Madagascar. As of 16 December, at least 89 people were infected, with 39 deaths with at least two cases involving pneumonic plague. However, as many as 90% of cases were later reported to have involved pneumonic plague.\nFrom 23 August to 30 September 2017, a total of 73 suspected, probable, and confirmed cases of pneumonic plague, including 17 deaths, were reported in Madagascar. The diagnosis was confirmed by the Institut Pasteur de Madagascar by a polymerase chain reaction test, while field health workers used a Rapid Diagnostic Test. The WHO and were both involved in administering antibiotic compounds and attempting to stop the spread of the disease. By mid-October, there were an estimated 684 confirmed cases of plague with 474 pneumonic, 156 bubonic and one septicemic. The remainder were not classified. At least 74 deaths have been ascribed to pneumonic plague.\nThe outbreak officially ended on 26 November 2017 with 2,348 cases and 202 deaths officially reported.\nUnited States.\nIn the fall of 1924, an outbreak occurred in Los Angeles that killed 30 people.\nOn 2 November 2007, wildlife biologist Eric York died of pneumonic plague in Grand Canyon National Park. York was exposed to the bacteria while conducting a necropsy on a cougar carcass.\nIn 2014, the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment confirmed that a Colorado man had been diagnosed with pneumonic plague, the first confirmed human case in Colorado in more than 10 years, and one of only 60 cases since 1957. The man was found to have the disease after the family dog died unexpectedly, and a necropsy revealed that the disease was the cause. Three additional pneumonic plague cases were confirmed in Colorado before the outbreak ended.\nA person near Flagstaff, Arizona died of pneumonic plague in July 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71065", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71065", "title": "DCT", "text": "DCT may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "71066", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71066", "title": "Piute County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nPiute County ( ) is a county in south-central Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 1,438, making it the second-least populous county in Utah. The county seat is Junction, and the largest town is Circleville.\nHistory.\nPiute County was formed on January 16, 1865, with areas annexed from Beaver County. It was named for the Paiute tribe of Native Americans. Its defined boundaries were altered by adjustments between adjoining counties in 1866, in 1880, in 1892, and in 1931. It has retained its current configuration since 1931.\nBy the 1860s, mining prospectors were pushing into central and southern Utah Territory, and several mining towns, such as Bullion and Webster, appeared. Mining activity had slowed by the 1900s, but gold mining (from lodes in Tushar Mountains) had produced 240,000 ounces of gold from 1868 through 1959. As the nation entered The Great War, a mine on the east Tushar Mountains producing potash and alumina became a national center of attention, both because of the strategic value of these products, and because of persistent rumors of sabotage attempts and spying. The town of Alunite flourished (1915-1930), then died as the war effort wound down. Today it is abandoned.\nGeography.\nThe Sevier River flows northward through the west-central part of Piute County, joined at Kingston by the East Branch of the Sevier. Immediately north of Kingston, it is dammed to form Piute Reservoir. Two mountain ridges lie north\u2013south across the county. The eastern ridge runs through the east-central part of the county, and the western ridge (Tushar Mountains) runs along the county's west border, its crestline defining the county line. Otter Creek flows southward through the east part of the county; it is dammed to form Otter Creek Reservoir in the SE part of the county. Along the way it is fed by Greenwich Creek and Box Creek, draining the east face of the eastern ridge. The eastern part of the county generally slopes to the south while the west-central part of the county slopes to the north. The county's highest point is Delano Peak on the Tushar Range, at ASL. The highest point on the eastern ridge is a crest near the county's north border, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.0%) is water. It is the fifth-smallest county in Utah by total area.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 1,438 people in Piute County with a population density of 1.9 people per square mile (0.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 1,276 (88.7%) White, 0 (0.0%) African American, 4 (0.3%) Native American, 0 (0.0%) Asian, 0 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 1 (0.1%) from other races, and 33 (2.3%) from two or more races. 124 (8.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 715 (49.72%) males and 723 (50.28%) females, and the population distribution by age was 346 (24.1%) under the age of 18, 705 (49.0%) from 18 to 64, and 387 (26.9%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 44.7 years.\nThere were 536 households in Piute County with an average size of 2.68 of which 397 (74.1%) were families and 139 (25.9%) were non-families. Among all families, 331 (61.8%) were married couples, 36 (6.7%) were male householders with no spouse, and 30 (5.6%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 118 (22.0%) were a single person living alone and 21 (3.9%) were two or more people living together. 165 (30.8%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 445 (83.0%) of households were owner-occupied while 91 (17.0%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Piute County household was $29,125 and the median family income was $42,500, with a per-capita income of $18,148. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $46,652 and for females $31,600. 19.1% of the population and 12.9% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 1,328 people in Piute County 25 years or older, 97 (7.3%) had not completed high school, 405 (30.5%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 539 (40.6%) had some college or associate degree, 218 (16.4%) had a bachelor's degree, and 69 (5.2%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nPolitics and government.\nPiute County is a traditional Republican stronghold. In no national election since 1940 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThe school district of the county is Piute School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "71067", "revid": "1320284840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71067", "title": "Rich County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nRich County is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 2,510, making it the third-least populous county in Utah. Its county seat is Randolph, and the largest town is Garden City. The county was created in 1864. It was named for an early LDS apostle, Charles C. Rich.\nThe southern half of Bear Lake and the Bear Lake Valley lies on the northern edge of the county. The Bear River Valley lies in most of the eastern portion of the county. The elevation of these valleys is close to , and the rest of the county is covered by mountains, including the Bear River Range. Because of the high elevation, the climate is cold in winter and mild in summer, and the population is limited.\nHistory.\nVarious Native American peoples inhabited the Rich County region for thousands of years. A prehistoric bison jump, dated to about 1,300 years before present, is located near the city of Woodruff, Utah\nLike all of modern-day Utah, Rich County was claimed by the Spanish Empire from the 1500s as part of Alta California, and later was part of Mexico. However, neither the Spanish nor Mexicans had a major or permanent presence in the area. The 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo placed the region under control of the United States.\nRich County was believed to have first been visited by European-descended explorers in 1811, when trapper Joseph Miller discovered the Bear River. In 1827, the first annual rendezvous of trappers occurred on the south shore of Bear Lake, a tradition that is still marked today. The site is also preserved as part of Bear Lake State Park. The Oregon Trail, a heavily traveled route to the Northwest Territories, passed through the upper part of the future county (as defined by its original description). Many emigrants traveling to the NW Territories also traveled around the south end of Bear Lake instead of hewing to the more heavily traveled route through present-day Idaho, although this adds to the Oregon Trail is usually not shown on maps of the route.\nThe Utah Territory had been initially settled by Mormon pioneers beginning in 1847, but no Mormons permanently moved into the Rich County area until after 1862. The US Congress passed the Homestead Act of 1862, opening this area to settlement. Mormon leader Brigham Young, fearing this would lead to an influx of non-Mormons, called members of his flock to move to the area and begin its settlement. The first settlement within the county's present boundary was Round Valley in 1863; located southwest of Laketown (settled 1864), it is now a ghost town. Randolph was settled in 1870. Originally created as Richland County on January 16, 1864, the name was shortened to Rich on January 29, 1868, by the 17th Utah Territorial Legislature. The boundary as originally defined extended beyond Utah into southwestern Wyoming and southeast Idaho. However, on July 25, 1868, the Wyoming Territory was created by the federal government, and all of the Rich County area east of the 34th meridian west from Washington became part of the new territory and thus was lost to Rich. The 1870 census for Rich County, Utah Territory enumerates a total of 1,672 residents in the eight Idaho communities of Bennington, Bloomington, Fish Haven, Liberty, Montpelier, Ovid, Paris and St. Charles. Utah Territory adjusted the county's boundary on February 16, 1872, by moving a small portion previous Summit County into Rich. The final adjustment to county boundaries was made on January 5, 1875, when Idaho Territory took the eight aforementioned communities and others in the Bear Lake Valley to form Bear Lake County.\nThe present county building was constructed in Randolph in 1940.\nGeography.\nRich County lies in the upper northeastern corner of Utah. Its northern border abuts the south border of the state of Idaho, and its east border abuts the west border of the state of Wyoming. The Bear River flows eastward out of the middle part of the county into Wyoming. The terrain is rugged, with less than ten percent of the area under cultivation. Over half of the county's area is used for cattle grazing. The county terrain slopes from the Bear River Mountain crests which form its western border, toward the east. The highest point is along its northern border known as Bridger Peak, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (5.3%) is water.\nThe Bear River Valley is created by the Bear River and consists of the east-central portion of the county. The towns of Randolph and Woodruff lie in this farming-oriented valley. Its high elevation makes this region one of the coldest areas in the state. Woodruff has a record low of and temperatures rarely exceed during the summer. Snow is heavy in late autumn, winter, and early spring and remains on the ground for the entire winter.\nFurther to the north lies the southern half of Bear Lake Valley, which contains Bear Lake. This lake is famous for its deep blue water, beaches, and surrounding mountains. The Bear River Mountains lies along the western edge of the county, and Logan Canyon opens up to the west of Garden City, which is a quaint tourist town that lies on the western edge of Bear Lake. Laketown lies at the southern edge of the lake. Three sections of the coastline are protected by Bear Lake State Park. The eastern slopes of the Bear River Range are an increasingly popular location for cabins.\nIn both major valleys, temperature inversions are a major problem during winter. These temperature inversions can bring extremely cold temperatures, fog, smog, and haze to the valleys, lasting for weeks at a time.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 2,510 people in Rich County with a population density of 2.4 people per square mile (0.9/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 2,329 (92.8%) White, 11 (0.4%) African American, 1 (0.0%) Native American, 2 (0.1%) Asian, 4 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 1 (0.0%) from other races, and 65 (2.6%) from two or more races. 97 (3.9%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 1,309 (52.15%) males and 1,201 (47.85%) females, and the population distribution by age was 767 (30.6%) under the age of 18, 1,276 (50.8%) from 18 to 64, and 467 (18.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 38.0 years.\nThere were 886 households in Rich County with an average size of 2.83 of which 660 (74.5%) were families and 226 (25.5%) were non-families. Among all families, 577 (65.1%) were married couples, 32 (3.6%) were male householders with no spouse, and 51 (5.8%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 207 (23.4%) were a single person living alone and 19 (2.1%) were two or more people living together. 322 (36.3%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 710 (80.1%) of households were owner-occupied while 176 (19.9%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Rich County household was $63,917 and the median family income was $73,819, with a per-capita income of $23,943. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $58,125 and for females $35,590. 10.5% of the population and 6.5% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 1,406 people in Rich County 25 years or older, 61 (4.3%) had not completed high school, 397 (28.2%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 638 (45.4%) had some college or associate degree, 208 (14.8%) had a bachelor's degree, and 102 (7.3%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry.\nAs of the 2010 census, the largest self-reported ancestry groups in Rich County were:\nPolitics and government.\nRich County voters are traditionally Republican. The county has not selected the Democratic Party candidate in a national election since 1944.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "71069", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71069", "title": "Morgan County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nMorgan County is a county in northern Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 12,295. Its county seat and largest city is Morgan.\nMorgan County is part of the Ogden-Clearfield, UT Metropolitan Statistical Area as well as the Salt Lake City-Provo-Orem, UT Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nAn early route of the Hastings Cutoff ran through the Morgan Valley and down through a narrow gorge in Weber Canyon. The Donner Party avoided going through the Morgan Valley in order to speed up their journey. However, their alternate route proved more time-consuming.\nIn 1855, Charles Sreeve Peterson and his family became the first white settlers to take up permanent residence in the Morgan Valley after cutting a road through Weber Canyon. After others began settling in the rather limited planar areas of the mountainous territory, the Utah Territory legislature acted on January 17, 1862, to form a separate county from sections partitioned off Davis, Great Salt Lake, Summit, and Weber counties. The small settlement at Morgan was named the county seat. The town (and thus the new county) was named for the father (Jedediah Morgan Grant) of Heber J. Grant, who would serve as president of LDS Church from 1918 until 1945.\nGeography.\nThe central core of Morgan County, the narrow East Canyon valley (now called Morgan Valley), is ringed by mountains. In its southern portion, Main Canyon Creek flows southward from Summit County to join East Canyon Creek, which flows northward from a different portion of Summit County. At their intersection, a dam has been installed to create East Canyon Reservoir and State Park. The combined discharge (now called East Canyon Creek) from the dam flows northwestward to Morgan, where it combines with Deep Creek to discharge into the Weber River, which also flows into the county from Summit and follows Lost Canyon to the Morgan Valley. The now-augmented Weber flows northwestward to Mountain Green, then turns west to exit the county through Weber Canyon. The terrain generally slopes to the north and west, with its highest point, Thurston Peak, at ASL. The county has an area of , of which is land and is water. It is Utah's third-smallest county by land area and smallest by total area.\nMajor highways.\nSome county roads accessing the canyons are closed during winters.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 12,295 people in Morgan County with a population density of 20.2 people per square mile (7.8/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 11,562 (94.0%) White, 12 (0.1%) African American, 31 (0.3%) Native American, 57 (0.5%) Asian, 0 (0.0%) Pacific Islander, 9 (0.1%) from other races, and 286 (2.3%) from two or more races. 338 (2.7%) people were Hispanic or Latino. The most commonly picked ancestries were English (47.1%), German (11%), Irish (7.4%), Scottish (5.3%), Danish (4.6%), and Swedish (3%).\nThere were 6,289 (51.15%) males and 6,006 (48.85%) females, and the population distribution by age was 4,299 (35.0%) under the age of 18, 6,441 (52.4%) from 18 to 64, and 1,555 (12.6%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 33.6 years.\nThere were 3,574 households in Morgan County with an average size of 3.44 of which 3,084 (86.3%) were families and 490 (13.7%) were non-families. Among all families, 2,783 (77.9%) were married couples, 91 (2.5%) were male householders with no spouse, and 210 (5.9%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 428 (12.0%) were a single person living alone and 62 (1.7%) were two or more people living together. 1,670 (46.7%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 3,176 (88.9%) of households were owner-occupied while 398 (11.1%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Morgan County household was $100,408 and the median family income was $101,572, with a per-capita income of $34,280. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $87,961 and for females $46,484. 1.7% of the population and 1.0% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 6,695 people in Morgan County 25 years or older, 145 (2.2%) had not completed high school, 1,350 (20.2%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 2,630 (39.3%) had some college or associate degree, 1,548 (23.1%) had a bachelor's degree, and 1,022 (15.3%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nPolitics and government.\nMorgan County traditionally votes Republican. In only one national election since 1948 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "71070", "revid": "47405915", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71070", "title": "Derbyshire", "text": "Derbyshire ( ) is a ceremonial county in the East Midlands of England. It borders Greater Manchester, West Yorkshire, and South Yorkshire to the north, Nottinghamshire to the east, Leicestershire to the south-east, Staffordshire to the south and west, and Cheshire to the west. The city of Derby is the largest settlement.\nThe county has an area of and had an estimated population of 1,096,526 in 2024. The eastern half of the county is the more densely populated and contains its largest settlements: Chesterfield in the north-east, Derby in the south-east, and Swadlincote in the south. The spa town of Buxton and Glossop are located in the north-west, and Matlock near the centre. For local government purposes Derbyshire comprises a non-metropolitan county, with eight districts, and the Derby unitary authority area. The East Midlands Combined County Authority includes Derbyshire County Council and Derby City Council.\nThe north and centre of Derbyshire are hilly and contain the majority of the Peak District, which has been designated a national park. They include Kinder Scout, at the highest point in the county. The River Derwent is the longest in the county, at , and flows south until it meets the River Trent just south of Derby. Church Flatts Farm at Coton in the Elms, near Swadlincote, is the furthest point from the sea in the UK.\nHistory.\nThe area that is now Derbyshire was first visited, probably briefly, by humans 200,000 years ago during the Aveley interglacial, as shown by a Middle Paleolithic Acheulean hand axe found near Hopton. Further occupation came with the Upper Paleolithic and Neolithic periods of the Stone Age when Mesolithic hunter-gatherers roamed the hilly tundra.\nEvidence of these nomadic tribes has been found in limestone caves located on the Nottinghamshire border. Deposits left in the caves date the occupancy at around 12,000 to 7,000 BCE.\nBurial mounds of Neolithic settlers are also situated throughout the county. These chambered tombs were designed for collective burial and are mostly located in the central Derbyshire region. There are tombs at Minninglow and Five Wells that date back to between 2000 and 2500 BCE. 5 kilometres west of Youlgreave lies the Neolithic henge monument of Arbor Low, which has been dated to 2500 BCE. It is not until the Bronze Age that real signs of agriculture and settlement are found in the county. In the moors of the Peak District signs of clearance, arable fields and hut circles were found after archaeological investigation. However this area and another settlement at Swarkestone are all that have been found.\nDuring the Roman conquest of Britain, the invaders were attracted to Derbyshire for its lead ore in the limestone hills of the area. They settled throughout the county, with forts built near Brough in the Hope Valley and near Glossop. Later they settled round Buxton, famed for its warm springs, and set up a fort near modern-day Derby in an area now known as Little Chester.\nSeveral kings of Mercia are buried in the Repton area.\nFollowing the Norman Conquest, much of the county was subject to the forest laws. To the northwest was the Forest of High Peak under the custodianship of William Peverel and his descendants. The rest of the county was bestowed upon Henry de Ferrers, a part of it becoming Duffield Frith. In time the whole area was given to the Duchy of Lancaster. Meanwhile, the Forest of East Derbyshire covered the whole county to the east of the River Derwent from the reign of Henry II to that of Edward I.\nGeography.\nThe terrain of Derbyshire mostly consists of uplands to the north and centre of the county, and lowlands to the south and east. The southern foothills and uplands of the Pennines extend from the north of the Trent Valley throughout the Peak District and into the north of the county, reaching the county's highest point at Kinder Scout. The terrain is relatively low-lying across the lower Dove Valley, from the Trent Valley and southwards, the far south of the Derwent Valley and near its eastern borders with Nottinghamshire and Leicestershire. The main rivers in the county are the River Derwent and the River Dove which both join the River Trent in the south. The River Derwent rises in the moorland of Bleaklow and flows throughout the Peak District and county for the majority of its course, while the River Dove rises in Axe Edge Moor and forms a boundary between Derbyshire and Staffordshire for most of its length.\nLandscape character.\nThe varied landscapes within Derbyshire have been formed mainly as a consequence of the underlying geology, but also by the way the land has been managed and shaped by human activity. The county contains 11 discrete landscape types, known as National Character Areas, which have been described in detail by Natural England and further refined, mapped and described by Derbyshire County Council and the Peak District National Park.\nThe 11 National Character Areas found within Derbyshire are:\nGeology.\nDerbyshire's solid geology can be split into two very different halves. The oldest rocks occur in the northern, more upland half of the county, and are mostly of Carboniferous age, comprising limestones, gritstones, sandstones and shales. In its north-east corner to the east of Bolsover, there are also Magnesian Limestone rocks of Permian age. In contrast, the southern and more lowland half of Derbyshire contains much softer rocks, mainly mudstones and sandstones of Permo-Triassic age, which create gentler, more rolling landscapes with few rock outcrops. Across both regions can be found drift deposits of Quaternary age \u2013 mainly terrace and river gravel deposits and boulder clays. Landslip features are found on unstable layers of sandstones and shales, with Mam Tor and Alport Castles being the best-known. Cemented screes and tufa deposits occur very rarely in the limestone dales and rivers, whilst cave systems have been created naturally in the limestone since Pleistocene times. A recently discovered cave chamber near Castleton, named Titan, is the deepest shaft and biggest chamber of any cave in Britain.\nThe oldest rocks are Lower Carboniferous limestones of Dinantian age, which form the core of the White Peak within the Peak District National Park. Because northern Derbyshire is effectively an uplifted dome of rock layers that have subsequently eroded to expose older rocks in the centre of the Derbyshire Dome, these are encircled by progressively younger limestone rocks, until they in turn give way on three sides to Upper Carboniferous shales, gritstones and sandstones of Namurian age.\nYounger still are the sandstones, shales and coal deposits found on the eastern flank of Derbyshire, forming the coal measures, which are of Westphalian age. All these rock layers disappear south of a line drawn between Ashbourne and Derby under layers of clays and sandstones (Mercia Mudstone Group and Sherwood Sandstones) of Permo-Triassic age. Small amounts of carboniferous limestones, gritstones and coal measures reappear in the far south of Derbyshire from Ticknall (limestone) to Swadlincote (coal measures).\nSome areas of the White Peak exhibit contemporaneous basalt flows (e.g. Ravens Tor at Millers Dale), as well as subsequent dolerite sill intrusion at a much later stage (e.g. near Tideswell Dale), whilst mineralisation of the carboniferous limestone in a subsequent period created extensive lead and fluorite deposits which have formed a significant part of Derbyshire's economy, as did coal mining. Lead mining has been important here since Roman Times. The more recent river gravels of the Trent valley remain a significant extractive industry today in south Derbyshire, as does the mining of limestone rock in central and northern parts of the county. Coarse sandstones were once extensively quarried both for local building materials and for the production of gritstone grinding wheels for use in mills, and both former industries have left their mark on the Derbyshire landscape.\nGreen belts.\nAs well as the protections afforded to the Peak District area under national and local policies, there are several green belts within the county, aimed at preserving the landscape surrounding main urban areas. There are four such areas, the first three being portions of much larger green belts that extend outside the county and surround large conurbations:\nEcology.\nBecause of its central location in England and altitude range from 27 metres in the south to 636 metres in the north,1 Derbyshire contains many species at the edge of their UK distribution ranges. Some species with a predominantly northern British distribution are at the southern limit of their range, whilst others with a more southern distribution are at their northern limit in Derbyshire. As climate change progresses, a number of sensitive species are now being seen to be either expanding or contracting their range as a result.314\nFor the purposes of protecting and recording the county's most important habitats, Derbyshire has been split into two regions, each with its own Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP), based around National Character Areas. The Peak District BAP includes all of Derbyshire's uplands of the Dark Peak, South-West Peak and White Peak, including an area of limestone beyond the national park boundary. The remaining areas are monitored and recorded in the Lowland Derbyshire Biodiversity Action Plan, which subdivides the landscape into eight smaller Action Areas.\nThe Derbyshire Biological Records Centre was formerly based at Derby Museum and Art Gallery, but since 2011 has been managed by Derbyshire Wildlife Trust. Two of Englands 48 Local Nature Partnerships (LNP) also cover Derbyshire; these are the Peak District LNP and the Lowland Derbyshire &amp; Nottinghamshire LNP.\nIn October 2025, Derbyshire County Council approved Derbyshire's Local Nature Recovery Strategy, which outlines how nature recovery will be supported and implemented across the county.\nBotany.\nSince 2002, the county flower for Derbyshire has been Jacob's-ladder (\"Polemonium caeruleum\"), a relatively rare species, and characteristic of certain limestone dales in the White Peak.187 Derbyshire is known to have contained 1,919 separate taxa of vascular plants (including species, hybrids and micro-species) since modern recording began,409 of which 1,133 are known to be either native or archaeophyte, the remainder being non-native species. These comprise 336 established species, 433 casuals and 17 unassigned. It is known that 34 species of plants once native here have been lost from Derbyshire (i.e. become locally extinct) since modern plant recording began in the 17th century.410 Derbyshire contains two endemic vascular plants, found nowhere else in the world: \"Rubus durescens\", a bramble occurring in central Derbyshire,89 and Derby hawkweed (\"Hieracium naviense\"), still known only from Winnats Pass.263 One endemic species of moss, Derbyshire Feather Moss, occurs in one small 3-metre patch in just one Derbyshire limestone dale, its sole world location intentionally kept confidential.\nThe distribution and status of vascular plants in Derbyshire have been recorded over the last 120 years in a series of four major botanical works, each by different authors between 1889 and 2015, all entitled \"The Flora of Derbyshire\". Plant recording is mainly undertaken locally by volunteers from the Derbyshire Flora Group,406 and by staff at Derbyshire Wildlife Trust and the Peak District National Park.\nThe Dark Peak is marked by heathlands, bogs, gritstone edges and acid grasslands containing relatively few species, with plants such as heather (\"Calluna vulgaris\"), crowberry (\"Empetrum nigrum\"), bilberry (\"Vaccinium myrtillus\") and hare's-tail cotton grass (\"Eriophorum vaginatum\") being dominant on the high moors.6 The dales of the White Peak are known for habitats such as calcareous grassland, ash woodlands and rock outcrops in all of which a much greater richness of lime-loving species occurs than elsewhere in the county.4 These include various orchids (such as early purple orchid (\"Orchis mascula\"), dark-red helleborine (\"Epipactis atrorubens\") and fly orchid (\"Ophrys insectifera\")), common rockrose (\"Helianthemum nummularium\"), spring cinquefoil (\"Helianthemum nummularium\") and grass of parnassus (\"Parnassia palustris\"). Specialised communities of plants occur on former lead workings, where typical metallophyte species include spring sandwort (\"Minuartia verna\"), alpine penny-cress (\"Thlaspi caerulescens\") (both known locally in Derbyshire as Leadwort), as well as mountain pansy (\"Viola lutea\") and moonwort (\"Botrychium lunaria\").6\nIn 2015, Derbyshire contained 304 vascular plant species now designated as of international, national or local conservation concern, for their rarity or recent declines, and collectively listed as Derbyshire Red Data plants.418 Work on recording and publishing a bryophyte flora for Derbyshire still continues: by 2012 a total of 518 bryophyte species had been recorded for the county.\nBotanical recording in the UK predominantly uses the unchanging vice-county boundary system, which results in a slightly different map of Derbyshire from the modern geographic county.20\nZoology.\nA number of specialist organisations protect, promote and monitor records of individual animal groups across Derbyshire. The main ones are Derbyshire Ornithological Society; Derbyshire Mammal Group; Derbyshire Bat Group, Derbyshire Amphibian and Reptile Group, and the Derbyshire &amp; Nottingham Entomological Society. All maintain databases of wildlife sightings, whilst some such as the Derbyshire Ornithological Society provide alerts of rare sightings on their websites or social media pages and also publish major works describing the status and distribution of species.\nEconomy.\nDerbyshire has a mixture of a rural economy in the west, with a former coal-mining economy in the north-east (Bolsover district), the Erewash Valley around Ilkeston and in the south around Swadlincote. The rural landscape varies from arable farmland in the flatlands to the south of Derby, to upland pasture and moorland in the high gritstone uplands of the southern Pennines.\nDerbyshire is rich in natural mineral resources such as lead, iron, coal, and limestone, which have been exploited over a long period. Lead, for example, has been mined since Roman times. The limestone outcrops in the central area led to the establishment of large quarries to supply the industries of surrounding towns with lime for building and steelmaking, and latterly in the 20th-century cement manufacture. The Industrial Revolution also increased demand for building stone, and in the late 19th and early 20th-century, the arrival of the railways led to a large number of stone quarries being established. This industry has left its mark on the countryside, but is still a major industry: a lot of the stone is supplied as crushed stone for road building and concrete manufacture, and is moved by rail.\nDerbyshire's relative remoteness in the late 18th century and an abundance of fast-flowing streams led to a proliferation of the use of hydropower at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, following the mills pioneered by Richard Arkwright. Derbyshire has been said to be the home of the Industrial Revolution, and part of the Derwent Valley has been given World Heritage status in acknowledgement of this historic importance.\nNationally famous companies in Derbyshire include Rolls-Royce, one of the world's leading aerospace companies, based since before World War I in Derby, Thorntons just south of Alfreton and Toyota, who have one of the UK's largest car manufacturing plants at Burnaston. Ashbourne Water used to be bottled in Buxton by Nestl\u00e9 Waters UK until 2006 and Buxton Water still is.\nDerbyshire is one of only three counties permitted to make cheese that is labelled as Stilton cheese. The others are Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire. The smallest of six companies making this product is Hartington Creamery at Pikehall. As of March 2021, Hartington Stilton was marketing within the UK but also exporting to the US, EU and Canada. The company director told the BBC that they had \"a surge in interest and consumer sales from the US\".\nGovernance.\nThe county is divided into eleven constituencies for the election of members of parliament (MPs) to the House of Commons. In the 2024 United Kingdom general election, all seats in Derbyshire were won by the Labour Party, including the seat of Derbyshire Dales, a Conservative safe seat that had not been won by Labour since the 1945 election.\nShown below are the vote and seat count at the 2019 election compared to the 2024 election:\nDerbyshire has a three-tier local government since the local government reorganisation in 1974. It has a county council based in Matlock and eight district councils and since 1997, a unitary authority area of the City of Derby. Derby remains part of Derbyshire only for ceremonial purposes.\nDerbyshire has become fractionally smaller during government reorganisation over the years. The Sheffield suburbs Woodseats, Beauchief, Handsworth, Woodhouse, Norton, Mosborough, Totley, Bradway and Dore were previously parts of the county, but were lost to Sheffield between 1900 and 1933; Mosborough was transferred in 1967. However, Derbyshire gained part of the Longdendale valley and Tintwistle from Cheshire in 1974. The current area of the geographic/ceremonial county of Derbyshire is only 4.7 square kilometres less than it was over 100 years ago.120\nAt the third tier are the parish councils, which do not cover all areas. The eight district councils in Derbyshire and the unitary authority of Derby are shown in the map above.\nThese district councils are responsible for local planning and building control, local roads, council housing, environmental health, markets and fairs, refuse collection and recycling, cemeteries and crematoria, leisure services, parks, and tourism. Education, social services, libraries, main roads, public transport, policing and fire services, trading standards, waste disposal and strategic planning are the responsibility of the County Council.\nAlthough Derbyshire is in the East Midlands, some parts, such as High Peak (which incorporated former areas of Cheshire after boundary changes in 1974), are closer to the northern cities of Manchester and Sheffield and these receive services more affiliated with northern England; for example, the North West Ambulance Service, Granada Television and United Utilities.Outside the main city of Derby, the largest town in the county is Chesterfield.\nDerbyshire is also part of multiple combined authorities. The Erewash, Amber Valley and Derby districts are part of the D2N2 partnership with neighbouring Nottinghamshire. The Derbyshire Dales, Bolsover, North East Derbyshire and Chesterfield districts are part of the South Yorkshire Mayoral Combined Authority (as non constituent members).\nDerbyshire County Council and Derby City Council are part of the East Midlands Combined Authority, and elected the first Mayor of the East Midlands in the 2024 East Midlands Mayoral Election.\nEducation.\nThe Derbyshire school system is comprehensive with no selective schools. The independent sector includes Repton School, Trent College and The Elms School.\nDerbyshire is home to the University of Derby, and the University of Nottingham Medical School.\nSettlements.\nThere are several towns in the county, with Derby the largest and most populous. At the time of the 2011 census, a population of 770,600 lived in the county with 248,752 (32%) living in Derby.\nAlthough Derbyshire is officially part of the East Midlands statistical region, parts of the county are often considered to be culturally in Northern England, such as Chesterfield and Glossop.\nThe table below shows all towns with over 10,000 inhabitants.\nHistoric areas.\nDuring a series of administrative boundary changes during the 20th century, settlements which were historically part of the county now fall under the administrative areas of Greater Manchester, South Yorkshire, and Staffordshire:\nNumerous other boundary changes also took place during the course of the 19th century, with county settlements being ceded to the counties of Staffordshire and Leicestershire\nMedia.\nBecause of the size of the county, southern parts of Derbyshire such as Derby, Matlock, Ashbourne and Bakewell are covered by BBC East Midlands and ITV Central in Nottingham, broadcast from Waltham.\nNortheast Derbyshire, Chesterfield, the eastern High Peak (Hope Valley) and northern area of the Derbyshire Dales (Tideswell and Hathersage) are covered by ITV Yorkshire and BBC Yorkshire from Emley Moor, with their ITV News Calendar and \"Look North\" programmes, both from Leeds. The western area of the High Peak (Buxton, Glossop, New Miils and Chapel-en-le-Frith) is covered by BBC North West from Winter Hill and ITV Granada, both based in Salford.\nBBC Local Radio for the county is provided by BBC Radio Derby, BBC Radio Sheffield (covering Chesterfield and Bolsover) and BBC Radio Manchester (covering Glossop, New Miils and Chapel-en-le-Frith).\nCounty-wide commercial radio stations are Capital Midlands, Hits Radio East Midlands, Gold, Greatest Hits Radio East Midlands and Greatest Hits Radio Yorkshire (for Chesterfield, Matlock and Bakewell).\nSport.\nDerbyshire has two Football League teams, Derby County, which plays in the EFL Championship, the second tier of English football. The next highest-placed team is Chesterfield, which participates in EFL League Two, the fourth tier of English football. There are also many non-league teams playing throughout the county, most notably Alfreton Town, which plays in the National League North. The county is currently home to the world's oldest football club, Sheffield F.C., which plays in Dronfield in north-east Derbyshire. Glossop was the smallest town in the country to have a football team in the top tier of English football, Glossop North End.\nDerbyshire has a cricket team based at the County Cricket Ground. Derbyshire County Cricket Club currently plays in Division Two of the County Championship. There are also rugby league clubs based in the north of the county, the North Derbyshire Chargers and in Derby (Derby City RLFC). The county has numerous rugby union clubs, including Derby, Chesterfield Panthers, Matlock, Ilkeston, Ashbourne, Bakewell and Amber Valley.\nThe county is a popular area for a variety of recreational sports such as rock climbing, hill walking, hang gliding, caving, sailing on its many reservoirs, and cycling along the many miles of disused rail tracks that have been turned into cycle trails, such as the Monsal Trail and High Peak Trail.\nThe town of Ashbourne in Derbyshire is known for its Royal Shrovetide Football, described as a \"medieval football game\", played annually on Shrove Tuesday and Ash Wednesday.\nDerbyshire is host to one of the only community Muggle quidditch teams in the country, known as Derby Union Quidditch Club. The Club recruits players from the age of 16 upwards from all over Derby, and has representatives from most local sixth forms and the University of Derby. The team has competed against both the Leeds Griffins and the Leicester Lovegoods in the past and is part of the vibrant UK quidditch scene. It is also an official International Quidditch Association team.\nLocal attractions.\nThe county of Derbyshire has many attractions for tourists and local people. It offers Peak District scenery such as Mam Tor and Kinder Scout, and more urban attractions such as Bakewell, Buxton and Derby. Such places include Bolsover Castle, Castleton, Chatsworth House, Hopton Hall, National Tramway Museum at Crich, Peak Rail steam railway, Midland Railway steam railway, Dovedale, Haddon Hall, the Heights of Abraham and Matlock Bath.\nIn the north of the county, three large reservoirs, Howden, Derwent and Ladybower, were built in the early part of the 20th century to supply the rapidly growing populations of Sheffield, Derby and Leicester with drinking water. The moorland catchment area around these is part of the Peak District National Park and extensively used for leisure pursuits such as walking and cycling.\nThere are many properties and lands in the care of the National Trust that are open to the public, such as Calke Abbey, Hardwick Hall, High Peak Estate, Ilam Park, Kedleston Hall, Longshaw Estate near Hathersage, and Sudbury Hall on the Staffordshire border.\nNotable gardens in Derbyshire include the formal ones in 17th\u201318th-century French style at Melbourne Hall south of Derby, the listed garden at Renishaw Hall near Eckington, Lea Rhododendron Gardens near Matlock, the Royal Horticultural Society recommended Bluebell Arboretum near Swadlincote, and the extensive gardens at Chatsworth House.\nArdotalia, also known as Melandra, or Melandra Castle, is an ancient Roman fort built in the north-west of the county. The ruins and foundations are open free of charge to the public.\nCounty emblems.\nAs part of a 2002 marketing campaign, the plant conservation charity Plantlife chose the Jacob's-ladder as the county flower.\nIn September 2006, a proposal for a county flag was introduced, largely on the initiative of BBC Radio Derby. It consists of a white-bordered dark green cross encompassing a golden Tudor rose (a historical symbol of the county) all set in a blue field. The blue field represents the many waters of the county, its rivers and reservoirs, while the cross is green to mark the great areas of countryside. The flag was subsequently registered with the Flag Institute in September 2008.\nIn 2015, BBC Radio Derby commissioned a Derbyshire anthem entitled \"Our Derbyshire\", including lyrics suggested by its listeners. It received its first performance on 17 September 2015 at Derby Cathedral.\nDemographics.\nIn 1801 the population was 147,481 This had grown to 272,217 inhabitants by the time of the 1841 census. According to the UK Census 2001 there were 956,301 people spread over the county's 254,615 hectares. This was estimated to have risen to 990,400 in 2006.\nThe county's population grew by 3.0 per cent from 1991 to 2001 which is around 21,100 people. This figure is higher than the national average of 2.65 per cent, but lower than the East Midlands average of 4.0 per cent. The county as a whole has an average population density of 2.9 people per hectare, making it less densely populated than England as a whole. The density varies throughout the county, with the lowest being in the region of Derbyshire Dales at 0.88 per hectare, and the highest outside the main cities in the region of Erewash, which has 10.04 people per hectare.\nIn literature and popular culture.\nThe 1969 film \"Women in Love\" by Ken Russell had scenes filmed in and around Elvaston Castle, notably the Greco-Roman wrestling scene, which was filmed in the castle's Great Hall.\nThe 1988 film \"The Lair of the White Worm\" by Ken Russell, (starring Amanda Donohoe and Hugh Grant) was filmed largely in Derbyshire. \"Lair's\" opening title sequence and primary story locations occur in and around Thor's Cave, part of the Peak District, River Manifold valley.\nThe 2008 film \"The Duchess\" includes scenes filmed at Chatsworth House and at Kedleston Hall.\nThe 1993\u20132002 TV series \"Peak Practice\" was set in Crich and Fritchley, except for the twelfth and final series, and originally starred Kevin Whately and Amanda Burton. In 2003, an unrelated and less successful medical TV drama, \"Sweet Medicine\", was mostly filmed in the historic market town of Wirksworth.\nOther Derbyshire locations in which British TV scenes have been filmed include:"}
{"id": "71071", "revid": "21586532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71071", "title": "Salt Lake County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nSalt Lake County is located in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 1,185,238, making it the most populous county in Utah. Its county seat and largest city is Salt Lake City, the state capital. The county was created in 1850. Salt Lake County is the 37th most populated county in the United States and is one of four counties in the Rocky Mountains to make it into the top 100. (Others being Denver and El Paso counties, Colorado and Clark County, Nevada.) Salt Lake County has been the only county of the first class in Utah. Under the Utah Code (Title 17, Chapter 50, Part 5) a county of the first class is a county with a population of 1,000,000 or greater.\nSalt Lake County occupies the Salt Lake Valley, as well as parts of the surrounding mountains, the Oquirrh Mountains to the west and the Wasatch Range to the east (essentially the entire Jordan River watershed north of the Traverse Mountains). In addition, the northwestern section of the county includes part of the Great Salt Lake. The county is noted for its ski resorts; Salt Lake City hosted the 2002 Winter Olympics. Salt Lake County is the central county of the Salt Lake City metropolitan area. Sustained drought in Utah has more recently strained Salt Lake County's water security and has caused the Great Salt Lake level to drop to record low levels.\nHistory.\nThis area was occupied for thousands of years by cultures of indigenous peoples.\n19th century.\nThe future Salt Lake County area was settled by European Americans in 1847 when Mormon pioneers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints fled religious persecution in the East. They arrived in the Salt Lake Valley after descending what settlers later called Emigration Canyon. Brigham Young, their leader, declared \"This is the place\" after seeing the valley. Compared to eastern regions, it seemed arid and unpromising to some of the migrants. Settlers used irrigation to develop agriculture and the flourishing, self-sufficient city known then as Great Salt Lake City. Thousands of Mormons joined them in the next several decades.\nSettlers buried thirty-six Native Americans in one grave after an outbreak of measles occurred during the winter of 1847.\nThe initial territorial settlement was in Great Salt Lake City proper, but Brigham Young desired to secure a substantial population base across the then-uninhabited Great Basin, so he soon asked members to resettle farther out from the central point. They declared themselves a state (State of Deseret) in hopes of gaining admittance to the Union, and to assure the nascent state would grow uniformly, they named an as-yet-unbuilt settlement in mid-state as the state's capital (Fillmore).\nThe county was officially organized on January 31, 1850, with slightly more than 11,000 residents recorded. In 1850, 26 slaves were counted in Salt Lake County. In 1852, the territorial legislature passed the Act in Relation to Service and the Act for the relief of Indian Slaves and Prisoners formally legalizing slavery in the territory.\nDue to Utah Territory's conflicts with the federal government, the federal surveyor abandoned his post in 1857, two years after he arrived. The surveyor's duty was to officially plat the territory in order to bring the area onto the market, to make homesteading possible. The intermediate years between 1857 and 1869 passed with no federal surveyors, the LDS Pioneers completed plats, deeds, and surveys of the county in order to homestead and collect taxes. Since the deeds and titles handed out during the twelve-year period were not federally recognized homestead certificates, the Utah Territory agreed to reconcile the unrecognized deeds and titles in order to fold the Utah Territory into the federal homestead system, calling them (instead of homestead certificates) Land Title Certificates. The process to adjudicate the certificates took place over several years in 1871\u20131873, through the county Probate Court, overseen by judge Elias Smith. Settlers were required to file land claims, make declaratory statements, attend their adjudication hearings, provide testimony if counter claims on a parcel of land were filed, and wait for final judgement from the probate judge, who issued a final Land Title Certificate which declared a person the rightful owner. These certificates are retroactive backwards to 1852.\nThe idea of statehood for the new area was quickly tossed aside by the federal government, and the area was declared a territory in September 1850 \u2013 the Utah Territory. Construction of the capitol building in Fillmore was completed in 1855, so the territorial legislature traveled to the small community for their first session there. It was to be their last, as they chose to meet in Great Salt Lake City the following year and, in 1857, formally voted to make the city the capital of the Territory. In 1858, when the Utah Territory was declared in rebellion, the federal government sent troops to install a new governor and keep watch over the area. The government transition was made peacefully, then the troops set up Camp Floyd to the south in Utah County. In 1862, Fort Douglas was established on the eastern bench, near the current site of the University of Utah, as the federal government wanted to ensure the loyalty of the territory during the American Civil War. On January 29, 1868, \"Great\" was dropped from both the county and city names, giving them their modern names.\nPatrick Edward Connor, the leader of the garrison at Fort Douglas, was openly anti-Mormon. He sent out parties to scout for mineral resources in the nearby mountains, hoping to encourage non-Mormons to settle in the territory. During the late 19th century, mines were established in the Wasatch mountains, most notably around Alta (and nearby Park City in Summit County). Exploiting the mineral wealth was difficult until the Utah Central Railroad was constructed and reached this area in 1870.\nIn the Oquirrh Mountains, the Bingham Canyon Mine, which contains vast deposits of copper and silver, was developed as the most productive of the county's mines. The mine, located in the southwest portion of the county, attracted thousands of workers to the narrow canyon. At its peak, the city of Bingham Canyon contained 20,000 residents, all crowded along the steep walls of the canyon, and natural disasters were a frequent occurrence. By the early 20th century, most of the mines in the county had closed. However, the Bingham Canyon Mine kept on expanding. In the early 21st century, it is among the largest open-pit mines in the world.\n20th century.\nAfter the railroad came to the county, the population began to expand more rapidly, and non-Mormons began to settle in Salt Lake City. During the early 20th century, the heavy industry came to the valley as well, diversifying its economy. Local and interurban trolley systems were built covering the more urban northeastern quarter of the valley. The city dismantled the trolley system by 1945, favoring the use of individual cars. Throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the east side of the valley began to be more densely settled.\nIn 1942, Kearns Army Air Base, a large military installation developed for World War II, was located in what is now Kearns on the western side of the valley. After the camp was closed in 1946, the land was sold for private development. Rapid postwar residential settlement of the area began. The federal government established other major defensive installations along the Wasatch Front and in the Great Salt Lake Desert during World War II, which stimulated the economy and brought more people to the area, establishing Utah as a major military center that benefited from federal investment. In the nationwide suburban boom of the late 1940s, 1950s, and early 1960s, such cities as South Salt Lake, Murray, Midvale, and much of the east side of the valley grew rapidly.\nIn common with other industrialized cities, Salt Lake City faced inner-city decay in the 1960s, when residents moved to newer housing in the suburbs. Cities such as Sandy, West Jordan, and what would become West Valley City grew at boomtown rates in the 1970s and 1980s. Huge residential tracts were developed through the center of the valley, and within ten years, the entire area had been converted from farmland into sprawling bedroom communities in Salt Lake City. West Valley City was created from the merger of the three unincorporated cities of Granger, Hunter and Redwood (including Chesterfield) in 1980.\nBut not every area of the county saw growth. The former mining towns related to Bingham Canyon were abandoned in the 1960s and 1970s to make way for the expansion of the open-pit mine. The city of Bingham Canyon was completely torn down and swallowed up in the mine by 1972, and the dismantling of Lark in 1980 completed the process. The only remaining mining town in the county is Copperton, located southwest of West Jordan, with approximately 800 residents. Magna has workers who continue to be associated with the mine's smelting operations in Garfield and at Arthur Mill.\nIn the 1990s, the county's areas of rapid growth shifted further south and west. Farm and pasturelands were developed as suburbs. The cities of West Jordan, South Jordan, Riverton, Herriman, and Draper are some of the fastest-growing cities in the state. During the 1990s, Salt Lake City gained population for the first time in 40 years.\n21st century.\nSalt Lake City's selection as the host of the 2002 Winter Olympics spurred a construction boom in the city that continued after the Olympics, slowing only in 2008 recession. As the county's population has surpassed 1 million, it has significantly urbanized, leaving only a few rural areas in the far west of the valley. Issues facing the county today include congested transportation and related air pollution.\nGeography.\nThe Salt Lake Valley is fed by seven streams from the surrounding mountains. All the runoff water eventually ends in the Great Salt Lake, which has no outlet. The mountains rise precipitously from the relatively flat valley surfaces, indicating their comparatively youthful formation. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (8.1%) is water. It is the fifth-smallest county in Utah by area. The county borders on the Great Salt Lake and is traversed by the northward flowing Jordan River.\nThe western portion of the county descends toward the valley of the lake, but perhaps the most dominating physical feature in Salt Lake County is the Wasatch Mountains in the eastern portion of the county, famous for both summer and winter activities. The mountains are administered as part of the Wasatch-Cache National Forest. The mountains' snow is touted in state-sponsored publicity as 'Greatest Snow on Earth' for its soft, powdery texture, and led to Salt Lake City's winning the bid for the 2002 Winter Olympics. Salt Lake County has four ski resorts: Snowbird and Alta in Little Cottonwood Canyon and Solitude and Brighton in Big Cottonwood Canyon. Hiking and camping are popular summer activities. The Oquirrh Mountains border the western part of the county. These two mountain ranges, together with the much smaller Traverse Mountains at the south of the valley, delimit Salt Lake Valley, which is also flanked on the northwest by the Great Salt Lake, and on the north by the Salt Lake Anticline (including Ensign Peak).\nOn the north and east benches, houses have been built halfway up the mountain to the boundary of the national forest, assuming greater risk from wildfires. New communities are also being constructed on the southern and western slopes. Rapid residential construction continues in the west-central, southwest, and southern portions of the valley. In the far west, southwest, and northwest, rural areas still exist, but rapid growth threatens what remains of the natural environment in the valley. The County government operates several large parks in the valley (including some with incorporated cities), including Big Cottonwood Park, Crestwood Park, and an Equestrian Center.\nAccess.\nTraffic into the Salt Lake Valley passes through four narrow geographic features: Parley's Canyon to the east; the space between the Salt Lake Anticline and the Great Salt Lake leading into Davis County to the north; the Point of the Mountain and adjacent Jordan Narrows leading to Utah County to the south; and a space (known as Garfield) between the Oquirrh Mountains and the Great Salt Lake leading to Tooele County to the west. Of these, only the connection to Davis County to the north is wide enough and flat enough to accommodate transportation routes without reliance on earthworks.\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nAnnual precipitation for the Salt Lake Valley is around , usually with more on the east side and less on the west side, as most storms come from the Pacific Ocean and the west side is in the rain shadow of the Oquirrh Mountains. Up to is received on the east benches. Most of this precipitation is received in spring. The summer is dry, with the majority of precipitation arriving from the monsoon that rises from the south. Short, localized, and often dry thunderstorms are usually associated with the monsoon. However, some can be very intense. These storms can cause contrasting emergencies of flash floods and wildfires (due to dry lightning and powerful winds). Precipitation is heaviest in late fall/early winter and in spring, while early summer is the driest season.\nAnnual snowfall in the valley is , with up to on the benches. The most snow falls between mid-November and late March. The mountains receive up to of light, dry snow and up to of precipitation annually. The dry snow is often considered good for skiing, contributing to the four ski resorts in the county. Snow usually falls from October through May. The heavy snow totals across the county can be attributed to the lake-effect, where precipitation is intensified by the warm waters of the Great Salt Lake, which never entirely freezes due to the lake's high salinity. The lake effect can affect any area of the county, depending on wind conditions. The dry snow is attributed to the low humidity of the region.\nDuring winter, temperature inversions are common, causing air pollution in the valley. They trap pollutants, moisture, and cold temperatures in the valley while the surrounding mountains enjoy warm temperatures and clear skies. This can cause some melting snow in the mountains and unhealthy air quality, and low visibility in the valley. This weather event lasts from a few days to a month in extreme cases and is caused when an area of high pressure forms over the Great Basin.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 1,185,238 people in Salt Lake County with a population density of 1,574.3 people per square mile (607.9/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 800,914 (67.6%) White, 21,976 (1.9%) African American, 7,205 (0.6%) Native American, 50,241 (4.2%) Asian, 21,194 (1.8%) Pacific Islander, 5,537 (0.5%) from other races, and 46,083 (3.9%) from two or more races. 232,088 (19.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 595,608 (50.25%) males and 589,630 (49.75%) females, and the population distribution by age was 310,343 (26.2%) under the age of 18, 740,417 (62.5%) from 18 to 64, and 134,478 (11.3%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 32.9 years.\nThere were 405,229 households in Salt Lake County with an average size of 2.92 of which 276,809 (68.3%) were families and 128,420 (31.7%) were non-families. Among all families, 207,859 (51.3%) were married couples, 23,928 (5.9%) were male householders with no spouse, and 45,022 (11.1%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 93,149 (23.0%) were a single person living alone and 35,271 (8.7%) were two or more people living together. 145,748 (36.0%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 259,912 (64.1%) of households were owner-occupied while 145,317 (35.9%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Salt Lake County household was $77,128 and the median family income was $90,815, with a per-capita income of $34,640. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $55,514 and for females $42,479. 8.6% of the population and 5.6% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 726,907 people in Salt Lake County 25 years or older, 61,635 (8.5%) had not completed high school, 162,491 (22.4%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 237,252 (32.6%) had some college or associate degree, 170,110 (23.4%) had a bachelor's degree, and 95,419 (13.1%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nPrevious enumerations.\nThe US Census Bureau estimate for 2019 lists 1,160,437 people in Salt Lake County. The racial makeup of the county was 70.3% non-Hispanic White, 2.2% Black, 1.4% Native American, 4.6% Asian, 1.8% Pacific Islander, and 2.9% from two or more races. 18.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 1,029,655 people, 343,218 households, and 291,686 families in the county. The population density was . There were 364,031 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 81.2% White, 1.59% Black or African American, 0.89% Native American, 3.3% Asian, 1.53% Pacific Islander, 8.35% from other races, and 3.14% from two or more races. 17.09% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nIn 2010 there were 343,218 households, out of which 40.10% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.80% were married couples living together, 10.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 27.50% were non-families. 20.80% of all households were made up of individuals, and 6.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.00 and the average family size was 3.53.\nIn terms of age, 30.5% of the county's population was under the age of 18, 12.90% from 18 to 24, 30.60% from 25 to 44, 18.00% from 45 to 64, and 8.10% was 65 years of age or older. The median age was 29 years. For every 100 females, there were 101.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 99.70 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $48,373, and the median income for a family was $54,470. Males had a median income of $36,953 versus $26,105 for females. The per capita income for the county was $20,190. About 5.70% of families and 8.00% of the population were below the poverty threshold, including 9.00% of those under age 18 and 5.50% of those age 65 or over.\nThe 2005 American Community Survey indicated that 11.4% of Salt Lake County's population living in households (as opposed to group arrangements such as college dormitories) spoke Spanish at home.\nReligion.\nAccording to data from the LDS Church and the State of Utah, Salt Lake County's population was 50.6% LDS (Mormon) in 2008, as reported in the \"Deseret News.\" By 2013, this had increased to 51.41%. However, by 2020, the share of LDS members had decreased to 46.89%.\nGovernment and politics.\nCounty Court, March 15, 1852 \u2013 June 8, 1896.\nThe first governing administrative body of the county was made up of the probate court and judge, Elias Smith, and three selectmen: Samuel Moore, Reuben Miller, and J.C. Wright. The first order of business on March 15 was to appoint a county Assessor/Collector, S. Eldridge. Second order was the appointment of a county Treasurer, Thomas Rhodes, and the third and fourth orders of business for the day was setting the rate of taxation on taxable property, at .5% of $0.01, and .25% of $0.01, as a road tax. The Court (probate section) adjudicated in civil and criminal cases in the county.\nCommission, June 8, 1896 \u2013 January 1, 2001.\nThe Board of County Commissioners began its duties on June 8, 1896, with Utah's statehood. Though the judge was removed when the court was abolished upon statehood, the Selectmen stayed on in their offices until elections to fill the new commission seats were held. The first commissioners elected were: A.S. Geddes, M. Christopherson, and C.H. Roberts. The Commission took over all duties the Court and Selectmen performed. The County Court house was demolished after the completion of the Salt Lake City and County Building in Downtown Salt Lake City in the mid-1890s. The new County Commission governed at the City and County Building until 1986 when the county government moved its offices to the newly built the Salt Lake County Government Center at State Street and 2100 South, formerly the location of the County Hospital, which was demolished in early the 1980s to build the County Government Center.\nCouncil and mayor, January 1, 2001.\nThe county currently has a mayor\u2013council form of government. The position of mayor is decided in partisan elections; the current mayor (as of January 2019) is Jenny Wilson, a Democrat. Former county mayors include Peter Corroon, Nancy Workman and Alan Dayton (Workman's deputy mayor; sworn in as acting mayor in September 2004 when Nancy Workman was placed on paid administrative leave). The County Council is composed of three seats elected at-large and six elected by district. District-elected councilors are elected to staggered four-year terms; the at-large councilors are elected to six-year terms. https://\nPolitics.\nLike most of Utah, Salt Lake County has traditionally favored candidates from the Republican Party. However, while it is relatively conservative for an urban county, it has been friendlier to Democratic candidates than the rest of the state. All but one Democrat in the state House of Representatives, and all six Democrats in the state Senate, represent districts based in the county. Democratic presidential candidates managed to carry the county four times between 2008 and 2024, despite losing the state by large margins.\nIn 2004, Republican President George W. Bush won the county over Democrat John Kerry 59% to 37%. In 2008, however, Democrat Barack Obama won Salt Lake County by an extremely narrow margin, 48.17% to 48.09%, over Republican John McCain\u2014a difference of 296 votes. It was the first time since 1964, when Lyndon B. Johnson was the Democratic candidate, that Salt Lake County had voted for a Democrat in a presidential race. In 2012, the Republicans recaptured the county, as Mitt Romney received 58% of the vote to Obama's 38%. In 2016, Democrat Hillary Clinton won the county with 41.5% of the vote, to Republican Donald Trump's 32.6% and Independent and Utah-native Evan McMullin's 25.9%\u2014a much wider margin of over 35,000 votes. In 2020, Salt Lake County saw a strong Democratic trend when Joe Biden carried it with 53% of the vote. He was the first Democratic presidential candidate to win a majority of the county's vote since Johnson.\nIn 2004, the Constitutional Amendment 3 that defined marriage as between one man and one woman passed the county with 54.4% of the vote, only neighboring Summit County and Grand County in the eastern part of the state voting no on the amendment that passed statewide with 66% of the vote. Salt Lake County was the only county to vote in favor of the amendment where it did not receive more than 55% of the vote.\nDemocratic strength in the county is mainly concentrated in Salt Lake City and closer inner ring suburbs like South Salt Lake and Millcreek. Other inner ring suburbs in the I-215 corridor such as West Valley City tend to be swing towns. Sandy and West Jordan tend to lean more Republican, and the other outer-ring suburbs in the southern part of the county like South Jordan are strongly Republican.\nThe bulk of the county was for a long time located in the 2nd congressional district. However, after Utah gained a seat following the 2010 census redistricting, the Republican-controlled state legislature split the county into three districts \u2013 2nd, 3rd and 4th. Despite that, from 2000 to 2020 Republicans controlled most of the county in Congress only for four years \u2013 from 2015 to 2019, after Jim Matheson, who survived two redistricting cycles following the 2000 and 2010 censuses, retired and was replaced by Mia Love, who in turn, was defeated by former county mayor Ben McAdams in the 2018 election. McAdams lost to Republican Burgess Owens in 2020, giving Republicans full control of the county\u2019s districts. Salt Lake County was split into 4 districts after the 2020 census, and Republicans have held all of them since.\nOnly one Republican (Workman) has ever been elected county mayor. Since its inception, the county council has mostly been Republican-controlled, save for two years in 2009\u20132011, when Democrats had a narrow 5\u20134 majority following the 2008 election.\nThe county last voted for the Democratic candidate for governor in 2004, and for a Democratic Senate candidate in 1974, although, it voted for independent candidate Evan McMullin in 2022.\nOther elected officials.\nIn addition to a mayor and council, Salt Lake County has eight other officials elected to four-year terms. Current officeholders:\nEconomy.\nThe region's economy traditionally revolved around LDS services and mining. While both are still important to the economy, each has greatly declined in significance since the 19th century. Since World War II, defense industries in the region have also played a very important role in the economy due to its strategic central location in the Western United States, as well as the largely uninhabited and desolate Great Salt Lake Desert to the west (used for training, weapons testing, and storage of hazardous materials).\nBeginning in 1939, with the opening of Alta Ski Area, skiing and other winter sports (as well as summer sports), have become a major force in the economy. In 1995, Salt Lake City won the bid to host the 2002 Winter Olympics. The 2002 Olympics boosted tourism and the economy, and helped to dramatically improve transportation throughout the county. Transportation has been a major focus, as the county continues to rapidly grow in population. It was drastically improved beginning in the late 80s and through the 90s, and continues to this day. Beginning in the 1960s, a more service-oriented economy began to develop, and information technologies began to arrive in the 80s and 90s. Although this business has waned in recent years, information and computer companies, such as iBAHN, InContact, Mstar, Opengear, and Overstock.com are still thriving businesses here.\nNorthrop Grumman is building solid rocket motors in Magna.https://news.northropgrumman.com/news/releases/northrop-grumman-invests-in-new-solid-rocket-motor-manufacturing-facilities-in-magna-utah\nEducation.\nThe county has one major research university, the University of Utah. Westminster College and Salt Lake Community College also have large, well defined campuses in the county. Colleges with smaller, non-traditional campuses in the county include Roseman University of Health Sciences, Broadview University, Eagle Gate College, Ensign College, Midwives College of Utah, Neumont University, and Stevens-Henager College.\nSalt Lake County includes five separate public school districts: Salt Lake City, Canyon, Granite, Jordan, and Murray.\nSalt Lake City and Murray operate their own school districts (although a recent annexation by Murray leaves a part of the city within the Granite School District). The Granite School District, the third largest in the state, is a broad district that covers a swath from Magna , Kearns, and Taylorsville through West Valley City and eastward to South Salt Lake and Millcreek. The Jordan School District, with approximately 48,000 students, covers the southwest part of the county, including most of West Jordan, South Jordan, Riverton, Herriman, Bluffdale, and Copperton.\nOn November 6, 2007, the east side residents of the Jordan School District in Sandy, Draper, Midvale, Cottonwood Heights, Alta, and nearby unincorporated areas voted to split from the Jordan District, creating the Canyons School District. A similar vote to make West Jordan its own district, however, failed.\nTwo high schools have closed:\nNon-traditional public high schools also include Horizonte and Valley, which was at one time located in the historic Crescent Elementary School building.\nIn addition, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Salt Lake City operates eight elementary schools, one middle school, two high schools, and two preschools in Salt Lake County. Judge Memorial Catholic High School in Salt Lake City is the largest Catholic high school in Utah. The Catholic Church also operates Juan Diego High School in Draper.\nIntermountain Christian School is the only PS-12 independent Christian School in Salt Lake County.\nSalt Lake County also has several independent schools including:\nSalt Lake County is home to the Bastian Agricultural and Equestrian Center, which also serves as an extension and distance education location for Utah State University.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nBecause the restricted geography permits only four major entrances to the Salt Lake Valley, routes for long-distance travel through the valley are mainly confined to an east\u2013west strip through Salt Lake City and South Salt Lake and a north\u2013south strip near the Jordan River. These corridors cross in the area between South Salt Lake and Downtown Salt Lake City and together form a latin cross of transportation infrastructure that is almost perfectly oriented north-to-south.\nAir transportation.\nSalt Lake City International Airport is the only airport with scheduled passenger service in the county, and South Valley Regional Airport is the only other public airport. Another small airport, Skypark Airport, is just to the north of Salt Lake County. Salt Lake City International Airport is the 24th-busiest airport in the United States and a hub of Delta Air Lines and SkyWest Airlines. In 2014, construction began on a major renovation and expansion project. The initial phase was completed in 2020, with expansion phases completing periodically between then and 2026.\nRailroads.\nUnion Pacific controls all long-distance freight tracks into the county, though the Utah Railway, BNSF, and Salt Lake, Garfield, and Western have long-standing trackage rights. The Salt Lake City Southern and Savage Bingham and Garfield railroads operate totally within the county. All four major entrances to the Salt Lake Valley once carried rail traffic, but only railroads at the north, south, and west entrances to the valley exist today as the line in Parley's Canyon was never built to high standards and was covered by Interstate 80 in the mid-20th century. All three of these entrances carry passenger trains as well as freight.\nAmtrak's \"California Zephyr\" runs daily in both directions between Garfield and Point of the Mountain via Salt Lake City Station (on its route between Emeryville, California and Chicago, Illinois).\nRail mass transit.\nThe Utah Transit Authority's (UTA) \"FrontRunner\" commuter rail line provides all-day service to Ogden (with select peak hour trips going to Pleasant View) to the north (via Davis County) and Provo to the south.\nA light rail system, known as TRAX, is operated by the Utah Transit Authority (UTA) and currently has three lines. The Blue Line runs from Downtown Salt Lake City to Draper), the Red Line from South Jordan to the University of Utah, and the Green Line from West Valley City to the Salt Lake City International Airport (via Downtown Salt Lake City). There are currently 50 stops in the system. The original line opened in 1999 from downtown to Sandy, with the line to the University of Utah completed in 2001, and to West Valley City and South Jordan in 2011. In April 2013 the extension to the airport (Airport Station) on the Green Line opened and the extension to Draper (Draper Town Center Station) on the Blue Line opened in August 2013.\nAn historic streetcar was proposed along 2100 South from the TRAX station to the historic business district in the Sugar House neighborhood. The proposal was refined and in December 2013, a modern (S Line) light rail track was completed and is operated by UTA. A future extension is planned to run north along Highland Drive and 1100 East to 1700 South.\nRoads.\nThe county is traversed by three Interstate Highways and one U.S. Highway, as well as an additional freeway and one major expressway. US-89 enters from Davis County to the north and traverses the county arrow-straight until merging with I-15 in north Draper. It is known as State Street along most of the route and is the primary surface road in the valley. I-15 and I-80 intersect just west of Downtown Salt Lake City, merging for approximately north-to-south. I-80 continues west past the Salt Lake City International Airport and east through Parley's Canyon and into the Wasatch Range. I-15 traverses the valley north-to-south, providing access to the entire urban corridor. The freeway is 10\u201312 lanes wide after a major expansion project from 1998 to 2001 undertaken in preparation for the 2002 Winter Olympics. I-215 directly serves many of the suburbs of Salt Lake City in the western, central, and eastern portions of the valley in a 270\u00b0 loop. SR-201, alternatively known as the \"21st South Freeway\", provides access to West Valley City and the west side of the valley. Bangerter Highway (SR-154) is an expressway that traverses the entire western end of the valley from the airport, ending at I-15 in southern Draper. SR-68, or Redwood Road, is the only surface street that traverses the entire valley from north-to-south. The Legacy Parkway opened in 2008 to connect with I-215 at the north end of the valley, providing an alternative route into Davis County to alleviate congestion. The Mountain View Corridor is a limited-access highway across the southwestern part of the county; construction began in 2010 and it was put into operation in stages.\nThe Utah Transit Authority operates bus routes throughout the valley and along the Wasatch Front, to Park City and Tooele, and to the ski resorts in winter.\nPedestrian and bicycle trails.\nThe Jordan River Parkway trail (and its northern extension, the Legacy Parkway trail) runs north\u2013south in the center of the valley from Utah County to Davis County (though it has a few gaps), and the planned Crosstown and Parley's trails will together form the primary east\u2013west route from Parley's Canyon to Garfield. The Bonneville Shoreline Trail runs along the face of the Wasatch mountains, skirting the edge of the built up areas of the east bench, though there are large gaps in the central part of the county. A large number of more remote trails provide access throughout the Wasatch-Cache National Forest.\nHealth care.\nThe largest health care providers in the county are Intermountain Health Care and University of Utah Healthcare, though three major hospitals (St Mark's, Pioneer Valley, and the Veterans Affairs Hospital) are run by other organizations. Hospitals in the county include:\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71072", "revid": "46101231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71072", "title": "San Juan County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nSan Juan County ( ) is a county in the southeastern portion of the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 14,518. Its county seat is Monticello, while its most populous city is Blanding. The Utah State Legislature named the county for the San Juan River, itself named by Spanish explorers (in honor of Saint John). San Juan County borders Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico at the Four Corners.\nHistory.\nThe Utah Territory authorized the creation of San Juan County on February 17, 1880, with territories annexed from Iron, Kane, and Piute counties. There has been no change in its boundaries since its creation. Monticello was founded in 1887, and by 1895 it was large enough to be designated the seat of San Juan County. On September 13, 2025, two extreme-level tornadoes touched down in the county. One was an EFU, the other was a strong EF2.\nGeography.\nSan Juan County lies in the southeastern corner of the state of Utah. Its borders coincide with the borders of the states of Colorado, New Mexico, and Arizona with Utah. The convergence point of these borders, Four Corners Monument, is located at the extreme southeastern corner of the county.\nThe county's terrain generally slopes to the west and the south, with its highest point, Mount Peale, at above sea level. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (1.4%) is water. It is the largest county by area in Utah.\nThe county's western and southern boundaries lie deep within gorges carved by the Colorado and San Juan Rivers. Tributary canyons, cutting through rock layers of the surrounding deserts, have carved the land up with chasms, cliffs, and plateaus. In the center of the county is Cedar Mesa, Comb Wash, Natural Bridges, and Hovenweep National Monuments. Canyonlands National Park lies mainly within the county borders. The Eastern side of Glen Canyon National Recreation Area / Lake Powell is also in the county.\nThe Blue (Abajo) Mountains and the La Sal Mountains exceed in elevation. Both ranges are covered with lush forests, contrasting the scenery below. The elevation change within the county is from nearly in the La Sal Mountains to at Lake Powell, a difference of about .\nThe county's towns lie primarily on a north-south axis along U.S. routes 191 and 163 from La Sal in the north to Monument Valley in the south.\nNatural resources.\nIn 2018, the only operating uranium processing plant in the United States was located in the town of Blanding; however, the plant was moved to be on standby in 2019.\nSan Juan County is home to numerous oil and gas fields, including Squaw Canyon Oil Field, that produce primarily from the Desert Creek and Ismay Formations.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSan Juan County is bordered by more counties than any other county in the United States, at 14.\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2017, San Juan County was the poorest county (per capita) in Utah and one of the poorest in the United States.\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 14,518 people in San Juan County with a population density of 1.9 people per square mile (0.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 6,038 (41.6%) White, 32 (0.2%) African American, 7,186 (49.5%) Native American, 34 (0.2%) Asian, 51 (0.4%) Pacific Islander, 26 (0.2%) from other races, and 404 (2.8%) from two or more races. 747 (5.1%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 7,269 (50.07%) males and 7,249 (49.93%) females, and the population distribution by age was 4,176 (28.8%) under the age of 18, 8,104 (55.8%) from 18 to 64, and 2,238 (15.4%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 34.6 years.\nThere were 4,649 households in San Juan County with an average size of 3.12 of which 3,397 (73.1%) were families and 1,252 (26.9%) were non-families. Among all families, 2,359 (50.7%) were married couples, 317 (6.8%) were male householders with no spouse, and 721 (15.5%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 1,070 (23.0%) were a single person living alone and 182 (3.9%) were two or more people living together. 1,848 (39.8%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 3,708 (79.8%) of households were owner-occupied while 941 (20.2%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a San Juan County household was $49,690 and the median family income was $57,401, with a per-capita income of $20,088. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $48,259 and for females $34,092. 22.8% of the population and 18.1% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 9,192 people in San Juan County 25 years or older, 1,313 (14.3%) had not completed high school, 2,801 (30.5%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 3,316 (36.1%) had some college or associate degree, 1,156 (12.6%) had a bachelor's degree, and 606 (6.6%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 14,746 people and 4,505 households in San Juan County. The racial and ethnic composition of the population was 50.4% Native American, 45.8% White, 0.3% Asian, 0.2% African American and 2.3% reporting two or more races. 4.4% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nPolitics and government.\nSan Juan County has supported Republican presidents since voting for Wendell Willkie in 1940. It supported a Democrat for president in 1896 (William Jennings Bryan), 1916 (Woodrow Wilson), and 1936 (Franklin D. Roosevelt). Though a Republican vote currently secures elections, the area has voted less Republican than the rest of Utah in many national elections. In 2004, for example, George W. Bush won 60.02% in San Juan County versus 71.54% in the state. In 2020, Democrat Joe Biden needed 6.13% more votes to win the county from Donald Trump, who secured 51.2% in the county as opposed to 58.13% in the state as a whole. The county is more competitive at the state level due to its high Native American population, which leans Democratic. Notably, the county voted for the Democratic candidates in the 1988 and 2000 gubernatorial elections, both of which Republican candidates won.\nFederally mandated commissioner districts put many Navajo voters in one district. The San Juan County Board of Commissioners has been majority white for many years. In 2016, a Federal District Court decision found voting districts violated the 1965 Voting Rights Act and the U.S. Constitution. Before the 2016 court decision, the county used an at-large voting system to elect commissioners.\nIn 2018, the first-ever majority-Navajo commission was seated. Two of the three county commissioners, Willie Grayeyes and Kenneth Maryboy, are board members of Utah Din\u00e9 Bikeyah, which supported the creation of Bears Ears National Monument. In a 2019 special election, Proposition 10, which would have changed the structure of the county government to include five county commissioners, was blocked needing 153 more popular votes. The proposition, spearheaded by Blanding Mayor Joe Lyman, was characterized by opponents as an effort to undermine the Navajo-majority county commission. Mayor Joe Lyman characterized the proposition as a way to restore representation to Blanding, the county's largest city. He states, \"I don't like how we arrived at the commissioners we have because it felt like a judicial appointment,\" and that \"the vote is very evenly split.\"\nAs of March 2020, efforts were underway to bring municipal water and electrical service to the 29-home Din\u00e9 (Navajo) community of Westwater, which has existed for decades with neither just outside the city limits of Blanding.\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71074", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71074", "title": "Summit County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nSummit County is a county in the U.S. state of Utah, occupying a rugged and mountainous area. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 42,357. Its county seat is Coalville, and the largest city is Park City.\nHistory.\nThe county was created by the Utah Territory legislature on January 13, 1854, with its description containing a portion of the future state of Wyoming. It was not organized then but was attached to Great Salt Lake County for administrative and judicial purposes. The county government was completed by March 4, 1861, so its attachment to the other county was terminated. The county boundaries were altered in 1856 and in 1862. In 1868 the Wyoming Territory was created by the US government, effectively de-annexing all Summit County areas falling within the new territory. The boundaries were further altered in 1872 and 1880. Its final alteration occurred on January 7, 1918, when Daggett's creation took a portion of its eastern territory. Its boundary has remained unchanged since that creation. It is so named because it includes 39 of the highest mountain peaks in Utah.\nThe county's mean elevation is above sea level, which is the second-highest (after Taos County, New Mexico) of any county outside Colorado. Owing to its proximity to Salt Lake City, Park City has acquired a reputation as an upscale getaway, bringing new development to the area.\nSummit County is part of the Heber, UT Micropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Salt Lake City-Provo-Orem, UT Combined Statistical Area.\nGeography.\nSummit County lies on the upper east side of Utah. Its northeast borders abut Wyoming's southern and western borders. Its central and eastern portion consists largely of the east\u2013west oriented Uinta Mountains, while its western portion runs to the east slopes of the north\u2013south oriented Wasatch Mountains. The county's highest point is Gilbert Peak, on the border with Duchesne County, at ASL. The county has an area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 42,357 people in Summit County with a population density of 22.6 people per square mile (8.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 35,108 (82.9%) White, 163 (0.4%) African American, 67 (0.2%) Native American, 723 (1.7%) Asian, 42 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 155 (0.4%) from other races, and 1,362 (3.2%) from two or more races. 4,737 (11.2%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 21,578 (50.94%) males and 20,779 (49.06%) females, and the population distribution by age was 10,351 (24.4%) under the age of 18, 26,149 (61.7%) from 18 to 64, and 5,857 (13.8%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 40.8 years.\nThere were 15,688 households in Summit County with an average size of 2.70 of which 11,419 (72.8%) were families and 4,269 (27.2%) were non-families. Among all families, 9,553 (60.9%) were married couples, 671 (4.3%) were male householders with no spouse, and 1,195 (7.6%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 3,171 (20.2%) were a single person living alone and 1,098 (7.0%) were two or more people living together. 5,424 (34.6%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 12,186 (77.7%) of households were owner-occupied while 3,502 (22.3%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Summit County household was $106,973 and the median family income was $119,592, with a per-capita income of $57,308. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $69,357 and for females $50,147. 4.5% of the population and 2.7% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 27,924 people in Summit County 25 years or older, 1,332 (4.8%) had not completed high school, 4,476 (16.0%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 6,446 (23.1%) had some college or associate degree, 9,841 (35.2%) had a bachelor's degree, and 5,829 (20.9%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nReligion.\nAccording to a 2000 survey by the Association of Statisticians of American Religious Bodies, Summit County is more religiously diverse than the rest of Utah. Roughly two-in-five people (44.2%) of the population claim no religion at all. 36.8% are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) (compared with some 66% statewide) and 10.6% are Catholic.\nPolitics and government.\nSummit County was a Republican stronghold in the decades following World War II. Beginning in the 1990s, it became more competitive due to the influence of Democratic-leaning Park City, with Democrats sometimes winning a plurality or majority of the countywide vote. In 1996, Bill Clinton became the first Democratic presidential nominee to win the county since Lyndon Johnson's 44-state landslide in 1964 and only the second Democrat to carry it since Franklin D. Roosevelt. George W. Bush carried the county in 2000 and 2004, but his performance there was worst in the state. In the 2006 Senate race, Summit County was the only county carried by Democrat Pete Ashdown even as the Republican incumbent Orrin Hatch carried the state as a whole by a 2 to 1 margin. Likewise, in the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Barack Obama carried the county by a 15.3% margin over John McCain, while McCain carried Utah by 28.1%. In the 2012 presidential election, Republican Mitt Romney defeated Obama in the county, 50% to 46%. In 2016, Democrat Hillary Clinton defeated Republican Donald Trump, 50% to 35%, and Joe Biden increased her margin by 3% in 2020, solidifying the county as a safe Democratic region.\nIn the 2016 Senate race, Summit County was the only county in Utah where a plurality voted for Democratic nominee Misty Snow against Republican incumbent Mike Lee. Snow was the first major-party transgender Senate candidate in United States history, making the county the first in the nation to vote for a transgender candidate for the Senate.\nOn the county level, most of the elected offices are held by Democrats, including four of the five seats on the newly created Summit County Council. John Hanrahan, D; Claudia McMullin, D; Sally Elliott, D; Chris Robinson, D; David Ure, R.\nSummit County was one of only two counties (along with Grand County) to vote against Utah's same-sex marriage ban in 2004. In June 2010, Summit County became the sixth local government of Utah to prohibit discrimination in employment or housing based on a person's sexual orientation or gender identity.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThere are three school districts covering sections of the county:\nSummit County also includes a local campus of Utah State University in Park City.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71075", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71075", "title": "Sanpete County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nSanpete County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 28,437. Its county seat is Manti, and its largest city is Ephraim. The county was created in 1850.\nHistory.\nThe Sanpete Valley may have been traversed or inhabited as long as 32,000 BP by small bands of hunters. This habitation may have continued for about 20,000 years when the extinction of larger game animals forced a change. About 8,500 years ago, different groups (characterized by use of atlatls, millstones and textiles) came onto the scene. These also departed the area about 2,500 years ago, for unknown reasons, after which the area does not seem to have been visited by humans for 1,500 years.\nArcheological evidence indicates that the Fremont people appeared next on the stage (from about 1-1300 CE), the first inhabitants of the area to domesticate crops and create relatively large communal settlements. In this county, the best-known Fremont site to date is \"Witch's Knoll\" SE of Ephraim. Around 1300 AD the evidence of Fremont habitation also ceases. The most recent groups of indigenous Americans in the Sanpete region are the Ute, Paiute, Goshute, and Shoshoni, who appeared in Utah about 1300 and \"perhaps they displaced, replaced, or assimilated the part-time Fremont hunter-gatherers.\" The Utes, Paiutes, Goshute and Shoshone share a common language family called Numic.\nMormon pioneers arrived in the Great Basin in the summer of 1847. The first few years were spent establishing a base in the Great Salt Lake Valley, then groups were sent, usually by the directive of the church leaders, to settle the more outlying areas. In 1849 two Ute chiefs traveled from what is now Sanpete County about north to the Salt Lake Valley to request a Mormon settlement be established. The chiefs, Walkara and Sowiette, asked Mormon leader Brigham Young to settle a group of his people in the valley of Sanpitch. Young sent a party to explore the area in August of that year. It was deemed favorable to settlement, and Brigham Young called Isaac Morley and George Washington Bradley to organize about fifty families to move south and settle \"San Pete.\" The group of 224 arrived on November 19, led by Isaac Morley, Charles Shumway, Seth Taft, and George Washington Bradley. After some debate, the first settlement in the valley was established on the present site of Manti, Utah.\nThe State of Deseret enacted the county effective January 31, 1850. The region was named for the Ute chief Sanpitch, which was changed to Sanpete. According to William Bright, the name comes from the Ute word \"saimpitsi\", meaning \"people of the tules\".\nThe county boundaries were adjusted more than a dozen times during the 19th century. These adjustments often shrank it from its previous size. As of 1880, the county of Sanpete included the area of what would later become modern-day Carbon County, as well as some of Emery, Uintah, and Grand Counties. An adjustment in 1913 and refining of the county boundary definitions in 1919 brought Sanpete County to its present configuration.\nThe Sanpete County Courthouse, completed in 1935 by the Works Project Administration, is on the National Register of Historic Places.\nGeography.\nThe Sanpete Valley runs from north to south through the center of the county. The county is sloped to the south, with its highest point east of Ephraim, on South Tent Mountain at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water. The geographical center of Utah is located in Sanpete County, just west of Ephraim.\nSanpete County is bounded along its eastern side by the Wasatch Plateau (sometimes known as the Manti Mountains). The Wasatch Plateau rises to approximately . Most of the Wasatch Plateau is encompassed by the Manti Division of the Manti-La Sal National Forest. Runoff from the western slopes of these mountains provides water to the county's cities and agricultural areas. Central Sanpete is dominated by the Sanpete Valley (sometimes known as the Sanpitch Valley), where most of the county's cities are located. The western side of the valley is bounded by the lower and drier San Pitch Mountains, which also form part of the western boundary of the county. The San Pitch River runs from north to south through Sanpete and empties into the Sevier River in southwestern Sanpete. This portion of the Sevier River Valley is known as Gunnison Valley.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 28,437 people in Sanpete County with a population density of 17.9 people per square mile (6.9/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 23,688 (83.3%) White, 224 (0.8%) African American, 240 (0.8%) Native American, 171 (0.6%) Asian, 247 (0.9%) Pacific Islander, 81 (0.3%) from other races, and 743 (2.6%) from two or more races. 3,043 (10.7%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 15,266 (53.68%) males and 13,171 (46.32%) females, and the population distribution by age was 8,003 (28.1%) under the age of 18, 15,846 (55.7%) from 18 to 64, and 4,588 (16.1%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 33.7 years.\nThere were 8,394 households in Sanpete County with an average size of 3.39 of which 6,459 (76.9%) were families and 1,935 (23.1%) were non-families. Among all families, 5,387 (64.2%) were married couples, 389 (4.6%) were male householders with no spouse, and 683 (8.1%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 1,610 (19.2%) were a single person living alone and 325 (3.9%) were two or more people living together. 3,190 (38.0%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 6,473 (77.1%) of households were owner-occupied while 1,921 (22.9%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Sanpete County household was $55,820 and the median family income was $65,047, with a per-capita income of $21,254. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $51,250 and for females $32,833. 14.8% of the population and 9.3% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 18,205 people in Sanpete County 25 years or older, 1,465 (8.0%) had not completed high school, 5,758 (31.6%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 7,205 (39.6%) had some college or associate degree, 2,541 (14.0%) had a bachelor's degree, and 1,236 (6.8%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nEconomy.\nSanpete County is a largely agricultural region of the state, dotted with rural farming towns. Agriculture, livestock, small businesses, government employment, and Snow College form the economic backbone of the county.\nA significant industry in the county is turkey ranching and the Moroni Feed Company, a turkey producing and processing cooperative. Moroni Feed Company is a part owner of the marketing cooperative Norbest. Moroni Feed Company operates several divisions throughout the county, including a turkey processing plant, hatchery, feed mill, propane store, and sales office located in and near the town of Moroni. The company employs over 600 people throughout the state, with the corporate headquarters located near Moroni. Numerous turkey barns and sheds dot the landscape, primarily around Moroni and the other northern Sanpete towns.\nAlfalfa fields and other animal feed crops make up the bulk of the agricultural activity and economy of the county.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics and government.\nSanpete County has traditionally voted Republican. In no national election since 1936 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nEducation.\nThere are two school districts: North Sanpete School District and South Sanpete School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71076", "revid": "46166101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71076", "title": "Sevier County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nSevier County ( ) is a county in Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 21,522. Its county seat and largest city is Richfield.\nPando, a clonal quaking aspen stand, that, according to some sources, is the oldest (80,000 years) and largest (106 acres, 13 million pounds) organism on Earth, is located in this county.\nHistory.\nEvidence of indigenous peoples residing in Sevier County up to 5,000 BP has been unearthed. The Fremont culture of Native Americans occupied the area from about 2000 to 700 BP. The Clear Creek site contains native petroglyphs from that period.\nIn Utah, the Numic- (or Shoshonean) speaking peoples of the Uto-Aztecan language family evolved into four distinct groups in the historical period: the Northern Shoshone, Goshute or Western Shoshone, Southern Paiute, and Ute peoples. This territory's central and eastern sections were occupied primarily by various bands of the Ute.\nThe first modern sighting of the Sevier River was most likely by the Catholic fathers Silvestre V\u00e9lez de Escalante and Francisco Atanasio Dom\u00ednguez, on their expedition to California in 1776. The Old Spanish Trail was the route they mapped. Over the next century, this trail carried fur trappers, hunters, government officials, traders, and settlers.\nSettlement of this area began when Richfield was first settled. Mormon settlers (The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints) arrived on June 15, 1864, most of whom had emigrated from Scandinavian countries. Because of the growth in this small community, the people soon petitioned Utah Territory officials about a separate county.\nOn January 16, 1865, the Utah Territory legislature created the county, with the area annexed from Sanpete County. It was named for the Sevier River. The county seat was Big Spring (later named Richfield). The county borders were adjusted in 1866, 1880, 1890, and in 1921. A clarification of boundary lines corresponding to government survey lines was completed in 1931, marking the present configuration of Sevier County.\nAlthough the county was in place by 1865, much of Sevier County was abandoned in the Black Hawk War in 1867. Attempts to resettle the area were not successful until 1870. By 1874, 753 residents lived in the area.\nGeography.\nSevier County terrain consists of semi-arid but arable rolling areas punctuated by northeast\u2013southwest mountain ridges, usually forested. The highest point is Fish Lake Hightop in the Central Utah Plateau, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.4%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 21,522 people in Sevier County with a population density of 11.3 people per square mile (4.3/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 19,396 (90.1%) White, 65 (0.3%) African American, 313 (1.5%) Native American, 40 (0.2%) Asian, 49 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 49 (0.2%) from other races, and 557 (2.6%) from two or more races. 1,053 (4.9%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 10,870 (50.51%) males and 10,652 (49.49%) females, and the population distribution by age was 6,449 (30.0%) under the age of 18, 11,325 (52.6%) from 18 to 64, and 3,748 (17.4%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 36.3 years.\nThere were 7,464 households in Sevier County with an average size of 2.88 of which 5,555 (74.4%) were families and 1,909 (25.6%) were non-families. Among all families, 4,491 (60.2%) were married couples, 362 (4.8%) were male householders with no spouse, and 702 (9.4%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 1,640 (22.0%) were a single person living alone and 269 (3.6%) were two or more people living together. 2,777 (37.2%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 5,752 (77.1%) of households were owner-occupied while 1,712 (22.9%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Sevier County household was $55,361 and the median family income was $62,058, with a per-capita income of $24,041. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $50,183 and for females $36,000. 14.3% of the population and 12.3% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 13,469 people in Sevier County 25 years or older, 1,206 (9.0%) had not completed high school, 4,206 (31.2%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 5,242 (38.9%) had some college or associate degree, 1,931 (14.3%) had a bachelor's degree, and 884 (6.6%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nFeatures.\nInterstate 70 runs through the county. As Richfield is about halfway between the major cities of Los Angeles, California and Denver, Colorado, it has built a hospitality industry, with motels and restaurants serving travelers.\nFremont Indian State Park is found in the Clear Creek Canyon, adjacent to I-70. It is noted for its archaeological remains from the ancient Native American Fremont culture. Its museum displays found artifacts.\nPolitics.\nSevier County is traditionally Republican. In no national election since 1936 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nAll of the county is in the Sevier School District.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71077", "revid": "45186589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71077", "title": "Tooele County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nTooele County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 72,698. Its county seat and largest city is Tooele. The county was created in 1850 and organized the following year. Tooele County is part of the Salt Lake City, UT Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nThe western half is mostly covered by the Great Salt Lake Desert and includes the city of Wendover (the immediate neighbor of West Wendover, Nevada) and Ibapah. Within the central section lies Skull Valley, between the Cedar and the Stansbury Mountains. It contains a few small towns as well as the Dugway Proving Ground. The population centers are on the eastern edge in the Tooele Valley, between the Stansbury and Oquirrh Mountains. This area contains the cities of Tooele, Grantsville, Erda, and Lake Point as well as the unincorporated community of Stansbury Park. Tooele Army Depot is located on the southern edge of the valley. The Stockton Bar geologic feature separates Tooele Valley and Rush Valley, in which the towns of Stockton, Vernon, Faust, and Rush Valley are located. Additional small towns, Ophir and Mercur, are located in two canyons on the south western side of the Oquirrh Mountains.\nTooele is home to one of the nine statewide regional campuses of Utah State University (located in the city of Tooele).\nHistory.\nEvidence of several indigenous Native American groups has been found in Tooele County, but only the western Shoshone-speaking Goshute tribe claim the desolate lands as their ancestral home. The Goshute's traditional territory includes most of modern Tooele County.\nThe Great Salt Lake Desert, which comprises much of the northern portion of the county, provided a major stumbling block for the ill-fated Donner-Reed Party in 1846. Its crusty sand slowed the group's wagons to such an extent that the group spent six days crossing its 80-mile length, severely sapping the group's resources and leading to their eventual disaster.\nIn 1847, Mormon pioneers settled in the neighboring Salt Lake Valley. Initially, Tooele Valley was used as a major grazing ground for Mormon cattle owners from Salt Lake and Utah Valleys. In 1849 the first white settlers established permanent roots in the Tooele Valley. Building a saw mill, the settlement was called E.T. City after LDS leader E.T. Benson. The territorial legislature first designated Tooele County\u2014initially called \"Tuilla\"\u2014on January31, 1850, with significantly different boundaries. Its government was not organized at that time, and the area was attached to Salt Lake County for judicial and administrative purposes. It is speculated the name derives from a Native American chief, but controversy exists about whether such a chief lived. Alternate explanations hypothesize that the name comes from \"tu-wanda\", the Goshute word for \"bear\", or from \"tule\", a Spanish word of Aztec origins meaning \"bulrush\".\nThe Goshutes did not accept Mormon encroachment on their traditional homeland. The Mormons occupied the best camping sites near reliable springs, hunted in Goshute hunting grounds, and overgrazed the meadowland, leaving it unfit for sustaining the animals and plants used by the Goshutes. Mormons believed that Utah was a promised land given to them by God, and did not recognize any Goshute claim to the land. Goshutes began confiscating Mormon cattle that trespassed onto their property. In response, the Mormons ordered their armies to kill the Goshutes. In 1850, they ambushed a Goshute village, but the Goshutes were able to defend themselves without casualties. Later that year, a contingent of at least 50 men attacked the Goshute camp, killing nine and suffering no casualties. In 1851, General Daniel H. Wells took 30 people prisoners. After they tried to escape, Wells executed them. Similar attacks occurred throughout the 1850s with Goshutes typically being on the losing side.\nBy June10, 1851, the county government was organized. On that date the county attachment to Salt Lake County was terminated. By 1852, Grantsville, Batesville, and Pine Canyon (later named Lincoln) were settled. \nIn 1855 the town of Richville was designated county seat, but it soon became clear that Tooele was much larger. In 1861 the territorial legislature allowed the county to select a new seat, and Tooele was selected.\nIn 1859 Robert B. Jarvis, a U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs representative, convinced some of the nomadic bands to congregate at a farm reservation called Deep Creek. The results looked promising, but Jarvis' resignation in 1860 led support to disappear and the farm to be abandoned. Jarvis' replacement, Benjamin Davies, noted the Goshutes had lost faith in the federal government, and recommended limiting further encroachments on Goshute land, but his suggestions were largely ignored.\nTwenty-two overland stagecoach outposts were built in Goshute territory, often on the sites of rare natural springs. Goshute attacks on mail outposts escalated in 1860, resulting in dozens of deaths in alternating waves of raids. At the outbreak of the American Civil War, federal troops left the area leaving defense in the hands of the Nauvoo Legion until General Patrick E. Connor arrived in Salt Lake City from California in 1862.\nConnor acted ruthlessly toward the natives. He killed over 300 Shoshone in southern Idaho in 1863. Connor's men attacked Native American camps, sometimes indiscriminately, but through 1863 stage coach companies had lost 16 men and over 150 horses to depredations. A peace treaty was signed in 1863 which included an annuity of goods and US$1000 in compensation of killed game in exchange for an end to the hostilities, and use of routes through the natives' territories. The treaty did not cede Goshute control of land, but a follow-up agreement made in June 1865 did.\nGeneral Connor, who was anti-Mormon, also encouraged his troops to prospect for minerals. Connor believed that mining would bring non-Mormons to Utah Territory. After his men discovered gold, silver, lead, and zinc deposits in Tooele County in 1864 he was proven right. The Rush Valley Mining District was established by soldiers in the western Oquirrh Mountains and more than 100 claims were staked in the first year. Two new mining towns, Ophir and Lewiston ballooned to over 6,000 people each in the 1870s, exceeding the population of Tooele and all the Mormon settlements in the area.\nTooele County as originally defined extended into present-day Nevada. The county's borders were adjusted in 1852, in 1854, in 1856, in 1861, and in 1862. When Nevada Territory was created in 1862, the county's borders were impacted, and when the Territory became a state (1864), Tooele County was formally divested of all its Nevada area. Two more boundary adjustments were made in 1870 and 1880, after which it has retained its boundaries to the present.\nRepublic of Tooele.\nFrom 1874 to 1879, non-Mormon politicians from the Liberal Party of Utah gained control of Tooele County, the first time any non-Mormons had success in Utah politics. Whimsically, they called the county the Republic of Tooele.\nThe 1874 election marked the first success of the anti-Mormon Liberal Party, which was organized in 1870. The party viewed the large non-Mormon mining population in the county as a natural environment for electoral success and campaigned fiercely in Tooele's mining districts leading up to the June 1874 election. The non-Mormon appointed governor of Utah Territory, George L. Woods, campaigned for the Liberals in Tooele County.\nThe incumbent Mormon People's Party observed several Tooele polling places on election day and lodged complaints of fraud after the Liberal Party triumphed by about 300 votes out of 2,200. The People's Party alleged Liberal Party supporters had voted more than once, that many had not been residents for the required six months, and they were not taxpayers\u2014according to territorial law, only taxpayers could vote in elections. The People's Party called attention to the 2,200 votes cast in the election although only 1,500 Tooele County property taxpayers were on record. Incumbents refused to yield control of the Tooele County recorder's office and the Tooele County Courthouse because of the alleged fraud.\nGovernor Woods dismissed the complaints and certified the Liberal victory. Third District Court Judge JamesB. McKean ruled that no evidence showing illegal activity had been presented. McKean construed poll tax as within the meaning of being a taxpayer. Since no evidence was provided there were over 300 carpetbaggers or repeat votes in the election, McKean sustained the tally and authorized deputy U.S. Marshals to install the Liberal candidates.\nThe recorder's office was seized when it was momentarily abandoned, but a contingent of People's Party supporters and incumbents held the county courthouse night and day. The marshals and Liberal Party candidates, outnumbered, attempted to negotiate with the armed and barricaded Mormons. Aware that a show of aggression could spark a battle, the parties were nonetheless unable to come to an agreement to hand over power.\nMcKean issued an even more strongly worded injunction, and Brigham Young advised his followers that they had an obligation to obey the federal courts. The county courthouse was abandoned, thus beginning about five years of Liberal Party rule. However, the Utah territorial legislature, which had the last say on the qualifications of its members, refused to seat the Liberal Party representative from Tooele County.\nThe Liberals won an unopposed 1876 election.\nIn 1876, the territorial legislature passed bills requiring voter registration and requiring women's suffrage for local elections\u2014women had been voting in territorial elections since 1870. The Liberal Party, typically supported by male miners casually interested in politics, opposed both measures. In 1878 the Liberal majority in Tooele County disappeared, and the People's Party regained control in 1879 after more than six months of Liberal procedural delays.\nThe Republic of Tooele era was characterized by subsequent politicians as one of excessive spending. The county was left with about $16,000 in debt, significantly more than it started with.\nModern Tooele.\nMining continued to play an important part in Tooele County into the 20th century, but the county benefited from two major military bases located in the western portion of the county. Wendover Air Force Base, now closed, was the training base of the Enola Gay crew, which dropped the first atomic weapon in 1945. The Tooele Army Depot, built in 1942, formerly housed the largest store of chemical and biological weapons, 45 percent of the nation's, in the United States, at the Deseret Chemical Depot. Starting August 1996, the store was reduced by destruction in a controversial weapons incinerator, at the Tooele Chemical Agent Disposal Facility; the last such weapon was destroyed in January 2012.\nSince the 1980s, much of Tooele County's economic prospects have centered around private hazardous waste disposal facilities. Between 1988 and 1993, hazardous waste landfills and incinerators have been installed at Clive and Aragonite. This, coupled with uranium mine tailings from Salt Lake County which were disposed in Tooele County in the 1980s, the presence of the Deseret Chemical Depot, and a high-polluting magnesium facility in Rowley, have contributed to a general perception of Tooele County as a \"sacrifice zone\" for unwanted wastes.\nNews coverage for the county is provided by the \"Tooele Transcript-Bulletin\" newspaper.\nOn September8, 2004, the Genesis spacecraft crashed into the desert floor of the Dugway Proving Ground in Tooele County.\nA 2008 CNNMoney.com article identified Tooele as the U.S. county experiencing the greatest job growth since 2000.\nThe county's western portion is home to the Bonneville Salt Flats, traversed by Interstate80 and the Wendover Cut-off, the former routing of the Victory Highway.\nGeography.\nTooele County lies on the west side of Utah. Its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada. Its northeast border abuts the Great Salt Lake. Three significant mountain ranges run north\u2013south through the county. Its east boundary line is delineated by the crestline of the Oquirrh Mountains, which separate the Tooele Valley from the Salt Lake Valley. The Stansbury Mountains parallel the Oquirrhs in the eastern part of the county, and the Cedar Mountains also run parallel to the other two through the east-central part of the county. There are also isolated prominences across the county, especially at its SW corner. The county terrain is largely arid and unused for agriculture unless irrigation water is available. The county generally slopes to the north. Its highest elevation is Deseret Peak in the Stansburys, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (4.7%) is water.\nCovering vast amounts of the Great Salt Lake desert west of Salt Lake Valley, Tooele County is the second largest county in Utah and among the driest. The Skull Valley Indian Reservation lies in Skull Valley, between the Cedar and Stansbury mountain ranges.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 72,698 people in Tooele County with a population density of 10.3 people per square mile (4.0/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 58,199 (80.1%) White, 436 (0.6%) African American, 445 (0.6%) Native American, 511 (0.7%) Asian, 637 (0.9%) Pacific Islander, 282 (0.4%) from other races, and 2,666 (3.7%) from two or more races. 9,522 (13.1%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 36,687 (50.46%) males and 36,011 (49.54%) females, and the population distribution by age was 23,959 (33.0%) under the age of 18, 41,869 (57.6%) from 18 to 64, and 6,870 (9.5%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 31.4 years.\nThere were 22,087 households in Tooele County with an average size of 3.29 of which 17,531 (79.4%) were families and 4,556 (20.6%) were non-families. Among all families, 13,990 (63.3%) were married couples, 1,398 (6.3%) were male householders with no spouse, and 2,143 (9.7%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 3,572 (16.2%) were a single person living alone and 984 (4.5%) were two or more people living together. 10,566 (47.8%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 17,970 (81.4%) of households were owner-occupied while 4,117 (18.6%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Tooele County household was $76,737 and the median family income was $83,730, with a per-capita income of $27,702. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $57,579 and for females $40,845. 5.9% of the population and 4.7% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 40,623 people in Tooele County 25 years or older, 3,224 (7.9%) had not completed high school, 12,971 (31.9%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 15,055 (37.1%) had some college or associate degree, 6,091 (15.0%) had a bachelor's degree, and 3,282 (8.1%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nEnvironmental concerns.\nHeavy industry and the resulting pollution of the air, soil, and groundwater has affected the region in several ways. The US Environmental Protection Agency has reported that Tooele-based US Magnesium discharges dangerous toxins and cancerous byproducts. In 2008, the federal government considered listing the area as a Superfund site. Tooele County was listed in 1989 as having the worst air in Utah, according to federal agencies and environmental groups. The Tooele County Health Department notes that the chemical output of the heavy industry can be particularly dangerous in the winter, because the region's climate and setting create winter inversions, suspending the toxins in the air, and posing \"serious health concerns\".\nDue to the history of toxic waste disposal in the area, Tooele County and Utah residents have opposed plans to dispose of nuclear waste in the county boundaries. A high level nuclear waste site proposed to be built at the Goshute Tribe Reservation in Skull Valley faced opposition until the plan slowly fizzled out. Projects to dispose of depleted uranium at Energy Solution's Clive facility continue to cause controversy.\nPolitics and government.\nFrom 1932 through 1968, Tooele County tended Democratic, selecting the Democratic nominee in every election save 1956 (but being blue enough to vote for Stevenson in 1952). From 1972 on, however, it has become powerfully Republican, voting Democratic only once in this period thus far, for Bill Clinton in 1996 (with a low plurality and by a narrow margin).\nEducation.\nAll parts of Tooele County are in the Tooele School District.\nTooele is home to one of the nine statewide regional campuses of Utah State University.\nCommunities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGhost towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71078", "revid": "45868518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71078", "title": "Wasatch County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nWasatch County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 34,788. Its county seat and largest city is Heber City. The county was named for a Ute word meaning \"mountain pass\" or \"low place in the high mountains\".\nWasatch County is part of the Heber, UT Micropolitan Statistical Area as well as the Salt Lake City\u2013Provo\u2013Orem, UT Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe first settlers were Mormon pioneers, in 1859, settling near present Heber City, Midway, and Charleston. On January 17, 1862, the Utah Territory legislature created the county, annexing areas from Great Salt Lake, Green River, Sanpete, Summit, and Utah counties. Heber was selected as the county seat.\nWasatch in Ute means \"mountain pass\" or \"low pass over high range\". Heber City was named for Mormon Apostle Heber C. Kimball. The county boundaries were altered in 1880 and 1884, and then on January 4, 1915, the eastern portion was partitioned off to become Duchesne County. The Wasatch County boundaries have remained unchanged since 1915.\nGeography.\nHeber Valley has a relatively cool climate since it is mountain-ringed, and over half the land is above sea level. The average annual precipitation is about . The county is divided into two watersheds\u2014the Colorado and the Great Basin drainage systems. Flowing from the East are Daniels, Lake Fork, and Center creeks. From the north and northeast is the Provo River. Flowing from the west is Snake Creek. The county's highest point is the west slope of Murdock Mountain in the Uinta Mountains, at ASL.\nWasatch County has a total area of , of which is land and (2.5%) is water.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 34,788 people in Wasatch County with a population density of 29.6 people per square mile (11.4/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 28,168 (81.0%) White, 141 (0.4%) African American, 67 (0.2%) Native American, 347 (1.0%) Asian, 41 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 65 (0.2%) from other races, and 913 (2.6%) from two or more races. 5,046 (14.5%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 17,665 (50.78%) males and 17,123 (49.22%) females, and the population distribution by age was 10,578 (30.4%) under the age of 18, 19,617 (56.4%) from 18 to 64, and 4,593 (13.2%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 35.3 years.\nThere were 11,040 households in Wasatch County with an average size of 3.15 of which 8,770 (79.4%) were families and 2,270 (20.6%) were non-families. Among all families, 7,325 (66.3%) were married couples, 543 (4.9%) were male householders with no spouse, and 902 (8.2%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 1,772 (16.1%) were a single person living alone and 498 (4.5%) were two or more people living together. 4,578 (41.5%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 8,421 (76.3%) of households were owner-occupied while 2,619 (23.7%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Wasatch County household was $85,807 and the median family income was $99,014, with a per-capita income of $38,622. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $62,837 and for females $37,394. 4.8% of the population and 3.4% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 19,926 people in Wasatch County 25 years or older, 920 (4.6%) had not completed high school, 4,099 (20.6%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 6,207 (31.2%) had some college or associate degree, 5,742 (28.8%) had a bachelor's degree, and 2,958 (14.8%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 23,530 people, 4,743 households, and 3,870 families in the county. The population density was . There were 9,840 (2009) housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.4% White, 0.3% Black or African American, 0.5% Native American, 0.8% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, and 1.4% from two or more races. 13.5% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 7,287 households, out of which 43.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 68.70% were married couples living together, 7.4% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.8% had a male householder with no wife present, and 20.1% were non-families. 15.5% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.18 and the average family size was 3.19.\nThe county population contained 36.3% under the age of 20, 5.2% from 20 to 24, 28.1% from 25 to 44, 21.9% from 45 to 64, and 8.6% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31.6 years. For every 100 females there were 103.40 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.5 males.\nCommunities.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics and government.\nThe county is governed by a seven-member county council with an appointed county manager.\nWasatch County has traditionally voted Republican. In no national election since 1964 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nEducation.\nAll areas of the county are in the Wasatch County School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71079", "revid": "35522930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71079", "title": "Rainbow flag", "text": "Flag with the colors of the rainbow\nA rainbow flag is a multicolored flag consisting of the colors of the rainbow. The designs differ, but many of the colors are based on the seven spectral colors of the visible light spectrum.\nHistory.\nIn the 18th century, American Revolutionary War writer Thomas Paine proposed that a rainbow flag be used as a maritime flag to signify neutral ships in time of war.\nContemporary international uses of a rainbow flag dates to the beginning of the 20th century. The International Co-operative Alliance adopted a rainbow flag in 1925. A similar flag (ca. 1920) is used in Andean indigenism in Peru and Bolivia to represent the legacy of the Inca Empire. Since 1961, the international peace flag, also known as the PACE flag, has been especially popular in Italy and to a lesser extent Europe and the rest of the world. Since 1978, when it was created to represent gay pride, the rainbow pride flag has evolved as a symbol of the LGBT movement (in 1978, the community as a whole was referred to and described as the \"Gay\" community; the term \"LGBT\" did not yet exist.)\nThere are several independent rainbow flags in use today.\nIn cultures and movements.\nReformation (1525).\nThe reformer Thomas M\u00fcntzer (1489\u20131525) connected socially revolutionary claims with his religious preaching (Genesis 9:11\u201317, Isaiah 40:8, 1 Peter 1:25). He is often portrayed with a rainbow banner in his hand. The Thomas M\u00fcntzer statue in the German town of Stolberg also shows him holding a rainbow banner in his hand.\nIn the German Peasants' War of the 16th century, M\u00fcntzer's rainbow banner together with the peasants' boot (\"Bundschuh\") was used as the sign of a new era, of hope and of social change.\nThe choice of the rainbow in the form of a flag harks back to the rainbow as a symbol of biblical promise. According to the Bible, God used the rainbow as a sign to Noah that there would never again be a worldwide flood, also known as the Rainbow covenant.\nArmenian Republic proposed flag (1919).\nA rainbow flag was proposed for Armenia when it regained independence after World War I. It was designed by Armenian artist Martiros Saryan. It was not adopted as the country instead went with three stripes using the colors used in a past Armenian kingdom. The artist used muted, richer colors reflecting Armenian fabrics and carpets.\nCooperative movement (1921).\nA seven-colour rainbow flag is a common symbol of the international cooperative movement. The rainbow flag has been the cooperative emblem since 1921 when the International Co-operative Congress of World Co-op Leaders met in Basel, Switzerland to identify and define the growing cooperative movement's common values and ideals to help unite co-ops around the world.\nIn Essen, Germany in 1922, the International Co-operative Alliance (ICA) designed an international co-op symbol and a flag for the first \"Co-operators' Day,\" which was held in July 1923. After some experiments with different designs, a famous French cooperator, Charles Gide, suggested using the seven colours of the rainbow for the flag. He pointed out that the rainbow symbolized unity in diversity and the power of light, enlightenment and progress. The first co-op rainbow flag was completed in 1924 and was adopted as an official symbol of the international cooperative movement in 1925.\nIn 2001, the ICA's official flag was changed from a rainbow flag to a rainbow logo flag on a white field, to clearly promote and strengthen the cooperative image, but still use the rainbow image. Other organizations sometimes use the traditional rainbow flag as a symbol of cooperation.\nLike the rainbow, this flag is a symbol of hope and peace. The seven colours from flags around the world fly in harmony. Each of the seven colours in the co-operative flag have been assigned the following meaning:\nThe ICA has been flying a flag with its official logo since April 2001, when its Board decided to replace the traditional rainbow flag. Its use by a number of non-cooperative groups led to confusion in several countries around the world.\nPeace movement (1961).\nThis rainbow flag in Italy was first used in a peace march in 1961, inspired by similar multi-coloured flags used in demonstrations against nuclear weapons. It became popular with the \"Pace da tutti i balconi\" (\"peace from every balcony\") campaign in 2002, started as a protest against the impending war in Iraq. The most common variety has seven colours, purple, blue, azure, green, yellow, orange and red, and is emblazoned in bold with the Italian word \"PACE\", meaning \"peace\".\nCommon variations include moving the purple stripe down below the azure one, and adding a white stripe on top (the original flag from the 60s had a white stripe on top). This flag has been adopted internationally as a symbol of the peace movement.\nAndean indigenism (1973, 2009).\nThe Flag of Cusco was introduced in Peru in 1973, and became used as the official emblem of the city of Cusco. In 2007, the municipality decided to modify the flag design so that it would not be confused with the Gay Pride flag. The new flag design was implemented in 2021. In Ecuador, a rainbow emblem is used by the \"Pachakutik\" political party (1995), which is composed mostly of left-wing indigenous people.\nA seven-striped rainbow flag design is used in Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador as a symbol of native ethnic groups and culture, and is anachronistically associated with the Tawantin Suyu, or Inca territory. Although commonly believed in Peru to be a flag of the Incan Empire, the oldest known rainbow flag dates back only to the 18th century and was used by T\u00fapac Amaru II during his indigenous revolt against the Spanish. Mar\u00eda Rostworowski, a Peruvian historian known for her extensive and detailed publications about Peruvian Ancient Cultures and the Inca Empire, said about this: \"I bet my life, the Inca never had that flag, it never existed, no chronicler mentioned it\". The National Academy of Peruvian History has stated on the topic: \"The official use of the wrongly called 'Tawantinsuyu flag' is a mistake. In the pre-Hispanic Andean world the concept of flags did not exist, it did not belong to their historic context\".\nLGBT (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender) Pride (1978).\nThe rainbow Pride flag was popularized as a symbol of the gay community by San Francisco artist Gilbert Baker in 1978. The different colors are often associated with \"diversity\" in the gay community, but actually have symbolic meanings. The flag is used predominantly at LGBT pride events and in gay villages worldwide in various forms including banners, clothing and jewelry. Since the 1990s, its symbolism has been applied by the extended \"LGBTQ\" (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer) community through differentiated flag designs. In 1994, for the 25th anniversary of the Stonewall riots in New York city, a mile-long rainbow flag was created by Baker which he later cut into sections that were distributed around the world.\nThe flag was originally created with eight colors, but pink and turquoise were removed for production purposes, and since 1979 it has consisted of six colored stripes. It is most commonly flown with the red stripe on top, as the colors appear in a natural rainbow. The colors were determined to symbolize: \nThe color pink stood for sexuality and turquoise stood for art/magic.\nDuring the 1980s, a black stripe representing AIDS victims was added to the bottom of a rainbow flag as a seventh color and named the flag.\nIn the late 2010s, the 1978 Pride flag by Gilbert Baker was annexed with separate flags containing additional colors representing individual segments of the LGBT community: in 2017, a collaboration between the Philadelphia Office of LGBT Affairs and the Tierney Agency added a brown and a black stripe at the top of the Pride flag to symbolize black and brown people of color, naming the design the \"More Color, More Pride\" (aka \"Philly Pride\") flag; and in 2018, the \"Progress Pride\" flag by Daniel Quasar incorporated the black and brown stripes of the Philly Pride flag, and colors of the 1999 transgender flag by Monica Helms, as a chevron on the Pride flag symbolizing queer, trans, and people of color. However, unlike the Gilbert Baker flag, transgender flag, and \"More Color, More Pride\" flag designs which are in the public domain, the Progress Pride flag is copyrighted and fees are paid to Quasar for commercial duplication and sales of his design.\nBasque nationalism (1978).\nThe leftist Herri Batasuna party used a rainbow version of the Ikurri\u00f1a (Basque national flag) from 1978 until it was dissolved in 2001.\nJewish Autonomous Oblast (1996).\nAnother variation of rainbow flag is used by Jewish Autonomous Oblast, situated in the Far Eastern Federal District of Russia, by the Chinese border. Proportions 2:3. Adopted first of October 1996.\nThe Jewish Autonomous Oblast has a flag with a seven-colour rainbow. The number of colours is meant to symbolize the seven-branched Jewish Menorah. Its colours are slightly different from the basic spectral colours, with gold in place of yellow, vivid blue instead of light blue, and indigo as dark blue. In 2013, the flag was checked according to the Russian gay propaganda law. JAO flag was confirmed as safe because of white background, white borders to the stripes and the seventh (light blue) colour.\nInfection prevention thorough declaration sticker (2020).\nThe Tokyo Metropolitan Government issued the \"Thorough Infection Prevention Declaration Sticker\" for the purpose of working on the infection spread prevention guidelines for businesses formulated by the metropolitan government. In the media, it is also known as the rainbow sticker. A checklist that businesses should take to prevent the spread of infection is checked on the web and issued online, and it is used as a guideline to show that businesses are working on infection prevention measures.\nSupport for the NHS (2020).\nDuring the 2020 coronavirus pandemic in the United Kingdom, the rainbow symbol has been used to signify support and gratitude for the National Health Service (NHS). However, the increasing association of the six-color Pride rainbow flag with the NHS has caused concern among some members of the LGBT community that it is being disassociated \"as a symbol of LGBT equality\" and may lead to the erasure of identity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71080", "revid": "50529384", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71080", "title": "Utah County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nUtah County is the second-most populous county in the U.S. state of Utah. The county seat and largest city is Provo, which is the state's fourth-largest city, and the largest outside of Salt Lake County. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 659,399.\nUtah County is one of two counties forming the Provo-Orem metropolitan area, and is part of the larger Salt Lake City metropolitan area. In 2020, the center of population of Utah was in Utah County, in the city of Saratoga Springs.\nUtah County is one of the fastest-growing counties in the United States, ranking among the top ten counties in numerical growth. Correspondingly, Provo\u2013Orem is among the top eight metropolitan areas by percentage growth in the country.\nUtah County is one of seven counties in the United States to have the same name as its state. The other six counties are Arkansas County, Hawaii County, Idaho County, Iowa County, Oklahoma County and New York County (commonly known as Manhattan).\nHistory.\nThe legislature of the State of Deseret created a county on January 31, 1850, to govern the civic affairs of Utah Valley, which by the 1850s was bustling with newly arrived settlers. The county name is derived from the valley name, which is derived from the Spanish name (\"Yuta\") for the Ute Indians. The State of Deseret dissolved soon after (April 5, 1851), but the counties it had set in place continued. There is little record of any official activity conducted by the fledgling county until April 18, 1852, when a full slate of county officials was published, and recordkeeping began. The first courthouse was built in central Provo in 1866\u201367. It was soon outgrown and was replaced by a second courthouse (1872\u201373). By the 1920s, this building was also cramped, and the decision was made to erect a combined city-county building, which was completed in 1926.\nThe county's boundaries were adjusted in 1852, 1854, 1856, 1862, 1880, and 1884. It has retained its present boundary since 1884.\nGeography.\nUtah County terrain ranges from steep mountain ranges in the east (the Wasatch Range), dropping steeply to a large lake-filled valley. Most of the comparatively level ground is dedicated to agriculture or developed uses, while most of the steep terrain is covered with arid-climate forestation. The county generally slopes to the west and north, with its highest point (the northern peak of the twin-peaked Mt. Nebo in the southern part of the county), at ASL. The county has an area of , of which is land and (6.6%) is water.\nUtah Valley lies at the center of the county, lined by the mountains of the Wasatch Range on the east. Utah Lake occupies a large part of the valley. The elevation ranges from above sea level at the lake to at the peak of Mount Nebo.\nMajor highways.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\nSource:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\nSource:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 659,399 people in Utah County with a population density of 329.0 people per square mile (127.0/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 518,460 (78.6%) White, 4,110 (0.6%) African American, 2,533 (0.4%) Native American, 10,111 (1.5%) Asian, 6,541 (1.0%) Pacific Islander, 2,421 (0.4%) from other races, and 26,692 (4.0%) from two or more races. 88,531 (13.4%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 330,884 (50.18%) males and 328,515 (49.82%) females, and the population distribution by age was 216,133 (32.8%) under the age of 18, 389,673 (59.1%) from 18 to 64, and 53,593 (8.1%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 25.9 years.\nThere were 184,558 households in Utah County with an average size of 3.57 of which 148,476 (80.4%) were families and 36,082 (19.6%) were non-families. Among all families, 124,424 (67.4%) were married couples, 8,394 (4.5%) were male householders with no spouse, and 15,658 (8.5%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 23,748 (12.9%) were a single person living alone and 12,334 (6.7%) were two or more people living together. 88,011 (47.7%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 124,353 (67.4%) of households were owner-occupied while 60,205 (32.6%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Utah County household was $77,057 and the median family income was $83,938, with a per-capita income of $27,365. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $60,356 and for females $37,391. 10.0% of the population and 6.9% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 310,161 people in Utah County 25 years or older, 14,999 (4.8%) had not completed high school, 51,916 (16.7%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 115,689 (37.3%) had some college or associate degree, 88,312 (28.5%) had a bachelor's degree, and 39,245 (12.7%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nGovernment.\nThe government is a three-member elected county commission elected at-large. Other elected officials include the county sheriff, the county clerk, county recorder, county assessor, county surveyor, county treasurer, and the county attorney. The current county attorney is Jeff Gray.\nIn 2020, Utah County voters rejected Proposition 9, which would have changed the county's government to a five-member elected county council with an elected county mayor.\nThe first sheriff of the county was John T. Willis, who was succeeded by William Madison Wall. Alexander Williams served during John Cradlebaugh's court in 1859. He was succeeded by Eli Whipple, who resigned in 1861 and was replaced by Russell Kelly. In 2020, Sheriff Mike Smith publicly stated he would not enforce COVID-19 face mask mandates.\nThe Utah County Fire Department provides emergency response to all unincorporated areas within Utah County and works with all the incorporated cities within the county plus all Utah state and federal lands. The department is primarily a wildland fires response and urban interspace service with some structure fire and HAZMAT abatement capability.\nPolitics.\nUtah County has been referred to as \"the most Republican county in the most Republican state in the United States\". It has voted for a Democratic presidential candidate nine times since statehood, but has not done so since 1964.\nIn the 1992 presidential election, George H. W. Bush received the most votes and Bill Clinton was third in votes received. In the 2004 presidential election, 85.99% voted for George W. Bush. In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, the county voted for John McCain by a 58.9% margin over Barack Obama, compared to McCain winning by 28.1% statewide. Eight other Utah counties voted more strongly in favor of McCain. In the 2012 election, Mitt Romney received 88.32% of the vote. In 2016, it gave a slim majority of the vote to Donald Trump, and nearly 30% of the vote to independent candidate Evan McMullin, who outperformed Hillary Clinton in the county. This was McMullin's largest share of the vote in any county in Utah and his second best nationwide after Madison County, Idaho. In 2020, Democratic candidate Joe Biden received over 75,000 votes, easily a record for the party \u2013 no Democratic candidate had previously received more than 30,000 votes in the county \u2013 but it amounted to barely a quarter of the county vote as Trump received two-thirds of the total.\nUntil 2013, Utah County was represented entirely by one congressional district. Currently, the county is split between two congressional districts. Most of the county's population is in the 3rd District, represented by Republican Mike Kennedy, former Provo Mayor. Much of the county's area however, including Utah Lake, resides in the 4th District currently represented by Republican Burgess Owens.\nThe county's Republican bent runs right through state and local politics. All five state senators representing the county, as well as all 14 state representatives, are Republicans.\nSocial issues.\nUtah County saw high rates of opioid and other prescription drug addiction from the mid-2000s onwards, foreshadowing the national opioid crisis. The 2008 documentary \"Happy Valley\" examined the problem.\n\"Giving USA\", which reports on charitable giving in the US, named Utah County as one of the three most generous counties in philanthropic donations, alongside San Juan County, Utah and Madison County, Idaho.\nIn 2019, one in eight people and one in six children in the county did not have sufficient food.\nInfrastructure.\nMuch of Utah's transportation infrastructure was built to support automobiles. Prior to the 1950s, Utah County relied on the U.S. Highway System for local transportation. When I-15 was built in 1956 (parallel to Highway 89), it became the dominant transportation vein in the state. The I-15 CORE project added multiple lanes on I-15 through most of Utah County. This expanded of freeway and was completed in 2012. Other construction projects by UDOT have been done on I-15 since then, including the Technology Corridor project and the Point of the Mountain project. However, the highway system retains its significance in Utah County due to the mountainous terrain. Highway 6 is the closest major road connecting Colorado to the Wasatch Front, running through Spanish Fork Canyon before converging with I-15 in the city of Spanish Fork. Portions of Highway 89 have become prominent local roads known collectively as 'State Street'. Highway 189 is known as 'University Avenue' in the city of Provo, and runs through Provo Canyon into Heber in neighboring Wasatch County.\nUtah County has seen significant growth in public transportation over the past 15 years, owing in part to the county's large student population of more than 70,000 commuting to-and-from Brigham Young University (BYU) in Provo and Utah Valley University (UVU) in Orem. The two cities jointly operate UVX, a bus rapid transit system, as part of their city bus routes. Provo also serves as the southernmost terminus of the FrontRunner, Utah's intrastate commuter rail service. The Provo FrontRunner station is located on South University Avenue, directly southwest of Amtrak's Provo Station\u2014which is Utah's third westbound stop, after Green River and Helper, for the California Zephyr Amtrak route. In addition to Provo, The FrontRunner currently has three stops in the county. The Orem FrontRunner station is located on the west side of I-15, served by a pedestrian bridge over the freeway that connects the UVU campus directly to the station. An additional stop in Vineyard, Utah was completed in August 2022. Utah County also operates the American Fork FrontRunner Station and the Lehi FrontRunner Station located near Thanksgiving Point. From Lehi, the FrontRunner leaves Utah County and enters Salt Lake County.\nEducation.\nSchool districts.\nSchool districts include:\nColleges and universities.\nFour-year institutions\nTwo-year institutions\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71081", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71081", "title": "Uintah County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nUintah County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census the population was 35,620. Its county seat and largest city is Vernal. The county was named for the portion of the Ute Indian tribe that lived in the basin.\nUintah County is the largest natural gas producer in Utah, with 272 billion cubic feet produced in 2008.\nThe Vernal, UT Micropolitan Statistical Area includes all of Uintah County.\nUintah County is home to one of the nine statewide regional campuses of Utah State University (located in the city of Vernal) and serves as a gateway to Dinosaur National Monument, contains the Red Fleet State Park, and the Uintah Mountain Range.\nHistory.\nArcheological evidence suggests that portions of the Uinta Basin have been inhabited by Archaic peoples and Fremont peoples. By the time of recorded history, its inhabitants were the Ute people. The first known traverse by non-Indians was made by Fathers Dom\u00ednguez and Escalante (1776), as they sought to establish a land route between California and Spanish America.\nThe region was claimed by the Spanish Empire as the Alta California division of New Spain (1521-1821) and was later under Mexican control (1821-1848). Neither the Spanish Empire nor Mexico ever had a major presence in the area and their practical control was nominal.\nBy the early nineteenth century, occasional fur trappers entered the Basin. In 1831-32 Antoine Robidoux, a French trapper licensed by the Mexican government established a trading post near present-day Whiterocks. He abandoned the effort in 1844.\nIn 1847 a contingent of Mormons under Brigham Young entered the Great Salt Lake Valley to the west of the Uintah region to establish what would become Salt Lake City. In 1861 Young dispatched an exploring party to the Uinta Basin; they reported \"that section of country lying between the Wasatch Mountains and the eastern boundary of the territory, and south of Green River country, was one vast contiguity of waste and measurably valueless.\" Young made no further effort to establish communities in the area but nonetheless included it in their proposed State of Deseret.\nThe United States took possession under the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. In 1861 US President Abraham Lincoln created the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation, reserved for the use and habitation of Utah and Colorado Indians. In the 1880s, the Uncompahgre Reservation was created in the southern portion of present-day Uintah County. Ashley Valley was not part of either Reservation; by 1880, enough ranchers and farmers had settled there that the Territorial Legislature created Uintah County from portions of Sanpete, Summit, and Wasatch counties. They established the county seat at Ashley, a now-abandoned settlement three miles north of the present courthouse in Vernal.\nUintah County boundaries were altered in 1892 (Grand County created), in 1917 (adjustments with Duchesne and Summit county boundaries), in 1918 (Daggett County created), and in 1919 (the Daggett boundary line was adjusted). It has remained in its present configuration since 1919.\nGilsonite was discovered in 1888 at Bonanza, in central Uintah County. This mineral was located on Reservation land, and, according to several sources, miners pressured the US government to remove about 7000 acres ( from the Reservation. Mining and its associated activities rapidly boomed in that area.\nThe northern boundary of Uintah County originally extended to the north border of Utah. In 1918, the extreme northern portion (lying north of the Uinta Mountain watershed divide) was split off to form Daggett County.\nGeography.\nUintah County lies on the east side of Utah. Its eastern border abuts the western border of the state of Colorado. The Green River flows southwestward through the central part of the county and forms the lower part of Uintah County's border with Duchesne County. Two miles south of Ouray, Utah, it is joined by the Duchesne River (flowing east-southeastward from Duchesne County), and farther down by the White River (flowing west-northwestward from Colorado). Ten miles farther downstream, it is joined by Willow Creek, flowing northward from the lower part of the county. The county terrain slopes to the south and to the west, with its highest parts found on the crests of the Uinta Mountains, running east\u2013west across the northern border. The maximum elevation along those crests is around . The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.5%) is water.\nUintah County is centered in the Uintah Basin, which runs from western Colorado on the east to the Wasatch Mountains on the west and from the Uinta Mountains on the north to the Roan Plateau on the south. This basin was formed by a prehistoric lake (\"Uinta Lake\") during the late Tertiary period.\nThe county's geography ranges from high mountain terrain (Uinta Mountains) to the fertile Ashley Valley (site of the county seat), to a rugged and desolate canyonland which includes the Dinosaur National Monument, to desolate and largely uninhabited hills in the south (\"The Bookcliffs\" to locals; officially Roan Plateau).\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 35,620 people in Uintah County with a population density of 7.9 people per square mile (3.1/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 28,726 (80.6%) White, 90 (0.3%) African American, 2,277 (6.4%) Native American, 157 (0.4%) Asian, 97 (0.3%) Pacific Islander, 116 (0.3%) from other races, and 1,323 (3.7%) from two or more races. 2,834 (8.0%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 17,686 (49.65%) males and 17,934 (50.35%) females, and the population distribution by age was 11,774 (33.1%) under the age of 18, 19,676 (55.2%) from 18 to 64, and 4,170 (11.7%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 31.5 years.\nThere were 11,993 households in Uintah County with an average size of 2.97 of which 8,898 (74.2%) were families and 3,095 (25.8%) were non-families. Among all families, 6,888 (57.4%) were married couples, 695 (5.8%) were male householders with no spouse, and 1,315 (11.0%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 2,546 (21.2%) were a single person living alone and 549 (4.6%) were two or more people living together. 5,126 (42.7%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 8,626 (71.9%) of households were owner-occupied while 3,367 (28.1%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Uintah County household was $59,428 and the median family income was $72,620, with a per-capita income of $24,578. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $56,101 and for females $35,259. 13.2% of the population and 9.8% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 20,893 people in Uintah County 25 years or older, 2,412 (11.5%) had not completed high school, 7,958 (38.1%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 7,119 (34.1%) had some college or associate degree, 2,505 (12.0%) had a bachelor's degree, and 899 (4.3%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nEconomy.\nThe extraction of natural resources, including oil, natural gas, phosphate, and gilsonite constitute primary economic activity of Uintah County. There is some agriculture in Uintah County, primarily focusing on raising cattle and sheep and cultivating alfalfa.\nA significant portion of west Uintah County is taken up by the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation. The Ute Tribe's headquarters is in Fort Duchesne. Much of the rest of the county is land owned by the Ashley National Forest and the Bureau of Land Management. There is relatively little private land in the county.\nThe Discovery of significant dinosaurs and other pre-historic remains on the eastern edge of the county caused nationwide interest, which culminated in the establishment of Dinosaur National Monument. In addition to the large Visitor Center at the Monument's Jensen site, a natural history museum, the Utah Field House of Natural History State Park Museum, showcasing some of the area's finds, was established in Vernal by the State of Utah.\nTransportation.\nAirport.\nLocated in southeastern Vernal, the Vernal Regional Airport provides daily scheduled air service to Denver, Colorado via Denver International Airport. Service is provided through United Express, operated by Skywest airlines. Fixed-Base Operator (FBO) service is available.\nPolitics and government.\nSince 1896 when Utah was admitted to The Union, Uintah County has voted for the Democratic presidential nominee eight times: twice from 1896 to 1900, once in 1916, and five times from 1932 to 1948. Only once has the majority voted for a \"third party\" candidate, that being Theodore Roosevelt in 1912. Since 1948, like most of Utah, Uintah County has voted Republican by substantial margins.\nCommunities.\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGhost towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEducation.\nThere is one school district, Uintah School District.\nSister cities.\n Barkly Region, Northern Territory, Australia\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71082", "revid": "14798203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71082", "title": "Washington County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nWashington County is a county in the southwestern corner of Utah, United States. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 180,279, making it the fifth-most populous county in Utah. Its county seat and largest city is St. George. The county was created in 1852 and organized in 1856. It was named after the first President of the United States, George Washington. A portion of the Paiute Indian Reservation is in western Washington County. Washington County comprises the St. George, UT Metropolitan Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe earliest settlement was Fort Harmony in 1852. Santa Clara was established in 1854 as a mission to the natives who lived on the Santa Clara River. Hamblin and Pinto were settled along the Los Angeles - Salt Lake Road in 1856, as was Gunlock in 1857.\nNext came the settlements established as colonies to grow cotton before the beginning of the American Civil War (1861-1865). They were located along the Virgin River, in the warmer climate below the central Great Basin, which was for decades called \"Utah's Dixie\". The first settlement was Virgin, and Washington in 1857. Heberville, Pintura and Toquerville followed in 1858, Grafton, Harrisburg and Pine Valley in 1859, Adventure in 1860, Duncans Retreat, Northrop, Shonesburg and St. George in 1861.\nFort Harmony, Adventure, and Northrup were abandoned, and Santa Clara, St. George, Washington, Harrisburg, Heberville, Grafton, and Duncans Retreat were nearly destroyed by the Great Flood of 1862 that followed 44 days of rainfall in January and February 1862. New Harmony, Springdale and Rockville were founded in 1862 by settlers flooded out of Fort Harmony, Adventure, Northrup and other places in the vicinity. Harrisburg was relocated.\nShoal Creek later called Hebron, was a ranching community established in 1862 west of the county. Leeds was settled in 1867, and Silver Reef was a mining town begun in 1875 and abandoned by 1891 due to the collapse in silver prices.\nThe old federal Utah Territory's territorial legislature created Washington County on March 3, 1852, in the southern border area of the Territory, adjacent to the then old federal New Mexico Territory of 1850-1912. It was not fully organized at that time, and so it was attached to Iron County, which was adjacent to the north for temporary administrative and judicial purposes in its county seat town and courthouse of Parowan, for its first four years. This continued until February 23, 1856, when the organization was completed, Saint George was listed as the newly designated county seat and site of a courthouse, and the attachment to Iron County was terminated. The county boundaries were altered a dozen times after that; but its boundaries have retained their present configuration since March 10, 1892, four years before statehood was achieved in 1896.\nGeography.\nWashington County lies in the southwest corner of Utah. Its south border abuts the northern border of the state of Arizona, and its west border abuts the east border of the state of Nevada. Its terrain is rough and arid, with a little area devoted to agriculture. It is a mixture of mountains and flat stretches. The terrain slopes to the south and west; the lowest point in the state of Utah is located in the Beaver Dam Wash in Washington County, where it (seasonally) flows out of Utah and into Arizona, at ASL. The county's highest point is Signal Peak in the Pine Valley Mountains, at ASL. The county has a total area of , of which is land and (comprising 0.1%) is water.\nWashington County is made up of three major geographic areas; the Colorado Plateau in the east-northeast, the Great Basin in the northwest, and the Mojave Desert in the south-southwest.\nGreater St. George.\nMost of the population is centered in the south-central part of the county near the Arizona border around St. George. Most national shopping, dining, and hospitality chains are located here, along with several local businesses. The climate of this section of the county is typical of the Mojave Desert in which it lies; its annual rainfall is 8 inches, and it is the lowest elevation in Washington County, making it particularly hot and dry compared to the rest of the county. Most homes are located in subdivisions characteristic of a growing urban sprawl. In Downtown St. George, several local restaurants and stores call the area home, and despite its small size, it tends to attract many locals and tourists alike. To combat the sprawl (which threatens many nature reserves and increases congestion), growth and promotion are projected inward to the central area of St. George, with many new infill developments being planned and constructed. The center of the city, or downtown, also contains Utah Tech University, the only four-year college within a radius. Dixie High School is also located in the downtown area.\nMost commercial and industrial lots exist in the eastern portion of the Greater St. George Area in eastern St. George and Washington. Rapidly expanding suburbs also exist there, especially in an area known as Washington Fields. Large irrigated farms have been sold to commercial and residential developers to make way for the anticipated need for more housing and business. Pine View High School is in this section and serves the east side and Washington. To accommodate the rapidly expanding population, an additional high school (Crimson Cliffs High School) has been built in the Washington Fields area.\nThe western portion of the urban area contains the suburbs of Santa Clara and Ivins, and the neighborhoods of Green Valley, Dixie Downs, Sunset, and Tonaquint. Due to this area's proximity to Snow Canyon State Park, this has resulted in the construction of many resort-style communities and gated subdivisions such as Entrada, Kayenta, and the Palisades, with homes often exceeding $1,000,000 in price. However, there are still many other neighborhoods and older houses that tend to be more affordable. This section is served by Snow Canyon High School.\nThe southern portion of the city contains the neighborhoods of Southgate, Bloomington, Bloomington Hills, SunRiver, Desert's Edge (near the airport), and Hidden Valley and is served by Desert Hills High School. Limitations on development in this area exist due to terrain, and as such, it contains less population than its east and west counterparts. The SR-7 freeway, also known as Southern Parkway, has been built as a beltway to accommodate future growth in the southeastern portion of St. George and Washington. The partially constructed freeway also connects to St. George Regional Airport, and in the future, will provide a vital connection to the community of Hurricane, which will thereby provide quicker and more efficient access to Zion National Park, thus providing an alternative route to Interstate 15.\nDespite its scenic location amid red sandstone, lava fields, and the backdrop of the Pine Valley Mountains, the northern area of St. George is almost entirely undeveloped due to the Red Cliffs National Conservation Area, which protects a variety of endangered wildlife and unspoiled desert. The only communities in northern St. George are The Ledges and Winchester Hills in the west, and Green Springs, near Washington, in the east. While the community of Winchester Hills has existed for many decades, The Ledges is a newer development met with significant controversy. A few houses in the gate portion feature what many consider to be multimillion-dollar views of Snow Canyon State Park and are visible from inside the state park. This has led many to believe that the beauty of Snow Canyon is in jeopardy due to the City of St. George's willingness to sell the land around the park to private companies. In reality, only three houses are visible inside the canyon, although more visible lots exist to be built upon. On the opposite end of the city is Green Springs, an upscale multimillion-dollar development that consists of a golf course and many distinct gated and non-gated housing communities.\nOn the east side of the metropolitan area lies the cities of Hurricane and La Verkin. Because this locale is disconnected from the rest of the area by undeveloped swaths of land, it is still usually considered distinct from urban St. George, though this may change in the future due to anticipated development that will connect these cities. This area is more farm-based and rural than St. George, but is still experiencing rapid expansion in commercial, industrial, and residential development like the rest of the region. It is served by Hurricane High School.\nOutside the urban area.\nWhile the entire county, due to its large size, is considered part of the St. George Metropolitan Area, most land in the county is rural.\nIn the middle and north of Washington County, a sparse population exists. The center-county communities of Central and Pine Valley are popular resort communities and contain many cabins and recreational parks due to their locations in Dixie National Forest and the Pine Valley Mountains. Veyo and Dammeron Valley, also near the center of the county, are primarily ranching towns, with most houses situated on large plots of land. This central area of Washington County is generally more wet and humid than the rest of the county due to its high elevation and high precipitation. In Pine Valley, precipitation often exceeds 20 inches per year.\nThe northern portion of Washington County is semi-arid and dry, albeit less so than in the southern portion. The only incorporated town in this area is Enterprise with a population of just over 1,700. Enterprise is the home of the only secondary school outside of the Greater St. George Area, Enterprise High School. The town contains a small grocery store and multiple gas stations but is very quaint and rural when compared to the urban area of St. George.\nWestern Washington County is home to Gunlock; also a ranching town, and a small Native American reserve named Shivwits, occupied by the Shivwits Band of Paiutes. This area of the county is also the location of the lowest area of the state, Beaver Dam Wash.\nEastern Washington County is also sparsely populated. However, the towns of Rockville and Springdale are filled with major hotels and resorts, despite their small sizes. This is due to their extreme proximity to Zion National Park, one of the most visited national parks in the United States. Springdale, in particular, contains many kitschy shopping and dining options. Most of the income in these two towns is fueled by tourism alone.\nThe county includes an area along the Old Spanish Trail called Mountain Meadows, just south of Enterprise on SR-18. Zion National Park is located in the eastern part of Washington County.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThere are 18 official wilderness areas in Washington County that are part of the National Wilderness Preservation System. Most are entities managed by the Bureau of Land Management, but some are integral parts of the above-listed protected areas. Two of these extend into neighboring counties (as indicated below). Many of the BLM wildernesses are not much more than small appendages of Zion Wilderness in Zion National Park:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 180,279 people in Washington County with a population density of 74.3 people per square mile (28.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 147,462 (81.8%) White, 913 (0.5%) African American, 1,566 (0.9%) Native American, 1,802 (1.0%) Asian, 1,607 (0.9%) Pacific Islander, 631 (0.4%) from other races, and 5,816 (3.2%) from two or more races. 20,482 (11.4%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 89,115 (49.43%) males and 91,164 (50.57%) females, and the population distribution by age was 47,542 (26.4%) under the age of 18, 92,818 (51.5%) from 18 to 64, and 39,919 (22.1%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 37.6 years.\nThere were 62,416 households in Washington County with an average size of 2.89 of which 46,724 (74.9%) were families and 15,692 (25.1%) were non-families. Among all families, 38,423 (61.6%) were married couples, 2,728 (4.4%) were male householders with no spouse, and 5,573 (8.9%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 12,372 (19.8%) were a single person living alone and 3,320 (5.3%) were two or more people living together. 20,177 (32.3%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 45,539 (73.0%) of households were owner-occupied while 16,877 (27.0%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Washington County household was $61,747 and the median family income was $72,683, with a per-capita income of $29,886. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $50,029 and for females $36,844. 10.0% of the population and 7.2% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 112,121 people in Washington County 25 years or older, 6,908 (6.2%) had not completed high school, 25,232 (22.5%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 47,254 (42.1%) had some college or associate degree, 20,939 (18.7%) had a bachelor's degree, and 11,788 (10.5%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nReligion.\nIn 2000, 92.5% of residents were adherents of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; 4.1% Catholic; 0.8% Southern Baptist; 0.6% Presbyterian; 0.4% Lutheran; 0.4% Episcopal; 0.2% United Methodist; 0.2% Baptist; 0.2% Assemblies of God; and 0.5% Other.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2015, the largest European self-reported ancestry groups in Washington County are:\nEducation.\nIn addition to the primary and secondary schools that compose Washington County School District, which covers the entire county, Washington County is home to Utah Tech University in St. George, with campus extensions in Hurricane and Hildale (\"Water Canyon Center\").\nUtilities.\nRetail utility companies operating in Washington County include city water and power departments, Dixie Power, Rocky Mountain Power, Dominion Energy (natural gas), Washington County Water Conservancy District, Mountain Springs Water Company in New Harmony, and the East Zion Special Service District.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFormer communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPolitics and government.\nWashington County has traditionally voted Republican; it voted for Franklin D. Roosevelt in all four of his elections but as of 2020 has not been carried by any Democratic presidential candidate since.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71083", "revid": "50464696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71083", "title": "Wayne County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nWayne County is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 2,486, making it the fourth-least populous county in Utah. Its county seat is Loa.\nHistory.\nDue to its remoteness and harsh terrain, settlements did not appear in the future Wayne County until the 1880s. By 1892, there was enough settlement and enough interest in a separate county (due mainly to the difficulty of accessing the Piute County seat), that Utah Territory passed an act (effective date March 10, 1892) to separate the east portion of Piute into a separate county. The county was named for Wayne County, Tennessee, itself named for Anthony Wayne. The county boundaries have remained unchanged since its creation.\nGeography.\nThe eastern border of Wayne County is delineated by the meanders of the Green River, which flows southward to discharge into the Colorado River. After the two rivers join, the combined southwestern flow forms the remaining portion of the county's eastern border. The central part of the county is drained by the Fremont River and Muddy Creek. The Fremont begins at Fish Lake in Sevier County and flows into Wayne County near its northwestern corner. It joins the Muddy near Hanksville to form the Dirty Devil River, which flows southeastward out of the county's southern border to discharge into Colorado. Wayne County terrain varies from rough forestland on the west to arid poor soil carved by drainages and rocky outcrops. The terrain slopes to the east and south; its highest point is Bluebell Knoll on Boulder Mountain at ASL The county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.2%) is water.\nThe Green River, passing through the canyons of Canyonlands National Park, forms the eastern boundary. The San Rafael Desert occupies the center of the county. Thousand Lake Mountain and Boulder Mountain flank Rabbit Valley on the western end of the county, where forests contrast with the deserts to the east. The small population of the county is centered in Rabbit Valley, with one town of 200, Hanksville, located in Graves Valley north of the Henry Mountains. Wayne County is also home to Capitol Reef National Park.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNational forests/parks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 2,486 people in Wayne County with a population density of 1.0 people per square mile (0.4/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 2,267 (91.2%) White, 1 (0.0%) African American, 19 (0.8%) Native American, 16 (0.6%) Asian, 3 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 5 (0.2%) from other races, and 79 (3.2%) from two or more races. 96 (3.9%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 1,239 (49.84%) males and 1,247 (50.16%) females, and the population distribution by age was 536 (21.6%) under the age of 18, 1,334 (53.7%) from 18 to 64, and 616 (24.8%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 47.3 years.\nThere were 1,064 households in Wayne County with an average size of 2.34 of which 711 (66.8%) were families and 353 (33.2%) were non-families. Among all families, 601 (56.5%) were married couples, 49 (4.6%) were male householders with no spouse, and 61 (5.7%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 307 (28.9%) were a single person living alone and 46 (4.3%) were two or more people living together. 290 (27.3%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 814 (76.5%) of households were owner-occupied while 250 (23.5%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Wayne County household was $49,299 and the median family income was $62,069, with a per-capita income of $23,184. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $50,625 and for females $34,653. 10.1% of the population and 6.8% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 1,822 people in Wayne County 25 years or older, 190 (10.4%) had not completed high school, 346 (19.0%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 848 (46.5%) had some college or associate degree, 374 (20.5%) had a bachelor's degree, and 64 (3.5%) had a graduate or professional degree.\nAncestry and ethnicity.\nAs of 2017 the largest self-identified ancestry groups/ethnic groups in Wayne County, Utah were:\nPolitics and government.\nWayne County voters are traditionally Republican. In only one national election since 1948 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate (as of 2024).\nEducation.\nThere is one school district, Wayne School District.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71084", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71084", "title": "Weber County, Utah", "text": "County in Utah, United States\nWeber County ( ) is a county in the U.S. state of Utah. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 262,223, making it Utah's fourth-most populous county. Its county seat and largest city is Ogden, the home of Weber State University. The county was named after a fur trapper John Weber.\nWeber County is part of the Ogden-Clearfield, UT Metropolitan Statistical Area as well as the Salt Lake City-Provo-Ogden, UT Combined Statistical Area.\nHistory.\nThe Weber Valley was visited by many trappers seeking beavers and muskrats along its streams. One of the first on record reached the area in 1824, traveling from Fort Bridger. He reported that the Bear River flowed into a salt bay. Peter Skene Ogden passed through in 1826, representing the Hudson's Bay Company. He traded in this area for several years, near present-day North Ogden. John C. Fr\u00e9mont explored the Weber Valley in 1843 and made maps of the area. The Fremont reports encouraged readers to seek their fortunes in the western frontier. Miles Goodyear was a fur trapper who constructed a way station on the Weber River in 1845. In 1847 he sold it to incoming Mormon pioneers. James Brown purchased and changed the site's name to Brownsville (later changed to Ogden).\nAfter the Mormon pioneers began filling out into the future state of Utah, the fledgling government (as of 1849 known as State of Deseret) began a system of government. On January 31, 1850, the legislature provided for the creation of six counties to generally cover the area, named in this order:\nThe county boundaries were better defined by the 1852 Utah Territory legislature. The borders were adjusted by subsequent acts in 1855, 1856, and 1862. The creation of Nevada Territory in 1862 also administratively reduced the county's territory significantly since its 1852 description had it running to the Sierra Nevada mountains in central California. A final adjustment in 1880 concerning the various lands in the Great Salt Lake area brought the county's borders to their present configuration.\nAs of the 1852 description, the original Weber County stretched from California in the west, to the Oregon boundary on the north, to a point in the middle Davis County in the south. As Nevada and the State of Utah evolved, Weber County was trimmed so that it now occupies a stretch of the Wasatch Front, part of the eastern shores of Great Salt Lake, and much of the rugged Wasatch Mountains.\nGeography.\nThe county extends from high in the Wasatch Range in the east into a portion of the Great Salt Lake to the west, where the county's elongated point exists. The Weber and Ogden rivers and their tributaries run through its valleys. The Weber County Surveyor's office divides the county into two regions, the \"Lower Valley\" and the \"Upper Valley\", divided by the ridge of the Wasatch front range south through the county. Lower Valley, adjacent to the Lake, is the county's more populous part. The Upper Valley consists mostly of the Ogden Valley, the watershed of the Ogden River. The county's highest elevation is Willard Peak in the Wasatch Mountains, at ASL. The county has an area of , of which is land and (13%) is water. It is the second-smallest county in Utah by land area and third-smallest by total area.\nMajor highways.\nMany roads in Weber County are named in a numerical grid system with an street name difference of 800 corresponding to one mile in a similar vein to Salt Lake County. In April 1947, North Ogden was the first municipality in Weber County to adopt the grid system, resulting in the north/south demarcator (1st Street) being placed in the northern half of the county. The east/west demarcator was selected as Wall Avenue which runs parallel to downtown Ogden.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAdjacent counties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAccording to the 2020 United States census and 2020 American Community Survey, there were 262,223 people in Weber County with a population density of 429.1 people per square mile (165.7/km2). Among non-Hispanic or Latino people, the racial makeup was 193,889 (73.9%) White, 3,209 (1.2%) African American, 1,394 (0.5%) Native American, 3,603 (1.4%) Asian, 948 (0.4%) Pacific Islander, 1,014 (0.4%) from other races, and 9,424 (3.6%) from two or more races. 48,742 (18.6%) people were Hispanic or Latino.\nThere were 131,864 (50.29%) males and 130,359 (49.71%) females, and the population distribution by age was 72,631 (27.7%) under the age of 18, 157,239 (60.0%) from 18 to 64, and 32,353 (12.3%) who were at least 65 years old. The median age was 32.9 years.\nThere were 89,595 households in Weber County with an average size of 2.93 of which 64,544 (72.0%) were families and 25,051 (28.0%) were non-families. Among all families, 48,636 (54.3%) were married couples, 5,660 (6.3%) were male householders with no spouse, and 10,248 (11.4%) were female householders with no spouse. Among all non-families, 19,876 (22.2%) were a single person living alone and 5,175 (5.8%) were two or more people living together. 33,909 (37.8%) of all households had children under the age of 18. 64,756 (72.3%) of households were owner-occupied while 24,839 (27.7%) were renter-occupied.\nThe median income for a Weber County household was $71,275 and the median family income was $80,961, with a per-capita income of $29,186. The median income for males that were full-time employees was $53,678 and for females $38,512. 8.6% of the population and 5.7% of families were below the poverty line.\nIn terms of education attainment, out of the 158,841 people in Weber County 25 years or older, 13,423 (8.5%) had not completed high school, 46,466 (29.3%) had a high school diploma or equivalency, 59,079 (37.2%) had some college or associate degree, 27,871 (17.5%) had a bachelor's degree, and 12,002 (7.6%) had a graduate or professional degree.\n2010 census.\nAs of the 2010 United States census, there were 231,236 people in the county, organized into 78,784 households and 57,867 families. The population density was . There were 86,187 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 85.2% White, 1.4% Black or African American, 1.3% Asian, 0.8% Native American, 0.3% Pacific Islander, 6.59% from other races, and 3.0% from two or more races. 16.7% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $62,036, and the median income for a family was $71,359. Males had a median income of $49,081 versus $34,954 for females. The per capita income for the county was $25,275. 12.1% of the population and 8.7% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 15.4% of those under 18 and 8.5% of those 65 and older lived below the poverty line. In the 2010 census, 67.0% of people over 16 were in labor, and 33.0% were not in labor. The unemployment rate was 3.2%.\nAge distribution.\nThe median age was 30.7 years. For every 100 females, there were 100.7 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 99.0 males.\nAncestry.\nAs of 2017, the largest self-identified ancestry groups in Weber County, Utah were:\nPolitics and government.\nLike most of Utah, Weber County voters usually vote Republican. In no national election since 1964 has the county selected the Democratic Party candidate.\nEducation.\nTertiary institutions and organizations of education in Weber County:\nThe two K-12 school districts in the county are Ogden City School District and Weber School District.\nThere is also a state-operated school, Utah Schools for the Deaf and the Blind.\nCommunities.\nCities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnincorporated communities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable residents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71085", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71085", "title": "Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem", "text": "Theorem that tells the maximum rate at which information can be transmitted\nIn information theory, the Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem tells the maximum rate at which information can be transmitted over a communications channel of a specified bandwidth in the presence of noise. It is an application of the noisy-channel coding theorem to the archetypal case of a continuous-time analog communications channel subject to Gaussian noise. The theorem establishes Shannon's channel capacity for such a communication link, a bound on the maximum amount of error-free information per time unit that can be transmitted with a specified bandwidth in the presence of the noise interference, assuming that the signal power is bounded, and that the Gaussian noise process is characterized by a known power or power spectral density. The law is named after Claude Shannon and Ralph Hartley.\nStatement of the theorem.\nThe Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem states the channel capacity formula_1, meaning the theoretical tightest upper bound on the information rate of data that can be communicated at an arbitrarily low error rate using an average received signal power formula_2 through an analog communication channel subject to additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) of power formula_3:\nformula_4\nwhere\nHistorical development.\nDuring the late 1920s, Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley developed a handful of fundamental ideas related to the transmission of information, particularly in the context of the telegraph as a communications system. At the time, these concepts were powerful breakthroughs individually, but they were not part of a comprehensive theory. In the 1940s, Claude Shannon developed the concept of channel capacity, based in part on the ideas of Nyquist and Hartley, and then formulated a complete theory of information and its transmission.\nNyquist rate.\nIn 1927, Nyquist determined that the number of independent pulses that could be put through a telegraph channel per unit time is limited to twice the one-sided bandwidth of the channel. In symbolic notation,\nformula_11\nwhere formula_12 is the pulse frequency (in pulses per second) and formula_7 is the one-sided bandwidth (in hertz). The quantity formula_14 later came to be called the \"Nyquist rate\", and transmitting at the limiting pulse rate of formula_14 pulses per second as \"signalling at the Nyquist rate\". Nyquist published his results in 1928 as part of his paper \"Certain topics in Telegraph Transmission Theory\".\nHartley's law.\nDuring 1928, Hartley formulated a way to quantify information and its line rate (also known as data signalling rate \"R\" bits per second). This method, later known as Hartley's law, became an important precursor for Shannon's more sophisticated notion of channel capacity.\nHartley argued that the maximum number of distinguishable pulse levels that can be transmitted and received reliably over a communications channel is limited by the dynamic range of the signal amplitude and the precision with which the receiver can distinguish amplitude levels. Specifically, if the amplitude of the transmitted signal is restricted to the range of [\u2212\"A\" ... +\"A\"] volts, and the precision of the receiver is \u00b1\u0394\"V\" volts, then the maximum number of distinct pulses \"M\" is given by\nformula_16.\nBy taking information per pulse in bit/pulse to be the base-2-logarithm of the number of distinct messages \"M\" that could be sent, Hartley constructed a measure of the line rate \"R\" as:\nformula_17\nwhere formula_12 is the pulse rate, also known as the symbol rate, in symbols/second or baud.\nHartley then combined the above quantification with Nyquist's observation that the number of independent pulses that could be put through a channel of one-sided bandwidth formula_7 hertz was formula_14 pulses per second, to arrive at his quantitative measure for achievable line rate.\nHartley's law is sometimes quoted as just a proportionality between the analog bandwidth, formula_7, in Hertz and what today is called the digital bandwidth, formula_22, in bit/s.\nOther times it is quoted in this more quantitative form, as an achievable line rate of formula_22 bits per second:\nformula_24\nHartley did not work out exactly how the number \"M\" should depend on the noise statistics of the channel, or how the communication could be made reliable even when individual symbol pulses could not be reliably distinguished to \"M\" levels; with Gaussian noise statistics, system designers had to choose a very conservative value of formula_25 to achieve a low error rate.\nThe concept of an error-free capacity awaited Claude Shannon, who built on Hartley's observations about a logarithmic measure of information and Nyquist's observations about the effect of bandwidth limitations.\nHartley's rate result can be viewed as the capacity of an errorless \"M\"-ary channel of formula_14 symbols per second. Some authors refer to it as a capacity. But such an errorless channel is an idealization, and if M is chosen small enough to make the noisy channel nearly errorless, the result is necessarily less than the Shannon capacity of the noisy channel of bandwidth formula_7, which is the Hartley\u2013Shannon result that followed later.\nNoisy channel coding theorem and capacity.\nClaude Shannon's development of information theory during World War II provided the next big step in understanding how much information could be reliably communicated through noisy channels. Building on Hartley's foundation, Shannon's noisy channel coding theorem (1948) describes the maximum possible efficiency of error-correcting methods versus levels of noise interference and data corruption. The proof of the theorem shows that a randomly constructed error-correcting code is essentially as good as the best possible code; the theorem is proved through the statistics of such random codes.\nShannon's theorem shows how to compute a channel capacity from a statistical description of a channel, and establishes that given a noisy channel with capacity formula_1 and information transmitted at a line rate formula_22, then if\nformula_30\nthere exists a coding technique which allows the probability of error at the receiver to be made arbitrarily small. This means that theoretically, it is possible to transmit information nearly without error up to nearly a limit of formula_1 bits per second.\nThe converse is also important. If\nformula_32\nthe probability of error at the receiver increases without bound as the rate is increased, so no useful information can be transmitted beyond the channel capacity. The theorem does not address the rare situation in which rate and capacity are equal.\nThe Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem establishes what that channel capacity is for a finite-bandwidth continuous-time channel subject to Gaussian noise. It connects Hartley's result with Shannon's channel capacity theorem in a form that is equivalent to specifying the \"M\" in Hartley's line rate formula in terms of a signal-to-noise ratio, but achieving reliability through error-correction coding rather than through reliably distinguishable pulse levels.\nIf there were such a thing as a noise-free analog channel, one could transmit unlimited amounts of error-free data over it per unit of time (Note that an infinite-bandwidth analog channel could not transmit unlimited amounts of error-free data absent infinite signal power). Real channels, however, are subject to limitations imposed by both finite bandwidth and nonzero noise.\nBandwidth and noise affect the rate at which information can be transmitted over an analog channel. Bandwidth limitations alone do not impose a cap on the maximum information rate because it is still possible for the signal to take on an indefinitely large number of different voltage levels on each symbol pulse, with each slightly different level being assigned a different meaning or bit sequence. Taking into account both noise and bandwidth limitations, however, there is a limit to the amount of information that can be transferred by a signal of a bounded power, even when sophisticated multi-level encoding techniques are used.\nIn the channel considered by the Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem, noise and signal are combined by addition. That is, the receiver measures a signal that is equal to the sum of the signal encoding the desired information and a continuous random variable that represents the noise. This addition creates uncertainty as to the original signal's value. If the receiver has some information about the random process that generates the noise, one can in principle recover the information in the original signal by considering all possible states of the noise process. In the case of the Shannon\u2013Hartley theorem, the noise is assumed to be generated by a Gaussian process with a known variance. Since the variance of a Gaussian process is equivalent to its power, it is conventional to call this variance the noise power.\nSuch a channel is called the Additive White Gaussian Noise channel, because Gaussian noise is added to the signal; \"white\" means equal amounts of noise at all frequencies within the channel bandwidth. Such noise can arise both from random sources of energy and also from coding and measurement error at the sender and receiver respectively. Since sums of independent Gaussian random variables are themselves Gaussian random variables, this conveniently simplifies analysis, if one assumes that such error sources are also Gaussian and independent.\nImplications of the theorem.\nComparison of Shannon's capacity to Hartley's law.\nComparing the channel capacity to the information rate from Hartley's law, we can find the effective number of distinguishable levels \"M\":\nformula_33\nformula_34\nThe square root effectively converts the power ratio back to a voltage ratio, so the number of levels is approximately proportional to the ratio of signal RMS amplitude to noise standard deviation.\nThis similarity in form between Shannon's capacity and Hartley's law should not be interpreted to mean that formula_25 pulse levels can be literally sent without any confusion. More levels are needed to allow for redundant coding and error correction, but the net data rate that can be approached with coding is equivalent to using that formula_25 in Hartley's law.\nFrequency-dependent (colored noise) case.\nIn the simple version above, the signal and noise are fully uncorrelated, in which case formula_37 is the total power of the received signal and noise together. A generalization of the above equation for the case where the additive noise is not white (or that the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is not constant with frequency over the bandwidth) is obtained by treating the channel as many narrow, independent Gaussian channels in parallel:\nformula_38\nwhere\nNote: the theorem only applies to Gaussian stationary process noise. This formula's way of introducing frequency-dependent noise cannot describe all continuous-time noise processes. For example, consider a noise process consisting of adding a random wave whose amplitude is 1 or \u22121 at any point in time, and a channel that adds such a wave to the source signal. Such a wave's frequency components are highly dependent. Though such a noise may have a high power, it is fairly easy to transmit a continuous signal with much less power than one would need if the underlying noise was a sum of independent noises in each frequency band.\nApproximations.\nFor large or small and constant signal-to-noise ratios, the capacity formula can be approximated:\nBandwidth-limited case.\nWhen the SNR is large (\"S\"/\"N\" \u226b 1), the logarithm is approximated by\nformula_44\nin which case the capacity is logarithmic in power and approximately linear in bandwidth (not quite linear, since N increases with bandwidth, imparting a logarithmic effect). This is called the bandwidth-limited regime.\nformula_45\nwhere\nformula_46\nPower-limited case.\nSimilarly, when the SNR is small (if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;), applying the approximation to the logarithm:\nformula_47\nthen the capacity is linear in power. This is called the power-limited regime.\nformula_48\nIn this low-SNR approximation, capacity is independent of bandwidth if the noise is white, of spectral density formula_49 watts per hertz, in which case the total noise power is formula_50.\nformula_51\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71086", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71086", "title": "Nietzche", "text": ""}
{"id": "71088", "revid": "3290041", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71088", "title": "Hibernation", "text": "Physiological state of dormant inactivity in order to pass the winter season\nHibernation is a state of minimal activity and metabolic reduction entered by some animal species. Hibernation is a seasonal heterothermy characterized by low body-temperature, slow breathing and heart-rate, and low metabolic rate. It is most commonly used to pass through winter months \u2013 called overwintering.\nAlthough traditionally reserved for \"deep\" hibernators such as rodents, the term has been redefined to include animals such as bears and is now applied based on active metabolic suppression rather than any absolute decline in body temperature. Many experts believe that the processes of daily torpor and hibernation form a continuum and use similar mechanisms. The equivalent during the summer months is aestivation.\nHibernation functions to conserve energy when sufficient food is not available. To achieve this energy saving, an endothermic animal decreases its metabolic rate and thereby its body temperature. Hibernation may last days, weeks, or months\u2014depending on the species, ambient temperature, time of year, and the individual's body-condition. Before entering hibernation, animals need to store enough energy to last through the duration of their dormant period, possibly as long as an entire winter. Larger species become hyperphagic, eating a large amount of food and storing the energy in their bodies in the form of fat deposits. In many small species, food caching replaces eating and becoming fat.\nSome species of mammals hibernate while gestating young, which are born either while the mother hibernates or shortly afterwards. For example, female black bears go into hibernation during the winter months in order to give birth to their offspring. The pregnant mothers significantly increase their body mass prior to hibernation, and this increase is further reflected in the weight of the offspring. The fat accumulation enables them to provide a sufficiently warm and nurturing environment for their newborns. During hibernation, they subsequently lose 15\u201327% of their pre-hibernation weight by using their stored fats for energy.\nEctothermic animals also undergo periods of metabolic suppression and dormancy, which in many invertebrates is referred to as diapause. Some researchers and members of the public use the term brumate to describe winter dormancy of reptiles, but the more general term hibernation is believed adequate to refer to any winter dormancy. Many insects, such as the wasp \"Polistes exclamans\" and the beetle \"Bolitotherus\", exhibit periods of dormancy which have often been referred to as hibernation, despite their ectothermy. Botanists may use the term \"seed hibernation\" to refer to a form of seed dormancy.\nMammals.\nThere is a variety of definitions for terms that describe hibernation in mammals, and different mammal clades hibernate differently. The following subsections discuss the terms \"obligate\" and \"facultative\" hibernation. The last two sections point out in particular primates, none of whom were thought to hibernate until recently, and bears, whose winter torpor had been contested as not being \"true hibernation\" during the late 20th\u00a0century, since it is dissimilar from hibernation seen in rodents.\nObligate hibernation.\nObligate hibernators are animals that spontaneously, and annually, enter hibernation regardless of ambient temperature and access to food. Obligate hibernators include many species of ground squirrels, other rodents, European hedgehogs and other insectivores, monotremes, and marsupials. \nThese species undergo what has been traditionally called \"hibernation\": a physiological state wherein the body temperature drops to near ambient temperature, and heart and respiration rates slow drastically.\nThe typical winter season for obligate hibernators is characterized by periods of torpor interrupted by periodic, euthermic arousals, during which body temperatures and heart rates are restored to more typical levels. The cause and purpose of these arousals are still not clear; the question of why hibernators may return periodically to normal body temperatures has plagued researchers for decades, and while there is still no clear-cut explanation, there are multiple hypotheses on the topic. One favored hypothesis is that hibernators build a \"sleep debt\" during hibernation, and so must occasionally warm up to sleep. This has been supported by evidence in the Arctic ground squirrel. Other theories postulate that brief periods of high body temperature during hibernation allow the animal to restore its available energy sources or to initiate an immune response.\nHibernating Arctic ground squirrels may exhibit abdominal temperatures as low as , maintaining sub-zero abdominal temperatures for more than three weeks at a time, although the temperatures at the head and neck remain at or above.\nFacultative hibernation.\nFacultative hibernators enter hibernation only when either cold-stressed, food-deprived, or both, unlike obligate hibernators, who enter hibernation based on seasonal timing cues rather than as a response to stressors from the environment.\nA chipmunk, for example, is a facultative hibernator. Even though it sleeps for a long period of time, it is not a true obligate hibernator. This is because during the long period of sleep, its temperatures do not decrease to the low levels of hibernation. It only truly hibernates if food is scarce.\nA good example of the differences between these two types of hibernation can be seen in prairie dogs. The white-tailed prairie dog is an \"obligate\" hibernator, while the closely related black-tailed prairie dog is a \"facultative\" hibernator.\nPrimates.\nWhile hibernation has long been studied in rodents (namely ground squirrels), no primate or tropical mammal was known to hibernate until the discovery of hibernation in the fat-tailed dwarf lemur of Madagascar, which hibernates in tree holes for seven months of the year. Malagasy winter temperatures sometimes rise to over , so hibernation is not exclusively an adaptation to low ambient temperatures.\nThe hibernation of this lemur is strongly dependent on the thermal behaviour of its tree hole: If the hole is poorly insulated, the lemur's body temperature fluctuates widely, passively following the ambient temperature; if well insulated, the body temperature stays fairly constant and the animal undergoes regular spells of arousal. Dausmann found that hypometabolism in hibernating animals is not necessarily coupled with low body temperature.\nBears.\nHistorically it was unclear whether or not bears truly hibernate, since they experience only a modest decline in body temperature of , compared with the much larger decreases (often or more) seen in other hibernators. Many researchers thought that their deep sleep was not comparable with true, deep hibernation, but this theory was refuted by research in 2011 on captive black bears and again in 2016 in a study on brown bears.\nHibernating bears are able to recycle their proteins and urine, allowing them to stop urinating for months and to avoid muscle atrophy. They stay hydrated with the metabolic water that is produced in sufficient quantities to satisfy the water needs of the bear. They also do not eat or drink while hibernating, but live off their stored fat. Despite long-term inactivity and lack of food intake, hibernating bears are believed to maintain their bone mass and do not suffer from osteoporosis. They also increase the availability of certain essential amino acids in the muscle, as well as regulate the transcription of a suite of genes that limit muscle wasting.\nA study by G. Edgar Folk, Jill M. Hunt and Mary A. Folk compared EKG of typical hibernators to three different bear species with respect to season, activity and dormancy, and found that the reduced relaxation (QT) interval of small hibernators was the same for the three bear species. They also found the QT interval changed for both typical hibernators and the bears from summer to winter. This 1977 study was one of the first pieces of evidence used to show that bears are hibernators.\nIn a 2016 study, wildlife veterinarian and associate professor at Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences, Alina L. Evans, researched 14 brown bears over three winters. Their movement, heart rate, heart rate variability, body temperature, physical activity, ambient temperature, and snow depth were measured to identify the drivers of the start and end of hibernation for bears. This study built the first chronology of both ecological and physiological events from before the start to the end of hibernation in the field. This research found that bears would enter their den when snow arrived and ambient temperature dropped to . However, physical activity, heart rate, and body temperature started to drop slowly even several weeks before this. Once in their dens, the bears' heart rate variability dropped dramatically, indirectly suggesting metabolic suppression is related to their hibernation. Two months before the end of hibernation, the bears' body temperature starts to rise, unrelated to heart rate variability but rather driven by the ambient temperature. The heart rate variability only increases around three weeks before arousal and the bears only leave their den once outside temperatures are at their lower critical temperature. These findings suggest that bears are thermoconforming and bear hibernation is driven by environmental cues, but arousal is driven by physiological cues.\nBirds.\nAncient people believed that swallows hibernated, and ornithologist Gilbert White documented anecdotal evidence in his 1789 book \"The Natural History of Selborne\" that indicated the belief was still current in his time. It is now understood that the vast majority of bird species typically do not hibernate, instead using shorter periods of torpor. One known exception is the common poorwill (\"Phalaenoptilus nuttallii\"), for which hibernation was first documented by Edmund Jaeger.\nDormancy and freezing in ectotherms.\nBecause they cannot actively down-regulate their body temperature or metabolic rate, ectothermic animals (including fish, reptiles, and amphibians) cannot engage in obligate or facultative hibernation. They can experience decreased metabolic rates associated with colder environments or low oxygen availability (hypoxia) and exhibit dormancy (known as brumation). It was once thought that basking sharks settled to the floor of the North Sea and became dormant, but research by David Sims in 2003 dispelled this hypothesis, showing that the sharks traveled long distances throughout the seasons, tracking the areas with the highest quantity of plankton. Epaulette sharks have been documented to be able to survive for three hours without oxygen and at temperatures of up to as a means to survive in their shoreline habitat, where water and oxygen levels vary with the tide. Other animals able to survive long periods with very little or no oxygen include goldfish, red-eared sliders, wood frogs, and bar-headed geese. The ability to survive hypoxic or anoxic conditions is not closely related to endotherm hibernation.\nSome animals can survive winter by freezing. For example, some fish, amphibians, and reptiles can naturally freeze and then \"wake\" up in the spring. These species have evolved freeze tolerance mechanism such as antifreeze proteins.\nHibernation induction trigger (HIT) protein and recombinant protein technology.\nHibernation induction trigger (HIT) proteins isolated from mammals have been used in the study of organ recovery rates. One study in 1997 found that \"delta 2\" opioid and hibernation induction trigger (HIT) proteins were not able to increase the recovery rate of heart tissue during ischemia. While unable to increase recovery rates at the time of ischemia, the protein precursors were identified to play a role in the preservation of veterinary organ function.\nRecent advances in recombinant protein technology make it possible for scientists to manufacture hibernation induction trigger (HIT) proteins in the laboratory without the need for animal euthanasia. Bioengineering of proteins can aid in the protection of vulnerable populations of bears and other mammals that produce valuable proteins. Protein sequencing of HIT proteins, such as \u03b1 1-glycoprotein-like 88 kDa hibernation-related protein HRP, contributes to this research pool. A study in 2014 uses recombinant technology to construct, express, purify, and isolate animal proteins (HP-20, HP-25, and HP-27) outside of the animal to study key hibernation proteins (HP).\nIn humans.\nResearchers have studied how to induce hibernation in humans. The ability to hibernate would be useful for a number of reasons, such as saving the lives of seriously ill or injured people by temporarily putting them in a state of hibernation until treatment can be given. For space travel, human hibernation is also under consideration, such as for missions to Mars.\nAnthropologists are also studying whether hibernation was possible in early hominid species.\nIn 1900 The British Medical Journal described a practice called 'Lotska' among Russian peasants in the Pskov Government, which was said to be closely akin to hibernation. Not having enough food to carry them through the winter, families spent six months sleeping around the stove, waking up once a day to consume some bread and water. \nEvolution of hibernation.\nIn endothermic animals.\nAs the ancestors of birds and mammals colonized land, leaving the relatively stable marine environments, more intense terrestrial seasons began playing a larger role in animals' lives. Some marine animals do go through periods of dormancy, but the effect is stronger and more widespread in terrestrial environments. As hibernation is a seasonal response, the movement of the ancestor of birds and mammals onto land introduced them to seasonal pressures that would eventually become hibernation. This is true for all clades of animals that undergo winter dormancy; the more prominent the seasons are, the longer the dormant period tends to be on average. Hibernation of endothermic animals has likely evolved multiple times, at least once in mammals\u2014though it is debated whether or not it evolved more than once in mammals\u2014and at least once in birds.\nIn both cases, hibernation likely evolved simultaneously with endothermy, with the earliest suggested instance of hibernation being in Thrinaxodon, an ancestor of mammals that lived roughly 252 million years ago. The evolution of endothermy allowed animals to have greater levels of activity and better incubation of embryos, among other benefits for animals in the Permian and Triassic periods. In order to conserve energy, the ancestors of birds and mammals would likely have experienced an early form of torpor or hibernation when they were not using their thermoregulatory abilities during the transition from ectothermy to endothermy. This is opposed to the previously dominant hypothesis that hibernation evolved after endothermy in response to the emergence of colder habitats. Body size also had an effect on the evolution of hibernation, as endotherms which grow large enough tend to lose their ability to be selectively heterothermic, with bears being one of very few exceptions. After torpor and hibernation diverged from a common proto-hibernating ancestor of birds and mammals, the ability to hibernate or go through torpor would have been lost in most larger mammals and birds. Hibernation would be less favored in larger animals because as animals increase in size, the surface area to volume ratio decreases, and it takes less energy to keep a high internal body temperature, and thus hibernation becomes unnecessary.\nThere is evidence that hibernation evolved separately in marsupials and placental mammals, though it is not settled. That evidence stems from development, where as soon as young marsupials from hibernating species are able to regulate their own heat, they have the capability to hibernate. In contrast, placental mammals that hibernate first develop homeothermy, only developing the ability to hibernate at a later point. This difference in development is evidence, though inconclusive, that they evolved by slightly different mechanisms and thus at different times.\nBrumation in reptiles.\nAs reptiles are ectothermic, having no system to deal with cold temperatures would be deadly in many environments. Reptilian winter dormancy, or brumation, likely evolved to help reptiles survive colder conditions. Reptiles that are dormant in the winter tend to have higher survival rates and slower aging. Reptiles evolved to exploit their ectothermy to deliberately cool their internal body temperatures. As opposed to mammals or birds, which will prepare for their hibernation but not directly cause it through their behavior, reptiles will trigger their own hibernation through their behavior. Reptiles seek out colder temperatures based on a periodic internal clock, which is likely triggered by cooler outside temperatures, as shown in the Texas horned lizard (\"Phrynosoma cornutum\"). One mechanism that reptiles use to survive hibernation, hypercapnic acidosis (the buildup of carbon dioxide in the blood), is also present in mammal hibernation. This is likely an example of convergent evolution. Hypercapnic acidosis evolved as a mechanism to slow metabolism and also interfere with oxygen transport so that oxygen is not used up and can still reach tissues in low oxygen periods of dormancy.\nDiapause in arthropods.\nSeasonal diapause, or arthropod winter dormancy, seems to be plastic and quickly evolving, with large genetic variation and strong effects of natural selection present as well as having evolved many times across many clades of arthropods. As such, there is very little phylogenetic conservation in the genetic mechanism for diapause. Particularly the timing and extent of the seasonal diapause seem particularly variable, currently evolving as a response to climate change. As typical with hibernation, it evolved after the increased influence of seasonality as arthropods colonized terrestrial environments as a mechanism to keep energy costs low, particularly in harsher than normal environments, as well as being a good way to time the active or reproductive periods in arthropods. It is thought to have originally evolved in three stages. The first is development of neuroendocrine control over bodily functions, the second is pairing of that to environmental changes\u2014in this case metabolic rates decreasing in response to colder temperatures\u2014and the third is the pairing of these controls with reliable seasonal indicators within the arthropod, like biological timers. From these steps, arthropods developed a seasonal diapause, where many of their biological functions end up paired with a seasonal rhythm within the organism. This is a very similar mechanism to the evolution of insect migration, where instead of bodily functions like metabolism getting paired with seasonal indicators, movement patterns would be paired with seasonal indicators.\nWinter dormancy in fish.\nWhile most animals that go through winter dormancy lower their metabolic rates, some fish, such as the cunner, do not. Instead, they do not actively depress their base metabolic rate, but instead they simply reduce their activity level. Fish that undergo winter dormancy in oxygenated water survive via inactivity paired with the colder temperature, which decreases energy consumption, but not the base metabolic rate that their bodies consume. But the Antarctic yellowbelly rockcod (\"Notothenia coriiceps\"), as well as fish that undergo winter dormancy in hypoxic conditions, do suppress their metabolism like other animals that are dormant in the winter. The mechanism for evolution of metabolic suppression in fish is unknown. Most fish that are dormant in the winters save enough energy by being still and so there is not a strong selective pressure to develop a metabolic suppression mechanism like that which is necessary in hypoxic conditions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "71091", "revid": "130326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71091", "title": "Peter Gandy (author)", "text": ""}
{"id": "71092", "revid": "1139870686", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71092", "title": "Hibernate", "text": ""}
{"id": "71094", "revid": "3628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71094", "title": "Gamal Abdul Nasser", "text": ""}
