{"id": "65689", "revid": "22388063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65689", "title": "\u00d3scar Romero", "text": "Archbishop of San Salvador from 1977 to 1980\n\u00d3scar Arnulfo Romero y Gald\u00e1mez (15 August 1917 \u2013 24 March 1980) was a prelate of the Catholic Church in El Salvador. He served as Auxiliary Bishop of the Archdiocese of San Salvador, the Titular Bishop of Tambeae, as Bishop of Santiago de Mar\u00eda, and finally as the fourth Archbishop of San Salvador. As archbishop, Romero spoke out against social injustice and violence amid the escalating conflict between the military government and left-wing insurgents that led to the Salvadoran Civil War. In 1980, Romero was shot by an assassin while celebrating Mass. Though no one was ever convicted for the crime, investigations by the UN-created Truth Commission for El Salvador concluded that Major Roberto D'Aubuisson, a death squad leader and later founder of the right-wing Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) political party, had ordered the killing.\nIn 1997, Pope John Paul II bestowed upon Romero the title of Servant of God, and a cause for his beatification was opened by the church. The cause stalled but was reopened by Pope Benedict XVI in 2012. Romero was declared a martyr by Pope Francis on 3 February 2015, paving the way for his beatification on 23 May 2015. During Romero's beatification, Pope Francis declared that his \"ministry was distinguished by his particular attention to the most poor and marginalized.\" Pope Francis canonized Romero on 14 October 2018.\nSeen as a social conservative at the time of his appointment as archbishop in 1977, Romero was deeply affected by the murder of his friend and fellow priest Rutilio Grande and thereafter became an outspoken critic of the military government of El Salvador. Hailed by supporters of liberation theology, Romero's relationship with this theology was debated and initially led to impediments in his beatification process, with both denials and affirmations of Romero adhering to it. According to his biographer Michael E. Lee, since Romero's theological thought and homilies extensively utilized the theme of liberation, and Romero borrowed numerous controversial elements of liberation theology, he \"can be seen as an exemplar of liberation theology\". Similarly, Peter McLaren also argued that \"Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero adopted an outspoken stance in favor of 'liberation theology'\".\nIn 2010, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 24 March as the \"International Day for the Right to the Truth Concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims\" in recognition of Romero's role in defence of human rights. Romero actively denounced violations of the human rights of the most vulnerable people and defended the principles of protecting lives, promoting human dignity and opposing all forms of violence. Archbishop Jos\u00e9 Luis Escobar Alas, one of Romero's successors as Archbishop of San Salvador, asked Pope Francis to proclaim Romero a Doctor of the Church, which is an acknowledgement from the church that his religious teachings were orthodox and had a significant impact on its philosophy and theology.\nLatin American church groups often proclaim Romero an unofficial patron saint of the Americas and El Salvador; Catholics in El Salvador often refer to him as \"San Romero\", as well as \"Monse\u00f1or Romero\". Outside of Catholicism, Romero is honoured by other Christian denominations, including the Church of England and Anglican Communion, through the Calendar in Common Worship, as well as in at least one Lutheran liturgical calendar. Romero is also one of the ten 20th-century martyrs depicted in statues above the Great West Door of Westminster Abbey in London.\nEarly life.\n\u00d3scar Romero was born on 15 August 1917 to Santos Romero and Guadalupe de Jes\u00fas Gald\u00e1mez in Ciudad Barrios in the San Miguel department of El Salvador. On 11 May 1919, at the age of one, Romero was baptized into the Catholic Church by the priest Cecilio Morales.\nRomero entered the local public school, which offered only grades one through three. When finished with public school, Romero was privately tutored by a teacher, Anita Iglesias, until the age of thirteen. During this time Romero's father trained him in carpentry. Romero showed exceptional proficiency as an apprentice. His father wanted to offer his son the skill of a trade, because in El Salvador studies seldom led to employment, however, Romero broached the idea of studying for the priesthood, which did not surprise those who knew him.\nPriesthood.\nRomero entered the minor seminary in San Miguel at the age of thirteen. He left the seminary for three months to return home when his mother became ill after the birth of her eighth child; during this time he worked with two of his brothers in a gold mine near Ciudad Barrios. After graduation, he enrolled in the national seminary in San Salvador. He completed his studies at the Gregorian University in Rome, where he received a Licentiate in Theology \"cum laude\" in 1941, but had to wait a year to be ordained because he was younger than the required age. He was ordained in Rome on 4 April 1942. His family could not attend his ordination because of travel restrictions due to World War II. Romero remained in Italy to obtain a doctoral degree in theology, specializing in ascetical theology and Christian perfection according to Luis de la Puente. Before finishing, in 1943 at the age of 26, he was summoned back home from Italy by his bishop. He traveled home with a good friend, Father Valladares, who was also doing doctoral work in Rome. On the route home, they made stops in Spain and Cuba, where they were detained by the Cuban police, likely for having come from Fascist Italy, and were placed in a series of internment camps. After several months in prison, Valladares became sick and Redemptorist priests helped to have the two transferred to a hospital. From the hospital they were released from Cuban custody and sailed on to Mexico, then traveled overland to El Salvador.\nRomero was first assigned to serve as a parish priest in Anamor\u00f3s, but then moved to San Miguel where he worked for over 20 years. He promoted various apostolic groups, started an Alcoholics Anonymous group, helped in the construction of San Miguel's cathedral, and supported devotion to Our Lady of Peace. He was later appointed rector of the inter-diocesan seminary in San Salvador. Emotionally and physically exhausted by his work in San Miguel, Romero took a retreat in January 1966 where he visited a priest for confession and a psychiatrist. He was diagnosed by the psychiatrist as having obsessive-compulsive personality disorder and by priests with scrupulosity.\nIn 1966, he was chosen to be Secretary of the Bishops Conference for El Salvador. He also became the director of the archdiocesan newspaper \"Orientaci\u00f3n\", which became fairly conservative while he was editor, defending the traditional Magisterium of the Catholic Church.\nBishop and Archbishop.\nOn 25 April 1970, Romero was appointed an auxiliary bishop for the Archdiocese of San Salvador and as the titular bishop of Tambeae. He was consecrated on 21 June by Girolamo Prigione, titular Archbishop of Lauriacum. On 15 October 1974, he was appointed Bishop of the Diocese of Santiago de Mar\u00eda, a poor, rural region.\nOn 3 February 1977, Romero was appointed Archbishop of San Salvador, assuming the position on 22 February. While this appointment was welcomed by the government, many priests were disappointed, especially those openly supportive of Marxist ideology. The progressive priests feared that his conservative reputation would negatively affect liberation theology's commitment to the poor.\nOn 12 March 1977, Rutilio Grande, a Jesuit priest and personal friend of Romero who had been creating self-reliance groups among the poor, was assassinated. His death had a profound impact on Romero, who later stated: \"When I looked at Rutilio lying there dead I thought, 'If they have killed him for doing what he did, then I too have to walk the same path.'\" Romero urged the government to investigate, but they ignored his request. Furthermore, the censored press remained silent.\nTension was noted by the closure of schools and the lack of Catholic priests invited to participate in government. In response to Grande's murder, Romero revealed an activism that had not been evident earlier, speaking out against poverty, social injustice, assassinations and torture.\nOn 15 October 1979, the Revolutionary Government Junta (JRG) came to power amidst a wave of human rights abuses by paramilitary right-wing groups and the government, in an escalation of violence that would become the Salvadoran Civil War. Romero criticized the United States for giving military aid to the new government and wrote an open letter to President Jimmy Carter in February 1980, warning that increased US military aid would \"undoubtedly sharpen the injustice and the political repression inflicted on the organized people, whose struggle has often been for their most basic human rights.\" This letter was then sent, via telegram, from the U.S. embassy in El Salvador to Washington D.C. Carter did not directly respond to the letter; instead, Cyrus Vance, the Secretary of State, wrote a telegram back to the U.S. embassy. The telegram carried a very contradictory message, both stating that the United States will not interfere but will respond to the Revolutionary Government Junta's requests. It is unknown if Archbishop Romero received the telegram.\nOn 11 May 1979, Romero met with Pope John Paul II and unsuccessfully attempted to obtain a Vatican condemnation of the Salvadoran military regime for committing human rights violations and its support of death squads, and expressed his frustration in working with clergy who cooperated with the government. He was encouraged by Pope John Paul II to maintain episcopal unity as a top priority.\nAs a result of his humanitarian efforts, Romero began to be noticed internationally. In February 1980, he was given an honorary doctorate by the Catholic University of Louvain.\nStatements on persecution of the church.\nRomero denounced the persecution of members of the Catholic Church who had worked on behalf of the poor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In less than three years, more than fifty priests have been attacked, threatened, calumniated. Six are already martyrs\u2014they were murdered. Some have been tortured and others expelled [from the country]. Nuns have also been persecuted. The archdiocesan radio station and educational institutions that are Catholic or of a Christian inspiration have been attacked, threatened, intimidated, even bombed. Several parish communities have been raided. If all this has happened to persons who are the most evident representatives of the Church, you can guess what has happened to ordinary Christians, to the campesinos, catechists, lay ministers, and to the ecclesial base communities. There have been threats, arrests, tortures, murders, numbering in the hundreds and thousands...\nBut it is important to note why [the Church] has been persecuted. Not any and every priest has been persecuted, not any and every institution has been attacked. That part of the church has been attacked and persecuted that put itself on the side of the people and went to the people's defense. Here again we find the same key to understanding the persecution of the church: the poor.\u2014\u200a\nPopular radio sermons.\nBy the time of his death, Romero had gained an enormous following among Salvadorans. He did this largely through broadcasting his weekly sermons across El Salvador on the church's station, YSAX, \"except when it was bombed off the air.\" In these sermons, he listed disappearances, tortures, murders, and much more each Sunday. This was followed by an hour-long speech on the radio the following day. On the importance of these broadcasts, one writer noted that \"the archbishop's Sunday sermon was the main source in El Salvador about what was happening. It was estimated to have the largest listenership of any programme in the country.\" According to listener surveys, 73% of the rural population and 47% of the urban listened regularly. Similarly, his diocesan weekly paper \"Orientaci\u00f3n\" carried lists of cases of torture and repression every week.\nTheology.\nAccording to Jes\u00fas Delgado, his biographer and postulator of the cause for his canonization, Romero agreed with the Catholic vision of liberation theology and not with the materialist vision: \"A journalist once asked him: 'Do you agree with Liberation Theology' And Romero answered: \"Yes, of course. However, there are two theologies of liberation. One is that which sees liberation only as material liberation. The other is that of Paul VI. I am with Paul VI.\" However, Romero had a close connection with a prominent and controversial liberation theologian Jon Sobrino. Romero greatly admired a minor figure in liberation theology, bishop of Argentina Eduardo Pironio, whom he called \"a holy bishop\" and \"a great friend\". While Pironio was often criticized as a 'communist' and Romero was even given a book criticizing the bishop, titled \"Pironio, Pyromaniac\", he dismissed this criticism and referred to Pironio as \"a great promoter of authentic liberation in Latin America\". In 1977, Romero \"adopted an outspoken stance in favor of \u2018\u2018liberation theology\u2019\u2019\".\nIn one of his homilies, Romero stated that he studied liberation theology through Pironio; the theology of Pironio endorsed liberation of the poor and marginalized through a social revolution, but also highlighted that the Church could never be separated from the process and that liberation must not be reduced to 'mere activism or to structural changes', because the liberations must also be 'reformed by the Spirit'. Michael E. Lee wrote that while Romero did adhere to liberation theology, it was often underplayed during the period of when liberation theology was looked at with suspicion by the Vatican: \"Romero can be seen as an exemplar of liberation theology. His homilies and writings show him reflecting extensively on the theme of liberation, and his assassination is a result of his untiring advocacy for justice in his divided land. Why would some fear this idea or find it difficult to accept? Sadly, the very way that liberation theologies have been treated in Vatican documents provides the clue.\"\nRomero spoke about social sin, a controversial concept in liberation theology that presented capitalism as sinful by nature, and was used by many as an example of a Marxist framework of liberation theology. In his pastoral letter, Romero defined social sin as \"the crystallization, in other words, of individuals\u2019 sins into permanent structures that keep sin in being, and make its force to be felt by the majority of the people\". Michal E. Lee writes of Romero's utilization of liberation theology's anti-capitalist teaching:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Continually, he speaks of the rich or \u201cthose who are opposed to a just social order\u201d needing conversion. He prayed for the conversion of those who \u201cdo not collaborate in the construction of a more just temporal order,\u201d those who \u201care able to transform society because they have power in their hands,\u201d those who \u201cpersecute the Church, paid by interests that want to maintain this system that can\u2019t be maintained,\u201d those who \u201coppose Christ\u2019s reign of justice, peace, and love in the world.\u201d58 The sins of El Salvador, he says, include the abuse of power, the selfish investment of capital, the idolatry of money, and even the refusal to develop oneself so as to contribute to society. \nHe also argued that the Catholic Church is 'by nature political' and that it 'must respect and support the right of the people to voice and move toward aspirations for liberation in their own way.' He was particularly dedicated to the preferential option for the poor, on which he wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The church would betray its own love for God and its fidelity to the gospel if it stopped being \u201cthe voice of the voiceless,\u201d a defender of the rights of the poor, a promoter of every just aspiration for liberation, a guide, an empowerer, a humanizer of every legitimate struggle to achieve a more just society\u2026. This demands of the church a greater presence among the poor. It ought to be in solidarity with them, running the risks they run, enduring the persecution that is their fate.\nRomero preached that \"the most profound social revolution is the serious, supernatural, interior reform of a Christian.\" He also emphasized: \"The liberation of Christ and of His Church is not reduced to the dimension of a purely temporal project. It does not reduce its objectives to an anthropocentric perspective: to a material well-being or only to initiatives of a political or social, economic or cultural order. Much less can it be a liberation that supports or is supported by violence.\" Romero expressed several times his disapproval of divisiveness in the church. In a sermon preached on 11 November 1979 he said: \"the other day, one of the persons who proclaims liberation in a political sense was asked: 'For you, what is the meaning of the Church'?\" He said that the activist \"answered with these scandalous words: 'There are two churches, the church of the rich and the church of the poor. We believe in the church of the poor but not in the church of the rich.'\" Romero declared, \"Clearly these words are a form of demagogy and I will never admit a division of the Church.\" He added, \"There is only one Church, the Church that Christ preached, the Church to which we should give our whole hearts. There is only one Church, a Church that adores the living God and knows how to give relative value to the goods of this earth.\"\nSpiritual life.\nRomero noted in his diary on 4 February 1943: \"In recent days the Lord has inspired in me a great desire for holiness. I have been thinking of how far a soul can ascend if it lets itself be possessed entirely by God.\" Commenting on this passage, James R. Brockman, Romero's biographer and author of \"Romero: A Life\", said that \"All the evidence available indicates that he continued on his quest for holiness until the end of his life. But he also matured in that quest.\"\nAccording to Brockman, Romero's spiritual journey had some of these characteristics:\nRomero was a strong advocate of the spiritual charism of Opus Dei. He received weekly spiritual direction from a priest of the Opus Dei movement. In 1975 he wrote in support of the cause of canonization of Opus Dei's founder, \"Personally, I owe deep gratitude to the priests involved with the Work, to whom I have entrusted with much satisfaction the spiritual direction of my own life and that of other priests.\"\nAssassination.\nOn 23 March 1980, Archbishop Romero delivered a sermon in which he called on Salvadoran soldiers, as Christians, to obey God's higher order and to stop carrying out the government's repression and violations of basic human rights.\nRomero spent 24 March in a recollection organized by Opus Dei, a monthly gathering of priest friends led by Fernando S\u00e1enz Lacalle. On that day they reflected on the priesthood. That evening, Romero celebrated Mass at a small chapel at Hospital de la Divina Providencia (Divine Providence Hospital), a church-run hospital specializing in oncology and care for the terminally ill. Romero finished his sermon, stepped away from the lectern, and took a few steps to stand at the center of the altar.\nAs Romero finished speaking, a red car came to a stop on the street in front of the chapel. A gunman emerged from the vehicle, stepped to the door of the chapel, and fired one, or possibly two, shots. Romero was struck in the heart, and the vehicle sped off. He died at the Chapel of Hospital de la Divina Providencia in San Salvador.\nFuneral.\nRomero was buried in the Metropolitan Cathedral of San Salvador. The Funeral Mass on 30 March 1980 in San Salvador was attended by more than 250,000 mourners from all over the world. Viewing this attendance as a protest, Jesuit priest John Dear has said, \"Romero's funeral was the largest demonstration in Salvadoran history, some say in the history of Latin America.\"\nAt the funeral, Cardinal Ernesto Corripio y Ahumada, speaking as the personal delegate of Pope John Paul II, eulogized Romero as a \"beloved, peacemaking man of God,\" and stated that \"his blood will give fruit to brotherhood, love and peace.\"\nMassacre at Romero's funeral.\nDuring the ceremony, smoke bombs exploded on the streets near the cathedral and subsequently, there were rifle shots that came from surrounding buildings, including the National Palace. Many people were killed by gunfire and in the stampede of people running away from the explosions and gunfire. Official sources reported 31 overall casualties, while journalists claimed that between 30 and 50 died. Some witnesses claimed it was government security forces who threw bombs into the crowd, and army sharpshooters, dressed as civilians, who fired into the chaos from the balcony or roof of the National Palace. However, there are contradictory accounts about the course of the events and one historian, Roberto Morozzo della Rocca, stated that \"probably, one will never know the truth about the interrupted funeral.\"\nAs the gunfire continued, Romero's body was buried in a crypt beneath the sanctuary. Even after the burial, people continued to line up to pay homage to the assassinated prelate.\nInternational reaction.\nIreland.\nAll sections of Irish political and religious life condemned his assassination, with the Minister for Foreign Affairs Brian Lenihan \"expressing shock and revulsion at the murder of Dr Romero\", while the leader of the Tr\u00f3caire charity, Bishop Eamon Casey, revealed that he had received a letter from Romero that very day. The previous October, parliamentarians had given their support to the nomination of Romero for the Nobel Peace Prize. In March each year since the 1980s, the Irish\u2013El Salvador Support Committee holds a mass in honour of Romero.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn October 1978, 119 British parliamentarians had nominated Romero for the Nobel Prize for Peace. In this they were supported by 26 members of the United States Congress. When news of the assassination was reported in March 1980, the new Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Runcie, was about to be enthroned in Canterbury Cathedral. On hearing of Romero's death, one writer observed that Runcie \"departed from the ancient traditions to decry the murder of Archbishop \u00d3scar Romero in El Salvador.\"\nUnited States.\nPublic reaction.\nThe United States public's reaction to Archbishop Romero's death was symbolized through the \"martyrdom of Romero\" as an inspiration to end US military aid to El Salvador. In December 1980 the International Longshoremen's and Warehousemen's Union refused to deliver military equipment destined for the Salvadoran government. The leader of the union, Jim Herman, was known as a supporter of Romero and denounced his death. On 24 March 1984 a protest was held in Los Angeles, California where around 3,000 people, organized by 20 November Coalition, protested US intervention in El Salvador, using the anniversary of the Archbishop's death and his face as a symbol. On 24 March 1990, 10,000 people marched in front of the White House to denounce the military aid that was still flowing from the United States to the Salvadoran government. Protestors carried a bust of the archbishop and quoted some of his speeches, in addition to the event being held on the anniversary of his death. Noted figures Ed Asner and Jennifer Casolo participated in the event.\nGovernment response.\nOn 25 March 1980, US Secretary of State Cyrus Vance revealed that the White House would continue to fund the Salvadoran government and provide it military aid, in spite of the pleas of Romero and his death immediately prior to this announcement. On 31 March 1983, Roberto D'Aubuisson was allowed entry to the United States by the State Department after deeming him not barred from entry any longer. When asked about D'Aubuisson's association with the assassination of Romero, the Department of State responded that \"the allegations have not been substantiated.\" In November 1993, documents by the Department of State, Department of Defense, and the Central Intelligence Agency were released after pressure by Congress increased. The 12,000 documents revealed that the administrations of Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush knew of the assassinations conducted by D'Aubuisson, including that of Romero, yet still worked with him despite this.\nInvestigations into the assassination.\nNo one has ever been prosecuted for the assassination or confessed to it to police. Immediately following the assassination, Jos\u00e9 Napole\u00f3n Duarte, the newly appointed foreign minister of El Salvador, actively promulgated a \"blame on both sides\" propaganda trope in order to provide cover for the lack of official inquiry into the assassination plot.\nSubsequent investigations by the United Nations and other international bodies have established that the four assassins were members of a death squad led by D'Aubuisson. Revelations of the D'Aubuisson plot came to light in 1984 when US ambassador Robert White testified before the United States Congress that \"there was sufficient evidence\" to convict D'Aubuisson of planning and ordering Romero's assassination. In 1993, an official United Nations report identified D'Aubuisson as the man who ordered the killing. D'Aubuisson had strong connections to the Nicaraguan National Guard and to its offshoot the Fifteenth of September Legion and had also planned to overthrow the government in a coup. Later, he founded the political party Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA) and organized death squads that systematically carried out politically motivated assassinations and other human rights abuses in El Salvador. \u00c1lvaro Rafael Saravia, a former captain in the Salvadoran Air Force, was chief of security for D'Aubuisson and an active member of these death squads. In 2003 a United States human rights organization, the Center for Justice and Accountability, filed a civil action against Saravia. In 2004, he was found liable by a US District Court under the Alien Tort Claims Act (ATCA) (28 U.S.C. \u00a7\u00a01350) for aiding, conspiring, and participating in the assassination of Romero. Saravia was ordered to pay $10 million for extrajudicial killing and crimes against humanity pursuant to the ATCA; he has since gone into hiding. On 24 March 2010\u2013the thirtieth anniversary of Romero's death\u2013Salvadoran President Mauricio Funes offered an official state apology for Romero's assassination. Speaking before Romero's family, representatives of the Catholic Church, diplomats, and government officials, Funes said those involved in the assassination \"unfortunately acted with the protection, collaboration, or participation of state agents.\"\nA 2000 article by Tom Gibb, then a correspondent with \"The Guardian\" and later with the BBC, attributes the murder to a detective of the Salvadoran National Police named \u00d3scar P\u00e9rez Linares, acting on the orders of D'Aubuisson. The article cites an anonymous former death squad member who claimed he had been assigned to guard a house in San Salvador used by a unit of three counter-guerrilla operatives directed by D'Aubuisson. The guard, whom Gibb identified as \"Jorge,\" purported to have witnessed Linares fraternizing with the group, which was nicknamed the \"Little Angels,\" and to have heard them praise Linares for the killing. The article furthermore attributes full knowledge of the assassination to the CIA as far back as 1983. The article reports that both Linares and the Little Angels commander, who Jorge identified as \"El Negro Mario,\" were killed by a CIA-trained Salvadoran special police unit in 1986; the unit had been assigned to investigate the murders. In 1983, U.S. Lt. Col. Oliver North, an aide to then-Vice President George H.W. Bush, is alleged to have personally requested the Salvadoran military to \"remove\" Linares and several others from their service. Three years later they were pursued and extrajudicially killed \u2013 Linares after being found in neighbouring Guatemala. The article cites another source in the Salvadoran military as saying \"they knew far too much to live\".\nIn a 2010 article for the Salvadoran online newspaper \"El Faro\", Saravia was interviewed from a mountain hideout. He named D'Aubuisson as giving the assassination order to him over the phone, and said that he and his cohorts drove the assassin to the chapel and paid him 1,000 Salvadoran col\u00f3nes after the event.\nIn April 2017, however, in the wake of the overruling of a civil war amnesty law the previous year, a judge in El Salvador, Rigoberto Chicas, allowed the case against the escaped Saravia's alleged role in the murder of Romero to be reopened. On 23 October 2018, days after Romero's canonization, Judge Chicas issued a new arrest warrant for him, and Interpol and the National Police are charged with finding his hideout and apprehending him. As both D'Aubuisson and Linares had already died, they could not be prosecuted.\nLegacy.\nInternational recognition.\nDuring his first visit to El Salvador in 1983, Pope John Paul II entered the cathedral in San Salvador and prayed at Romero's tomb, despite opposition from the government and from some within the church who strongly opposed liberation theology. Afterwards, the Pope praised Romero as a \"zealous and venerated pastor who tried to stop violence.\" John Paul II also asked for dialogue between the government and opposition to end El Salvador's civil war.\nOn 7 May 2000, in Rome's Colosseum during the Jubilee Year celebrations, Pope John Paul II commemorated 20th-century martyrs. Of the several categories of martyrs, the seventh consisted of Christians who were killed for defending their brethren in the Americas. Despite the opposition of some social conservatives within the church, John Paul II insisted that Romero be included. He asked the organizers of the event to proclaim Romero \"that great witness of the Gospel.\"\nOn 21 December 2010, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 24 March as the International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims which recognizes, in particular, the important work and values of Romero.\nOn 22 March 2011, U.S. President Barack Obama visited Romero's tomb during an official visit to El Salvador. Irish President Michael D. Higgins visited the cathedral and tomb of Romero on 25 October 2013 during a state visit to El Salvador. Famed linguist Noam Chomsky speaks highly of Romero's social work, and refers often to his murder. In 2014, El Salvador's main international airport was named after him, becoming Monse\u00f1or \u00d3scar Arnulfo Romero y Gald\u00e1mez International Airport, and later, San \u00d3scar Arnulfo Romero y Gald\u00e1mez International Airport in 2018 after his canonization.\nRomero is remembered in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 24 March.\nSainthood.\nProcess for beatification.\nRomero's sainthood cause at the Vatican was opened in 1993, but the Catholic News Service reported that it \"was delayed for years as the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith studied his writings, amid wider debate over whether he had been killed for his faith or for political reasons.\"\nIn March 2005, Vincenzo Paglia, the Vatican official in charge of the process, announced that Romero's cause had cleared a theological audit by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, at the time headed by Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later elected Pope Benedict XVI) and that beatification could follow within six months. Pope John Paul II died within weeks of those remarks. Predictably, the transition of the new pontiff slowed down the work of canonizations and beatifications. Pope Benedict instituted changes that had the overall effect of reining in the Vatican's so-called \"factory of saints.\" In an October 2005 interview, Cardinal Jos\u00e9 Saraiva Martins, the Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, was asked if Paglia's predictions of a clearance for Romero's beatification remained on track. Saraiva responded, \"Not as far as I know today,\" In November 2005, the Jesuit magazine \"La Civilt\u00e0 Cattolica\" signaled that Romero's beatification was still \"years away.\"\nAlthough Benedict XVI had always been a fierce critic of liberation theology, Paglia reported in December 2012 that the Pope had informed him of the decision to \"unblock\" the cause and allow it to move forward. However, no progress was made before Benedict's resignation in February 2013. Pope Francis was elected in March 2013, and in September 2013, Archbishop Gerhard Ludwig M\u00fcller, Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, stated that the Vatican doctrinal office has been \"given the green light\" to pursue sainthood for Romero.\nBeatification.\nOn 18 August 2014, Pope Francis said that \"[t]he process [of beatification of Romero] was at the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, blocked for 'prudential reasons', so they said. Now it is unblocked.\" Francis stated, \"There are no doctrinal problems and it is very important that [the beatification] is done quickly.\" The beatification signaled Francis' affirmation of Romero's work with the poor as a major change in the direction of the church since he was elected.\nIn January 2015, an advisory panel to the Roman Curia's Congregation for the Causes of Saints voted unanimously to recognize Romero as a martyr, and the cardinals who were voting members of the Congregation unanimously recommended to Francis that he be beatified as a martyr (a martyr can be beatified without recognition of a miracle). Archbishop Vincenzo Paglia, the postulator (chief promoter) of the causes of saints, said that Romero's assassination at the altar was intended \"to strike the Church that flowed from the Second Vatican Council\" and that the motive for his murder \"was not caused by motives that were simply political, but by hatred for a faith that, imbued with charity, would not be silent in the face of the injustices that relentlessly and cruelly slaughtered the poor and their defenders.\" On 3 February 2015, Francis received Cardinal Angelo Amato, Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, in a private audience, and authorized Amato to promulgate (officially authorize) Romero's decree of martyrdom, meaning it had gained the Congregation's voting members and the Pope's approval. This cleared the way for the Pope to later set a date for his beatification.\nThe beatification of Romero was held in San Salvador on 23 May 2015 in the Plaza Salvador del Mundo under the Monumento al Divino Salvador del Mundo. Amato presided over the ceremony on behalf of Francis, who in a letter to the Archbishop of San Salvador Jos\u00e9 Luis Escobar Alas marked the occasion by calling Romero \"a voice that continues to resonate.\" An estimated 250,000 people attended the service, many watching on large television screens set up in the streets around the plaza.\nCanonization.\nThree miracles were submitted to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints in Rome in October 2016 that could have led to Romero's canonization. But each of these miracles was rejected after being investigated. A fourth (concerning the pregnant woman Cecilia Maribel Flores) was investigated in a diocesan process in San Salvador that was opened on 31 January 2017 and which concluded its initial investigation on 28 February before documentation was submitted to Rome via the apostolic nunciature. The CCS validated this on 7 April. On 11 August, Paglia celebrated the Romero Centenary Mass in St George's Cathedral, Southwark, in London, where the cross and relics of Romero are preserved. Subsequently, medical experts issued unanimous approval to the presented miracle on 26 October with theologians also confirming their approval on 14 December. The CCS members likewise approved the case on 6 February 2018. Pope Francis approved this miracle on 6 March 2018, allowing for Romero to be canonized and the date was announced at a consistory of cardinals held on 19 May. The canonization was celebrated in Rome's Saint Peter's Square on 14 October 2018.\nPreviously, there had been hopes that Romero would be canonized during a possible papal visit to El Salvador on 15 August 2017 \u2013 the centennial of the late bishop's birth \u2013 or that he could be canonized in Panama during World Youth Day in 2019.\nRomero was the first Salvadoran to be raised to the altars; the first martyred archbishop of America, the first to be declared a martyr after the Second Vatican Council; and the first native saint of Central America, (Peter of Saint Joseph de Betancur, who did all his work for which he was canonized in the city of Santiago de los Caballeros of Guatemala, was from Tenerife, Spain,) Romero had already been included on the Anglican Church's list of official saints and on the Lutheran Church's liturgical calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65691", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65691", "title": "K\u00f6nigsberg (disambiguation)", "text": "K\u00f6nigsberg was the capital of East Prussia, renamed Kaliningrad in 1946.\nK\u00f6nigsberg may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "65692", "revid": "50349540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65692", "title": "Operational definition", "text": "Defining a concept in terms of specific, replicable actions or procedures\nAn operational definition specifies concrete, replicable procedures designed to represent a construct. In the words of American psychologist S.S. Stevens (1935), \"An operation is the performance which we execute in order to make known a concept.\" For example, an operational definition of \"fear\" (the construct) often includes measurable physiologic responses that occur in response to a perceived threat. Thus, \"fear\" might be operationally defined as specified changes in heart rate, electrodermal activity, pupil dilation, and blood pressure.\nOverview.\nAn operational definition is designed to model or represent a concept or theoretical definition, also known as a construct. Scientists should describe the operations (procedures, actions, or processes) that define the concept with enough specificity such that other investigators can replicate their research.\nOperational definitions are also used to define system states in terms of a specific, publicly accessible process of preparation or validation testing. For example, 100 degrees Celsius may be operationally defined as the process of heating water at sea level until it is observed to boil.\nA cake can be operationally defined by a cake recipe.\nApplication.\nDespite the controversial philosophical origins of the concept, particularly its close association with logical positivism, operational definitions have undisputed practical applications. This is especially so in the social and medical sciences, where operational definitions of key terms are used to preserve the unambiguous empirical testability of hypothesis and theory. Operational definitions are also important in the physical sciences.\nPhilosophy.\nThe \"Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy\" entry on scientific realism, written by Richard Boyd, indicates that the modern concept owes its origin in part to Percy Williams Bridgman, who felt that the expression of scientific concepts was often abstract and unclear. Inspired by Ernst Mach, in 1914 Bridgman attempted to redefine unobservable entities concretely in terms of the physical and mental operations used to measure them. Accordingly, the definition of each unobservable entity was uniquely identified with the instrumentation used to define it. From the beginning objections were raised to this approach, in large part around the inflexibility. As Boyd notes, \"In actual, and apparently reliable, scientific practice, changes in the instrumentation associated with theoretical terms are routine. and apparently crucial to the progress of science. According to a 'pure' operationalist conception, these sorts of modifications would not be methodologically acceptable, since \"each\" definition must be considered to identify a \"unique\" 'object' (or class of objects).\"\nScience.\nThe special theory of relativity can be viewed as the introduction of operational definitions for simultaneity of events and of distance, that is, as providing the operations needed to define these terms.\nIn quantum mechanics the notion of operational definitions is closely related to the idea of observables, that is, definitions based upon what can be measured.\nOperational definitions are often most challenging in the fields of psychology and psychiatry, where intuitive concepts, such as intelligence need to be operationally defined before they become amenable to scientific investigation, for example, through processes such as IQ tests.\nBusiness.\nOn October 15, 1970, the West Gate Bridge in Melbourne, Australia collapsed, killing 35 construction workers. The subsequent enquiry found that the failure arose because engineers had specified the supply of a quantity of \"flat steel plate.\" The word \"flat\" in this context lacked an operational definition, so there was no test for accepting or rejecting a particular shipment or for controlling quality.\nIn his managerial and statistical writings, W. Edwards Deming placed great importance on the value of using operational definitions in all agreements in business.\nGeneral process.\nOperational, in a process context, also can denote a working method or a philosophy that focuses principally on cause and effect relationships (or stimulus/response, behavior, etc.) of specific interest to a particular domain at a particular point in time. As a working method, it does not consider issues related to a domain that are more general, such as the ontological, etc.\nIn computing.\nScience uses computing. Computing uses science. We have seen the development of computer science. There are not many who can bridge all three of these. One effect is that, when results are obtained using a computer, the results can be impossible to replicate if the code is poorly documented, contains errors, or if parts are omitted entirely.\nMany times, issues are related to persistence and clarity of use of variables, functions, and so forth. Also, systems dependence is an issue. In brief, length (as a standard) has matter as its definitional basis. What pray tell can be used when standards are to be computationally framed?\nHence, operational definition can be used within the realm of the interactions of humans with advanced computational systems. In this sense, one area of discourse deals with computational thinking in, and with how it might influence, the sciences. To quote the American Scientist:\nOne referenced project pulled together fluid experts, including some who were expert in the numeric modeling related to computational fluid dynamics, in a team with computer scientists. Essentially, it turned out that the computer guys did not know enough to weigh in as much as they would have liked. Thus, their role, to their chagrin, many times was \"mere\" programmer.\nSome knowledge-based engineering projects experienced similarly that there is a trade-off between trying to teach programming to a domain expert versus getting a programmer to understand the intricacies of a domain. That, of course, depends upon the domain. In short, any team member has to decide which side of the coin to spend one's time.\nThe International Society for Technology in Education has a brochure detailing an \"operational definition\" of computational thinking. At the same time, the ISTE made an attempt at defining related skills.\nA recognized skill is tolerance for ambiguity and being able to handle open-ended problems. For instance, a knowledge-based engineering system can enhance its operational aspect and thereby its stability through more involvement by the subject-matter expert, thereby opening up issues of limits that are related to being human. As in, many times, computational results have to be taken at face value due to several factors (hence the duck test's necessity arises) that even an expert cannot overcome. The end proof may be the final results (reasonable facsimile by simulation or artifact, working design, etc.) that are not guaranteed to be repeatable, may have been costly to attain (time and money), and so forth.\nIn advanced modeling, with the requisite computational support such as knowledge-based engineering, mappings must be maintained between a real-world object, its abstracted counterparts as defined by the domain and its experts, and the computer models. Mismatches between domain models and their computational mirrors can raise issues apropos this topic. Techniques that allow the flexible modeling required for many hard problems must resolve issues of identity, type, etc. which then lead to methods, such as duck typing. Many domains, with a numerical focus, use limit theory, of various sorts, to overcome the duck test necessity with varying degrees of success. Yet, with that, issues still remain as representational frameworks bear heavily on what we can know.\nIn arguing for an object-based methodology, Peter Wegner suggested that \"positivist scientific philosophies, such as operationalism in physics and behaviorism in psychology\" were powerfully applied in the early part of the 20th century. However, computation has changed the landscape. He notes that we need to distinguish four levels of \"irreversible physical and computational abstraction\" (Platonic abstraction, computational approximation, functional abstraction, and value computation). Then, we must rely on interactive methods, that have behavior as their focus (see duck test).\nExamples.\nTemperature.\nThe thermodynamic definition of temperature, due to Nicolas L\u00e9onard Sadi Carnot, refers to heat \"flowing\" between \"infinite reservoirs\". This is all highly abstract and unsuited for the day-to-day world of science and trade. In order to make the idea concrete, temperature is defined in terms of operations with the gas thermometer. However, these are sophisticated and delicate instruments, only adapted to the national standardization laboratory.\nFor day-to-day use, the International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS) is used, defining temperature in terms of characteristics of the several specific sensor types required to cover the full range. One such is the electrical resistance of a thermistor, with specified construction, calibrated against operationally defined fixed points.\nElectric current.\nElectric current is defined in terms of the force between two infinite parallel conductors, separated by a specified distance. This definition is too abstract for practical measurement, so a device known as a current balance is used to define the ampere operationally.\nMechanical hardness.\nUnlike temperature and electric current, there is no abstract physical concept of the hardness of a material. It is a slightly vague, subjective idea, somewhat like the idea of intelligence. In fact, it leads to three more specific ideas:\nOf these, indentation hardness itself leads to many operational definitions, the most important of which are:\nIn all these, a process is defined for loading the indenter, measuring the resulting indentation, and calculating a hardness number. Each of these three sequences of measurement operations produces numbers that are consistent with our subjective idea of hardness. The harder the material to our informal perception, the greater the number it will achieve on our respective hardness scales. Furthermore, experimental results obtained using these measurement methods has shown that the hardness number can be used to predict the stress required to permanently deform steel, a characteristic that fits in well with our idea of resistance to permanent deformation. However, there is not always a simple relationship between the various hardness scales. Vickers and Rockwell hardness numbers exhibit qualitatively different behaviour when used to describe some materials and phenomena.\nThe constellation Virgo.\nThe constellation Virgo is a specific constellation of stars in the sky, hence the process of forming Virgo cannot be an operational definition, since it is historical and not repeatable. Nevertheless, the process whereby we locate Virgo in the sky \"is\" repeatable, so in this way, Virgo is operationally defined. In fact, Virgo can have any number of definitions (although we can never prove that we are talking about the \"same\" Virgo), and any number may be operational.\nAcademic discipline.\nNew academic disciplines appear in response to interdisciplinary activity at universities. An academic suggested that a subject matter area becomes a discipline when there are more than a dozen university departments using the same name for roughly the same subject matter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65693", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65693", "title": "Hancock, Michigan", "text": "Hancock is a city in the Upper Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan. The population of Hancock was 4,501 at the 2020 United States census. The city is located within Houghton County, and is situated upon the Keweenaw Waterway, a channel of Lake Superior that cuts across the Keweenaw Peninsula. Hancock is located across the Keweenaw Waterway from the city of Houghton, and is connected to that city by the Portage Lake Lift Bridge. The city is located within Michigan's Copper Country region.\nHancock is considered a \"cultural capital\" for Finnish Americans. The city is home to the Finnish American Heritage Center, and was home to Finlandia University from 1896 to 2023. Some street name signs in Hancock are bilingual, reading in both English and Finnish.\nThe Weather Channel has consistently ranked Hancock as the third-snowiest city in the U.S.\nHistory.\nHancock is located within Ojibwa (Chippewa) homelands and ceded-territory established by the Treaty of 1842. The founding of the settlement of Hancock began during the summers of 1847 and 1848, when a small group of prospectors laboring on a rugged hillside (later named Quincy Hill) discovered a sequence of prehistoric Ojibwe copper mining pits, stretching out for 100 feet along the local amygdaloid lode. Upon inspecting one, they realized that the Native Americans were able to take copper in small quantities through these pits. The discovery formed the basis upon which the Quincy Mining Company was created in October 1848, under a special charter granted by the legislature.\nThe earliest building in what is now the City of Hancock was a log cabin erected in 1846 on the site of the Ruggles Mining Claim, halfway up atop the hillside; it is no longer standing as the site has been taken up by the Houghton County Garage buildings. It was owned by Christopher Columbus (C.C.) Douglass, who came to live there in 1852. The Quincy Mining Company founded Hancock in 1859 after purchasing the land from Douglass and building an office and mine on the site. The city was named after John Hancock, a signer of the Declaration of Independence.\nHancock's first store was built by the Leopold brothers in 1858; the store also housed the first post office. Samuel W. Hill, an agent for the Quincy Mining Company, platted the Village of Hancock in 1859. On 20 August 1860, Bishop Frederic Baraga and Reverend Edward Jacker selected lots nine and ten of block eight in the village for the purpose of constructing a church. It was on the northeast corner of what is now Quincy and Ravine Streets. The Quincy Mining Company donated this ground, but for some reason the official paperwork didn't go through for it until 2 July 1875.\nIn Hancock's earliest days, the village had been within the borders of what is now the Portage Charter Township, but on 1 April 1861 the area was set off and organized into a new township called Hancock Township. The Portage Stamp Mill was also founded nearby at Portage Lake in 1861. In 1860, the Keweenaw Waterway was dredged, widening the then-Portage River to allow more aquatic transportation to Hancock and neighboring Houghton. The waterway was initially opened to ships in 1859.\nAlso in 1859 was the debut of the Hancock Mine, later called the Sumner Mine before being renamed the Hancock Mine once more. The mine was on Quincy Hill near both Summit and Franklin Streets in an area that is now part of Finlandia Campus.\nOn 10 March 1863, the Village of Hancock was officially organized and the first officers were elected in the office of William Lapp, the justice of the peace and a pioneer lawyer. Hervey Coke Parke was elected as the first village president. This is considered the founding date of Hancock.\nM.J. McGurrin opened the village's first drugstore in 1865. There were also a few small grocery stores where James Artman sold handmade harnesses. The population of the town may have been about 400, mostly miners who had occupied smaller houses near the vicinity of their workplace, the mines.\nOn 11 April 1869, Hancock was struck by the worst fire in the community's history when a stovepipe in a local saloon where the post office is now exploded and engulfed the building in flames. It soon spread across the village with the help of a strong west wind. The fire destroyed some 150 buildings, including every store in the village and almost all other businesses, the wooden bridges that had stretched across the ravines, and 120 homes. At the time, Hancock had no fire department or fire equipment. This short-lived fire obliterated three-fourths of Hancock. It took two years to rebuild. Famously, Mary Chase Perry Stratton, the founder of the Pewabic Pottery, survived the 1869 fire without injuries.\nOn 1 March 1871, in response to the devastating fire of 1869, the Hancock Fire Department was officially organized. In an 1883 publication the fire chief, Archibald J. Scott, stated that the fire department had 2,500\u00a0ft of hose on hand and that the water supply was ample.\nIn 1872, the Hancock and Calumet Railroad (H&amp;C RR) and the Mineral Range Railroad (MRRR) began their operations. The MRRR provided passenger and freight service between Houghton, Hancock, Dollar Bay and Calumet. The Mineral Range's yards were along Portage Lake near Tezcuco Street. In 1877, Gustave Diemal, an immigrant from Germany and the 1870 sheriff-elect of Keweenaw County, arrived in Hancock and opened a jewelry and watchmakers shop.\nIn 1876, Alfred Elieser Backman arrived in Hancock and served as Copper Country's first pastor of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. He found a divided community of Finnish Lutherans: some were faithful followers of the Church of Finland, and others Laestadian. Backman later found the situation too unstable and was replaced by Juho Kustaa Nikander, who arrived in January 1885. By 1889, four pastors from the Church of Finland were serving Finnish communities in the Upper Peninsula: Nikander, Jacob Juhonpoika Hoikka (who had served as Nikander's co-pastor), Kaarlo L. Tolonen of Ishpeming, and Johan W. Eloheimo of Calumet. The four pastors met often and eventually founded the Suomi Synod on 25 March 1890, though they had conceived the idea as early as November 1889.\nSuomi College was founded in September 1896 by Nikander, and on 21 January 1900, it completed its first building, now affectionately called \"Old Main\" on Quincy Street. As many as 2,000 people traveled to Hancock to see the laying of the cornerstone. Like a large handful of historic buildings in the city, it is made of Jacobsville Sandstone and built in the Richardsonian Romanesque style. For eight years, Nikander, who served as the college's first president, resided in Old Main. Also in 1900, the Book Concern of Suomi College was established as the publishing house of the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America.\nIn 1898, the Quincy Smelter was constructed in nearby Ripley, Franklin Township, to serve the industrious Quincy Mine. The smelter was built on a site formerly held by the Pewabic Mining Company, which the Quincy had absorbed in 1891. In 1893 both the H&amp;C RR and the MRRR were administered by the Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railroad (DSA).\nOn 28 August 1896 the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of Hancock was struck by lightning, which killed the assistant pastor and then-recently appointed Suomi College instructor Jooseppi Riippa after he had just dismissed 50 children because of the severe weather.\nThe Houghton County Street Railway Company (renamed in 1908 the Houghton County Traction Company) also offered street car service from Houghton through Hancock to Calumet, Laurium, Mohawk, Hubbell, and Lake Linden, beginning in 1902. In fall of 1902 the Kerredge Theatre was completed by William and Ray Kerredge in response to the wildly popular Calumet Theatre. Hancock was officially incorporated as a city on 10 March 1903 and subsequently divided into four wards. The then-incumbent village president Archibald J. Scott was elected the city's first mayor.\nAfter having broken ground for the construction process in August 1903, on 5 June 1904 the St. Joseph's Medical Center was dedicated in a public ceremony. Built with brick and local Jacobsville sandstone, the new complex was five stories high and of Renaissance style architecture. The entryway was completed at a cost of $78 000 plus $21,396 for necessary equipment. In 1906, the Scott Hotel on East Quincy Street was completed. A year later, the Copper Country Limited line of both the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul and Pacific Railroad and the Duluth, South Shore and Atlantic Railway, began operations. The line went to Calumet in the north, through Hancock, connecting the Keweenaw to Chicago, Illinois, where it began.\nIn 1906, the Scott Hotel, adjacent to the previously erected Kerredge Theater, was built and named after the prominent city businessman and mayor Archibald J. Scott. The Scott Hotel was constructed as a symbol of Hancock's size and importance. In 1906, the Hancock Mine expanded its operations and sank the No. 2 vertical shaft. In 1913, the Scott Hotel was host to the high-profile kidnapping, shooting, and beating of Western Federation of Miners President Charles Moyer and his bodyguard Charles Tanner at the hands of members of the local Citizens' Alliance in the Keweenaw and Houghton County Sheriff's Department. This was in response to his pleas to Governor Woodbridge N. Ferris and President Woodrow Wilson for proper investigations into the Italian Hall Disaster. The kidnapping, beating, and subsequent \"deportation\" to Chicago by officials of the area has cemented its place in local memory.\nBefore World War I, around the time of the tempestuous Copper Country Strike of 1913\u201314, the city population had dropped from its all-time high of 8,981 to 7,527, as many families moved away with the heads of their households to seek a means of living in the factories of Lower Michigan and Wisconsin or in other copper mines in Montana.\nHancock received its second hospital in March 1917, a Finnish hospital called \"Suomalainen Sairaala\". It was also called the Hancock Bethany Hospital, and later known as Dr. Henry Holm's Hospital. In 1917 the old First Congregational Church of Hancock, on the corner of Quincy and Tezcuco Streets, burned down. In 1921, the new First Congregational Church of Hancock was completed, though services had begun after breaking ground in 1919.\nMisfortune came to Hancock after the financial crash in 1929 as mines began to close for lack of a profitable market. Copper at the time sold for only five cents a pound. The Quincy Mine closed in 1931, and neighboring mines closed the next year. By 1934, one third of the families in Houghton County were seeking aid through relief programs. The Quincy Mine resumed its operations in 1937, but discontinued them in 1946, one week after Japan surrendered in 1945, ending World War II.\nBy 1949 the facilities of St. Joseph's Hospital were no longer adequate to meet the needs of the population, and through funds from the Hill-Burton Act and lavish contributions of hospital benefactors, the new St. Joseph's Hospital facility on Michigan Street was assembled. The new building was dedicated on 29 July 1951 by Bishop Thomas L. Noa of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Marquette. The first patients moved in on 27 August 1951.\nOn 29 May 1959 the historic Kerredge Theater, the counterpart to The Calumet Theatre, burned to the ground. Joint preparations with Houghton were carried out in 1963 to install a sewage disposal plant to prevent the contamination of Portage Lake.\nDuring the United States Bicentennial in 1976, then-Finnish President Urho Kekkonen visited the Hancock area and entirely filled the Michigan Technological University ice arena when he gave his official address to the local Finnish-American community. In 1990, a rundown former Catholic church on Quincy Street was renovated extensively with traditional Finnish architectural styles and officially became the Finnish-American Heritage Center.\nIn 2023, Finlandia University, which had been in operation since 1896, closed.\nGeography.\nThe City of Hancock is further north than Montreal in Quebec, Canada. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which is land and is water. Hancock is connected to Houghton by the Portage Lake Lift Bridge, which crosses the dredged Keweenaw Waterway. The Keweenaw Waterway effectively slices the Keweenaw in two. Both Houghton and Hancock are on 500-foot bluffs.\nThe city is bounded on the south by the Portage Canal, parts of Quincy, Hancock and Franklin Townships; on the east by West Ripley; and on the north by Quincy and Hancock Townships. Other communities that share a border with Hancock include Ripley and Arcadian Location.\nClimate.\nHancock has a humid continental climate, with long and snowy winters and much lake effect snow. It is the third-snowiest city in the United States, the snowiest city in the Midwestern United States, and the snowiest city in the Eastern United States, with snowfall averaging per year. The city is along the Keweenaw Peninsula. In 1978\u201379, a whopping of snow fell in Hancock. Accumulating snow has been known to fall as late as early June here.\nPeople and culture.\nFinnish-American culture.\nHancock has been called \"the focal point of Finns in the United States.\" Many Finns settled in Hancock because the forests, the lakes, and the clear blue skies reminded them of home. In Hancock, about 40% of the population claimed Finnish ancestry in the most recent federal census. Since 1983, Hancock has had an active Finnish Theme Committee entrusted with preserving the region's Finnish heritage. In recognition of the large number of Finns in the area, some street signs in Hancock are written in both English and Finnish.\nFestivals.\nHancock hosts an annual midwinter festival called Heikinp\u00e4iv\u00e4 (\"Henry's Day\") on 19 January, celebrating the feast day of Saint Henrik of Uppsala, the patron saint of Finland, and Heikki Lunta. Heikinp\u00e4iv\u00e4 includes a traditional wife-carrying competition. Every June, Hancock and Houghton host a festival known as Bridgefest to commemorate the building of the Portage Lake Lift Bridge, which united both the communities of Copper Island and those in the southern portions of the Keweenaw Peninsula. Also held in June is the Keweenaw Chain Drive Festival. The Keweenaw Trail Running Festival takes place each July.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAs of the census of 2010, there were 4,634 people, 1,882 households, and 934 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 2,111 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 94.7% White, 1.2% African American, 1.0% Native American, 1.7% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.1% from other races, and 1.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1.4% of the population.\nThere were 1,882 households, of which 21.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 36.4% were married couples living together, 9.7% had a female householder with no husband present, 3.6% had a male householder with no wife present, and 50.4% were non-families. 37.7% of all households were made up of individuals, and 13% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.20 and the average family size was 2.90.\nThe median age in the city was 34.1 years. 16.7% of residents were under the age of 18; 21.8% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 20.8% were from 25 to 44; 21.5% were from 45 to 64; and 19.3% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 49.5% male and 50.5% female.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 4,323 people, 1,769 households, and 902 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,983 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 96.0% White, 0.8% Black or African American, 0.9% Native American, 1.1% Asian, &lt;0.1% Pacific Islander, 0.2% from other races, and 1.0% from two or more races. 0.8% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 32.2% were of Finnish, 14.4% German, 8.2% English, 5.3% Italian, and 5.2% French ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.4% spoke English and 4.4% Finnish as their first language.\nThere were 1,769 households, out of which 23.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 39.2% were married couples living together, 9.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 49.0% were non-families. 38.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.9% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.22 and the average family size was 2.97.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 19.0% under the age of 18, 18.0% from 18 to 24, 22.6% from 25 to 44, 20.1% from 45 to 64, and 20.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 98.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 97.1 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $28,118, and the median income for a family was $36,625. Males had a median income of $27,090 versus $22,150 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,669. About 6.9% of families and 14.4% of the population were below the poverty line, including 7.0% of those under age 18 and 15.1% of those age 65 or over.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe East Hancock neighborhood is part of the city and consists of many old Victorian-style houses which were once owned by mining company officials.\nDoctors' Park is a neighborhood in West Hancock near the former Portage View Hospital Building (now the Jutila Centre of Finlandia University). It lies north of West Quincy Street.\nThe Quincy Street Historic District encompasses the center of Hancock's downtown, covering the 100, 200, and 300 blocks of Quincy Street.\nUP Health system operates a Hospital with a Level 3 Trauma Center at 500 Campus Drive Hancock, MI 49930 called the UP Health System - Portage.\nSports.\nThe 2004 Professional Walleye Trail Championship Tournament was held partly in the city.\nParks and recreation.\nBicycling.\nThe Jack Stevens Rail Trail runs through Hancock and continues 14 miles north to Calumet on a now-abandoned Soo Line Railroad grade.\nSnowmobiling.\nThe Keweenaw Trail or Trail 3 is the main snowmobiling route to and from Houghton and Hancock. It connects to other nearby trails, including the North and South Freda Trails, which lead to Lake Superior, and the Stevens Trail, which goes to Calumet.\nEducation.\nPublic education.\nElementary-school students attend the Gordon Barkell Elementary School (formerly Hancock Elementary School), middle school students Hancock Middle School and high-school students Hancock Central High School. Hancock Central High and Hancock Middle School are now connected.\nHigher education.\nHancock was the home of Finlandia University (formerly Suomi College). Suomi College was founded in 1896 by the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America. In the 1880s large numbers of Finns immigrated to Hancock to labor in the copper and lumber industries. One immigrant, mission pastor J. K. Nikander of the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, headquartered in Hancock, wanted to ensure seminary training in America. He had observed that Swedish and Finnish immigrants along the Delaware River did not train new ministers, and he feared a loss of Finnish identity. In 1896, Nikander founded Suomi College. The college's role was to preserve Finnish culture, train Lutheran ministers and teach English. During the 1920s, Suomi became a liberal arts college. In 1958, the seminary separated from the college. Four years later, the Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America merged with other mainstream Lutheran churches. The cornerstone of Old Main, the first building erected at Suomi College, was laid on May 30, 1898. Jacobsville sandstone, quarried at the Portage Entry of the Keweenaw waterway, was brought there by barge, cut, and used to construct Old Main. Dedicated on January 21, 1900, it contained a dormitory, kitchen, laundry, classrooms, offices, library, chapel, and lounge. The college quickly outgrew this building, and in 1901 a frame structure, housing a gym, meeting hall, and music center was erected on an adjacent lot. The frame building was demolished when Nikander Hall, named for Suomi's founder, was constructed in 1939. The hall was designed by the architectural firm of Saarinen and Swanson, which employed the world-renowned Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen.\nSeveral parts of the campus of Michigan Technological University are also in Hancock, including a former MTU \"underground classroom\" in the Quincy Mine.\nTransportation.\nIntercity bus.\nIndian Trails bus lines operates a terminal at the Shottle Bop Party Store, 125 Quincy Street. The service runs between Hancock and Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Until January 31, 2007, this was operated by Greyhound Bus Lines.\nPublic transportation.\nIn the very late 19th and early 20th centuries, the Houghton County Traction Company ran a trolley system with service from Houghton, through Hancock, and on to other destinations, with the other boundaries being Hubbell to the northeast and Mohawk to the far north. The Mineral Range Railroad also historically served the city.\nHancock Public Transit operates a demand bus which will take riders to anywhere in Hancock, Houghton, or Ripley. The service is headquartered on Quincy Street. Checker Transport also provides service to the Hancock area from a satellite office in the region, though the main office is in Marquette.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister cities.\nHancock is the sister city of Porvoo, Finland.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65696", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65696", "title": "James Bacque", "text": "Canadian writer (1929\u20132019)\nJames Watson Bacque (19 May 1929 \u2013 13 September 2019) was a Canadian writer, publisher, and book editor. He was born in Toronto, Ontario.\nEarly life.\nBacque was educated at Upper Canada College in Toronto and then the University of Toronto, where he studied history and philosophy, graduating in 1952 with a Bachelor of Arts degree. He was a member of Seaton's House, one of the school's boarding houses.\nFiction writing.\nBacque was a mainstream fiction writer and essayist before turning his attention, in 1989, to the fate of German soldiers held as POWs by the Allies after World War II. His recent works include \"Dear Enemy\" (2000), with Richard Matthias Mueller, essays on Germany \"Then and Now\". Bacque had just completed a comic drama for the stage entitled \"Conrad\", about a media mogul in prison, which was scheduled for production on 2 October 2009 at the George Ignatieff Theatre in Toronto. Bacque's latest book, \"Putting On Conrad\", about the experiences of producers trying to put on his play in the face of libel chill, is an amusing satire on Canada's literary establishment.\n\"Other Losses\".\nIn \"Other Losses\" (1989), Bacque claimed that Allied Supreme Commander Dwight Eisenhower's policies caused the death of 790,000 German captives in internment camps through disease, starvation and cold from 1944 to 1949. In similar French camps some 250,000 more are said to have perished. The International Committee of the Red Cross was refused entry to the camps, Switzerland was deprived of its status as \"protecting power\" and POWs were reclassified as \"Disarmed Enemy Forces\" to circumvent recognition under the Geneva Convention. Bacque argued that this alleged mass murder was a direct result of the policies of the western Allies, who, with the Soviets, ruled as the Military Occupation Government over partitioned Germany from May 1945 until 1949. He laid the blame on Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, saying Germans were kept on starvation rations even though there was enough food in the world to avert the lethal shortage in Germany in 1945\u20131946.\nAcademic criticism.\nAcademic reviewers question three major aspects of Bacque's work: his claims that there was no post-war food shortage in other European countries; Bacque's estimate of the number of German deaths; and the allegation that Eisenhower was deliberately vindictive.\nBacque's critics note many of the German soldiers were sick and wounded at the time of their surrender, and say his work does not place the plight of the German prisoners within the context of the grim situation in Western Europe in 1945 and 1946.\nWriting in the \"Canadian Historical Review\", David Stafford called the book \"a classic example of a worthwhile investigation marred by polemic and overstatement.\" R.J. Rummell, a scholar of 20th-century atrocities, has written that \"Bacque misread, misinterpreted, or ignored the relevant documents and that his mortality statistics are simply impossible.\" More recently, writing in the \"Encyclopedia of Prisoners of War and Internment\", S. P. MacKenzie states, \"That German prisoners were treated very badly in the months immediately after the war [\u2026] is beyond dispute. All in all, however, Bacque's thesis and mortality figures cannot be taken as accurate\".\nEisenhower biographer Stephen Ambrose, who helped edit \"Other Losses\", wrote \"I quarrel with many of your interpretations, [but] I am not arguing with the basic truth of your discovery\" and acknowledged that Bacque had made a \"major historical discovery\", in the sense that very little attention had hitherto been paid to the treatment of German POWs in Allied hands. He acknowledged he did not now support Bacque's conclusions, but said at the American Military Institute's Annual Meeting in March 1990:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Bacque has done some research and uncovered an important story that I, and other American historians, missed altogether in work on Eisenhower and the conclusion of the war. When those millions of Wehrmacht soldiers came into captivity at the end of the war, many of them were deliberately and brutally mistreated. There is no denying this. There are men in this audience who were victims of this mistreatment. It is a story that has been kept quiet.\"\nHowever, in a 1991 \"New York Times\" book review, Ambrose claimed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"when scholars do the necessary research, they will find Mr. Bacque's work to be worse than worthless. It is seriously\u2014nay, spectacularly\u2014flawed in its most fundamental aspects. [\u2026] Mr. Bacque is wrong on every major charge and nearly all his minor ones. Eisenhower was not a Hitler, he did not run death camps, German prisoners did not die by the hundreds of thousands, there was a severe food shortage in 1945, there was nothing sinister or secret about the \"disarmed enemy forces\" designation or about the column \"other losses.\" Mr. Bacque's \"missing million\" were old men and young boys in the Volkssturm (People's Militia) released without formal discharge and transfers of POWs to other allies control areas.\"\nA book-length disputation of Bacque's work, entitled \"Eisenhower and the German POWs\", appeared in 1992, featuring essays by British, American, and German historians.\nDespite the criticisms of Bacque's methodology, Stephen Ambrose and Brian Loring Villa, the authors of the chapter on German POW deaths, conceded the Allies were motivated in their treatment of captured Germans by disgust and revenge for German atrocities. They did, however, argue Bacque's casualty figures are far too high, and that policy was set by Allied politicians, not by Eisenhower.\nStephen Ambrose said, \"we as Americans can't duck the fact that terrible things happened. And they happened at the end of a war we fought for decency and freedom, and they are not excusable.\"\nJonathan Osmond, writing in the \"Journal of the Royal Institute of International Affairs\", said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Bacque [\u2026] has published a corrective to the impression that the Western allies after the Second World War behaved in a civilised manner to the conquered Germans [\u2026] It is clear that he has opened up once more a serious subject dominated by the explanations of those in power. Even if two-thirds of the statistical discrepancies exposed by Bacque could be accounted for by the chaos of the situation, there would still be a case to answer.\"\nOsmond also called the book \"emotive and journalistic\".\nOne of the historians in support of Bacque was Colonel Ernest F. Fisher, 101st Airborne Division, who in 1945 took part in investigations into allegations of misconduct by U.S. troops in Germany and later became a Senior Historian with the United States Army. In the foreword to the book he states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"More than five million German soldiers in the American and French zones were crowded into barbed wire cages, many of them literally shoulder to shoulder. The ground beneath them soon became a quagmire of filth and disease. Open to the weather, lacking even primitive sanitary facilities, underfed, the prisoners soon began dying of starvation and disease. Starting in April 1945, the United States Army and the French Army casually annihilated about one million men, most of them in American camps.\"\n\"Crimes and Mercies\".\nIn a subsequent book, \"Crimes And Mercies\" (1997), Bacque claimed that Allied policies led to the premature deaths of 5.7\u00a0million civilians among the indigenous population of East and West Germany (in excess of recorded mortality) between censuses in October 1946 and September 1950, 2.5\u00a0million ethnic German refugees from Eastern Europe and 1.1\u00a0million German POWs due to Allied starvation and expulsion policies in the five years following World War II.\nThe book also details the charity work conducted by the Allies, primarily Canada and the United States, crediting it with saving or improving the lives of up to 500 million people around the world in the post war period. This work was led by Herbert Hoover at the behest of President Truman, and by the Canadian Prime Minister, Mackenzie King, together with Norman Robertson and Mitchell Sharp. This was the largest relief program ever organized, and expressed the ideals of many of the allied combatants.\nBacque's figures for prisoners of war and expellees are in excess of those accepted by historians, and his claim of 5.7 million unrecorded civilian deaths in East and West Germany between 1946 and 1950 censuses has no correspondence at all in historical literature. A review of \"Crimes and Mercies\" by German historian https:// considers the aforementioned 5.7 million claim to have no substance, contextualizes Bacque's book with attempts of the extreme right to gain mainstream acceptance, and expresses surprise at historians' passivity in the face of such tendencies (\"Es ist mehr als erstaunlich, wie Wolfgang Wippermann unl\u00e4ngst zu Recht anmerkte, da\u00df die seri\u00f6sen Fachhistoriker diesem Treiben noch immer unger\u00fchrt zusehen.\"). A panel of scholars gathered at the annual German Studies Association meeting in Salt Lake City in October 1999 and found the charges of \"Crimes and Mercies\" even more extravagant than those proffered in \"Other Losses\". The panel's papers were never published, however, since the participants thought that the business of refuting Bacque's claims again and again and in detail gives more credence to his wild conspiracy history, and trying to revive the debate was yet another attempt by him to gain acceptability in the scholarly community.\nAccording to the German Federal Archives in 1956, more than 2 million refugees/expellees from the eastern territories of the former German Reich in its 1937 borders and from ethnic German minorities outside Germany's 1937 borders perished during and after the war. However, this order of magnitude is under considerable dispute by historians.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65698", "revid": "752956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65698", "title": "Mel scale", "text": "Conceptual scale\nThe mel scale (after the word \"melody\") is a perceptual scale of pitches judged by listeners to be equal in distance from one another. The reference point between this scale and normal frequency measurement is defined by assigning a perceptual pitch of 1000 mels to a 1000\u00a0Hz tone, 40\u00a0dB above the listener's threshold. Above about 500\u00a0Hz, increasingly large intervals are judged by listeners to produce equal pitch increments.\nFormula.\nA formula (O'Shaughnessy 1987) to convert \"f\" hertz into \"m\" mels is\nformula_1\nHistory and other formulas.\nThe formula from O'Shaughnessy's book can be expressed with different logarithmic bases:\nformula_2\nThe corresponding inverse expressions are\nformula_3\nThere were published curves and tables on psychophysical pitch scales since Steinberg's 1937 \ncurves based on just-noticeable differences of pitch. More curves soon followed in Fletcher and Munson's 1937 \nand Fletcher's 1938\nand Stevens' 1937 and Stevens and Volkmann's 1940\npapers using a variety of experimental methods and analysis approaches.\nIn 1949 Koenig published an approximation based on separate linear and logarithmic segments, with a break at 1000\u00a0Hz.\nGunnar Fant proposed the current popular linear/logarithmic formula in 1949, but with the 1000\u00a0Hz corner frequency.\nAn alternate expression of the formula, not depending on choice of logarithm base, is noted in Fant (1968):\nformula_4\nIn 1976, Makhoul and Cosell published the now-popular version with the 700\u00a0Hz corner frequency.\nAs Ganchev et al. have observed, \"The formulae [with 700], when compared to [Fant's with 1000], provide a closer approximation of the Mel scale for frequencies below 1000\u00a0Hz, at the price of higher inaccuracy for frequencies higher than 1000\u00a0Hz.\" Above 7\u00a0kHz, however, the situation is reversed, and the 700\u00a0Hz version again fits better.\nData by which some of these formulas are motivated are tabulated in Beranek (1949), as measured from the curves of Stevens and Volkmann:\nA formula with a break frequency of 625\u00a0Hz is given by Lindsay &amp; Norman (1977); the formula does not appear in their 1972 first edition:\nformula_5\nFor direct comparison with other formulae, this is equivalent to\nformula_6\nMost mel-scale formulas give exactly 1000 mels at 1000\u00a0Hz. The break frequency (e.g. 700\u00a0Hz, 1000\u00a0Hz, or 625\u00a0Hz) is the only free parameter in the usual form of the formula. Some non-mel auditory-frequency-scale formulas use the same form but with much lower break frequency, not necessarily mapping to 1000 at 1000\u00a0Hz; for example the ERB-rate scale of Glasberg and Moore (1990) uses a break point of 228.8\u00a0Hz, and the cochlear frequency\u2013place map of Greenwood (1990) uses 165.3\u00a0Hz.\nOther functional forms for the mel scale have been explored by Umesh et al.; they point out that the traditional formulas with a logarithmic region and a linear region do not fit the data from Stevens and Volkmann's curves as well as some other forms, based on the following data table of measurements that they made from those curves:\nSlaney's MATLAB Auditory Toolbox agrees with Umesh et al. and uses the following two-piece fit, though notably not using the \"1000\u00a0mels at 1000\u00a0Hz\" convention:\nformula_7\nApplications.\nThe first version of Google's Lyra codec uses \"log mel spectrograms\" as the feature-extraction step. The transmitted data is a vector-quantized form of the spectrogram, which is then synthesized back to speech by a neural network. Use of the mel scale is believed to weigh the data in a way appropriate to human perception. MelGAN takes a similar approach.\nCriticism.\nStevens' student Donald D. Greenwood, who had worked on the mel scale experiments in 1956, considers the scale biased by experimental flaws. In 2009 he posted to a mailing list:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would ask, why use the Mel scale now, since it appears to be biased? If anyone wants a Mel scale, they should do it over, controlling carefully for order bias and using plenty of subjects\u00a0\u2013 more than in the past\u00a0\u2013 and using both musicians and non-musicians to search for any differences in performance that may be governed by musician/non-musician differences or subject differences generally.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65700", "revid": "911875649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65700", "title": "Abolitionist", "text": ""}
{"id": "65702", "revid": "33", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65702", "title": "The Republic of The Gambia", "text": ""}
{"id": "65704", "revid": "10248457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65704", "title": "Stanley Smith Stevens", "text": "American psychologist (1906\u20131973)\nStanley Smith Stevens (November 4, 1906 \u2013 January 18, 1973) was an American psychologist who founded Harvard's Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory, studying psychoacoustics, and he is credited with the introduction of Stevens's power law. Stevens authored a milestone textbook, the 1400+ page \"Handbook of Experimental Psychology\" (1951). He was also one of the founding organizers of the Psychonomic Society. In 1946 he introduced a theory of levels of measurement widely used by scientists but whose use in some areas of statistics has been criticized. In addition, Stevens played a key role in the development of the use of operational definitions in psychology.\nA \"Review of General Psychology\" survey, published in 2002, ranked Stevens as the 52nd most cited psychologist of the 20th century. He was a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, the United States National Academy of Sciences, and the American Philosophical Society.\nLife.\nStevens was born in Ogden, Utah, to Stanley and Adeline (Smith) Stevens and educated in Latter-day Saint-affiliated schools in Salt Lake City, Utah. He spent much of his childhood in the polygamous household of his maternal grandfather Orson Smith. At the death of his parents in 1924, he spent the next 3 years on an LDS mission in Switzerland and Belgium. He attended the University of Utah from 1927 to 1929 and Stanford University for the next two years, graduating with an A.B. in psychology in 1931.\nShortly after arriving in Massachusetts to begin a Ph.D., he left the LDS church, but continued to struggle with conflicting ideas of faith and science. After two years of graduate study, he received his Ph.D. in psychology from Harvard University, where he served under Edwin Boring as assistant in psychology, from 1932 to 1934.\nThe following year he spent studying physiology under Hallowell Davis at Harvard Medical School, and in 1935 served as a research fellow in physics at Harvard for a year. In 1936, Stevens accepted a position as an instructor in experimental psychology at Harvard University.\nHe married Maxine Leonard in 1930 and had a son, Peter Smith Stevens, in 1936. He married Geraldine Stone, who had worked in the Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory from its inception, in 1963.\nScience of Science discussion group.\nStevens played a key role in organising the Science of Science discussion group in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which met on eight occasions from October 1940 to mid-1941. Stevens, who was noted for the clarity of his scientific writing, attracted to the group a number of participants whose aim was the \"debabelisation of science\". The group was also influenced by the 5th Congress of the Unity of Science, which had been held at Harvard University in September 1939 and featured a number of well-known scientists from different disciplines.\nWork.\nStevens' experimental and theoretical work lay primarily in the fields of psychophysics and psychoacoustics. One of his most influential contributions was his definition of a measurement scale defined by four types: Nominal, Ordinal, Interval, and Ratio. (see Level of measurement) He is the author of the operational theory of measurement, which \u201c...in the broadest sense, is defined as the assignment of numerals to objects or events according to rules.\u201d In fact, the definition paraphrased Campbell's note from the Final Report of the so-called Ferguson's committee (joint committee of sections A, Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and J, Psychology, of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, held 1932\u20131940). Stevens just omitted or extended some of Campbell's assumptions. While Campbell considered additivity to be a necessary condition, Stevens considered any rule to fit the definition. His goal was to overcome the committee's conclusion concerning the possibility of measurement in psychology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65705", "revid": "16119042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65705", "title": "John Volkman", "text": ""}
{"id": "65707", "revid": "1319440695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65707", "title": "Aerobatics", "text": "Flying maneuvers involving attitudes not attained during normal flight\nAerobatics is the practice of flying maneuvers involving aircraft attitudes that are not used in conventional passenger-carrying flights. The term is a portmanteau of \"aeroplane\" and \"acrobatics\". Aerobatics are performed in aeroplanes and gliders for training, recreation, entertainment, and sport. Additionally, some helicopters, such as the MBB Bo 105, are capable of limited aerobatic manoeuvres. An example of a fully aerobatic helicopter, capable of performing loops and rolls, is the Westland Lynx.\nMost aerobatic manoeuvres involve rotation of the aircraft about its longitudinal (roll) axis or lateral (pitch) axis. Other maneuvers, such as a spin, displace the aircraft about its vertical (yaw) axis. Manoeuvres are often combined to form a complete aerobatic sequence for entertainment or competition. Aerobatic flying requires a broader set of piloting skills and exposes the aircraft to greater structural stress than for normal flight. In some countries, the pilot must wear a parachute when performing aerobatics.\nAerobatic training enhances a pilot's ability to recover from unusual flight conditions, and thus is an element of many flight safety training programs for pilots. While many pilots fly aerobatics for recreation, some choose to fly in aerobatic competitions, a judged sport.\nOverview.\nIn the early days of flying, some pilots used their aircraft as part of a flying circus to entertain. Maneuvers were flown for artistic reasons or to draw gasps from onlookers. In due course some of these maneuvers were found to allow aircraft to gain tactical advantage during aerial combat or dogfights between fighter aircraft.\nAerobatic aircraft fall into two categories\u2014specialist aerobatic, and aerobatic capable. Specialist designs such as the Pitts Special, the Extra 200 and 300, and the Sukhoi Su-26M and Sukhoi Su-29 aim for ultimate aerobatic performance. This comes at the expense of general purpose use such as touring, or ease of non aerobatic handling such as landing. At a more basic level, \"aerobatic capable\" aircraft, such as the Cessna 152 Aerobat or the R2160 Acrobin, can be dual purpose\u2014equipped to carrying passengers and luggage, as well as being capable of basic aerobatic figures.\n\"Flight formation aerobatics\" are flown by teams of up to sixteen aircraft, although most teams fly between four and ten aircraft. Some are state funded to reflect pride in the armed forces while others are commercially sponsored. Coloured smoke trails may be emitted to emphasise the patterns flown and/or the colours of a national flag.\nAerobatic maneuvers flown in a jet-powered aircraft are limited in scope as they cannot take advantage of the gyroscopic forces that a propeller driven aircraft can exploit. Jet-powered aircraft also tend to fly much faster, which increases the size of the figures and the length of time the pilot has to withstand increased g-forces. Jet aerobatic teams often fly in formations, which further restricts the maneuvers that can be safely flown.\nAerobatics done at low levels and for an audience is called \"stunt flying\". To enhance the show effect of aerobatic manoeuvres, smoke is sometimes generated; the smoke allows viewers to see the path travelled by the aircraft. Due to safety concerns, the smoke is not a result of combustion but is produced by the vaporization of fog oil into a fine aerosol, achieved either by injecting the oil into the hot engine exhaust or by the use of a dedicated device that can be fitted in any position on the aircraft. The first military aerobatic team to use smoke at will during displays was Fleet Air Arm 702 Squadron \"The Black Cats\" at the Farnborough Airshow in September 1957.\nTraining.\nAerobatics are taught to military fighter pilots as a means of developing flying skills and for tactical use in combat. Many aerobatic manoeuvres were indeed developed in military conflicts, e.g. the Immelmann turn or Split S.\nAerobatics and formation flying is not limited solely to fixed-wing aircraft; the British Army, Royal Navy, Spanish Air Force and the Indian Air Force, among others, have helicopter display teams.\nAll aerobatic manoeuvres demand training and practice to avoid accidents. Accidents due to aerobatic manoeuvres are very rare in competition aerobatics; most of them happen when performing formation flying or stunt flying at very low levels at airshows or air racing. Low-level aerobatics are extremely demanding and airshow pilots must demonstrate their ability before being allowed to gradually reduce the height at which they may fly their show.\nIn the EU, flying aerobatics requires special training and a rating. In Canada, no licence is required to perform aerobatics, but to carry passengers during aerobatics a pilot must have at least 10 hours dual flight instruction of aerobatic manoeuvres, or 20 hours of total aerobatic experience.\nCompetition.\nAerobatic flying competitions are a worldwide phenomenon, rather like the Olympic games, and are governed by the FAI Aerobatics Commission (CIVA).\nCompetitions start at Primary, or Graduate level (in UK \"Beginners\") and proceed in complexity through Sportsman (in UK \"Standard\"), Intermediate and Advanced, with Unlimited being the top competition level. Experienced aerobatic pilots have been measured to pull \u00b15 g for short periods while unlimited pilots can perform more extreme maneuvers and experience higher g levels -possibly up to +8/\u22126 g. The limits for positive g are higher than for negative g and this is due to the ability to limit blood pooling for positive g maneuvers, but it is generally accepted that +9 g for more than a few seconds will lead to loss of consciousness (also known as GLOC).\nPerformance.\nAerobatics are most likely to be seen at public airshows in the form of stunt flying. Aerobatic competitions usually do not attract large crowds of spectators since the manoeuvers are flown at safe altitudes to avoid accidents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65711", "revid": "39165258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65711", "title": "D\u00fcsseldorf", "text": "Capital of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany\nD\u00fcsseldorf () is the capital city of North Rhine-Westphalia, the most populous state of Germany. It is the second-largest city in the state after Cologne and the sixth-largest city in Germany, with a 2024 population of 618,685. Most of D\u00fcsseldorf lies on the right bank of the Rhine, and the city has grown together with Neuss, Ratingen, Meerbusch, Erkrath and Monheim. D\u00fcsseldorf is the central city of Rhine-Ruhr, the second biggest metropolitan region by GDP in the European Union, that stretches from Bonn via Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf to the Ruhr.\nD\u00fcsseldorf began as a small settlement at the mouth of the D\u00fcssel River, gaining city rights in 1288 after the Battle of Worringen. In the Late Middle Ages and Renaissance, it grew into a regional political and cultural centre under the Dukes of Berg and later as the capital of the United Duchies of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg. The 17th and 18th centuries saw flourishing arts and architecture, with D\u00fcsseldorf becoming known for its court culture and early art academy. During the Napoleonic era, it was briefly part of the Grand Duchy of Berg before coming under Prussian control in 1815, where it industrialised rapidly in the 19th century. During the 20th century, D\u00fcsseldorf developed into one of Germany\u2019s most important centres for administration, business, and culture. In 1946, it became the capital of the newly created state of North Rhine-Westphalia, strengthening its political role.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is classified as a GaWC Alpha- world city. It is an international business and financial centre, renowned for its fashion and trade fairs, and is headquarters to one Fortune Global 500 and two DAX companies. Messe D\u00fcsseldorf organises nearly one fifth of premier trade shows. D\u00fcsseldorf Airport is Germany's fourth-busiest airport, serving as the main international hub for the Ruhr, Germany's largest urban area. Mercer's 2023 Quality of Living survey ranked D\u00fcsseldorf the tenth most livable city in the world.\nThere are 22 institutions of higher education in the city including the Heinrich-Heine-Universit\u00e4t D\u00fcsseldorf, the university of applied sciences (Hochschule D\u00fcsseldorf), the academy of arts (Kunstakademie D\u00fcsseldorf, whose members include Joseph Beuys, Emanuel Leutze, August Macke, Gerhard Richter, Sigmar Polke, and Andreas Gursky), and the university of music (Robert-Schumann-Musikhochschule D\u00fcsseldorf). The city is also known for its influence on electronic/experimental music (Kraftwerk) and its Japanese community. As the second largest city of the Rhineland, D\u00fcsseldorf holds Rhenish Carnival celebrations in February/March, which rank as the third most prominent in Germany after those of Cologne and Mainz.\nEtymology.\nThe name is derived from the small river D\u00fcssel, which joins the Rhine at the city\u2019s location. The suffix (German for \"village\") reflects the original character of the settlement as a fishing and farming community on the riverbanks. Thus, the literal meaning of D\u00fcsseldorf is \"village on the D\u00fcssel.\"\nAs the settlement expanded and developed into a regional and later international centre, the name remained unchanged. D\u00fcsseldorf is unusual among Germany\u2019s major cities in having retained the suffix, which is otherwise mostly associated with small villages.\nIn the Limburgish language, called D\u00fcsseldorfer Platt, the city is called .\nHistory.\nEarly development.\nWhen the Roman Empire was strengthening its position throughout Europe, a few Germanic tribes clung on in marshy territory off the eastern banks of the Rhine. In the 7th and 8th centuries, the odd farming or fishing settlement could be found at the point where the small river D\u00fcssel flows into the Rhine. It was from such settlements that the city of D\u00fcsseldorf grew.\nThe first mention of D\u00fcsseldorf dates from 1135\u20131159; in 1162 it was referred to as . Under Emperor Friedrich Barbarossa the small town of Kaiserswerth to the north of D\u00fcsseldorf became a well-fortified outpost, where soldiers kept a watchful eye on every movement on the Rhine. Kaiserswerth eventually became a suburb of D\u00fcsseldorf in 1929.\nDuchy of Berg.\nIn 1186, D\u00fcsseldorf came under the rule of the County of Berg, a state of the Holy Roman Empire. Around 1206, the settlement was likely separated from the parish of Bilk and became an independent parish. In 1263, the Count of Berg granted ferry rights to the inhabitants.\n14 August 1288 is one of the most important dates in the history of D\u00fcsseldorf, the day the sovereign Count Adolf VIII of Berg granted town privileges to the village on the banks of the D\u00fcssel. Before this, a bloody struggle for power had taken place between the Archbishop of Cologne and his allies arrayed against the count of Berg and other local powers, culminating in the Battle of Worringen. The Archbishop of Cologne's forces were wiped out by the forces of the count of Berg, who were supported by citizens and farmers of Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf, paving the way for D\u00fcsseldorf's elevation to city status, which is commemorated today by a monument on the Burgplatz.\nAfter this battle the relationship between Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf deteriorated, because they were commercial rivals; it is often said that there is a kind of hostility between the citizens of Cologne and D\u00fcsseldorf. Today, it finds its expression mainly in a humorous form (especially during the Rhineland \"Karneval\") and in sports.\nIn the first century following its founding, D\u00fcsseldorf developed only slowly. It was not until the rule of William II of Berg, who became Duke in 1380, that the town experienced significant growth. He expanded D\u00fcsseldorf by establishing a new town, increasing its area to about 22.5 hectares. William also enlarged the ducal palace and commissioned the construction of stone fortifications around the entire settlement. During the following centuries several famous landmarks were built, including the Collegiate Church of St Lambertus. In 1609, the ducal line of the United Duchies of J\u00fclich-Cleves-Berg died out, and after a violent struggle over succession, J\u00fclich and Berg fell to the Wittelsbach Counts of Palatinate-Neuburg, who made D\u00fcsseldorf their main domicile.\nUnder the art-loving Johann Wilhelm II (r. 1690\u20131716), a vast art collection comprising numerous paintings and sculptures was established in the (city palace). After his death, the city fell on hard times again, especially after Elector Charles Theodore inherited Bavaria and moved the electoral court to Munich. With him he took the art collection, which became part of what is now the Alte Pinakothek in Munich.\nDestruction and poverty struck D\u00fcsseldorf after the Napoleonic Wars. Napoleon made Berg a Grand Duchy and D\u00fcsseldorf its capital. In 1806, Joachim Murat (1767\u20131815) became Grand Duke of Berg but handed power over to Napoleon in 1808. D\u00fcsseldorf was visited by Napoleon in November 1811. Johann Devaranne, a leader of Solingen's resistance to Napoleon's conscription decrees, was executed in the city in 1813.\nPrussia.\nFollowing the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the Rhineland including D\u00fcsseldorf was incorporated into the Kingdom of Prussia. D\u00fcsseldorf lost its status as a capital, but became the seat of a regional governor and of the Rhenish provincial diet established in 1824. In 1820, the city lost its municipal independence and was incorporated into the District of D\u00fcsseldorf, to which it belonged until 1872.\nIn the first half of the 19th century D\u00fcsseldorf earned the nickname \"City of Art and Gardens.\" Prominent painters such as Peter von Cornelius and Wilhelm von Schadow, composers including Friedrich August Burgm\u00fcller, Felix Mendelssohn, and Robert Schumann, and writers like Karl Leberecht Immermann and Christian Dietrich Grabbe shaped D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s cultural life.\nDuring the period of industrialisation, D\u00fcsseldorf benefited from its favourable location on the Rhine, its proximity to the Ruhr region, opportunities to expand into the surrounding areas, and its connection to various railway lines. From the 1850s onwards, numerous industrial enterprises, particularly in the iron, steel, and chemical industries, settled in D\u00fcsseldorf, greatly increasing the demand for labour. The city also developed into a centre for associations, trade unions, and corporate headquarters, growing into an important industrial and commercial city by the end of the 19th century. D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s population grew from 40,000 in 1850 to 100,000 in 1882. In 1908 and 1909, the partially industrialised towns of Wersten, Gerresheim, Eller, Heerdt, Himmelgeist, Ludenberg, Rath, Stockum, and Vennhausen were incorporated into the city.\nDuring World War I, the Royal Naval Air Service (RNS) undertook the first Entente strategic bombing missions on 22 September 1914, when it bombed the Zeppelin bases in D\u00fcsseldorf. As both a garrison town and an armaments centre, D\u00fcsseldorf was particularly affected by the war.\nAfter the war, the city was occupied by Belgian and British forces after 1918 and by French troops from 1921 to 1925. In 1920, D\u00fcsseldorf became the centre of the General Strike that grew out of the resistance to the Kapp Putsch. On 15 April 1920, 45 delegates of the German Miners Union were murdered by the Freikorps.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, D\u00fcsseldorf was the location of a Nazi prison with several forced labour subcamps, five subcamps of the Buchenwald concentration camp for mostly Polish and Soviet prisoners, but also French, Dutch, Belgian, Czech, Italian, Yugoslav, and a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see \"Romani Holocaust\"). The Rabbi of the D\u00fcsseldorf Jewish Community fled to the Netherlands and died in KZ Auschwitz in 1943.\nThe city was a target of strategic bombing during World War II, particularly during the RAF bombing campaign in 1943 when over 700 bombers were used in a single night. Raids continued late into the war. As part of the campaign against German oil facilities, the RAF raid of 20\u201321 February 1945 on the Rhenania Ossag refinery in the Reisholz district of the city halted oil production there.\nThe Allied ground advance into Germany reached D\u00fcsseldorf in mid-April 1945. The United States 97th Infantry Division easily captured the city on 18 April 1945, after the local German Resistance group launched Aktion Rheinland.\nGerman Federal Republic.\nIn 1946, D\u00fcsseldorf was made capital of the newly established state of North Rhine-Westphalia. The establishment of ministries and the state parliament gave the city an important political role that it retains to the present day.\nThe immediate postwar decades were marked by reconstruction. Much of the old town and city center was rebuilt, though partly in modernist forms rather than historical replicas. D\u00fcsseldorf emerged as a key economic hub during the (\"economic miracle\") of the 1950s and 1960s, attracting industries such as steel, machinery, chemicals, and banking. From the 1960s onwards, the city developed into one of Germany\u2019s most important centres for trade fairs and international business. The Messe D\u00fcsseldorf became a leading venue for global exhibitions.\nBeginning in the 1950s, the Japanese community of D\u00fcsseldorf grew significantly as numerous Japanese companies opened offices in the city. The growing expatriate population led to the founding of the Japanese Club D\u00fcsseldorf in 1964. Two years later, in 1966, the Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry was established, which formalised the coordination of Japanese corporate interests in Germany. In 1971, the Japanese International School in D\u00fcsseldorf was established, followed by the creation of a Japanese garden in Nordpark in 1975. By the 1980s, D\u00fcsseldorf hosted the largest Japanese community in Germany. The city developed a distinctive \"Little Tokyo\" district along , where Japanese shops, restaurants, and cultural institutions were established.\nThe late 20th century saw the decline of heavy industry, but the city transitioned towards services, telecommunications, fashion, and advertising. After German reunification in 1990, D\u00fcsseldorf consolidated its status as a political, economic and cultural centre. From the late 20th century, urban renewal measures included the redevelopment of the Medienhafen (Media Harbour), with new buildings designed by international architects.\nGeography.\nPhysical geography.\nD\u00fcsseldorf lies at the centre of the Lower Rhine basin, where the delta of the D\u00fcssel flows into the Rhine. The city lies on the east side of the Rhine, except District 4 (Oberkassel, Niederkassel, Heerdt and L\u00f6rick). Across the Rhine, the city of Neuss stands on the delta of the Erft. D\u00fcsseldorf lies southwest of the Ruhr urban area, and in the middle of the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is built entirely on alluvium, mud, sand, clay and occasionally gravel. The highest point in D\u00fcsseldorf is the top of Sandberg in the far eastern part of the city (Hubbelrath borough) at . The lowest point is at the far northern end in Wittlaer borough where the Schwarzbach enters the Rhine, with an average elevation of .\nAdjacent cities and districts.\nThe following districts and cities border D\u00fcsseldorf (clockwise starting from the north): the City of Duisburg, the District of Mettmann (Ratingen, Mettmann, Erkrath, Hilden, Langenfeld, and Monheim), and the District of Neuss (Dormagen, Neuss, and Meerbusch).\nClimate.\nThe city has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\", mild in relation to East Germany). Like the rest of the lower Rhineland, D\u00fcsseldorf experiences moderate winters with little snowfall and mild to warm summers. The average annual temperature is with an average yearly precipitation of . The dominant wind direction is from the west with velocities in the range of , with gusts of . The wind is calm (defined as being under 2\u00a0m/s or 4.5\u00a0mph) about 35% of the time, more frequently at night and in the winter.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith a population of 653,253 within the city boundaries (31 December 2022), D\u00fcsseldorf is Germany's sixth largest city. Its population surpassed the threshold of 100,000 inhabitants during the height of industrialisation in 1882, and peaked at just over 705,000 in 1962. The city then began to lose residents, with many moving into neighbouring municipalities. However, since the late 1990s, the city's population has been slowly rising again.\nNationality.\nAccording to municipal data, as of 2019, 272,982 people, or 42.6% of D\u00fcsseldorf's residents had a migration background. Around 25.5% of the population held foreign citizenship in 2024. At the end of 2023, the largest groups of foreign citizens were Turkish, Ukrainian, Greek, Polish, and Italian nationals. Among these, Turkish citizens formed the largest single group, numbering approximately 12,800 persons. D\u00fcsseldorf and its surroundings have the third-largest Japanese community in Europe and the largest in Germany (about 11,000 people). As of 2023, 6,265 Japanese nationals lived in the city proper.\nReligion.\nAs early as 2006, 35.5% of D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s population did not belong to any organised religious community. At that time, the non-religious population already formed the largest group in the city, ahead of the Catholic and Protestant churches. At the end of February 2025, the Evangelical Church had 85,269 members, and at the end of 2024 the Roman Catholic Church had 147,648 members, together representing just over one-third of the city\u2019s 658,245 inhabitants. In addition to the major Christian denominations, D\u00fcsseldorf is also home to numerous Eastern Orthodox communities and free churches.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has the third-largest Jewish community in Germany\u2014after Berlin and Munich\u2014with around 7,000 members. The New Synagogue, located on Zietenstra\u00dfe in Golzheim, was inaugurated in 1958.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is home to numerous Muslim communities, which do not form a single umbrella organisation but are structured according to the national backgrounds of their members\u2014Turkish, Bosnian, Moroccan, and other mosque associations. The largest Turkish organization, the Turkish-Islamic Union for Religious Affairs (DITIB), operates three mosques in D\u00fcsseldorf, located in L\u00f6rick, Eller, and Derendorf. According to a calculation based on census data for residents with a migration background, the proportion of Muslims in D\u00fcsseldorf was 8.3% (about 48,900 people) in 2011.\nIn the district of Niederkassel stands the only J\u014ddo Shinsh\u016b Buddhist temple in Europe, located on the grounds of the Japanese Ek\u014d House established by the Japanese community.\nGovernment.\nBoroughs.\nSince 1975, D\u00fcsseldorf is divided into ten administrative boroughs. Each borough (\"Stadtbezirk\") has its own elected borough council (Bezirksvertretung) and its own borough mayor (Bezirksvorsteher). The borough councils are advisory only. Each borough is further subdivided into quarters (\"Stadtteile\"). There are 50 quarters in D\u00fcsseldorf.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of D\u00fcsseldorf is Stephan Keller of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), who was elected in 2020 and reelected in 2025.\nThe most recent mayoral election was held on 14 September 2025, with a runoff held on 28 September, and the results were as follows:\nCity council.\nThe D\u00fcsseldorf city council (\"D\u00fcsseldorfer Stadtrat\") governs the city alongside the mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 14 September 2025, and the results were as follows:\nEconomy.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is among the leading economic centres of Germany. The city combines a strong service economy with diversified industrial activity. As of 2023, D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s GDP was approximately \u20ac62.7 billion, making it the 8th highest among German cities in terms of economic output. In 2024, the city\u2019s unemployment rate averaged 7.7%.\nD\u00fcsseldorf forms a joint economic region with the neighbouring district of Mettmann. It is the wealthiest economic region in North Rhine-Westphalia. As of 2023, the region had a GDP per capita of around \u20ac72,900, with the city of D\u00fcsseldorf itself reaching \u20ac93,600 per capita, while the district of Mettmann was closer to the state average at \u20ac46,300. Productivity, measured as GDP per working hour, was also significantly higher than the state average: employees in the D\u00fcsseldorf region generated about \u20ac71.3 per hour, compared with \u20ac61.2 per hour in North Rhine-Westphalia. The region\u2019s purchasing power is the highest in North Rhine-Westphalia, both per capita and per household.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has become one of the top telecommunications centres in Germany. With two of the four big German providers of mobile frequencies, D2 Vodafone and E-Plus, D\u00fcsseldorf leads the German mobile phone market. There are many foreign information and communication technology companies in D\u00fcsseldorf such as Huawei, NTT, Ericsson, Oppo, Vivo and Xiaomi. There are 18 internet service providers located in the capital of North Rhine-Westphalia. Eurowings, a low-cost carrier wholly owned by the Lufthansa Group, is headquartered in the city.\nMany of the internet companies in D\u00fcsseldorf have their roots in the world of advertising: there are 400 advertising agencies in D\u00fcsseldorf, among them four of the largest in Germany: BBDO Worldwide, Havas Worldwide, Grey Global Group and Publicis. A number of affiliates of foreign agencies deserve mention as well, such as Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Dentsu, Hakuhodo, TBWA, and DDB. There are also about 200 publishing houses in D\u00fcsseldorf.\nBusinesses operating in D\u00fcsseldorf include Peek &amp; Cloppenburg (fashion); Uniper (electricity generation); L'Or\u00e9al Germany (cosmetics and beauty); Net mobile AG (business-to-business service provider in mobile telecommunications); Henkel AG &amp; Co. KGaA (branded consumer goods and industrial technologies); Rheinmetall (automotive and arms); Teekanne GmbH &amp; Co. KG (tea bags and iced tea products); Metro (wholesale, retail); Ceconomy (retail); BASF personal care &amp; nutrition (formerly Cognis \u2013 chemicals, headquarters in Monheim near D\u00fcsseldorf, but production mainly in D\u00fcsseldorf). Daimler AG builds the Mercedes-Benz Sprinter light commercial vehicles in D\u00fcsseldorf.\nThe \"K\u00f6\", which stands for K\u00f6nigsallee (\"King's Avenue\"), is a shopping destination. Many jewellery shops, designer labels, and galleries have store locations here. The K\u00f6 has among the highest rents for retail and office space in Germany.\nFinancial centre.\nThe city is an important financial center. More than 30,000 people work for the financial and insurance sector in D\u00fcsseldorf. There are around 170 national and international financial institutions, and about 130 insurance agencies, and one of Germany's eight stock exchanges. HSBC has its German headquarters in D\u00fcsseldorf and employs 3,000 people. NRW.BANK is a development bank of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia and the largest state development bank in Germany. NRW.BANK was spun off from WestLB in 2002. Today Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank have major branches in D\u00fcsseldorf with about 2,000 employees. D\u00fcsseldorf is also the most important German financial center for Japanese credit institutions. MUFG Bank, SMBC and Mizuho have offices in D\u00fcsseldorf. Also the German retail banking division of Santander (known as Santander Consumer Bank) has its headquarters in the D\u00fcsseldorf region. Some major insurance companies such as ERGO, a subsidiary of Munich Re, and ARAG are located in the city. Several other major financial service companies have their headquarters in the city.\nTrade fairs.\nMesse D\u00fcsseldorf is a major trade fair organiser whose events attract hundreds of thousands of visitors annually and contribute substantially to the local economy. Among the best-known fairs are drupa (printing and paper technologies), boot D\u00fcsseldorf (one of the world\u2019s largest boat and water sports exhibitions), and MEDICA (medical technology).\nIn 2023, Messe D\u00fcsseldorf organised 27 trade shows in the city, attracting 26,866 exhibitors and 1,146,874 visitors. Of these, about 78% of exhibitors came from abroad.\nInternational business.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is notable for its high concentration of foreign companies. Since the 1960s, there has been a strong relationship between the city and Japan. Many Japanese banks and corporations have their European headquarters in D\u00fcsseldorf \u2013 so many that D\u00fcsseldorf has the third largest Japanese community in Europe, after London and Paris. The city also attracts multinationals from other countries: L\u2019Or\u00e9al (France), Vodafone (United Kingdom), and Huawei (China) are examples of major international companies with a strong presence.\nAs of 2023, more than one in six member-companies of the D\u00fcsseldorf Chamber of Commerce and Industry had majority foreign ownership. Between 2010 and 2023, the number of foreign companies grew by 60%.\nMedia.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is home to studios of the public broadcasters Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR Studio D\u00fcsseldorf) and Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (ZDF Regional Studio D\u00fcsseldorf). Programs from NRW.TV and QVC also originate from D\u00fcsseldorf. The statewide educational television channel NRWision features on its media platform TV programs about D\u00fcsseldorf or produced by TV creators from D\u00fcsseldorf.\nThe city is also home to the 1990-founded \"Verbands der Betriebsgesellschaften in Nordrhein-Westfalen e. V.\" (Association of Operating Companies in North Rhine-Westphalia (BGNRW)), which represents the interests of 43 operating companies in the North Rhine-Westphalian local radio sector. The private radio station Antenne D\u00fcsseldorf, which receives a framework program from Radio NRW, is located in D\u00fcsseldorf. Radio for D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s universities is produced by \"hochschulradio d\u00fcsseldorf\", a campus radio station with its own 24-hour frequency. StreamD has existed since 2020.\nDaily newspapers published in D\u00fcsseldorf include the Westdeutsche Zeitung, Rheinische Post, a local edition of Express, and regional pages of the Neue Rhein/Neue Ruhr-Zeitung originating from Essen. Major nationwide publications based in the city include Handelsblatt and Wirtschaftswoche.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is additionally the highest-revenue advertising location in Germany. Alongside major agencies such as BBDO, Grey, Ogilvy &amp; Mather, Havas, and Publicis, numerous smaller agencies have their headquarters or a German branch office in D\u00fcsseldorf.\nTransport.\nAir.\nD\u00fcsseldorf Airport, also referred to as Rhein-Ruhr Airport, is located north of the city centre in the district of Lohausen and can easily be reached by train or the S-Bahn urban railway. There is a long-distance train station served by regional and national services, which is linked to the airport by the SkyTrain, an automatic people mover. Another station situated under the terminal building carries the S-Bahn line (S11) to D\u00fcsseldorf Central Station, and to Cologne as well as a few selected night services.\nAfter those of Frankfurt, Munich and Berlin, D\u00fcsseldorf Airport is Germany's fourth largest commercial airport, with 25.5 million passengers annually (2019). The airport offers 180 destinations on four continents, and is served by 70 airlines.\nThe airport buildings were partly destroyed by a devastating fire caused by welding works in 1996, killing 17 people. Following this event, it was completely rebuilt and the Skytrain was installed.\nRail.\nThe city is a major hub in the Deutsche Bahn (DB) railway network. More than 1,000 trains stop in D\u00fcsseldorf daily. D\u00fcsseldorf Central Station at Konrad-Adenauer-Platz is located in D\u00fcsseldorf-Stadtmitte. Several Rhein-Ruhr S-Bahn lines connect D\u00fcsseldorf to other cities of Rhine-Ruhr.\nThe following railway lines run through the city:\nAt D\u00fcsseldorf Central Station\u2014the main long-distance station, located at its current site since 1891\u2014these railway lines (except the freight line) are connected with each other, with the city\u2019s light rail system, and with the rest of the public transport network.\nOn the Cologne\u2013Duisburg line near the airport lies D\u00fcsseldorf Airport Station, where, in addition to trains on one S-Bahn line and all seven Regional-Express lines, some of the ICE and EC/IC trains stopping here also call. Passengers and visitors can reach the airport terminals, located about 2.5 kilometers away, via the SkyTrain. There is also a second rail connection to the airport through the underground terminus station D\u00fcsseldorf Airport Terminal, served by another S-Bahn line during the day and by extended nighttime services of several Regional-Express and additional S-Bahn lines.\nAlso on the Cologne\u2013Duisburg line, but in the south of D\u00fcsseldorf, is D\u00fcsseldorf-Benrath regional station, served throughout the day by two Regional-Express lines and one S-Bahn line. Also notable is D\u00fcsseldorf-Bilk station on the M\u00f6nchengladbach\u2013D\u00fcsseldorf line, a heavily used transfer point between four Regional-Express lines, one Regionalbahn line, three S-Bahn lines, the light-rail trains operating on the Wehrhahn Line, and the bus connections to Heinrich Heine University.\nIncluding the stations mentioned above, there are 25 S-Bahn stations within the city.\nIn freight rail transport, however, D\u00fcsseldorf is no longer a railway hub since the closure and demolition of its D\u00fcsseldorf-Derendorf marshalling yard. The largest freight yard in the D\u00fcsseldorf railway area is now in the neighboring city of Neuss.\nCarsharing.\nIn addition to stationary car sharing, where vehicles must be returned to their original location after use, one-way carsharing vehicles have also been available for hire since 2012. These vehicles, which can be parked anywhere where parking is normally allowed within D\u00fcsseldorf, can be rented from Car2go, Greenwheels, Stadtmobil and DriveNow.\nStreets and highways.\nAfter World War II, city traffic planning was shaped mainly by Friedrich Tamms, a proponent of the car-oriented city. In addition to projects such as the Rheinkniebr\u00fccke and the Oberkasseler Br\u00fccke, he planned a third high-capacity north\u2013south axis between Golzheim and Wersten. The Berliner Allee and the elevated road continuing northward\u2014nicknamed the Tausendf\u00fc\u00dfler (lit. \"centipede\"), demolished in April 2013 and replaced by tunnels beneath the K\u00f6-Bogen\u2014were central projects on this axis and were built between 1954 and 1962.\nThe federal highways B1 and B8 cross the city in a north\u2013south direction, while the B7 runs east\u2013west. The B228 connects D\u00fcsseldorf-Benrath with Hilden, Haan, and Wuppertal. D\u00fcsseldorf is unique in Germany in that three single-digit federal highways run along the same alignment. Their present course and character are the result of:\nToday, all federal highways in the city primarily serve urban through-traffic and traffic to and from the motorways, which outside the city area have taken over the role of federal highways in the long-distance road network. North Rhine-Westphalia has the densest network of motorways in Germany and D\u00fcsseldorf is directly accessible via the A3, A44, A46, A52, A57, A59 and A524.\nPublic local transport.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has a dense network of S-Bahn, light rail (Stadtbahn), tram, and city bus lines, all of which are part of the Rhine-Ruhr Transport Association (VRR). Public local transport (\u00d6PNV) within the city area is operated by Rheinbahn, Regiobahn, and various companies in regional rail transport. All lines can be used with VRR tickets. Beyond the VRR tariff area, the NRW tariff applies, and for journeys toward the greater Cologne area, the tariff of the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Sieg (VRS) also applies.\nA tram network was developed toward the end of the 19th century, initially using cars pulled by horses along the tracks, and from 1896 switched to electric operation. This rail network also included interurban lines to Krefeld (the K-Line) and Duisburg (the D-Line), as well as from Benrath to Solingen-Ohligs. The connections to Krefeld and Duisburg still exist today as Stadtbahn lines U70 and U76 (Krefeld), and U79 (Duisburg). Additional cross-city lines run to Neuss and Ratingen. As the light rail network expanded, the tram network decreased from 19 lines in 1981 to seven lines in 2018, with a route length of 70.2 kilometers.\nThe D\u00fcsseldorf light rail system currently consists of eleven lines. Seven of them run through the inner-city tunnel, opened in 1988, between the Heinrich-Heine-Allee underground station and the central station. Another tunnel route for four new light rail lines, the Wehrhahn Line, was opened on February 20, 2016. Heinrich-Heine-Allee station is the central transfer point between all light rail lines. All tunnel routes have above-ground approach tracks, only some of which have dedicated or special trackways.\nBus lines have been operating in D\u00fcsseldorf since 1924. In addition to city bus lines within the city area, regional buses provided connections to other cities, particularly after operations on some interurban tram lines were discontinued. In the meantime, Rheinbahn has discontinued its line to J\u00fclich and shortened other lines to Essen, Velbert, Solingen, Leichlingen, Opladen, and Moers. Today, connections still exist to M\u00fclheim an der Ruhr, Mettmann, Erkrath, Solingen-Ohligs, Langenfeld, and Monheim; express buses now also run to Haan. Today, 42 city bus lines and seven express bus lines operate within the city. Buses are also an essential component of night service on Friday/Saturday nights, Saturday/Sunday nights, and nights before public holidays. Eight NightExpress lines operate between midnight and 5:00 a.m. at 30- or 60-minute intervals. Metrobus service on three lines began on August 20, 2018.\nCycling and pedestrian traffic.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is connected to several national and international long-distance cycling routes, including the Rhine Cycle Route. The city is a member of \"Arbeitsgemeinschaft fu\u00dfg\u00e4nger- und fahrradfreundlicher St\u00e4dte, Gemeinden und Kreise in Nordrhein-Westfalen\" (Working Group of Pedestrian- and Bicycle-Friendly Cities, Municipalities, and Districts in North Rhine-Westphalia).\nSince 2008, D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s city centre has had a bicycle-sharing system with a network structure that is also suitable for one-way trips. The operator is the company nextbike. Pedelecs can be rented at the bicycle station at the main train station. Since 2020, rental bicycles of Deutsche Bahn (Call a Bike) may no longer be parked in public street space in D\u00fcsseldorf, such as on sidewalks. The City of D\u00fcsseldorf issued an administrative order requiring the operator to remove the entire fleet from public spaces and to refrain from parking the bicycles there in the future.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is the only city in Germany whose pedestrian traffic lights have a separate yellow phase. Here, the yellow signal is indicated by a rectangular yellow bar. During this time, pedestrians have the opportunity to clear the intersection without having to walk against a red signal, as they would in other cities. Immediately after the pedestrian signal switches from yellow to red, the green phase for cross traffic begins. Before the green phase for pedestrians, there is also a short red-yellow phase lasting less than one second.\nShipping traffic and ports.\nWith the centrally located harbour in the district of the same name and the Reisholz harbour \u2014 whose expansion has been planned for a long time \u2014 two transshipment points for goods are available to Rhine shipping within the city area. Through the Rhine, the connected canals, and the Main\u2013Danube Canal, D\u00fcsseldorf is extensively linked to the European inland waterway network \u2014 including the Ems, Weser, Elbe, Oder, and Danube \u2014 as well as to major seaports on the North Sea and the Black Sea. There is a sports and yacht harbour at Rheinpark Golzheim.\nBetween the Old Town and Kaiserswerth, passenger ships of the Weisse Flotte D\u00fcsseldorf operate regularly; before 1993, they were operated by Rheinbahn. K\u00f6ln-D\u00fcsseldorfer Rheinschifffahrts AG (KD) also has landing stages within the city area. With the Langst\u2013Kaiserswerth Rhine ferry and the ferry between Urdenbach and Zons, two car ferries are still in service. A third car ferry operated between Himmelgeist and Uedesheim until the opening of the Flehe Bridge in 1979. Today, on Sundays in good weather, a passenger ferry with bicycle transport operates there. For several years now, passenger ferries have also operated between the Rheinkirmes fairgrounds and the Old Town.\nCulture.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is one of Germany\u2019s arts and culture hubs. Elector Jan Wellem and his wife Anna Maria Luisa de' Medici of Tuscany, were patrons of D\u00fcsseldorf's first significant cultural activities in the 17th and 18th centuries. In addition to the large North Rhine-Westphalia Art Collection and other museums and galleries, the city is home to the renowned D\u00fcsseldorf Art Academy, which produced the D\u00fcsseldorf School of Painting in the 19th century and the D\u00fcsseldorf School of Photography in the 20th century. Well-known stages such as the Schauspielhaus and the Kom(m)\u00f6dchen are represented in the city. Moreover, several of Germany\u2019s popular musicians and poets were born in D\u00fcsseldorf or made the city their home. Heinrich Heine; Clara and Robert Schumann; Felix Mendelssohn, and Joseph Beuys are among the most prominent artists related to the city.\nMuseums and galleries.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is a centre for visual arts, with a long tradition rooted in the Kunstakademie D\u00fcsseldorf (D\u00fcsseldorf Art Academy), an institution that has shaped several major European art movements, such as the D\u00fcsseldorf School of Painting in the 19th century. During the post-war period the academy became internationally influential through the D\u00fcsseldorf School of Photography, associated with figures such as Bernd and Hilla Becher, Andreas Gursky, Thomas Struth, and Candida H\u00f6fer.\nThe city hosts numerous museums and galleries covering a broad range of artistic disciplines. The Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen (K20 and K21) displays an extensive collection of modern and contemporary art, including works by Pablo Picasso, Paul Klee, Gerhard Richter, and Joseph Beuys. The Museum Kunstpalast, located near the Rhine, houses artworks from the medieval period to the present day and is known for its collection of Baroque painting and glass art. Several smaller institutions contribute to D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s cultural landscape, including the NRW Forum, which focuses on photography, design, and digital culture, and the Kunst im Tunnel (KIT), which exhibits contemporary art in a tunnel space beneath the Rhine promenade. The Hetjens-Museum, dedicated to ceramics, and the Goethe-Museum, located in Schloss J\u00e4gerhof, further reflect the city\u2019s diverse museum scene.\nIn addition to visual arts, D\u00fcsseldorf maintains a variety of museums that cover science, history, and regional culture. The Filmmuseum D\u00fcsseldorf showcases the history of film and cinema technology, including equipment and screenings of classic films. The Aquazoo L\u00f6bbecke Museum combines zoological exhibits with natural history, featuring local and exotic animal species alongside ecological and environmental displays. The Stadtmuseum D\u00fcsseldorf provides an overview of the city's history and culture, displaying artifacts ranging from prehistory to contemporary times. The Haus der Geschichte Nordrhein-Westfalen presents the history and development of North Rhine-Westphalia, highlighting themes such as democracy, diversity, and societal change. Additionally, the Schifffahrtsmuseum documents the city\u2019s maritime history and its development as a major Rhine port.\nPerforming arts.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has a theatre tradition that can be traced back to the 16th century. The earliest theatrical events are dated to the year 1585. The present D\u00fcsseldorfer Schauspielhaus, with its modern curved architecture, was completed in 1970 and is the city's largest theatre. It is located on Gustaf-Gr\u00fcndgens-Platz, named after the former artistic director.\nOther major theatres in the North Rhine-Westphalian metropolis include the Forum Freies Theater, which presents performing arts; the Kom\u00f6die D\u00fcsseldorf, a classic boulevard theatre; the \"Theater an der K\u00f6\", which primarily offers comedies and modern plays and is run by the well-known Heinersdorff theatre family; the \"Theater an der Luegallee\" in Oberkassel; the KaBARett FLiN in Grafenberg; and the Savoy Theatre.\nFor children, the \"Theateratelier Takelgarn\"\u2014with comedy, cabaret, puppetry, and children\u2019s theatre\u2014is particularly appealing. The Puppet Theatre on Helmholtzstra\u00dfe, as well as the D\u00fcsseldorf Marionette Theatre, caters to both children and adults. The latter was founded in 1956 and is located in Palais Wittgenstein, which also houses various other cultural projects.\nOpera, musical theatre, and variety.\nThe Deutsche Oper am Rhein also has a very long tradition. At its two venues in D\u00fcsseldorf and Duisburg, it presents opera, operetta, and ballet.\nThe Apollo Variet\u00e9, located beneath the Rheinknie Bridge on the Carlstadt riverbank, offers classic variety theatre in the style of the early 20th century.\nThe Tonhalle D\u00fcsseldorf, built in 1925 as a planetarium, is a venue for concerts and other musical events spanning classical music, jazz, pop, and cabaret.\nThe Capitol Theater is the largest theatre in the state capital and hosts changing productions of musicals and live entertainment.\nCabaret.\nThe Kom(m)\u00f6dchen is the oldest cabaret stage in Germany still in existence. It was founded in 1946 by Kay and Lore Lorentz. Many cabaret artists who later became prominent first proved themselves here.\nTanzhaus NRW.\nTanzhaus NRW (stylized as \"tanzhaus nrw\") in D\u00fcsseldorf is an institution for dance founded in 1998. It offers stage performances, professional dance training, the development of productions within the framework of choreographer residencies, as well as a wide range of educational opportunities through courses and workshops under one roof.\nMusic.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has been home to a number of influential music artists and bands, particularly in the electronic and krautrock genres, with Kraftwerk being the most prominent example. As one source describes, \"This is the place where Neu! conceived the motorik beat, Harmonia dreamed up ambient, Die Krupps expanded the idea of industrial, and where those brilliant mensch-maschines Kraftwerk, declared: 'We are the robots'.\"\nThe city's best-known contribution to the culture of modern popular music is the influential avant-garde electronic band Kraftwerk. Formed by two D\u00fcsseldorf-born musicians, Kraftwerk is internationally known as the most significant band in the history of post-war German music and as pioneers in electronic music.\nOther influential musical groups originating from D\u00fcsseldorf include Neu!, formed in 1971 by Klaus Dinger and Michael Rother, after their split from Kraftwerk, and La D\u00fcsseldorf, also formed by Dinger in 1976 shortly after Neu! disbanded. Both groups had a significant influence on a variety of subsequent rock, post-punk, and electronic music artists.\nInternationally known power metal band Warlock was formed in D\u00fcsseldorf in 1982. Its frontwoman, Doro Pesch, has had a successful solo career in Europe and Asia since Warlock ended. The punk band Die Toten Hosen, the electronic act D.A.F., as well as the electronic/industrial pioneers Die Krupps, all originated in D\u00fcsseldorf.\nD\u00fcsseldorf appears in several songs, including \"D\u00fcsseldorf\" by the British indie band Teleman and \"W\u00e4rst du doch in D\u00fcsseldorf geblieben\" by Danish singer Dorthe Kollo.\nThe city hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2011.\nLiterature.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has a long literary tradition that reflects its role as a cultural centre of the Rhineland. The city is associated with the Romantic poet Heinrich Heine, who was born in D\u00fcsseldorf in 1797 and spent his childhood there. The Heinrich Heine Institute preserves his manuscripts and correspondence, and also functions as a research centre and museum dedicated to 19th- and 20th-century German literature.\nContemporary literary life in the city is supported by the Literaturb\u00fcro NRW, which organises readings, workshops and projects to promote authors and literary education across D\u00fcsseldorf and North Rhine-Westphalia. The annual Literaturtage D\u00fcsseldorf (D\u00fcsseldorf Literature Days) presents a programme of readings and events at venues across the city. In addition, the Central Library D\u00fcsseldorf regularly hosts author readings and cultural programmes, strengthening the city's reputation as a hub for literary exchange.\nThe F\u00f6rderpreis f\u00fcr Literatur der Landeshauptstadt D\u00fcsseldorf is a German literary award established by the City of D\u00fcsseldorf. The award has been presented annually since 1972 by the City Council.\nFashion.\nD\u00fcsseldorf has been the fashion capital of Germany for decades; it is also a major cultural centre for the art scene. Berlin, Germany's 'fashion capital' until 1945, lost its position because of its special location within the Soviet occupation zone. After the monetary reform of 20 June 1948, fashionable clothes trends gained importance. Igedo organised fashion shows staged in D\u00fcsseldorf starting in March 1949.\nThere are a number of schools dedicated to fashion design in D\u00fcsseldorf, among them \"Akademie Mode &amp; Design\" (), \"Design Department\", and \"Mode Design College\".\nCarnival.\nOne of the biggest cultural events in D\u00fcsseldorf is the \"Karneval\" (also referred to as the \"fifth season\") which starts every year on 11 November at 11:11\u00a0a.m., and reaches its climax on \"Rosenmontag\" (Rose Monday), featuring a huge parade through the streets of D\u00fcsseldorf. \"Karneval\" ends on \"Aschermittwoch\" (Ash Wednesday).\nD\u00fcsseldorf's cartwheeler.\nD\u00fcsseldorf's cartwheeler () is said to be the city's oldest tradition. There are different theories about its origin. The cartwheeler symbol appears on souvenirs, and many things in D\u00fcsseldorf owe their names to the cartwheeler.\nCartwheelers can be found at several fountains within the city and near many small landmarks. The most famous is Cartwheeler's Fountain on \"Burgplatz\" (). The fountain was designed by Alfred Zschorsch in 1954 and donated by \"Heimatverein D\u00fcsseldorfer Jonges\", which is a club devoted to the maintenance of local and regional traditions. Other cartwheelers can be found decorating storm drains and the door knocker of the Church of Lambertus, designed by Friedrich Becker. Becker also created the cartwheeler in front of the Schadow Arcades.\nThe tradition has been kept alive by the \"Alde D\u00fcsseldorfer B\u00fcrgergesellschaft von 1920 e. V.\", a society founded in 1920, which organised the first cartwheeler competition on 17 October 1937. This event has been held annually since 1971. Formerly held on K\u00f6nigsallee, since 2006 it has taken place on the \"Rheinwerft\", near the Old Town. In an art project \"Radschl\u00e4ger-Kunst\" (Cartwheeler Art) launched in 2001, over 100 cartwheeler sculptures were designed by various artists. They were positioned around the city centre. Some of the sculptures have been auctioned off to companies and private owners.\nCuisine.\nTraditional meals in the region are Rheinischer Sauerbraten (a beef roast and sometimes horse marinated for a few days in vinegar and spices served with gravy and raisins) and Heaven and Earth (Himmel und \u00c4d; black pudding with stewed apples mixed with mashed potatoes). In winter the people like to eat Muscheln Rheinischer Art (Rhenish-style mussels) as well as Reibekuchen which is a fried potato pancake served with apple sauce.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is known for its strong Dijon-like mustard served in a traditional pot called \"Mostertp\u00f6ttche\", which was immortalised in a still life by Vincent van Gogh in 1884. Therefore, also among the local dishes is the D\u00fcsseldorfer Senfrostbraten, including medium rare steaks roasted with D\u00fcsseldorf mustard and onion crust. Sides may include roast potatoes and a small salad in a restaurant, making this local dish a menu staple where upscale cuisine is served. D\u00fcsseldorf's Old Town has over 250 pubs and bars, often serving Altbier in a 0.25-liter glass. D\u00fcsseldorf Altbier is top-fermented beer of spicy aroma.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is noted for its diverse culinary scene. It hosts a large Japanese community, which has contributed to a strong presence of authentic Asian cuisine. D\u00fcsseldorf\u2019s gastronomy has been recognised by the travel guide Lonely Planet for its quality and variety. In addition to a wide range of international dining options, the city is home to several Michelin-starred restaurants.\nLocal specialties include:\nHalve Hahn \u2013 this dish is made from a half a double rye roll, which is another of the specialties of D\u00fcsseldorf, buttered, with a thick slice of aged Gouda cheese, onions, mustard, ground paprika and sour pickles.\nHimmel un Aad \u2013 a dish of mashed potatoes and apples along with slices of blutwurst. Caramelized onions are usually served with this meal.\nReibekuchen is another famous dish from D\u00fcsseldorf; this dish is usually drizzled with R\u00fcbensyrup (beet syrup) and is served on pumpernickel slices along with applesauce.\nBeer.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is well known for its Altbier, a hoppy beer which translates as \"old [style] beer\", a reference to the pre-lager brewing method of using a warm top-fermenting yeast like British pale ales. Over time the Alt yeast adjusted to lower temperatures, and the Alt brewers would store or lager the beer after fermentation, leading to a cleaner, crisper beer. The name \"altbier\" first appeared in the 19th century to differentiate the beers of D\u00fcsseldorf from the new pale lager that was gaining a hold on Germany.\nBrewers in D\u00fcsseldorf used the pale malts that were used for the modern pale lagers, but retained the old (\"alt\") method of using warm fermenting yeasts. The first brewery to use the name Alt was Schumacher, which opened in 1838. The founder, Mathias Schumacher, allowed the beer to mature in cool conditions in wooden casks for longer than normal, and laid the foundation for the modern alt \u2013 amber coloured and lagered. The result is a pale beer that has some of the lean dryness of a lager but with fruity notes as well.\nThere are five brewpubs in D\u00fcsseldorf that brew Altbier on site: Brauerei im F\u00fcchschen, Schumacher, Hausbrauerei Zum Schl\u00fcssel, Uerige, and Brauerei K\u00fcrzer. Four of the five are in the historic centre (Altstadt); the fifth, Schumacher, lies between the Altstadt and D\u00fcsseldorf Hauptbahnhof, but also maintains an establishment in the Altstadt () across the street from .\nEach (except Brauerei K\u00fcrzer) produces a special, secret, seasonal \"Sticke\" version in small quantities, though the names vary: Schl\u00fcssel spells it \"Stike\", without the \"c\", while Schumacher calls its special beer \"Latzenbier\", meaning \"slat beer\", possibly because the kegs from which it was poured had been stored on raised shelves. F\u00fcchschen's seasonal is its Weihnachtsbier (Christmas beer), available in bottles starting mid-November, and served in the brewpub on Christmas Eve.\nChristmas market.\nEvery Christmas, the city of D\u00fcsseldorf uses the city centre to host one of the largest Christmas gatherings in Germany. The Christmas festival occurs every year from 17 November until 23 December. This Christmas festival is responsible for a large portion of tourism every year as many people from nearby areas come to the city to drink mulled wine and hot chocolate and watch craftsmen blow glass and create art. The event takes place among many small wooden buildings all clustered in the middle of the city for all the citizens to enjoy. The event, to many visitors, has an old European feel, but is very lively.\nRivalry with Cologne.\nD\u00fcsseldorf and Cologne have had a \"fierce regional rivalry\". The rivalry includes carnival parades, football, ice hockey and beer. People in Cologne prefer K\u00f6lsch while people in D\u00fcsseldorf prefer Altbier. Some Waiters and patrons will \"scorn\" and make a \"mockery\" of people who order Alt beer in Cologne and K\u00f6lsch in D\u00fcsseldorf. The rivalry has been described as a \"love-hate relationship\".\nSports.\nD\u00fcsseldorf's main football team Fortuna D\u00fcsseldorf won the 1933 German championship, the German Cup in 1979 and 1980, and were finalists in the European Cup Winners Cup in 1979. They currently play in the 2. Bundesliga, after being relegated from the Bundesliga in 2020. They play their matches in the Merkur Spiel-Arena (formerly known as the \"ESPRIT Arena\" from 2009\u20132018 and as the \"LTU Arena\" before 2009), a multi-functional stadium with a capacity of 54,500 people.\nD\u00fcsseldorf was one of nine host cities for the 1974 FIFA World Cup, and is one of ten venues staging the 2024 UEFA European Championship. The Rochusclub D\u00fcsseldorf has hosted the tennis World Team Cup from 1978 until 2012.\nD\u00fcsseldorf also hosted the Grand D\u00e9part for the Tour de France in July 2017.\nOther sports in D\u00fcsseldorf are ice hockey (the D\u00fcsseldorfer EG which play in the PSD Bank Dome) and American football. The D\u00fcsseldorf Panther are one of the most successful teams in Germany with six German Bowl titles and the Eurobowl victory in 1995. In addition the Junior Team are the most successful youth department in Germany with fifteen Junior Bowl victories. Rhine Fire D\u00fcsseldorf were an established team of the NFL Europe and won the World Bowl two times in 1998 and 2000. D\u00fcsseldorf has a successful rugby union team (D\u00fcsseldorf Dragons), who as of 2017/18 play in the western division of the 2. Bundesliga, the second tier of German rugby.\nTable tennis is also played (Borussia D\u00fcsseldorf \u2013 the most successful team in Germany with Timo Boll), as are handball (HSG D\u00fcsseldorf), basketball (D\u00fcsseldorf Giants), baseball (D\u00fcsseldorf Senators) and dancing (Rot-Wei\u00df D\u00fcsseldorf). D\u00fcsseldorf also has a Cricket team, the D\u00fcsseldorf Blackcaps, who play in the regional NRW league.\nEducation.\nHeinrich Heine University D\u00fcsseldorf is located in the southern part of the city.\nIt has about 30,000 students and a wide range of subjects in natural sciences, mathematics, computer sciences, philosophy, social sciences, arts, languages, medicine, pharmacy, economy and the law. The institution was founded in 1907 as an academy for practical medicine and was elevated to university status in 1965. It has its current name since 1988.\nOther academic institutions include:\nInternational primary and secondary schools:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nD\u00fcsseldorf is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendship and cooperation.\nD\u00fcsseldorf also cooperates with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\nHonors.\nThe city of D\u00fcsseldorf awards, in addition to honorary citizenship, other honors and distinctions.\nSince 1972, the Heinrich Heine Prize has been awarded every three years, and since 1981 every two years, to \u201cindividuals who, through their intellectual work in the spirit of the human rights for which Heinrich Heine advocated, promote social and political progress, serve international understanding, or spread awareness of the interconnectedness of all people.\u201d The predecessor of this prize was the Immermann Prize.\nThe Helmut K\u00e4utner Prize is an award given every two years to individuals who \u201cthrough their work have strongly supported and influenced the development of German film culture, promoted its understanding, and contributed to its recognition.\u201d\nSince 1972, the city of D\u00fcsseldorf has awarded seven annual grant prizes for outstanding artistic achievements to artists in the fields of visual arts, performing arts, music, and literature. It also supports artists in their further development. The \"F\u00f6rderpreis f\u00fcr Literatur der Landeshauptstadt D\u00fcsseldorf\" (Literary Advancement Prize of the State Capital D\u00fcsseldorf) is awarded to artists and groups, particularly in the fields of poetry, writing, criticism, and translation. The prize is awarded either for a single artistic achievement or for the overall work of a young artist whose further development deserves support.\nThe \"Kunstpreis der Landeshauptstadt D\u00fcsseldorf\" (Art Prize of the State Capital D\u00fcsseldorf) is an annual award given to a visual artist whose work is \u201cpioneering for the development of contemporary art.\u201d\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nLat. Long. "}
{"id": "65712", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65712", "title": "Battle of Nanking", "text": "1937 battle of the Second Sino-Japanese War\nThe Battle of Nanking (or Nanjing) was fought in early December 1937 during the Second Sino-Japanese War between the Chinese National Revolutionary Army and the Imperial Japanese Army for control of Nanjing (), the capital of the Republic of China.\nFollowing the outbreak of war between Japan and China in July 1937, the Japanese and Chinese forces engaged in the vicious three-month Battle of Shanghai, where both sides suffered heavy casualties. The Japanese eventually won the battle, forcing the Chinese army into a withdrawal. Capitalizing on their victory, the Japanese officially authorized a campaign to capture Nanjing. The task of occupying Nanjing was given to General Iwane Matsui, the commander of Japan's Central China Area Army, who believed that the capture of Nanjing would force China to surrender and thus end the war. Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek ultimately decided to defend the city and appointed Tang Shengzhi to command the Nanjing Garrison Force, a hastily assembled army of local conscripts and the remnants of the Chinese units who had fought in Shanghai.\nIn a five-week campaign between November 11 and December 9, the Japanese army marched from Shanghai to Nanjing at a rapid pace, pursuing the retreating Chinese army and overcoming all Chinese resistance in its way. The campaign was marked by tremendous brutality and destruction, with increasing levels of atrocities committed by Japanese forces against the local population, while Chinese forces implemented scorched earth tactics to slow the Japanese advances.\nNevertheless, by December 9 the Japanese had reached the last line of defense, the Fukuo Line, behind which lay Nanjing's fortified walls. On December 10 Matsui ordered an all-out attack on Nanjing, and after two days of intense fighting Chiang decided to abandon the city. To prevent the Nanjing defenders from being surrounded and annihilated by the enemy, Chiang Kai-shek considered ordering a retreat at noon on the 11th. He then instructed Gu Zhutong, then in Jiangbei, to convey this message by phone to Tang Shengzhi. Gu instructed Tang to cross the river north that night and order the defenders to break out if necessary. Tang Shengzhi, having previously advocated for a firm hold, feared the potential liability of a sudden withdrawal. Therefore, he demanded that the Supreme Commander's intentions be clearly conveyed to the defending generals before any withdrawal could be allowed. Tang Shengzhi, a man of urgency, insisted on receiving Chiang Kai-shek's personal order before retreating. That evening, Chiang Kai-shek indeed telegraphed Tang Shengzhi: \"If the situation cannot be sustained, you may retreat if necessary to regroup and prepare for a counterattack.\" Tang ordered his men to launch a concerted breakout of the Japanese siege, but by this time Nanjing was largely surrounded and its defenses were at the breaking point. Most of Tang's troops collapsed in a disorganized rout. While some units were able to escape, many more were caught in the death trap the city had become. By December 13, Nanjing had fallen to the Japanese.\nFollowing the capture of the city, Japanese forces massacred Chinese prisoners of war, murdered civilians, and committed acts of looting, torture, and rape in the Nanjing Massacre. Though Japan's victory excited and emboldened them, the subsequent massacre tarnished their reputation in the eyes of the world. Contrary to Matsui's expectations, China did not surrender and the Second Sino-Japanese War continued for another eight years, leading to the surrender of Japan.\nBackground.\nJapan's decision to capture Nanjing.\nThe conflict which would become known as the Second Sino-Japanese War started on July 7, 1937, with a skirmish at Marco Polo Bridge which escalated rapidly into a full-scale war in northern China between the armies of China and Japan. China, however, wanted to avoid a decisive confrontation in the north and so instead opened a second front by attacking Japanese units in Shanghai in central China. The Japanese responded by dispatching the Shanghai Expeditionary Army (SEA), commanded by General Iwane Matsui, to drive the Chinese Army from Shanghai. Intense fighting in Shanghai forced Japan's Army General Staff, which was in charge of military operations, to repeatedly reinforce the SEA, and finally on November 9 an entirely new army, the 10th Army commanded by Lieutenant General Heisuke Yanagawa, was also landed at Hangzhou Bay just south of Shanghai.\nAlthough the arrival of the 10th Army succeeded at forcing the Chinese Army to retreat from Shanghai, the Japanese Army General Staff had decided to adopt a policy of non-expansion of hostilities with the aim of ending the war. On November 7 its \"de facto\" leader Deputy Chief of Staff Hayao Tada laid down an \"operation restriction line\" preventing its forces from leaving the vicinity of Shanghai, or more specifically from going west of the Chinese cities of Suzhou and Jiaxing. The city of Nanjing is roughly west of Shanghai.\nHowever, a major rift of opinion existed between the Japanese government and its two field armies, the SEA and 10th Army, which as of November were both nominally under the control of the Central China Area Army led by SEA commander Matsui. Matsui made clear to his superiors even before he left for Shanghai that he wanted to march on Nanjing. He was convinced that the conquest of the Chinese capital city of Nanjing would provoke the fall of the entire Nationalist Government of China and thus hand Japan a quick and complete victory in its war on China. Yanagawa was likewise eager to conquer Nanjing and both men chafed under the operation restriction line that had been imposed on them by the Army General Staff.\nOn November 19 Yanagawa ordered his 10th Army to pursue retreating Chinese forces across the operation restriction line to Nanjing, a flagrant act of insubordination. When Tada discovered this the next day he ordered Yanagawa to stop immediately, but was ignored. Matsui made some effort to restrain Yanagawa, but also told him that he could send some advance units beyond the line. In fact, Matsui was highly sympathetic with Yanagawa's actions and a few days later on November 22 Matsui issued an urgent telegram to the Army General Staff insisting that \"To resolve this crisis in a prompt manner we need to take advantage of the enemy's present declining fortunes and conquer Nanking ... By staying behind the operation restriction line at this point we are not only letting our chance to advance slip by, but it is also having the effect of encouraging the enemy to replenish their fighting strength and recover their fighting spirit and there is a risk that it will become harder to completely break their will to make war.\"\nMeanwhile, as more and more Japanese units continued to slip past the operation restriction line, Tada was also coming under pressure from within the Army General Staff. Many of Tada's colleagues and subordinates, including the powerful Chief of the General Staff Operations Division Sadamu Shimomura, had come around to Matsui's viewpoint and wanted Tada to approve an attack on Nanjing. On November 24 Tada finally relented and abolished the operation restriction line \"owing to circumstances beyond our control\", and then several days later he reluctantly approved the operation to capture Nanjing. Tada flew to Shanghai in person on December 1 to deliver the order, though by then his own armies in the field were already well on their way to Nanjing.\nChina's decision to defend Nanjing.\nOn November 15, near the end of the Battle of Shanghai, Chiang Kai-shek convened a meeting of the Military Affairs Commission's Supreme National Defense Council to undertake strategic planning, including a decision on what to do in case of a Japanese attack on Nanjing. Here Chiang insisted fervently on mounting a sustained defense of Nanjing. Chiang argued, just as he had during the Battle of Shanghai, that China would be more likely to receive aid from the great powers, possibly at the ongoing Nine Power Treaty Conference, if it could prove on the battlefield its will and capacity to resist the Japanese. He also noted that holding onto Nanjing would strengthen China's hand in peace talks which he wanted the German ambassador Oskar Trautmann to mediate.\nChiang ran into stiff opposition from his officers, including the powerful Chief of Staff of the Military Affairs Commission He Yingqin, the Deputy Chief of Staff Bai Chongxi, the head of the Fifth War Zone Li Zongren, and his German advisor Alexander von Falkenhausen. They argued that the Chinese Army needed more time to recover from its losses at Shanghai, and pointed out that Nanjing was highly indefensible topographically. The gently sloping terrain in front of Nanjing would make it easy for the attackers to advance on the city, while the Yangtze River behind Nanjing would cut off the defenders' retreat.\nChiang, however, had become increasingly agitated over the course of the Battle of Shanghai, even angrily declaring that he would stay behind in Nanjing alone and command its defense personally. But just when Chiang believed himself completely isolated, General Tang Shengzhi, an ambitious senior member of the Military Affairs Commission, spoke out in defense of Chiang's position, although accounts vary on whether Tang vociferously jumped to Chiang's aid or only reluctantly did so. Seizing the opportunity Tang had given him, Chiang responded by organizing the Nanjing Garrison Force on November 20 and officially making Tang its commander on November 25. The orders Tang received from Chiang on November 30 were to \"defend the established defense lines at any cost and destroy the enemy's besieging force\".\nThough both men publicly declared that they would defend Nanjing \"to the last man\", they were aware of their precarious situation. On the same day that the Garrison Force was established Chiang officially moved the capital of China from Nanjing to Chongqing deep in China's interior. Further, both Chiang and Tang would at times give contradictory instructions to their subordinates on whether their mission was to defend Nanjing to the death or merely delay the Japanese advance.\nPrelude.\nChina's defense preparations.\nFollowing the Manchurian Incident of 1931, the Chinese government began a fast track national defense program with massive construction of primary and auxiliary air force bases around the capital of Nanjing including Jurong Airbase, completed in 1934, from which to facilitate aerial defense as well as launching counter-strikes against enemy incursions; on August 15, 1937, the IJN launched the first of many heavy \"schnellbomber\" (fast bomber) raids against Jurong Airbase using the advanced G3Ms based upon Giulio Douhet's blitz-attack concept in an attempt to neutralize the Chinese Air Force fighters guarding the capital city, but was severely repulsed by the unexpected heavy resistance and performance of the Chinese fighter pilots stationed at Jurong, and suffering almost 50% loss rate.\nOn November 20 the Chinese Army and teams of conscripted laborers began to hurriedly bolster Nanjing's defenses both inside and outside the city. Nanjing itself was surrounded by formidable stone walls stretching almost around the entire city. The walls, which had been constructed hundreds of years earlier during the Ming Dynasty, rose up to in height, were thick, and had been studded with machine gun emplacements. By December 6 all the gates into the city had been closed and then barricaded with an additional layer of sandbags and concrete thick.\nOutside the walls a series of semicircular defense lines were constructed in the path of the Japanese advance, most notably an outer one about from the city and an inner one directly outside the city known as the Fukuo Line, or multiple positions line. The Fukuo Line, a sprawling network of trenches, moats, barbed wire, mine fields, gun emplacements, and pillboxes, was to be the final defense line outside Nanjing's city walls. There were also two key high points of land on the Fukuo Line, the peaks of Zijinshan to the northeast and the plateau of Yuhuatai to the south, where fortification was especially dense. In order to deny the Japanese invaders any shelter or supplies in this area, Tang adopted a strategy of scorched earth on December 7, ordering all homes and structures in the path of the Japanese within one to of the city to be incinerated, as well as all homes and structures near roadways within of the city.\nChina's forces.\nThe defending army, the Nanjing Garrison Force, was on paper a formidable army of thirteen divisions, including three elite German-trained divisions plus the super-elite Training Brigade. The reality was that nearly all of these units, save for the 2nd Army Group, had been severely mauled from the combat in Shanghai. By the time they reached Nanjing they were physically exhausted, low on equipment, and badly depleted in total troop strength. In order to replenish some of these units, 16,000 young men and teenagers from Nanjing and the rural villages surrounding it were speedily pressed into service as new recruits.\nThe German trained units, the 36th, 87th and 88th Divisions, had each taken heavy casualties in Shanghai and saw their elite quality drop as a result. As of December, each division consisted of between 6,000 and 7,000 troops, of which roughly half were raw recruits. In addition to these units, the defenders of Nanjing and the outside defensive lines were composed of four Guangdong (Cantonese) divisions in the 66th and 83rd Corps, five divisions and two brigades from Sichuan in the 23rd Group Army, and two divisions from the NRA Central Army in the 74th Corps. Additional units were provided in by the Nanjing Gendarmerie and Nanjing Capital Garrison. However, most of these units had also suffered very high losses from the months of fighting in and around Shanghai. The 66th Corps had been reduced to half its original size, and its two divisions had to be reorganized into regiments. To replenish the Chinese garrison, 40,200 men from 44 supplementary battalions, 4 supplementary regiments, and 1 Jiangxi security regiment were sent towards the 36th division, 87th division, 88th division, 51st and 58th divisions of the 74th corps, and the Training Division of the Central Army. An additional 16,000-18,000 fresh soldiers were brought in from Hankou in the ranks of the 2nd Army, with 80% of their strength composed of recent recruits. However, due to the unexpected rapidity of the Japanese advance, most of these new conscripts received only rudimentary training on how to fire their guns on their way to or upon their arrival at the frontlines.\nNo definitive statistics exist on how many soldiers the Nanjing Garrison Force had managed to cobble together by the time of the battle. Ikuhiko Hata estimates 100,000, and Tokushi Kasahara who argues in favor of about 150,000. The most reliable estimates are those of David Askew, who estimates via a unit-by-unit analysis a strength of 73,790 to 81,500 Chinese defenders in the city of Nanjing itself. These numbers are backed up by the Nanking Garrison staff officer T'an Tao-p'ing, who records a garrison of 81,000 soldiers, a number which Masahiro Yamamoto argues to be one of the most probable figures.\nJapanese mass bombings.\nEven before the conclusion of the battle of Shanghai, Japan's Navy Air Service was launching frequent air raids on the city, eventually totaling 50 raids according to the Navy's own records. The Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service had struck Nanjing for the first time on August 15 with Mitsubishi G3M medium-heavy bombers, but suffered heavy losses in face of the aerial defense from Chinese Air Force Boeing P-26/281 Peashooter and Hawk II/Hawk III fighters based primarily at Jurong Airbase for the defense of Nanjing. It wasn't until after the introduction of the advanced Mitsubishi A5M fighter did the Japanese begin to turn the tide in air-to-air combat, and proceed with bombing both military and civilian targets day and night with increasing impunity as the Chinese Air Force losses mounted through continuous attrition; the Chinese did not have the aircraft industry nor comprehensive training regimen to replace men and machines to contend against the ever-growing and ever-improving Japanese war machine.\nHowever, experienced fighter pilots of the Chinese Air Force still proved a danger against Japanese air power; combat aces Col. Gao Zhihang, Maj. John Wong Pan-yang and who were outnumbered by the superior A5Ms entering Nanjing on October 12, shot down four A5M fighters that day, including Shotai leader W.O. Torakuma who was downed by Chinese fighter ace Col. Gao. Both Col. Gao and Capt. Liu died in non-aerial combat incidents by the following month as they were preparing to receive improved fighter aircraft design in the Polikarpov I-16s.\nEvacuation of Nanjing.\nIn the face of Japanese terror bombing and the ongoing advance of the Imperial Japanese Army, the large majority of Nanjing's citizens fled the city. By early December Nanjing's population had dropped from its former total of more than one million to less than 500,000, a figure which included Chinese refugees from rural villages burned down by their own government's scorched earth policies. Most of those still in the city were very poor and had nowhere else to go. Foreign residents of Nanjing were also repeatedly asked to leave the city which was becoming more and more chaotic under the strain of bombings, fires, looting by criminals, and electrical outages, but those few foreigners brave enough to stay behind strived to find a way to help the Chinese civilians who had been unable to leave. In late-November a group of them led by German citizen John Rabe established the Nanking Safety Zone in the center of the city, a self-proclaimed demilitarized zone where civilian refugees could congregate in order to hopefully escape the fighting. The safety zone was recognized by the Chinese government, and on December 8 Tang Shengzhi demanded that all civilians evacuate there.\nAmong those Chinese who did manage to escape Nanjing were Chiang Kai-shek and his wife Soong Mei-ling, who had flown out of Nanjing on a private plane just before the crack of dawn on December 7. The mayor of Nanjing and most of the municipal government left the same day, entrusting management of the city to the Nanjing Garrison Force.\nJapanese advance on Nanjing (November 11 \u2013 December 4).\nBy the start of December, Japan's Central China Area Army had swollen in strength to over 160,000 men, though only about 70,000 of these would ultimately participate in the fighting. The plan of attack against Nanjing was a pincer movement which the Japanese called \"encirclement and annihilation\". The two prongs of the Central China Area Army's pincer were the Shanghai Expeditionary Army (SEA) advancing on Nanjing from its eastern side and the 10th Army advancing from its southern side. To the north and west of Nanjing lay the Yangtze River, but the Japanese planned to plug this possible escape route as well both by dispatching a squadron of ships up the river and by deploying two special detachments to circle around behind the city. The Kunisaki Detachment was to cross the Yangtze in the south with the ultimate aim of occupying Pukou on the river bank west of Nanjing while the Yamada Detachment was to be sent on the far north route with the ultimate aim of taking Mufushan just north of Nanjing.\nFighting retreat of the Chinese Army, breaching the Wufu line.\nAs of 11 November, all elements of the Chinese army in the Lower Yangtze Theatre were falling back after the Battle of Shanghai. Unlike previous instances during the Shanghai campaign where Chinese retreats were conducted with discipline, the Chinese retreat from Shanghai was poorly coordinated and disorganized, in part due to the sheer size of the operation and lack of prior planning. The orders to retreat had been passed top-down in a haphazard manner, and the Chinese army frequently bogged down under its own weight or became congested at bottlenecks like bridges. Making matters worse were Japanese aircraft constantly harassing the Chinese columns, adding to the growing casualties and mayhem. Despite their losses, the Chinese army managed to escape destruction by the Japanese forces, who were attempting to encircle them in the last few days of the combat in Shanghai.\nOn 12 November, the Japanese forces deployed in Shanghai were ordered to pursue the retreating Chinese forces. With most Chinese troops melting away into the retreat, many cities and towns were quickly captured by the Japanese, including Jiading and Taicang. In Jiashan however, the main force of the Japanese 18th division encountered fierce resistance from the Right Wing Force. The defenders, consisting of 2 complete divisions and one regiment each from 2 divisions and 1 brigade, fought against the 18th division along the Zhapu-Pinghu-Jiaxing line (\u4e4d\u5e73\u5609\u7dda). The 18th division took Fengjing Town in two days, during which brigade commander Shozo Tezuka (\u624b\u585a\u7701\u4e09) was wounded. On November 10, the 18th division began its attack on Jiashan County. In the next four days, both sides suffered heavy casualties. By the 14th, the defenders had been exhausted and began preparation for retreat when the 18th division launched a general offensive covered by dozens of aircraft, fully occupying the county on the 15th. During the six-day Fengjing and Jiashan battles, the 18th division suffered more than 1,000 casualties. The Chinese defenders totalling 15,573 troops suffered as many as 7,317 killed, wounded, or missing. Japanese troops from the freshly deployed Tenth Army, consisting of the 6th, 18th, 114th divisions and the Kunisaki Detachment, were eager for combat. However, many of the other Japanese units were exhausted from the fighting in Shanghai, and were slower to follow through with their orders.\nDespite the Chinese retreat, the Japanese encountered strong resistance at the Wufu defensive line between Fushan and Lake Tai, which had been nicknamed a \"new Hindenburg line\" in Chinese propaganda. At Changshu, Japanese forces had to fight slowly through an interlocking system of concrete pillboxes manned by Chinese soldiers fighting to the death, all whilst Chinese artillery bombarded them with accurate fire. The Japanese 9th Division was faced with a similar challenge in Suzhou: contrary to propaganda accounts of the city falling without a fight, Japanese soldiers had to fight through a series of pillboxes in front of the city before painstakingly eliminating pockets of resistance in street fighting. These operations were concluded by 19 November, with some 1,000 Chinese soldiers killed in Suzhou and another 100 artillery pieces captured, according to Japanese records.\nBy late November, the Japanese army was advancing rapidly around Lake Tai en route to Nanjing. The Chinese, in order to counter these advances, deployed some five divisions of the Sichuanese 23rd Group Army from warlord Liu Xiang's forces to the southern end of the lake near Guangde, and two more divisions (the 103rd and 112th) to the river fortress Jiangyin near the lake's northern end, which had been the site of a naval battle in August.\nBattles of Lake Tai and Guangde.\nOn November 25, the Japanese 18th Division attacked the town of Sian near Guangde. The Chinese defenders, underequipped and inexperienced troops from the 145th Division, were overwhelmed by Japanese airpower and tanks and hastily fell back. A counterattack on Sian from the 146th Division was repelled by Japanese armor.\nOn the southwestern edge of Lake Tai, the Sichuanese 144th Division from the 23rd Group Army had dug into a position where the local terrain formed a narrow funnel in the local road. When faced with the advance of the Japanese 114th Division, the Chinese ambushed the Japanese with hidden mountain guns, inflicting heavy casualties on the Japanese. However, fearing the loss of their artillery from retaliatory enemy attacks, the Chinese officers withdrew their artillery in the heat of battle. As a result, the Chinese infantry were slowly pushed back, and finally broke into a retreat towards Guangde when Japanese troops flanked their positions on the lake's shores via stolen civilian motor boats.\nThe last days of November saw the five Sichuanese divisions fight fiercely in the vicinity of Guangde, but their defense was hindered by divided leadership and a lack of radio communications. The Japanese overwhelmed the Chinese defenders with artillery, and finally forced the 23rd Group Army back on November 30. Sichuanese division commander Rao Guohua, unable to bear the defeat, shot himself the day after the retreat. The 23rd Group Army suffered heavy casualties in this battle, with at least 4,454 killed, wounded, or missing.\nBattle of Jiangyin.\nOn November 29, the Japanese 13th Division attacked the walled town of Jiangyin near the Yangtze River after a two-day artillery bombardment. They were confronted by some 10,000 troops from the Chinese 112th and 103rd Divisions, which were composed of a mix of Manchurian veteran exiles and recruits from Southwestern China, respectively. Despite encountering ambushes and difficult terrain in the form of 33 hills around the city, the Japanese were able to advance under the cover of land and naval artillery from their ships on the Yangtze. Chinese coastal batteries mounted on Jiangyin's walls retaliated against the Japanese ships, causing damage to several Japanese vessels. To even the odds, Chinese raiders organized suicide missions to infiltrate Japanese lines at night and destroy enemy tanks with explosives. The hills around Jiangyin were the site of vicious fighting, with Mount Ding changing hands several times, resulting in Chinese company commander Xia Min'an being killed in action.\nThe Japanese eventually managed to overcome the Chinese defenses through a combination of artillery, aircraft and tanks. The Chinese began a withdrawal on December 1, but poor communication resulted in the 112th Division leaving too soon, resulting in a chaotic retreat for the 103rd Division. Both divisions had suffered heavy losses in the fighting, and only a portion of their original strength (estimated to be between 1,000 and 2,000 men for the 103rd Division) made it back to Nanjing.\nDuring the rest of their advance, the Japanese overcame resistance from the already battered Chinese forces who were being pursued by the Japanese from Shanghai in a \"running battle\". Here the Japanese were aided by their complete air supremacy, abundance of tanks, the improvised and hastily constructed nature of the Chinese defenses, and also by the Chinese strategy of concentrating their defending forces on small patches of relatively high ground which made them easy to outflank and surround. Tillman Durdin reported in one case where Japanese troops surrounded some 300 Chinese soldiers from the 83rd Corps on a cone-shaped peak: \"The Japanese set a ring of fire around the peak. The fire, feeding on trees and grass, gradually crept nearer and nearer to the top, forcing the Chinese upward until, huddled together, they were mercilessly machine-gunned to death.\"\nJapanese atrocities on the way to Nanjing.\nGeneral Matsui, along with the Army General Staff, had originally envisaged making a slow and steady march on Nanjing, but his subordinates disobeyed orders and instead raced each other to the city. The capture of Guangde had occurred three days before the army was even supposed to start its planned advance, and the SEA had captured Danyang on December 2, more than five days ahead of schedule. \nOn average, the Japanese units were advancing on Nanjing at the breakneck pace of up to per day. In order to achieve such speeds, the Japanese soldiers carried little with them except weaponry and ammunition. Because they were marching well ahead of most of their supply lines, Japanese troops usually looted from Chinese civilians along the way, which was almost always accompanied by extreme violence. As a Japanese journalist in the 10th Army recorded, \"The reason that the [10th Army] is advancing to Nanjing quite rapidly is due to the tacit consent among the officers and men that they could loot and rape as they wish.\"\nThe Japanese advance on Nanjing was marked by a trail of arson, rape and murder. The 170 miles between Shanghai and Nanjing were left \"a nightmarish zone of death and destruction.\" Japanese planes strafed unarmed farmers and refugees \"for fun\". Civilians were subjected to extreme violence and brutality in a foreshadowing of the Nanjing Massacre. For example, the Nanqiantou hamlet was set on fire, with many of its inhabitants locked within the burning houses. Two women, one of them pregnant, were raped repeatedly. Afterwards, the soldiers \"cut open the belly of the pregnant woman and gouged out the fetus.\" A crying two-year-old boy was wrestled from his mother's arms and thrown into the flames, while the hysterically sobbing mother and remaining villagers were bayoneted, disemboweled, and thrown into a nearby creek. Many Chinese civilians committed suicide, such as two girls who deliberately drowned themselves near Pinghu.\nMany cities and towns were subject to destruction and looting by the advancing Japanese, including but not limited to Suzhou, Taicang and Jiading. When massacring villages, Japanese forces usually executed the men immediately, while the women and children were raped and tortured first before being murdered. One atrocity of note was the killing contest between two Japanese officers, where both men held a competition to see who could behead 100 Chinese captives the first. The atrocity was conducted twice with the second round raising the goal to 150 captives, and was reported on by Japanese newspapers.\nIn a continuation of their practices from Shanghai, the Japanese troops executed all Chinese soldiers they captured on their way to Nanjing. Prisoners of war were shot, beheaded, bayonetted and burned to death. In addition, since thousands of Chinese soldiers had dispersed into the countryside, the Japanese implemented \"mopping-up operations\" in the countryside to deny the Chinese shelter, where all buildings without any immediate value to the Japanese army were burned down, and their inhabitants slaughtered.\nBattle for Nanjing's outer line of defense (December 5\u20139).\nBattles of Chunhua and the Two Peaks.\nOn December 5, Chiang Kai-shek paid a visit to a defensive encampment near Jurong to boost the morale of his men but was forced to leave when the Imperial Japanese Army began their attack on the battlefield. On that day the rapidly moving forward contingents of the SEA occupied Jurong and then arrived near Chunhua(zhen), a town 15 miles southeast of Nanjing and a key point of the capital's outer line of defense which would put Japanese artillery in range of the city. Chunhua was defended by China's 51st Division of the 74th Corps, veterans of the fighting from Shanghai. Despite facing difficulties in using the fortifications around the town due to a lack of keys, the 51st Division had managed to establish a three-line defense with pillboxes, hidden machine gun nests, two rows of barbed wire and an anti-tank ditch.\nBattle had already begun on 4 December, when 500 soldiers from the Japanese 9th division attacked Chinese forward positions in Shuhu, a small town several miles away from Chunhua. The Chinese company in Shuhu held out for two days, and at one point deployed a tank platoon against the Japanese infantry, losing 3 armored vehicles in exchange for 40 Japanese casualties. By 6 December, the defenders abandoned their positions, and some 30 survivors fought their way out of Shuhu.\nThe Japanese pushed to Chunhua, but were faced with heavy resistance by the 51st Division, who inflicted heavy casualties on the Japanese in preplanned kill zones with machine guns and artillery attacks. Nevertheless, Japanese artillery strikes enabled their infantry to capture the first defensive line, while a well-timed attack by six Japanese bombers enabled a deeper breakthrough. The Japanese left flank managed to penetrate behind Chunhua on December 7, but the final breakthrough came on December 8 when an entire regiment of the 9th Division that had lagged behind entered the fray. The Chinese defenders, who had endured incessant shelling for days and suffered more than 1,500 casualties, finally cracked under the renewed Japanese assault and withdrew. In the five-day battle at Chunhua Town, the 51st division suffered more than 2000 casualties including 2 regiment commanders and 4 battalion commanders.\nThe SEA also took the fortress at Zhenjiang and the spa town of Tangshuizhen the same day. Meanwhile, on the south side of the same defense line, armored vehicles of Japan's 10th Army charged the Chinese positions at Jiangjunshan (General's Peak) and Niushoushan (Ox Head Peak) defended by China's 58th Division of the 74th Corps. The Chinese defenders had dug in on the high ground, and possessed mountain guns powerful enough to destroy Japanese armor. Multiple Japanese tanks were destroyed, and in some cases, valiant Chinese soldiers armed with hammers jumped onto the vehicles and banged repeatedly on their roofs shouting \"Get out of there!\" Gradually, through its coordinated use of armor, artillery and infantry, the Japanese managed to slowly dislodge the Chinese defenders. On December 9, after darkness fell on the battlefield, the 58th Division was finally overwhelmed and withdrew, having suffered, according to its own records, 800 casualties. By this point, the 58th division had suffered more than 1,700 casualties including 2 regimental adjutants and 5 battalion commanders.\nDefensive stand of the 2nd Army and the Battle for Old Tiger's Cave.\nOn December 6, the Japanese 16th Division attacked Chinese positions 14 miles east of Nanjing. The Chinese defenders were composed of fresh troops from the 2nd Army, and had dug in onto a ridgeline to meet the Japanese assault. Japanese aircraft and artillery shelled the Chinese defenses relentlessly, inflicting extensive damage and confusion. The Chinese defenders were also hampered by their own inexperience, with some soldiers forgetting to ignite the fuses of their hand grenades before throwing them. Only a cadre of experienced officers and NCO's prevented a total collapse, and enabled the 2nd Army to hold an organized defense for three days until December 9, when they were forced back to Qixia. The fighting had resulted in 3,919 killed and 1,099 wounded for the two divisions of the 2nd Army, an almost four-to-one death-injury ratio. Additionally, the special service company of the 2nd Army suffered 47 killed and 13 wounded.\nMeanwhile, the 16th division had also begun probing Chinese positions around Purple Mountain, which was manned by China's elite Training Brigade. The Japanese first attacked the Old Tiger's Cave on a hill east of Purple Mountain, which was defended by the Training Brigade's 5th Regiment. After shelling the peak on December 8, Japanese infantry attacked up the hill's slopes, but were cut down by accurate and concentrated fire. On December 9, the Japanese attacked again using smokescreens and air bombardment, but the assault was stopped again when a neighboring Chinese unit counterattacked on the Japanese right flank. However, the 5th Regiment had also suffered heavy casualties in the fighting, losing more than half their men including their commander. In addition, the hill was very exposed and hard to resupply, so the Training Brigade ultimately abandoned the Old Man's Cave and retreated to better positions on the Purple Mountain itself.\nBy December 9, Japan's forces had reached Nanjing's last line of defense, the daunting Fukuo Line. The stage was set for the final stage of the campaign: the battle for Nanjing itself.\nFinal Battle for Nanjing City (December 9\u201313).\nOpening shots.\nIn the dawn of December 9, Japanese soldiers from the 36th Infantry Regiment engaged a battalion of the elite Training Division outside the Nanjing city wall near the Guanghua gate (Gate of Enlightenment). The Chinese withdrew into the wall after half had become casualties. When the Japanese attempted to follow, the Chinese exposed their positions with electrical lights and attacked with small-arms fire, forcing the Japanese back.\nThe Japanese then wheeled up two mountain guns and began shelling the gate, while Japanese aircraft launched several raids in the area, resulting in over 100 Chinese casualties. The Chinese reinforced the gate with troops from the Nanjing Gendarmerie Military Police and a battalion from the elite 88th Division, the latter of which suffered some 300 casualties in further fighting. The Japanese sent engineers to blow holes in the gate, but after three attempts failed to inflict significant damage. Additional Japanese soldiers rushed the gate in support, but most were cut down by Chinese gunfire. At one point, several Chinese defenders launched a raid to burn down a flour mill outside the wall to deny the Japanese an observation point, which they succeeded in accomplishing. Chinese stragglers outside the city wall also attacked the Japanese in the rear, targeting and killing several messengers in the Japanese communication network. By nightfall, the first battle had ended with a stalemate between both sides.\nJapanese requests for a Chinese surrender.\nAt this point General Matsui had a \"summons to surrender\" drawn up which requested the Chinese to send military envoys to Nanjing's Zhongshan Gate to discuss terms for the peaceful occupation of the city, and he then had a Mitsubishi Ki-21 scatter thousands of copies of the message over the city. On December 10 a group of Matsui's senior staff officers waited to see if the gate would be opened, but Tang Shengzhi had no intention of responding.\nLater that day Tang proclaimed to his men that, \"Our army has entered into the final battle to defend Nanjing on the Fukuo Line. Each unit shall firmly defend its post with the resolve to either live or die with it. You're not allowed to retreat on your own, causing defense to collapse.\" To enforce his orders, Tang deployed the elite 36th division near the Xiaguan docks to ward off any retreat attempts across the Yangtze River, and sent many of the larger vessels away to Hankou. The American journalist F. Tillman Durdin, who was reporting on site during the battle, saw one small group of Chinese soldiers set up a barricade, assemble in a solemn semicircle, and promise each other that they would die together where they stood.\nAssault on Nanjing.\nAt 1:00 pm on December 10, General Matsui ordered all units to launch a full-scale attack on Nanjing. The 16th division immediately assaulted China's super-elite Training Brigade on the peaks of Purple Mountain (Zijinshan), which dominate Nanjing's northeast horizon. Clambering up the ridges of the mountain, the men of the SEA had to painstakingly wrest control of each Chinese encampment one by one in bloody infantry charges. Advancing along the south side of Zijinshan was no easier as General Matsui had forbidden his men from using artillery there due to his deep conviction that no damage should come to its two famous historical sites, Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum and Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum.\nAlso on Nanjing's eastern side but further south, other units of the SEA faced the difficult task of fording the large moat standing between them and three of the city gates, Zhongshan Gate, Guanghua Gate, and Tongji Gate, though the speed of Japan's earlier advance played in their favor as key Chinese units slated to be deployed here were not yet in position.\nAttacking the Gate of Enlightenment.\nThat evening, Japanese engineers and artillerymen closing in on Guanghua Gate managed to blow a hole in the wall. Two Japanese companies of the 36th Regiment immediately launched a daring attack through the gap and planted a Japanese flag on a portion of the gate, but were immediately pinned down by a series of determined Chinese counterattacks.\nThe Chinese brought up reinforcements from the 83rd Corps and the elite 87th Division, including artillery, tanks and armored cars. The Chinese attacked the Japanese foothold with a pincer movement, inflicting serious losses on the Japanese, who deployed a third company to reinforce their bridgehead. Chinese soldiers atop the city wall attacked the Japanese from above, hurling down hand grenades and even flaming, gasoline-soaked lumber onto the Japanese defenders, which was only saved from annihilation by timely bursts of concentrated artillery fire from the rest of their division. One of the companies had lost eighty of its eighty-eight men as well as its leader, battalion commander Major Ito. The Chinese for their part had lost several officers and over 30 men killed in its counterattacks.\nThe 88th Division at Yuhuatai Plateau and Zhonghua Gate.\nAt the same time, the Japanese 6th Division was storming Yuhuatai, a rugged plateau situated directly in front of Zhonghua Gate on Nanjing's southern side. The 6th division's progress was slow and casualties were heavy, as Yuhuatai was built like a fortress of interlocking fortifications and trenches, fortified with dense tangles of barbed wire, antitank ditches and concrete pillboxes. Making matters worse was the presence of the German-trained 88th Division, who were apt to counterattack, forcing some Japanese units to spend more time defending than attacking. The Chinese defenders, recognizing the importance of Yuhaitai, had deployed the 527th and 528th Regiment, providing tactical artillery support with two artillery companies. Behind Yuhuatai was Nanjing's Zhonghua Gate, which the 88th Division had stationed its barely trained new recruits atop.\nThe Japanese attacked the 88th division on December 10, but suffered heavy casualties, as they had to fight through hilly terrain covered in barbed wire barricades and tactically placed machine gun nests. Chinese defenders often fought to the last man, with Japanese soldiers noticing that many Chinese pillboxes had been chained from the outside to prevent their occupants from fleeing. The Japanese also encountered problems with advancing too fast at times and bypassing surviving Chinese soldiers, who would then open fire into their flanks and rear. The 88th division also encountered many difficulties for their part, as half of those fighting in the division's ranks were raw recruits, and nearly all of its trained officer corps had been wiped out from the fighting in Shanghai. Furthermore, Chinese artillery crews were reluctant to provide effective artillery support, citing a fear of exposing their positions to return fire.\nOn December 11, the Japanese, frustrated by the lack of progress near the Gate of Enlightenment, attacked the Zhonghua Gate. Japanese aircraft routed Chinese forces in front of the gate, forcing them inside with the Japanese on their heels. When some 300 Japanese soldiers managed to breach the wall, the Chinese mobilized all available forces and forced them out. By the end of the night, the 88th Division had been forced to fall back in front of the city wall, with many of its surviving troops suffering from severe fatigue. The Japanese made an attempt to infiltrate a \"suicide squadron\" bearing explosive picric acid up to the Zhonghua Gate to blow a hole in it, but it got lost in the morning fog and failed to reach the wall.\nOn the morning of December 12, the Japanese began to bombard Zhonghua Gate with field artillery and tank fire. Chinese troops who remained posted outside the gate attempted to retreat back inside the city wall, but almost all were killed before they could make it. By noon, Yuhuatai had been overrun and virtually every man of the 88th division defending it had been killed, including three of their four regimental commanders and both of their brigade commanders, but in the process the Japanese had suffered heavy casualties of their own, some 2,240 losses including 566 dead according to their own records.\nAt noon on December 12 a squad of six Japanese soldiers made it across the moat in a small boat, and attempted to scale the wall at Zhonghua Gate with a bamboo ladder, but were killed by machine gun fire before they reached the wall.\nBreaching the Nanjing city wall.\nBack at Guanghua Gate, the Japanese attempted to relieve their beleaguered comrades trapped inside, and after two attempts managed to link up with their forces inside. What followed was an artillery duel between both sides, which lasted the entirety of December 12. During the duel, a stray shell severed the telephone line of the Chinese 87th Division, severing their communications to the rear.\nBurdened with the fog of war, the commanders of the 87th Division were alarmed upon noticing their comrades in the Guangdong 83rd Corps abandoning their positions, but did not immediately retreat due to their prior orders and because Nanjing had become considered a home amongst many soldiers in the division. After some deliberation through the night, the 87th Division, having already suffered 3,000 casualties, abandoned their positions on the Gate of Enlightenment at 2am on December 13 to retreat to the Xiaguan wharfs, leaving some 400 of the most severely wounded who could not walk behind in the city.\nThe Japanese, having noticed the diminishing Chinese resistance, scaled the city gate at around 4am and found it almost deserted. They killed whatever few Chinese soldiers remained in the area and raised the Rising Sun flag to cheers of \"Banzai!\" Per its own records, the 36th Regiment had suffered some 257 or 275 killed and 546 wounded in the battle of Nanjing, with most of the casualties being from the battle of Chunhua Town and the battle of Guanghua Gate.\nBack near Zhonghua Gate, two Japanese regiments had become pinned down by Chinese gunfire and mortars atop the gate. To conceal their movements, a Japanese team set a fire in front of the gate to create a smokescreen, and by 5:00 pm more and more Japanese troops were crossing the moat and swarming Zhonghua Gate by fording makeshift bridges so rickety their engineers had to hold them aloft with their own bodies. Japanese artillery suppressed the Chinese defenders from atop the Yuhaitai heights, and fired so many rounds into the city wall that part of it finally crumbled. The Japanese seized the gate through this opening, and with artillery support beat back all Chinese counterattacks, securing the Zhonghua Gate by nightfall. Meanwhile, just west of Zhonghua Gate, other soldiers also of Japan's 10th Army had punched a hole through Chinese lines in the wetlands south of Shuixi Gate and were launching a violent drive on that gate with the support of a fleet of tanks.\nAt the height of the battle, Tang Shengzhi complained to Chiang that, \"Our casualties are naturally heavy and we are fighting against metal with merely flesh and blood\", but what the Chinese lacked in equipment they made up for in the sheer ferocity with which they fought, partially due to strict orders that no man or unit was to retreat one step without permission. Over the course of the battle, roughly 1,000 Chinese soldiers were shot dead by other members of their own army for attempting to retreat.\nAttacks on the USS Panay and British vessels.\nIn the morning of December 12, the American gunboat \"USS Panay\" was escorting three Standard Oil river tankers on the Yangtze River away from the battle zone. The ship was clearly marked by two large American flags painted on canvas awnings, as well as another cloth flag flying from the bow. \nThe \"Panay\" was about twenty-eight miles upstream from Nanjing when Japanese naval aircraft led by Lt. Shigeharu Murata (who would later lead torpedo bomber squadrons against Pearl Harbor) attacked and bombed the gunboat. The first bomb hit disabled the \"Panay's\" forward gun and snapped its foremast. Several A4Ns also machine-gunned the ship. After twenty minutes of continuous bombing and strafing, the \"Panay\" had caught fire and was listing to starboard, having been crippled by two bomb hits. The three other river tankers had been beached on the riverbanks.\nThe crew and civilians aboard the \"Panay\", the vast majority of them injured in the attack, evacuated the sinking ship in two boats. Two newsreel cameramen on board the \"Panay\" were able to film parts of the attack, at one point capturing footage of Japanese aircraft passing so close to the ship that the pilots' faces were visible. \nThe crew and passengers hid in the reeds of a nearby island, and witnessed a passing Japanese motorboat machine-gun the sinking ship and board it briefly before departing; the American flag had still been flying from the bow at that time. At 3:54pm, the Panay rolled over to starboard and sank. The survivors then made their way to a nearby village, where some of the injured succumbed to their wounds. Two crewmen and a civilian had been killed in the attack, and another forty-three crew and five civilians wounded.\nIn addition\",\" the \"Panay's\" three consorts, the Standard Oil Company river tankers \"Mei Ping, Mei Hsia,\" and \"Mei An,\" had also been struck and severely damaged. The trio of ships had been evacuating about eight hundred Chinese employees of Standard Oil and their families on board, and presumably suffered high losses during the Japanese raid.\nThe pilots responsible for the Panay attack would also bomb the British vessel \"SS\" \"Wantung\" later that same day. \nAn Imperial Army officer in the vicinity, Col. Kingoro Hashimoto, a founder of one of the right-wing secret societies in Japan, also ordered firing on the \"Panay\" as it was sinking, in additional to several British vessels whose identities he knew, including the \"SS Scarab\" and \"HMS Cricket\".\nUpon receiving complaints that the vessels had clearly displayed the British flag, Hashimoto replied \"I do not recognize any flag but my own.\" Hashimoto also issued orders for his troops and artillery to fire on all ships on the Yangtze \"regardless of nationality.\"\nCollapse of the Nanjing Garrison Force.\n Back in Nanjing, the Japanese had gained the upper hand over the hard-pressed and surrounded Chinese defenders. On December 12 the 16th division captured the second peak of Zijinshan, and from this vantage point unleashed a torrent of artillery fire at Zhongshan Gate where a large portion of the wall suddenly gave way. After sunset, the fires that blazed out of control on Zijinshan were visible even from Zhonghua Gate in the south, which had been completely occupied by Japan's 6th and 114th division on the night of December 12 to 13.\nUnbeknownst to the Japanese, Chiang had already ordered Tang to abandon the defense. In spite of his earlier promise about holding out in Nanjing to the bitter end, Chiang telegraphed an order to Tang on December 11 to abandon the city. Tang prepared to do so the next day on December 12, but startled by Japan's intensified onslaught he made a frantic last-minute bid to conclude a temporary ceasefire with the Japanese through German citizens John Rabe and Eduard Sperling. Only when it became clear that the negotiations could not be completed in time did Tang finally finish drawing up a plan calling for all his units to launch a coordinated breakout of the Japanese encirclement. They were to commence the breakout under cover of darkness at 11:00 pm that night and then muster in Anhui. Just after 5:00 pm on December 12, Tang arranged for this plan to be transmitted to all units, and then he crossed the Yangtze River, escaping through the city of Pukou on the opposite bank of the river less than twenty-four hours before it was occupied by Japan's Kunisaki Detachment.\nBy the time Tang slipped out of the city, however, the entire Nanjing Garrison Force was rapidly disintegrating with some units in open retreat. Furthermore, contact had already been lost with many units (such as the 87th division) who never received Tang's message, and thus continued to hold their positions as ordered. However even those that did receive Tang's orders faced tremendous difficulties at slipping through the Japanese lines.\nUnit-by-unit breakout attempts.\nIn accordance with Tang's orders, the Guangdong 66th Corps under Ye Zhao and elements of the 83rd Corps under Deng Longguang gathered their remaining forces to break through the Japanese lines using a gap in the east, an extremely difficult task given the circumstances. Upon exiting the Taiping Gate, the troops of the Guangdong Army had to navigate both Chinese and Japanese minefields, then move through the countryside using pre-planned escape routes. Despite avoiding roads and Japanese armored patrols, the Guangdong troops were forced to fight through multiple attacks by Japanese units, and suffered many casualties including two divisional chiefs of staff in combat. After a three-day trek through the devastated countryside, the survivors of the two corps regrouped in Ningguo south of Nanjing, before being sent further south. Of the 12,500 men in the two corps at the start of the battle, only some 3,000 or 4,000 of them made it out of Nanjing. According to Ye Zhao, the 159th and 160th divisions of his 66th Corps still had more than 7,800 officers and soldiers after breaking out of the capital.\nOne of the units that did manage to escape Nanjing intact was China's 2nd Army led by Xu Yuanquan, situated just north of Nanjing. Though Xu never received Tang's order to abandon the defense, on the night of December 12 he had heard that Nanjing had been captured, and so decided to withdraw on his own accord. Having obtained some 20 private vessels ahead of time, the 2nd Army managed to evacuate 11,851 officers and soldiers, save for the 5,078 casualties already lost in battle, across the Yangtze River just before Japanese naval units blockaded the way. In addition, some 5,000 men and officers of the 74th Corps were also successfully evacuated across the river, as they had secured a boat for themselves in time.\nOther units were less fortunate. Near dawn on December 13, a different part of the 74th Corps was destroyed in its attempt to break through Japanese lines along the Yangtze River south of Nanjing. According to the battle report of the 51st Division, the unit had suffered 4,070 killed and 3,785 wounded in the fighting for Nanjing.\nOf the 1,000-2,000 troops of the 103rd Division from the former Guizhou Army, only 500 troops managed to break out. The 112th Division of the Northeastern Army was in a worse condition, with only 60 soldiers from the unit managing to cross the Yangtze River. The regular police, which participated in the battle with more than 6,000 men, had only 840 who broke out of the city, with the remaining 5,160 presumed dead.\nDue to the chaotic nature of the evacuation in the city, only between 3,000 and 4,000 men of the 36th Division and 2,400 men from the Gendarmerie MP units managed to cross the Yangtze as planned, roughly half their strength. According to its own battle report, the 78th Corps (consisting of the 36th division and a supplementary brigade) participated in the battle with 11,967 troops and suffered 228 killed, 285 wounded, and 6,673 missing. By the end of December, the 78th Corps had taken in 4,937 officers and soldiers. Some of its soldiers would gradually return in early 1938 after slipping through the Japanese lines, as the number of missing in the statistics of casualties of the 78th Corps for the Shanghai-Nanjing Campaign was at 5,964 missing. The Nanjing Gendarmerie Military Police participated in the battle with 5,452 officers and soldiers, and suffered 794 killed, 56 wounded, and 2,184 missing. According to the casualty survey compiled by the Gendarmerie Headquarters on 1 July 1939, 3,097 of its men were killed and 14 badly wounded in the battle of Nanjing.\nDue to their heavy losses from combat and proximity to the frontline, only between one and two thousand troops from the 88th Division escaped over the river, as did another thousand troops from the Training Division. Sun Yuanliang, commander of the 72nd Corps and 88th Division, claimed in his memoir to have led 600 of his men to reach Wuhan in late March 1938. Deputy commander Zhou Zhenqiang recalled the Training Division taking in 4,000 officers and soldiers after crossing the river. The 87th Division, which arrived at the Xiaguan wharves far too late with some 3,000 men, only had 300 survivors. Yu Jishi reported taking in 500 survivors and 400 rifles from the 87th Division.\nDuring the battle of Nanjing, the Zhenjiang and Jiangning Fortresses exchanged fire with the Imperial Japanese Navy until December 12, breaking out on December 13 after suffering heavy losses from combined assaults of infantry, aircraft, and naval guns. All of the artillery guns and most of their equipment were destroyed or abandoned, and more than 1,000 of the defenders were killed, wounded, or went missing.\nPerhaps the worst moments of the rout were in the city's northwest suburbs and the Xiaguan harbor itself. Near the Yijiang Gate, a massive crowd of fleeing Chinese soldiers and civilians from the south side of Nanjing, who were fleeing in panicked disarray from the advance of the Japanese, were funneled violently through the exit. However, only half of the gate was open, and combined with the crowd's density and disorganized movements, a deadly bottleneck formed that resulted in hundreds of people being crushed or trampled to death, including Colonel Xie Chengrui of the Training Division. Adding to the mayhem were barrier troops of the 36th Division posted atop the gate, who had not received word of Tang's orders and mistaken members of the crowd for deserters. Errors in communication resulted in those soldiers opening fire on parts of the crowd. So violent was the clash that a tank charged the barrier troops at around 9:00 pm, crushing many people until it was destroyed by a grenade.\nThose who made it to Xiaguan were faced with \"unimaginable chaos\", because there was a severe shortage of boats as a consequence of Tang's earlier orders, and much of the harbor had been set aflame by Japanese bombardment. As a result, the crowd would frequently fight to clamber aboard what few craft were available, resulting in some becoming so overloaded that they sank midway across the 2\u00a0km stretch. Those who rigged improvised rafts rarely made it across the river, as their makeshift vessels frequently broke apart in the water. Many Chinese soldiers who couldn't get on a boat took to the Yangtze's rough and frigid waters while clinging to logs, furniture and pieces of scrap lumber, though most were quickly swallowed up by the river, or froze to death beforehand due to the icy waters from the winter cold. By the afternoon of December 13, the Japanese had virtually completed their encirclement of Nanjing, and patrols and sailors on naval vessels began shooting at soldiers and civilians crossing the Yangtze from both sides of the river. Others who saw this turned back to the city in despair.\nMany of these tens of thousands of Chinese soldiers who could not escape the city responded by casting off their uniforms and weaponry, switching to civilian clothes often by stealing them from passersby, and then desperately seeking sanctuary in the Nanking Safety Zone by mingling with civilians.\nThe American journalist F. Tillman Durdin \"witnessed the wholesale undressing of an army that was almost comic\". \"Arms were discarded along with uniforms, and the streets became covered with guns, grenades, swords, knapsacks, coats, shoes and helmets ... In front of the Ministry of Communications and for two blocks further on, trucks, artillery, busses, staff cars, wagons, machine-guns, and small arms became piled up as in a junk yard.\"\nThe Nanjing Massacre.\n\"Mopping-up operations\": the mass execution of prisoners.\nBy the late morning December 13, all major gates to the city had been captured by the Japanese. The fighting in Nanjing did not end on the night of December 12\u201313, when the Japanese Army took the remaining gates and entered the city. During their mopping-up operations in the city the Japanese continued for several more days to beat back sporadic resistance from remnant Chinese forces. Though Mufushan, just north of Nanjing, was taken by Japan's Yamada Detachment without much bloodshed on the morning of December 14, pockets of resistance outside Nanjing persisted for several more days.\nMonths of fighting had taught the Chinese defenders to expect no mercy if captured by Japanese forces, and many who remained in the city were frantically seeking a way out before it was too late. For some units like those in the Guangdong Army, there were detailed plans establishing a route out of Nanjing. As a result, there were hundreds, or perhaps thousands, of Chinese stragglers who managed to slip through Japanese lines, in groups or individually. However, these plans were only good for those who got word of them, with most being intercepted by Japanese troops or remaining in the city, meeting almost certain death.\nMeanwhile, the Japanese units in Nanjing, under the pretense of rooting out military opposition, began conducting thorough searches of every building in Nanjing for Chinese soldiers, and made frequent incursions into the Nanking Safety Zone in search of them. Japanese units attempted to identify former soldiers by checking if they had marks on their shoulders from wearing a backpack or carrying a rifle. However, the criteria used were often arbitrary as was the case with one Japanese company which apprehended all men with \"shoe sores, callouses on the face, extremely good posture, and/or sharp-looking eyes\" and for this reason many civilians were taken at the same time. According to George Fitch, head of Nanjing's YMCA, \"rickshaw coolies, carpenters, and other laborers are frequently taken.\" Chinese police officers and firefighters were also targeted, with even street sweepers and Buddhist burial workers from the Red Swastika Society being marched away on suspicion of being soldiers.\nChinese prisoners who were rounded up were summarily executed en masse as part of an event that came to be known as the Nanjing Massacre, which the foreign residents and journalists in Nanjing made known internationally within days of the city's fall.\nThe massacres were organized to kill as many people within a short timeframe, which usually meant rows of unarmed prisoners being mowed down by machine gun fire before being finished off with bayonets or revolvers. In one instance, Japanese troops from the Yamada Detachment and the 65th Infantry Regiment systemically led 17,000 to 20,000 Chinese prisoners to the banks of the Yangtze River near Mufushan and machine gunned them to death. They then disposed of the corpses by burning or flushing them downstream.\nIn many other instances, prisoners were decapitated, used for bayonet practice, or tied together, doused in gasoline and set on fire. Wounded Chinese soldiers who remaining in the city were killed in their hospital beds, bayonetted, clubbed, or dragged outside and burned alive. The massacres were usually conducted on the banks of the Yangtze River to facilitate the mass disposal of corpses.\nThe rounding-up and mass killings of male civilians and genuine POWs were referred to euphemistically as \"mopping-up operations\" in Japanese communiqu\u00e9s, in a manner \"just like the Germans were to talk about 'processing' or 'handling' Jews.\" The number of prisoners of war executed is disputed, as numerous male civilians were falsely accused of being former soldiers and summarily executed. The International Military Tribunal in Tokyo, using the thorough records of the Safety Zone Committee, found that some 20,000 male civilians were killed on false grounds of being soldiers, whilst another 30,000 genuine former combatants were unlawfully executed and their bodies disposed of in the river. Other estimates vary: Colonel Uemura Toshimichi wrote in his war diary that somewhere between 40,000 and 50,000 Chinese prisoners were executed, but makes no distinction between soldiers or male civilians. Zhaiwei Sun estimates between 36,500 and 40,000 Chinese prisoners of war were executed after capture.\nThe Rape of Nanjing.\nIn conjunction with the mass executions of young men, the Japanese also committed numerous acts of murder, torture, rape, looting, and arson during their occupation of Nanjing.\nAccording to the International Military Tribunal for the Far East, the total number of civilians and prisoners of war murdered in Nanjing and its vicinity during the first six weeks of the Japanese occupation was over 200,000 while at least 20,000 women were raped, including infants and the elderly. Recent research estimates up to 80,000 women and children were victimized, as many victims were immediately murdered by Japanese soldiers after their rape. Estimates for the total death toll of the Nanjing Massacre vary widely, from 40,000 at the least to 430,000 at the greatest.\nBy December 30, most Japanese soldiers had left Nanjing, though units of the Shanghai Expeditionary Army stayed on to occupy the city. The Nanjing Self-Government Committee, a new municipal authority formed from local Chinese collaborators, was inaugurated on January 1, 1938, but it was not until February 25 that all restrictions on the free movement of civilians into and out of the city were lifted.\nCasualties.\nThe capture of Nanjing had been quicker and easier than the Japanese had foreseen. Excluding the Yamada Detachment, they lost only 1,558 soldiers in battle, plus 4,619 wounded. Recent research however, suggests higher Japanese losses in the five week-long campaign to take Nanjing. According to Benjamin Lai, casualties for the IJA over the entire month-long campaign are estimated at 26,000 killed and wounded, with 18,000 casualties for the X Corps alone between 6 November and 17 December. An additional 624 killed and 876 wounded for the Japanese Navy makes a total of 27,500 Japanese casualties for the month long campaign.\nChinese casualties were undoubtedly significantly higher, though no precise figures exist on how many Chinese were killed in action. The Japanese claimed to have killed up to 84,000 Chinese soldiers during the Nanjing campaign, whereas a contemporary Chinese source claimed that their army suffered 20,000 casualties in the fighting. Masahiro Yamamoto noted that the Japanese usually inflated their opponent's body counts by a factor of three while the Chinese had reason to downplay the scale of their loss. Ikuhiko Hata estimates that 50,000 Chinese soldiers were killed in combat during the entire battle whereas Jay Taylor puts the number at 70,000, and states that proportionate to the size of the force committed, such losses were greater than those suffered in the Battle of Shanghai. On the other hand, Chinese scholar Sun Zhaiwei estimates Chinese combat losses at 6,000 to 10,000 men. New York Times correspondent Tillman Durdin estimated some 33,000 Chinese soldiers had died in the city of Nanjing, including 20,000 who had been executed unlawfully as prisoners of war.\nThe number of Chinese soldiers wounded in action also lacks precise figures, but was undoubtedly also very high. Towards the end of November, wounded soldiers were arriving in Nanjing from the front line at a rate of 2,000 to 3,000 men per day, double the rate of the attrition in Shanghai. Many of these wounded soldiers would not receive adequate treatment due to the poor state of China's medical services, and also because Nanjing's hospitals were unable to treat so many patients at once. As a result, many injured soldiers were neglected and often succumbed to their wounds, a number estimated by Masahiro Yamamoto to be 9,000 total. Despite the efforts of hospital staff to evacuate as many wounded soldiers as possible during the last days of the battle, many, perhaps the majority of wounded Chinese soldiers were left behind in Nanjing at the mercy of the Japanese. Most, if not all of them, would be executed.\nAftermath.\nNews of the massacre was tightly censored in Japan, where Nanjing's capture provoked a frenzy of excitement among the citizenry. Mass celebrations of every sort, either spontaneous or government-sponsored, took place throughout the country, including a number of resplendent lantern parades which were still vividly remembered by onlookers several decades later. F. Tillman Durdin noted even before Nanjing had fallen that \"Events in the field have renewed the belief of the Japanese people in the invincibility of their arms.\"\nAn official report of the Nationalist Government argued that an excess of untrained and inexperienced troops was a major cause of the defeat, but at the time Tang Shengzhi was made to bear much of the blame and later historians have also criticized him. Japanese historian Tokushi Kasahara, for instance, has characterized his battlefield leadership as incompetent, arguing that an orderly withdrawal from Nanjing may have been possible if Tang had carried it out on December 11 or if he had not fled his post well in advance of most of his beleaguered units. However, Chiang's very decision to defend Nanjing is also controversial. Masahiro Yamamoto believes that Chiang chose \"almost entirely out of emotion\" to fight a battle he knew he could only lose, and fellow historian Frederick Fu Liu concurs that the decision is often regarded as one of \"the greatest strategical mistakes of the Sino-Japanese war\". Still, the historian Jay Taylor notes that Chiang was convinced that to run from his capital city \"without a serious fight ... would forever be regarded as a cowardly decision\".\nIn spite of its military accomplishment, Japan's international reputation was blackened by the Nanjing Massacre, as well as by a series of international incidents that occurred during and after the battle. Most notable among them were the shelling by Japanese artillery of the British steamship \"Ladybird\" on the Yangtze River on December 12, and the sinking by Japanese aircraft of the American gunboat \"Panay\" not far downstream on the same day. The Allison Incident, the slapping of an American consul by a Japanese soldier, further increased tensions with the United States.\nFurthermore, the loss of Nanjing did not force China to capitulate as Japan's leaders had predicted. Even so, buoyed by their victory, the Japanese government replaced the lenient terms for peace which they had relayed to the mediator Ambassador Trautmann prior to the battle with an extremely harsh set of demands that were ultimately rejected by China. On December 17 in a fiery speech entitled, \"A Message to the People Upon Our Withdrawal from Nanjing\", Chiang Kai-shek defiantly declared that,The outcome of this war will not be decided at Nanking or in any other big city; it will be decided in the countryside of our vast country and by the inflexible will of our people ... In the end we will wear the enemy down. In time the enemy's military might will count for nothing. I can assure you that the final victory will be ours.The Second Sino-Japanese War was to drag on for another eight years and ultimately end with Japan's surrender in 1945.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65713", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65713", "title": "Nanjing Massacare", "text": ""}
{"id": "65719", "revid": "35019008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65719", "title": "Temple Mount", "text": "Religious site in Jerusalem\nThe Temple Mount (, ()) is a hill in the Old City of Jerusalem. Once the site of two successive Temples in Jerusalem, it is now home to the Islamic compound known as al-Aqsa, which includes the al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock. It has been venerated as a holy site for thousands of years, including in Judaism, Christianity and Islam.\nThe present site is a flat plaza surrounded by retaining walls (including the Western Wall), which were originally built by Herod the Great in the first century BCE to expand the Second Temple. The plaza is dominated by two monumental structures originally built during the Rashidun and early Umayyad caliphates after the 637 first Muslim conquest of Jerusalem: the Qibli Mosque of al-Aqsa and the Dome of the Rock, near the center of the hill, which was completed in 692, making it one of the oldest extant Muslim structures in the world. The Herodian walls and gates, with additions from the late Byzantine, early Muslim, Mamluk, and Ottoman periods, flank the site, which can be reached through eleven gates, ten reserved for Muslims and one for non-Muslims, with guard posts of the Israel Police in the vicinity of each. The courtyard is surrounded on the north and west by two Mamluk-era porticos or arcades (\"arwiqa\") and four minarets.\nThe Temple Mount is the holiest site in Judaism, and where the Temples in Jerusalem once stood. According to Jewish and Samaritan tradition and scriptures, the first Temple was Solomon's Temple, built by King Solomon, the son of King David, in 957 BCE, and was destroyed along with the city itself by the Neo-Babylonian Empire in the Siege of Jerusalem (587 BC), in 587 BCE. No archaeological evidence has been found to verify the existence of the First Temple, and scientific excavations are limited due to religious sensitivities. \nThe Second Temple, constructed under Zerubbabel in 516 BCE, was later renovated by King Herod and destroyed by the Roman Empire in 70 CE. Orthodox Judaism maintains it is here that the third and final Temple will be built when the Messiah comes. \nJews face the Temple Mount during prayer. Jewish attitudes towards entering the site vary. Due to its extreme sanctity, many Jews will not walk on the Mount itself to avoid unintentionally entering the area where the Holy of Holies stood, since, according to rabbinical law, there is still some aspect of the divine presence at the site.\nThe Al-Aqsa mosque compound atop the site is the second oldest mosque in Islam, and one of the three Sacred Mosques, the holiest sites in Islam; it is revered as \"the Noble Sanctuary\". Its courtyard (\"sahn\") can host more than 400,000 worshippers, making it one of the largest mosques in the world. \nFor Sunni and Shia Muslims alike, it ranks as the third holiest site in Islam. The plaza includes the location regarded as where Muhammad ascended bodily into heaven, and served as the initial qibla, the direction Muslims turn towards when praying. As in Judaism, Muslims also associate the site with Solomon and other prophets also venerated in Islam. The site, and the term \"al-Aqsa\", in relation to the whole plaza, is also a central identity symbol for Palestinians, including Palestinian Christians.\nSince the Crusades, the Muslim community of Jerusalem has managed the site through the Jerusalem Waqf. The site, along with the whole of East Jerusalem (which includes the Old City), was controlled by Jordan from 1948 until 1967 and has been occupied by Israel since the Six-Day War of 1967. Shortly after capturing the site, Israel handed its administration back to the Waqf under the Hashemite (Jordanian) custodianship while maintaining Israeli security control. Israel enforces a ban on prayer by non-Muslims as part of an arrangement usually referred to as the \"status quo\". The site remains a major focal point of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nTerminology.\nThe name of the site is disputed, primarily between Muslims and Jews, in the context of the ongoing Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict. Some Arab-Muslim commentators and scholars attempt to deny Jewish connection with the Temple Mount, while some Jewish commentators and scholars attempt to belittle the importance of the site in Islam. During a 2016 dispute over the name of the site, UNESCO Director-General Irina Bokova stated: \"Different peoples worship the same places, sometimes under different names. The recognition, use of and respect for these names is paramount.\"\nTemple Mount.\nThe term \"Har haBay\u012bt\" \u2013 commonly translated as \"Temple Mount\" in English \u2013 was first used in the books of Micah (4:1) and Jeremiah (26:18), literally as \"Mount of the House\", a literary variation of the longer phrase \"Mountain of the House of the Lord\". The abbreviation was not used again in the later books of the Hebrew Bible or in the New Testament. The term remained in use throughout the Second Temple period, although the term \u201cMount Zion\u201d, which today refers to the eastern hill of ancient Jerusalem, was used more frequently. Both terms are in use in the Book of Maccabees. The term \"Har haBay\u012bt\" is used throughout the Mishnah and later Talmudic texts.\nThe exact moment when the concept of the Mount as a topographical feature separate from the Temple or the city itself first came into existence is a matter of debate among scholars. According to Eliav, it was during the first century CE, after the destruction of the Second Temple. Shahar and Shatzman reached different conclusions. In the Books of Chronicles, edited at the end of the Persian period, the mountain is already referred to as a distinct entity. In 2 Chronicles, Solomon's Temple was constructed on Mount Moriah (3:1), and Manasseh's atonement for his sins is associated with the Mountain of the House of the Lord (33:15). The conception of the Temple as being located on a holy mountain possessing special qualities is found repeatedly in Psalms, with the surrounding area being considered an integral part of the Temple itself.\nThe governmental organization which administers the site, the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf (part of the Jordanian government), have stated that the name \"The Temple Mount\" is a \"strange and alien name\" and a \"newly-created Judaization term\". In 2014, the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) issued a press release urging journalists not to use the term \"Temple Mount\" when referring to the site. In 2017, it was reported that Waqf officials harassed archeologists such as Gabriel Barkay and tour guides who used the term at the site. According to Jan Turek and John Carman, in modern usage, the term Temple Mount can potentially imply support for Israeli control of the site.\nOther Hebrew terms.\n2 Chronicles 3:1 refers to the Temple Mount in the time before the construction of the temple as Mount Moriah (, ).\nSeveral passages in the Hebrew Bible indicate that during the time when they were written, the Temple Mount was identified as Mount Zion. The Mount Zion mentioned in the later parts of the Book of Isaiah (Isaiah 60:14), in the Book of Psalms, and the First Book of Maccabees (c.\u20092nd century BCE) seems to refer to the top of the hill, generally known as the Temple Mount. According to the Book of Samuel, Mount Zion was the site of the Jebusite fortress called the \"stronghold of Zion\", but once the First Temple was erected, according to the Bible, at the top of the Eastern Hill (\"Temple Mount\"), the name \"Mount Zion\" migrated there too. The name later migrated for a last time, this time to Jerusalem's Western Hill.\nAl-Aqsa Mosque.\nThe English term \"al-Aqsa Mosque\" is a translation of either \"al-Masjid al-'Aq\u1e63\u0101\" () or \"al-J\u00e2mi' al-Aq\u1e63\u0101\" (). \"Al-Masjid al-'Aq\u1e63\u0101\" \u2013 \"the farthest mosque\" \u2013 is derived from the Quran's \"Surah 17\" (\"The Night Journey\") which writes that Muhammad travelled from Mecca to the mosque, from where he subsequently ascended to Heaven. Arabic and Persian writers such as 10th-century geographer Al-Maqdisi, 11th-century scholar Nasir Khusraw, 12th-century geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi and 15th-century Islamic scholar Mujir al-Din, as well as 19th century American and British Orientalists Edward Robinson, Guy Le Strange and Edward Henry Palmer explained that the term \"Masjid al-Aqsa\" refers to the entire esplanade plaza which is the subject of this article \u2013 the entire area including the Dome of the Rock, the fountains, the gates, and the four minarets \u2013 because none of these buildings existed at the time the Quran was written.\n\"Al-J\u00e2mi' al-Aq\u1e63\u00e1\" refers to the specific site of the silver-domed congregational mosque building, also referred to as Qibli Mosque or Qibli Chapel (\"al-Jami' al-Aqsa\" or \"al-Qibli\", or \"Masjid al-Jumah\" or \"al-Mughata\"), in reference to its location on the southern end of the compound as a result of the Islamic qibla being moved from Jerusalem to Mecca. The two different Arabic terms, translated as \"mosque\" in English, parallel the two different Greek terms translated as \"temple\" in the New Testament: (equivalent to \"Masjid\") and (equivalent to \"Jami'a\"), and use of the term \"mosque\" for the whole compound follows the usage of the same term for other early Islamic sites with large courtyards such as the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo, the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus and the Great Mosque of Kairouan. Other sources and maps have used the term \"al-Masjid al-'Aq\u1e63\u0101\" to refer to the congregational mosque itself.\nThe term \"al-Aqsa\" as a symbol and brand-name has become popular and prevalent in the region. For example, the Al-Aqsa Intifada (the uprising of September 2000), the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades (a coalition of Palestinian nationalist militias in the West Bank), al-Aqsa TV (the official Hamas-run television channel), al-Aqsa University (Palestinian university established in 1991 in the Gaza Strip), Jund al-Aqsa (a Salafist jihadist organization that was active during the Syrian Civil War), the Jordanian military periodical published since the early 1970s, and the associations of both the southern and northern branches of the Islamic Movement in Israel are all named Al-Aqsa after this site.\nHaram al-Sharif.\nDuring the period of Mamluk (1260\u20131517) and Ottoman rule (1517\u20131917), the wider compound of the Temple Mount began to also be popularly known as the Haram al-Sharif, or \"al-\u1e24aram ash-Shar\u012bf\" (), which translates as the \"Noble Sanctuary\". It mirrors the terminology of the Masjid al-Haram in Mecca; This term elevated the compound to the status of Haram, which had previously been reserved for the Masjid al-Haram in Mecca, and the Al-Masjid an-Nabawi in Medina. Other Islamic figures disputed the haram status of the site. Usage of the name \"Haram al-Sharif\" by local Palestinians has waned in recent decades, in favor of the traditional name of Al-Aqsa Mosque.\nIn\nJerusalem's sacred esplanade.\nSome scholars have used the terms Sacred Esplanade or Holy Esplanade as a \"strictly neutral term\" for the site. A notable example of this usage is the 2009 work \"Where Heaven and Earth Meet: Jerusalem's Sacred Esplanade\", written as a joint undertaking by 21 Jewish, Muslim and Christian scholars.\nJerusalem's Holy Esplanade.\nIn recent years, the term \"Holy Esplanade\" has been used by the United Nations, by its Secretary-General and by the UN's subsidiary organs.\nLocation and dimensions.\nThe Temple Mount forms the northern portion of a narrow spur of hill that slopes sharply downward from north to south. Rising above the Kidron Valley to the east and Tyropoeon Valley to the west, its peak reaches a height of above sea level. In around 19 BCE, Herod the Great extended the Mount's natural plateau by enclosing the area with four massive retaining walls and filling the voids. This artificial expansion resulted in a large flat expanse which today forms the eastern section of the Old City of Jerusalem. The trapezium shaped platform measures along the west, along the east, along the north and along the south, giving a total area of approximately . The northern wall of the Mount, together with the northern section of the western wall, is hidden behind residential buildings. The southern section of the western flank is revealed and contains what is known as the Western Wall. The retaining walls on these two sides descend many meters below ground level. A northern portion of the western wall may be seen from within the Western Wall Tunnel, which was excavated through buildings adjacent to the platform. On the southern and eastern sides, the walls are visible almost to their full height. The platform itself is separated from the rest of the Old City by the Tyropoeon Valley, though this once deep valley is now largely hidden beneath later deposits and is imperceptible in places. The platform can be reached via Gate of the Chain Street \u2013 a street in the Muslim Quarter at the level of the platform, actually sitting on a monumental bridge; the bridge is no longer externally visible due to the change in ground level, but it can be seen from beneath via the Western Wall Tunnel.\nHeritage site.\nIn 1980, Jordan proposed that the Old City be listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site and it was added to the List in 1981. In 1982, it was added to the List of World Heritage in Danger.\nOn 26 October 2016, UNESCO passed the Occupied Palestine Resolution that condemned what it described as \"escalating Israeli aggressions\" and illegal measures against the waqf, called for the restoration of Muslim access and demanded that Israel respect the historical status quo and also criticized Israel for its continuous \"refusal to let the body's experts access Jerusalem's holy sites to determine their conservation status\". While the text acknowledged the \"importance of the Old City of Jerusalem and its walls for the three monotheistic religions\", it referred to the sacred hilltop compound in Jerusalem's Old City only by its Muslim name Al-Haram al-Sharif.\nIn response, Israel denounced the UNESCO resolution for its omission of the words \"Temple Mount\" or \"Har HaBayit\", stating that it denied Jewish ties to the site. Israel froze all ties with UNESCO. In October 2017, Israel and the United States announced they would withdraw from UNESCO, citing anti-Israel bias.\nOn 6 April 2022, UNESCO unanimously adopted a resolution reiterating all 21 previous resolutions concerned with Jerusalem.\nReligious significance.\nThe Temple Mount has historical and religious significance for all three of the major Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. It has particular religious significance for Judaism and Islam.\nJudaism.\nThe Temple Mount is considered the holiest site in Judaism. According to Jewish tradition, both Temples stood at the Temple Mount. Jewish tradition further places the Temple Mount as the location for a number of important events which occurred in the Bible, including the Binding of Isaac, Jacob's dream, and the prayer of Isaac and Rebekah. According to the Talmud, the Foundation Stone is the place from where the world was created and expanded into its current form. Orthodox Jewish tradition maintains it is here that the third and final Temple will be built when the Messiah comes.\nThe Temple Mount is the place Jews turn towards during prayer. Jewish attitudes towards entering the site vary. Due to its extreme sanctity, many Jews will not walk on the Mount itself, to avoid unintentionally entering the area where the Holy of Holies stood, since, according to rabbinical law, there is still some aspect of the divine presence at the site.\nThe Temple.\nAccording to the Hebrew Bible, the Temple Mount was originally a threshing-floor owned by Araunah, a Jebusite. The Bible narrates how David united the twelve Israelite tribes, conquered Jerusalem and brought the Israelites' central artifact, the Ark of the Covenant, into the city. When a great plague struck Israel, a destroying angel appeared on Araunah's threshing floor. The prophet Gad then suggested the area to David as a fitting place for the erection of an altar to Yawheh. David bought the property from Araunah, for fifty pieces of silver, and erected the altar. God answered his prayers and stopped the plague. David subsequently chose the site for a future temple to replace the Tabernacle and house the Ark of the Covenant; God forbade him from building it, however, because he had \"shed much blood\".\nThe First Temple was instead constructed under David's son Solomon, who became an ambitious builder of public works in ancient Israel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then Solomon began to build the house of the LORD at Jerusalem in Mount Moriah, where [the LORD] appeared unto David his father; for which provision had been made in the Place of David, in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.\u2014\u200a\nSolomon placed the Ark in the Holy of Holies \u2013 the windowless innermost sanctuary and most sacred area of the temple in which God's presence rested; entry into the Holy of Holies was heavily restricted, and only the High Priest of Israel entered the sanctuary once per year on Yom Kippur, carrying the blood of a sacrificial lamb and burning incense. According to the Bible, the site functioned as the center of all national life \u2013 a governmental, judicial and religious center.\nThe Genesis Rabba, which was probably written between 300 and 500 CE, states that this site is one of three about which the nations of the world cannot taunt Israel and say, \"you have stolen them,\" since it was purchased \"for its full price\" by David.\nThe First Temple was destroyed in 587/586 BCE by the Neo-Babylonian Empire under the second Babylonian king, Nebuchadnezzar II, who subsequently exiled the Judeans to Babylon following the fall of the Kingdom of Judah and its annexation as a Babylonian province. The Jews who had been deported in the aftermath of the Babylonian conquest of Judah were eventually allowed to return following a proclamation by the Persian king Cyrus the Great that was issued after the fall of Babylon to the Achaemenid Empire. In 516 BCE, the returned Jewish population in Judah, under Persian provincial governance, rebuilt the Temple in Jerusalem under the auspices of Zerubbabel, producing what is known as the Second Temple.\nDuring the Second Temple Period, Jerusalem was the center of religious and national life for Jews, including those in the Diaspora. The Second Temple is believed to have attracted tens and maybe hundreds of thousands during the Three Pilgrimage Festivals. The holiday of Hanukkah commemorates the rededication of the Temple at the beginning of the Maccabean revolt in the 2nd century BCE. During the first century BCE, the Temple was renovated by Herod. It was destroyed by the Roman Empire at the height of the First Jewish-Roman War in 70 CE. Tisha B'Av, an annual fast day in Judaism, marks the destruction of the First and Second Temples, which according to Jewish tradition, occurred on the same day on the Hebrew calendar.\nIn prophecy.\nThe Book of Isaiah foretells the international importance of the Temple Mount:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And it shall come to pass in the end of days, that the mountain of the LORD'S house shall be established as the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.\nAnd many peoples shall go and say: 'Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths.' For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.\u2014\u200a\nBinding of Isaac.\nIn Jewish tradition, the Temple Mount is also believed to be the location of Abraham's binding of Isaac. 2 Chronicles 3:1 refers to the Temple Mount in the time before the construction of the temple as Mount Moriah (, ). The \"land of Moriah\" (, ) is the name given by Genesis to the location of the binding of Isaac. Since at least the first century CE, the two sites have been identified with one another in Judaism, this identification being subsequently perpetuated by Jewish and Christian tradition. Modern scholarship tends to regard them as distinct (see Moriah).\nCreation of the world.\nAccording to the rabbinic sages whose debates produced the Talmud, the Foundation Stone, which sits below the Dome of the Rock, was the spot from where the world was created and expanded into its current form, and where God gathered the dust used to create the first human, Adam.\nThird Temple.\nJewish texts predict that the Mount will be the site of a Third and final Temple, which will be rebuilt with the coming of the Messiah. The rebuilding of the Temple remained a recurring theme among generations, particularly in thrice daily Amidah (Standing prayer), central prayer of the Jewish liturgy, which contains a plea for the building of a Third Temple and the restoration of sacrificial services. A number of vocal Jewish groups now advocate building the Third Temple without delay in order to bring to pass God's \"end-time prophetic plans for Israel and the entire world.\"\nChristianity.\nThe Temple was of central importance in Jewish worship in the Tanakh (Old Testament). In the New Testament, Herod's Temple was the site of several events in the life of Jesus, and Christian loyalty to the site as a focal point remained long after his death. After the destruction of the Temple in 70 CE, which came to be regarded by early Christians, as it was by Josephus and the sages of the Jerusalem Talmud, to be a divine act of punishment for the sins of the Jewish people, the Temple Mount lost its significance for Christian worship with the Christians considering it a fulfillment of Christ's prophecy at, for example, Matthew 23:38 and Matthew 24:2. It was to this end, proof of a biblical prophecy fulfilled and of Christianity's victory over Judaism with the New Covenant, that early Christian pilgrims also visited the site. Byzantine Christians, despite some signs of constructive work on the esplanade, generally neglected the Temple Mount, especially when a Jewish attempt to rebuild the Temple was destroyed by the earthquake of 363. It became a desolate local rubbish dump, perhaps outside the city limits, as Christian worship in Jerusalem shifted to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, and Jerusalem's centrality was replaced by Rome.\nDuring the Byzantine era, Jerusalem was primarily Christian and pilgrims came by the tens of thousands to experience the places where Jesus walked. After the Persian invasion in 614 many churches were razed, and the site was turned into a dump. The Arabs conquered the city from the Byzantine Empire which had retaken it in 629. The Byzantine ban on the Jews was lifted and they were allowed to live inside the city and visit the places of worship. Christian pilgrims were able to come and experience the Temple Mount area. The war between Seljuqs and Byzantine Empire and increasing Muslim violence against Christian pilgrims to Jerusalem instigated the Crusades. The Crusaders captured Jerusalem in 1099 and the Dome of the Rock was given to the Augustinians, who turned it into a church, and al-Aqsa Mosque became the royal palace of Baldwin I of Jerusalem in 1104. The Knights Templar, who believed the Dome of the Rock was the site of Solomon's Temple, gave it the name \"Templum Domini\" and set up their headquarters in al-Aqsa Mosque adjacent to the Dome for much of the 12th century.\nIn Christian art, the circumcision of Jesus was conventionally depicted as taking place at the Temple, even though European artists until recently had no way of knowing what the Temple looked like and the Gospels do not state that the event took place at the Temple.\nThough some Christians believe that the Temple will be reconstructed before, or concurrent with, the Second Coming of Jesus (also see dispensationalism), pilgrimage to the Temple Mount is not viewed as important in the beliefs and worship of most Christians. The New Testament recounts a story of a Samaritan woman asking Jesus about the appropriate place to worship, Jerusalem (as it was for the Jews) or Mount Gerizim (as it was for the Samaritans), to which Jesus replies:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father. You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is from the Jews. But the hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him. God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.\u2014\u200a\nThis has been construed to mean that Jesus dispensed with physical location for worship, which was a matter rather of spirit and truth.\nIslam.\n \nAmong both Sunni and Shia Muslims, the entire plaza, known as the al-Aqsa Mosque, also known as Haram al-Sharif or \"the Noble Sanctuary\", is considered the third holiest site in Islam. According to Islamic tradition, the plaza is the location of Muhammad's ascension to heaven from Jerusalem, and served as the first \"qibla\", the direction Muslims turn towards when praying. As in Judaism, Muslims also associate the site with Abraham, and other prophets who are also venerated in Islam. Muslims view the site as being one of the earliest and most noteworthy places of worship of God. They preferred to use the esplanade as the heart for the Muslim quarter, since it had been abandoned by Christians, to avoid disturbing the Christian quarters of Jerusalem. Umayyad Caliphs commissioned the construction of al-Aqsa Mosque on the site, including the shrine known as the \"Dome of the Rock\". The Dome was completed in 692 CE, making it one of the oldest extant Islamic structures in the world. The Al-Aqsa Mosque, sometimes known as the Qibli Mosque, rest on the far southern side of the Mount, facing Mecca.\nIn early Islam.\nEarly Islam regarded the Foundation Stone as the location of Solomon's Temple, and the first architectural initiatives on the Temple Mount sought to glorify Jerusalem by presenting Islam as a continuation of Judaism and Christianity. Almost immediately after the Muslim conquest of Jerusalem in 638 CE, Caliph 'Omar ibn al Khatab, reportedly disgusted by the filth covering the site, had it thoroughly cleaned, and granted Jews access to the site. According to early Quranic interpreters and what is generally accepted as Islamic tradition, in 638 CE Umar, upon entering a conquered Jerusalem, consulted with Ka'ab al-Ahbar \u2013 a Jewish convert to Islam who came with him from Medina \u2013 as to where the best spot would be to build a mosque. Al-Ahbar suggested to him that it should be behind the Rock \"...\u00a0so that all of Jerusalem would be before you.\" Umar replied, \"You correspond to Judaism!\" Immediately after this conversation, Umar began to clean up the site \u2013 which was filled with trash and debris \u2013 with his cloak, and other Muslim followers imitated him until the site was clean. Umar then prayed at the spot where it was believed that Muhammad had prayed before his night journey, reciting the Quranic \"sura\" \"Sad\". Thus, according to this tradition, Umar thereby reconsecrated the site as a mosque.\nMuslim interpretations of the Quran agree that the Mount is the site of the Temple originally built by Solomon, considered a prophet in Islam, that was later destroyed. After the construction, Muslims believe, the temple was used for the worship of the one God by many prophets of Islam, including Jesus. Other Muslim scholars have used the Torah (called in Arabic) to expand on the details of the temple. The term \"Bayt al-Maqdis\" (or \"Bayt al-Muqaddas\"), which frequently appears as a name of Jerusalem in early Islamic sources, is a cognate of the Hebrew term \"b\u0113t ha-miqd\u0101sh\" (\u05d1\u05d9\u05ea \u05d4\u05de\u05e7\u05d3\u05e9), the Temple in Jerusalem. Mujir al-Din, a 15th-century Jerusalemite chronicler, mentions an earlier tradition related by al-Wasti, according which \"after David built many cities and the situation of the children of Israel was improved, he wanted to construct Bayt al-Maqdis and build a dome over the rock in the place that Allah sanctified in Aelia.\"\nIsra and Mi'raj.\nAccording to the Qur'an, Muhammad was transported to a site named Al-Aqsa Mosque \u2013 \"the furthest place of prayer\" (\"al-Masjid al-'Aq\u1e63\u0101\") during his Night Journey (\"Isra and Mi'raj\"). The Qur'an describes how Muhammad was taken by the miraculous steed Buraq from the Great Mosque of Mecca to al-Aqsa Mosque where he prayed. After Muhammad finished his prayers, the angel Jibril (Gabriel) traveled with him to heaven, where he met several other prophets and led them in prayer:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Glory be to the One Who took His servant \u02f9Mu\u1e25ammad\u02fa by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque whose surroundings We have blessed, so that We may show him some of Our signs. Indeed, He alone is the All-Hearing, All-Seeing.\nThe Qur'an does not mention the exact location of \"the furthest place of prayer\", and the city of Jerusalem is not mentioned by any of its names in the Qur'an. According to the Encyclopaedia of Islam, the phrase was originally understood as a reference to a site in the heavens. A group of Islamic scholars understood the story of Muhammad's ascension from al-Aqsa Mosque as relating to the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem. Another group disagreed with this identification and preferred the meaning of the term as referring to heaven. Al-Bukhari and Al-Tabari, for example, are believed to have rejected the identification with Jerusalem. Eventually, a consensus emerged around the identification of the \"furthest place of prayer\" with Jerusalem, and by implication the Temple Mount. Later \"hadiths\" referred to Jerusalem as the site of the Al-Aqsa Mosque:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Narrated Jabir bin `Abdullah:&lt;br&gt;\nThat he heard Allah's Messenger saying, \"When the people of Quraish did not believe me (i.e. the story of my Night Journey), I stood up in Al-Hijr and Allah displayed Jerusalem in front of me, and I began describing it to them while I was looking at it.\"\u2014\u200a\nSome scholars point to the political motives of the Umayyad dynasty which led to the sanctification of Jerusalem in Islam. According to the Encyclopaedia of Islam, the Night Journey was associated with Jerusalem by the Umayyads as a political means to advance the glory of Jerusalem to compete with the glory of the sanctuary in Mecca then controlled by Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr. The construction of the Dome of the Rock was interpreted by Ya'qubi, a 9th-century Abbasid historian, as an Umayyad attempt to redirect the Hajj from Mecca to Jerusalem by creating a rival to the Ka'aba.\nOther academics attribute the holiness of Jerusalem to the rise and expansion of a certain type of literary genre, known as \"al-Fadhail\" or history of cities. The Fadhail of Jerusalem inspired Muslims, especially during the Umayyad period, to embellish the sanctity of the city beyond its status in the holy texts. Based on the writings of the eighth century historians Al-Waqidi and al-Azraqi, some scholars have suggested that al-Aqsa Mosque mentioned in the Qur'an is not in Jerusalem but in the village of al-Ju'ranah, 18 miles northeast of Mecca.\nLater medieval scripts, as well as modern-day political tracts, tend to classify al-Aqsa Mosque as the third holiest site in Islam.\nFirst qibla.\nThe historical significance of al-Aqsa Mosque in Islam is further emphasized by the fact that Muslims turned towards al-Aqsa when they prayed for a period of 16 or 17 months after migration to Medina in 624; it thus became the \"qibla\" (\"direction\") that Muslims faced for prayer. Muhammad later prayed towards the Kaaba in Mecca after receiving a revelation during a prayer session in the Masjid al-Qiblatayn. The \"qibla\" was relocated to the Kaaba where Muslims have been directed to pray ever since.\nReligious status.\nThe Organisation of Islamic Cooperation refers to al-Aqsa Mosque as the third holiest site in Islam (and calls for Arab sovereignty over it).\nHistory.\nPre-Israelite.\nThe hill is believed to have been inhabited since the 4th millennium BCE. An amulet bearing the cartouche of Thutmose III (r. 1479\u20131425 BCE) was discovered by the Temple Mount Sifting Project at the site in 2012.\nIsraelite period.\nAccording to archeologists, the Temple Mount served as the center of the religious life of biblical Jerusalem as well as the royal acropolis of the Kingdom of Judah. The First Temple is believed to have once been a part of a much larger royal complex. The Bible also mentions several other buildings constructed by Solomon at the site, including the royal palace, the \"House of the Lebanon Forest\", the \"Hall of Pillars\", the \"Hall of Throne\" and the \"House of Pharaoh's Daughter\". Some scholars believe that, in accordance with biblical accounts, the royal and religious compound on the Temple Mount was built by Solomon during the 10th century BCE as a separate entity, which was later incorporated into the city.\u00a0Knauf argued that the Temple Mount already served as the cultic and governmental center of Jerusalem as early as in the Late Bronze Age. Alternatively, Na'aman suggested that Solomon built the Temple on a much smaller scale than the one described in the Bible, which was enlarged or rebuilt during the 8th century BCE. In 2014, Finkelstein, Koch and Lipschits proposed that the tell of ancient Jerusalem lies beneath the modern-day compound, rather than the nearby archeological site known as the City of David, as mainstream archaeology believes; however, this proposal was rejected by other scholars of the subject.\nAll scholars agree that the Iron Age Temple Mount was smaller than the Herodian compound still visible today. Some scholars, such as Kenyon and Ritmeyer, argued that the walls of the First Temple compound extended eastward as far as the Eastern Wall. Ritmeyer identifies specific courses of visible ashlars located to the north and south of the Golden Gate as Judean Iron Age in style, dating them to the construction of this wall by Hezekiah. More such stones are supposed to survive underground. Ritmeyer has also suggested that one of the steps leading to the Dome of the Rock is actually the top of a remaining stone course of the western wall of the Iron Age compound.\nThe First Temple was destroyed in 587/586 BCE by the Neo-Babylonian Empire under Nebuchadnezzar II.\nPersian, Hellenistic and Hasmonean periods.\nConstruction of the Second Temple began under Cyrus in around 538 BCE and was completed in 516 BCE. It was built at the original site of Solomon's Temple.\nAccording to Patrich and Edelcopp, the ideal area of the complex, described in Ezekiel as 50x50 cubits, was attained by the Hasmoneans, perhaps under John Hyrcanus; this is the same size later mentioned by the Mishnah.\nEvidence of a Hasmonean expansion of the Temple Mount has been recovered by archaeologist Leen Ritmeyer.\nIn 67 BCE a quarrel broke out between Aristobulus II and Hyrcanus II on the Hasmonean throne. Roman general Pompey, who had been invited to intervene in the conflict, sided with Hyrcanus; Aristobulus and his followers barricaded themselves inside the Temple Mount and destroyed the bridge linking it to the city. When the Roman Army arrived in Jerusalem, Pompey ordered the moat defending the Temple Mount from the north to be filled in. To accomplish this, Pompey waited for Sabbaths, so the defenders would not disrupt the work. After a three-month siege, the Romans were able to topple one of the guard towers and storm the Temple Mount. Pompey himself entered the Holy of Holies, but did not harm the Temple, and allowed the priests to continue their work as usual.\nHerodian and early Roman periods.\nAround 19 BCE, Herod the Great further expanded the Temple Mount and rebuilt the temple. The ambitious project, which involved the employment of 10,000 workers, more than doubled the size of the Temple Mount to approximately . Herod leveled the area by cutting away rock on the northwest side and raising the sloping ground to the south. He achieved this by constructing huge buttress walls and vaults and filling the necessary sections with earth and rubble. The result was the largest temenos in the ancient world.\nThe main entrances to the Herodian Temple Mount were two sets of gates built into the southern wall, together with four other gates reachable from the western side by stairs and bridges. Grand stoas encircled the platform on three sides, and on its southern side stood a magnificent basilica Josephus referred to as the Royal Stoa. The Royal Stoa served as a center for the city's commercial and legal transactions, and was provided with separate access to the city below via the Robinson's Arch overpass. The Temple itself and its courts were located on an elevated platform in the middle of the larger compound. In addition to the restoration of the Temple, its courtyards and porticoes, Herod also built the Antonia Fortress, which dominated the northwestern corner of the Temple Mount, and a rainwater reservoir, Birket Israel, in the northeast. A monumental street, today referred to as the \"Stepped Street\", took pilgrims from the city's southern gate via the Tyropoeon Valley to the western side of the Temple Mount. It has been proposed in 2019 that Pontius Pilate constructed the road during the 30s.\nDuring the early phases of the First Jewish-Roman War (66\u201370 CE), the Temple Mount became a center of fighting for various Jewish factions struggling for control of the city, with different factions holding the area during the conflict. In April 70, the Roman army under Titus reached Jerusalem and began besieging the city. It took the Romans four months to defeat the Temple Mount's defenders and take the site. The Romans completely destroyed the Temple and all the other structures on the platform. Massive stone collapses from the upper walls were discovered laying over the Herodian street that runs along the southern part of the Western Wall, with some of the stones burned at temperatures reaching 800\u00a0\u00b0C (1472\u00a0\u00b0F). The Trumpeting Place inscription, a monumental Hebrew inscription which was thrown down by Roman legionnaires, was found in one of these stone piles.\nMiddle Roman period.\nThe city of Aelia Capitolina was built in 130 CE by the Roman emperor Hadrian and occupied by a Roman colony on the site of Jerusalem, which was still in ruins from the First Jewish Revolt in 70 CE. \"Aelia\" came from Hadrian's \"nomen gentile\", \"Aelius\", while \"Capitolina\" meant that the new city was dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus, to whom a temple was built overlapping the site of the former second Jewish temple, the Temple Mount.\nHadrian had intended the construction of the new city as a gift to the Jews, but since he had constructed a giant statue of himself in front of the Temple of Jupiter and the Temple of Jupiter had a huge statue of Jupiter inside it, there were on the Temple Mount now two enormous graven images, which Jews considered idolatrous. It was also customary in Roman rites to sacrifice a pig in land purification ceremonies. After the Third Jewish Revolt, all Jews were forbidden on pain of death from entering the city or the surrounding territory around the city.\nLate Roman period.\nFrom the first through the seventh centuries Christianity spread throughout the Roman Empire, gradually became the predominant religion of Palestine and under the Byzantines Jerusalem itself was almost completely Christian, with most of the population being Jacobite Christians of the Syrian rite.\nEmperor Constantine I promoted the Christianization of Roman society, giving it precedence over pagan cults. One consequence was that Hadrian's Temple to Jupiter on the Temple Mount was demolished immediately following the First Council of Nicea in 325 CE on orders of Constantine.\nThe Bordeaux Pilgrim, who visited Jerusalem in 333\u2013334, during the reign of Emperor Constantine I, wrote that \"There are two statues of Hadrian, and, not far from them, a pierced stone to which the Jews come every year and anoint. They mourn and rend their garments, and then depart.\" The occasion is assumed to have been Tisha b'Av, since decades later Jerome related that that was the only day on which Jews were permitted to enter Jerusalem.\nConstantine's nephew Emperor Julian granted permission in the year 363 for the Jews to rebuild the Temple. In a letter attributed to Julian he wrote to the Jews that \"This you ought to do, in order that, when I have successfully concluded the war in Persia, I may rebuild by my own efforts the sacred city of Jerusalem, which for so many years you have longed to see inhabited, and may bring settlers there, and, together with you, may glorify the Most High God therein.\" Julian saw the Jewish God as a fitting member of the pantheon of gods he believed in, and he was also a strong opponent of Christianity. Church historians wrote that the Jews began to clear away the structures and rubble on the Temple Mount but were thwarted, first by a great earthquake, and then by miracles that included fire springing from the earth. However, no contemporary Jewish sources mention this episode directly.\nByzantine period.\nDuring his excavations in the 1930s, Robert Hamilton uncovered portions of a multicolor mosaic floor with geometric patterns, but did not publish them. The date of the mosaic is disputed: Zachi Dvira considers that they are from the pre-Islamic Byzantine period, while Baruch, Reich and Sandhaus favor a much later Umayyad origin on account of their similarity to a mosaic from an Umayyad palace excavated adjacent to the Temple Mount's southern wall. By comparing the photographs to Hamilton's excavation report, Di Cesare determined that they belong to the second phase of mosque construction in the Umayyad period. Moreover, the mosaic designs were common in Islamic, Jewish and Christian buildings from the 2nd to the 8th century. Di Cesare suggested that Hamilton didn't include the mosaics in his book because they were destroyed to explore beneath them.\nSassanid period.\nIn 610, the Sassanid Empire drove the Byzantine Empire out of the Middle East, giving the Jews control of Jerusalem for the first time in centuries. The Jews in Palestine were allowed to set up a vassal state under the Sassanid Empire called the \"Sassanid Jewish Commonwealth\" which lasted for five years. Jewish rabbis ordered the restart of animal sacrifice for the first time since the time of Second Temple and started to reconstruct the Jewish Temple. Shortly before the Byzantines took the area back five years later in 615, the Persians gave control to the Christian population, who tore down the partially built Jewish Temple edifice and turned it into a garbage dump, which is what it was when the Rashidun Caliph Umar took the city in 637.\nEarly Muslim period.\nIn 637, Arabs besieged and captured the city from the Byzantine Empire, which had defeated the Persian forces and their allies, and reconquered the city. There are no contemporary records, but many traditions, about the origin of the main Islamic buildings on the mount. A popular account from later centuries is that the Rashidun Caliph Umar was led to the place reluctantly by the Christian patriarch Sophronius. He found it covered with rubbish, but the sacred Rock was found with the help of a converted Jew, Ka'b al-Ahbar. Al-Ahbar advised Umar to build a mosque to the north of the rock, so that worshippers would face both the rock and Mecca, but instead Umar chose to build it to the south of the rock. It became known as al-Aqsa Mosque. According to Muslim sources, Jews participated in the construction of the haram, laying the groundwork for both al-Aqsa and the Dome of the Rock mosques. The first known eyewitness testimony is that of the pilgrim Arculf who visited about 670. According to Arculf's account as recorded by Adomn\u00e1n, he saw a rectangular wooden house of prayer built over some ruins, large enough to hold 3,000 people.\nIn 691, an octagonal Islamic building topped by a dome was built by the Caliph Abd al-Malik around the rock, for a myriad of political, dynastic and religious reasons, built on local and Quranic traditions articulating the site's holiness, a process in which textual and architectural narratives reinforced one another. The shrine became known as the Dome of the Rock (, \"Qubbat as-Sakhra\"). (The dome itself was covered in gold in 1920.) In 715, the Umayyads, led by the Caliph al-Walid I, built al-Aqsa Mosque (, \"al-Masjid al-'Aq\u1e63\u0101\", lit.\u00a0\"Furthest Mosque\"), corresponding to the Islamic belief of Muhammad's miraculous nocturnal journey as recounted in the Quran and hadith. The term \"Noble Sanctuary\" or \"Haram al-Sharif\", as it was called later by the Mamluks and Ottomans, refers to the entirer area that surrounds that Rock.\nCrusader and Ayyubid period.\nThe Crusader period began in 1099 with the First Crusade's capture of Jerusalem. After the city's conquest, the Crusading order known as the Knights Templar was granted use of Al-Aqsa Mosque to use as their headquarters. This was probably by Baldwin II of Jerusalem and Warmund, Patriarch of Jerusalem at the Council of Nablus in January 1120. The Temple Mount had a mystique because it was above what were believed to be the ruins of the Temple of Solomon. The Crusaders therefore referred to al-Aqsa Mosque as Solomon's Temple, and it was from this location that the new Order took the name of \"Poor Knights of Christ and the Temple of Solomon\", or \"Templar\" knights.\nIn 1187, once he retook Jerusalem, Saladin removed all traces of Christian worship from the Temple Mount, returning the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa Mosque to their Muslim purposes. It remained in Muslim hands thereafter, even during the relatively short periods of Crusader rule following the Sixth Crusade.\nMamluk period.\nThere are several Mamluk buildings on and around the Haram esplanade, such as the late 15th-century al-Ashrafiyya Madrasa and Sabil (fountain) of Qaytbay. The Mamluks also raised the level of Jerusalem's Central or Tyropoean Valley bordering the Temple Mount from the west by constructing huge substructures, on which they then built on a large scale. The Mamluk-period substructures and over-ground buildings are thus covering much of the Herodian western wall of the Temple Mount.\nOttoman period.\nFollowing the Ottoman conquest of Palestine in 1516, the Ottoman authorities continued the policy of prohibiting non-Muslims from setting foot on the Temple Mount until the early 19th century, when non-Muslims were again permitted to visit the site.\nIn 1867, a team from the Royal Engineers, led by Lieutenant Charles Warren and financed by the Palestine Exploration Fund (P.E.F.), discovered a series of tunnels near the Temple Mount. Warren secretly excavated some tunnels near the Temple Mount walls and was the first one to document their lower courses. Warren also conducted some small-scale excavations inside the Temple Mount, by removing rubble that blocked passages leading from the Double Gate chamber.\nBritish Mandatory period.\nBetween 1922 and 1924, the Dome of the Rock was restored by the Islamic Higher Council. The Zionist movement at the time was strongly opposed to any notion that the Temple itself might be rebuilt. Indeed, its armed wing, the Haganah militia, assassinated a Jewish man when his plan to blow up the Islamic sites on the Haram came to their attention in 1931. Renovations were also conducted at the Al-Aqsa Mosque from 1938\u20131942, following an earthquake in the summer of 1937.\nJordanian period.\nJordan undertook two renovations of the Dome of the Rock, replacing the leaking, wooden inner dome with an aluminum dome in 1952, and, when the new dome leaked, carrying out a second restoration between 1959 and 1964.\nNeither Israeli Arabs nor Israeli Jews could visit their holy places in the Jordanian territories during this period.\nIsraeli period.\nOn 7 June 1967, during the Six-Day War, Israeli forces advanced beyond the 1949 Armistice Agreement Line into West Bank territories, taking control of the Old City of Jerusalem, inclusive of the Temple Mount.\nThe Chief Rabbi of the Israeli Defense Forces, Shlomo Goren, led the soldiers in religious celebrations on the Temple Mount and at the Western Wall. The Israeli Chief Rabbinate also declared a religious holiday on the anniversary, called \"Yom Yerushalayim\" (Jerusalem Day), which became a national holiday to commemorate the reunification of Jerusalem. Many saw the capture of Jerusalem and the Temple Mount as a miraculous liberation of biblical-messianic proportions. A few days after the war over 200,000 Jews flocked to the Western Wall in the first mass Jewish pilgrimage near the Mount since the destruction of the Temple in 70 CE. Islamic authorities did not disturb Goren when he went to pray on the Mount until, on the Ninth Day of Av, he brought 50 followers and introduced both a shofar, and a portable ark to pray, an innovation which alarmed the Waqf authorities and led to a deterioration of relations between the Muslim authorities and the Israeli government.\nIn June 1969, an Australian set fire to the Jami'a al-Aqsa. On April 11, 1982, a Jew hid in the Dome of the Rock and sprayed gunfire, killing 2 Palestinians and wounding 44; in 1974, 1977 and 1983 groups led by Yoel Lerner conspired to blow up both the Dome of the Rock and al-Aqsa. On 26 January 1984 Waqf guards detected members of B'nei Yehuda, a messianic cult of former gangsters turned mystics based in Lifta, trying to infiltrate the area to blow it up.\nOn 15 January 1988, during the First Intifada, Israeli troops fired rubber bullets and tear gas at protesters outside the mosque, wounding 40 worshipers.\nOn October 8, 1990, Israeli forces patrolling the site blocked worshippers from reaching it. A tear gas canister was set off among the female worshippers, which caused events to escalate. On 12 October 1990 Palestinian Muslims protested violently the intention of some extremist Jews to lay a cornerstone on the site for a New Temple as a prelude to the destruction of the Muslim mosques. The attempt was blocked by Israeli authorities but demonstrators were widely reported as having stoned Jews at the Western Wall. According to Palestinian historian Rashid Khalidi, investigative journalism has shown this allegation to be false. Rocks were eventually thrown, while security forces fired rounds that killed 21 people and injuring 150 more. An Israeli inquiry found Israeli forces at fault, but it also concluded that charges could not be brought against any particular individuals.\nOn 8 October 1990, 22 Palestinians were killed and over 100 others injured by Israeli Border Police during protests that were triggered by the announcement of the Temple Mount Faithful, a group of religious Jews, that they were going to lay the cornerstone of the Third Temple. Between 1992 and 1994, the Jordanian government undertook the unprecedented step of gilding the dome of the Dome of the Rock, covering it with 5000 gold plates, and restoring and reinforcing the structure. Saladin's minbar was also reconstructed. The project was paid for by King Hussein personally, at a cost of $8 million. The Temple Mount remains, under the terms of the 1994 Israel\u2013Jordan peace treaty, under Jordanian custodianship. In December 1997, Israeli security services preempted an attempt by Jewish extremists to throw a pig's head wrapped in the pages of the Quran into the area, in order to spark a riot and embarrass the government.\nOn 28 September 2000, then-opposition leader of Israel Ariel Sharon and members of the Likud Party, along with 1,000 armed guards, visited the al-Aqsa compound. The visit was seen as a provocative gesture by many Palestinians, who gathered around the site. After Sharon and the Likud Party members left, a demonstration erupted and Palestinians on the grounds of the Haram al-Sharif began throwing stones and other projectiles at Israeli riot police. Police fired tear gas and rubber bullets at the crowd, injuring 24 people. The visit sparked a five-year uprising by the Palestinians, commonly referred to as the al-Aqsa Intifada, though some commentators, citing subsequent speeches by Palestinian Authority officials, particularly Imad Falouji and Yasar Arafat, claim that the Intifada had been planned months in advance, as early as July upon Arafat's return from Camp David talks in the United States. On 29 September, the Israeli government deployed 2,000 riot police to the mosque. When a group of Palestinians left the mosque after Friday prayers (\"Jumu'ah,\") they hurled stones at the police. The police then stormed the mosque compound, firing both live ammunition and rubber bullets at the group of Palestinians, killing four and wounding about 200.\nOn 3 January 2023, Israeli Minister of National Security Itamar Ben-Gvir visited the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, sparking protests by Palestinians and the condemnation of several Arab countries.\nStatus quo.\nUnder Muslim control.\nJews were not allowed to visit for approximately one thousand years.\nBritish Mandate.\nIn the first ten years of British rule in Palestine, all were allowed entry to the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif complex. Sometimes violence broke out at the entrance between Jews and Muslims. During the 1929 Palestine riots, Jews were accused of violating the status quo. Following the riots, the Supreme Muslim Council and the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf prohibited Jews from entering the site's gates. During the mandate period, Jewish leaders celebrated ancient religious practices at the Western Wall. The ban on visitors continued until 1948\nJordanian control.\nAlthough the 1949 Armistice Agreement called for \"resumption of the normal functioning of the cultural and humanitarian institutions on Mount Scopus and free access thereto; free access to the Holy Places and cultural institutions and use of the cemetery on the Mount of Olives\", in practice, wire and concrete barriers were the reality. Cultural and religious sites in both sides of the city were destroyed and neglected and the Jewish community barred from its sacred places.\nUnder Israeli control.\nA few days after the Six-Day War, on June 17, 1967, a meeting was held at the al-Aqsa mosque between Moshe Dayan and Muslim religious authorities of Jerusalem reformulating the status quo. Jews were given the right to visit the Temple Mount unobstructed and free of charge if they respected Muslims' religious feelings and acted decently, but they were not allowed to pray. The Western Wall was to remain the Jewish place of prayer. 'Religious sovereignty' was to remain with the Muslims while 'overall sovereignty' became Israeli. The Muslims objected to Dayan's offer, as they completely rejected the Israeli conquest of Jerusalem and the Temple Mount. Some Jews, led by Shlomo Goren, then the military chief rabbi, had objected as well, claiming the decision handed over the complex to the Muslims, since the Western Wall's holiness is derived from the Mount and symbolizes exile, while praying on the Mount symbolizes freedom and the return of the Jewish people to their homeland. The President of the High Court of Justice, Aharon Barak, in response to an appeal in 1976 against police interference with an individual's putative right to prayer on the site, expressed the view that, while Jews had a right to prayer there, it was not absolute but subject to the public interest and the rights of other groups. Israel's courts have considered the issue as one beyond their remit, and, given the delicacy of the matter, under political jurisdiction. Barak wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The basic principle is that every Jew has the right to enter the Temple Mount, to pray there, and to have communion with his maker. This is part of the religious freedom of worship, it is part of the freedom of expression. However, as with every human right, it is not absolute, but a relative right... Indeed, in a case where there is near certainty that injury may be caused to the public interest if a person's rights of religious worship and freedom of expression would be realized, it is possible to limit the rights of the person in order to uphold the public interest.\nPolice continued to forbid Jews to pray on the Temple Mount. Subsequently, several prime ministers also made attempts to change the status quo but failed. In October 1986, an agreement between the Temple Mount Faithful, the Supreme Muslim Council and police, which would allow short visits in small groups, was exercised once and never repeated, after 2,000 Muslims armed with stones and bottles attacked the group and stoned worshipers at the Western Wall. During the 1990s, additional attempts were made for Jewish prayer on the Temple Mount, which were stopped by Israeli police.\nUntil 2000, non-Muslim visitors could enter the Dome of the Rock, al-Aqsa Mosque and the Islamic Museum by getting a ticket from the . This procedure ended when the Second Intifada erupted. Fifteen years later, negotiation between Israel and Jordan might result in reopening of those sites once again.\nIn the 2010s, fear arose among Palestinians that Israel planned to change the status quo and permit Jewish prayers or that al-Aqsa mosque might be damaged or destroyed by Israel. Al-Aqsa was used as a base for attacks on visitors and the police from which stones, firebombs and fireworks were thrown. The Israeli police had never entered al-Aqsa Mosque until November 5, 2014, when dialog with the leaders of the and the rioters failed. This resulted in imposing strict limitations on entry of visitors to the Temple Mount. Israeli leadership repeatedly stated that the status quo would not change. According to then Jerusalem police commissioner Yohanan Danino, the place is at the center of a \"holy war\" and \"anyone who wants to change the status quo on the Temple Mount should not be allowed up there\", citing an \"extreme right-wing agenda to change the status quo on the Temple Mount\"; Hamas and Islamic Jihad continued to erroneously assert that the Israeli government planned to destroy the al-Aqsa Mosque, resulting in chronic terrorist attacks and rioting.\nThere have been several changes to the status quo:\nMany Palestinians believe the status quo is threatened since right-wing Israelis have been challenging it with more force and frequency, asserting a religious right to pray there. Until Israel banned them, members of Murabitat, a group of women, cried 'Allah Akbar' at groups of Jewish visitors to remind them the Temple Mount was still in Muslim hands. In October 2021, a Jewish man, Aryeh Lippo, who was banned by Israeli police from the Temple Mount for fifteen days after being caught quietly praying, had his ban overturned by an Israeli court on the grounds that his behavior had not violated police instructions. Hamas called the ruling \"a clear declaration of war\". A higher Israel court quickly reversed the lower court's ruling.\nManagement and access.\nAn Islamic Waqf has managed the Temple Mount continuously since the Muslim reconquest of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem in 1187. On June 7, 1967, soon after Israel had taken control of the area during the Six-Day War, Prime Minister Levi Eshkol assured that \"no harm whatsoever shall come to the places sacred to all religions\". Together with the extension of Israeli jurisdiction and administration over east Jerusalem, the Knesset passed the Preservation of the Holy Places Law, ensuring protection of the Holy Places against desecration, as well as freedom of access thereto. The site remains within the area controlled by the State of Israel, with administration of the site remaining in the hands of the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf.\nAlthough freedom of access was enshrined in the law, as a security measure, the Israeli government now enforces a ban on non-Muslim prayer on the site. Non-Muslims who are observed praying on the site are subject to expulsion by the police. At various times, when there is fear of Arab rioting upon the mount resulting in throwing stones from above towards the Western Wall Plaza, Israel has prevented Muslim men under 45 from praying in the compound, citing these concerns. Sometimes such restrictions have coincided with Friday prayers during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan. Normally, West Bank Palestinians are allowed access to Jerusalem only during Islamic holidays, with access usually restricted to men over 35 and women of any age eligible for permits to enter the city. Palestinian residents of Jerusalem, which because of Israel's annexation of Jerusalem, hold Israeli permanent residency cards, and Israeli Arabs, are permitted unrestricted access to the Temple Mount. The Mughrabi Gate is the only entrance to the Temple Mount accessible to non-Muslims.\nJewish attitudes towards entering the site.\nDue to religious restrictions on entering the most sacred areas of the Temple Mount (see following section), the Western Wall, a retaining wall for the Temple Mount and remnant of the Second Temple structure, is considered by some rabbinical authorities to be the holiest accessible site for Jews to pray. A 2013 Knesset committee hearing considered allowing Jews to pray at the site, amidst heated debate. Arab-Israeli MPs were ejected for disrupting the hearing, after shouting at the chairman, calling her a \"pyromaniac\". Religious Affairs Minister Eli Ben-Dahan of Jewish Home said his ministry was seeking legal ways to enable Jews to pray at the site.\nJewish religious law concerning entry to the site.\nDuring Temple times, entry to the Mount was limited by a complex set of purity laws. Persons suffering from corpse uncleanness were not allowed to enter the inner court. Non-Jews were also prohibited from entering the inner court of the Temple. A hewn stone measuring and engraved with Greek uncials was discovered in 1871 near a court on the Temple Mount in Jerusalem in which it outlined this prohibition:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTranslation: \"Let no foreigner enter within the parapet and the partition which surrounds the Temple precincts. Anyone caught [violating] will be held accountable for his ensuing death.\" Today, the stone is preserved in Istanbul's Museum of Antiquities.\nMaimonides wrote that it was only permitted to enter the site to fulfill a religious precept. After the destruction of the Temple there was discussion as to whether the site, bereft of the Temple, still maintained its holiness. Jewish codifiers accepted the opinion of Maimonides who ruled that the holiness of the Temple sanctified the site for eternity and consequently the restrictions on entry to the site remain in force. While secular Jews ascend freely, the question of whether ascending is permitted is a matter of some debate among religious authorities, with a majority holding that it is permitted to ascend to the Temple Mount, but not to step on the site of the inner courtyards of the ancient Temple. The question then becomes whether the site can be ascertained accurately.\nThere is debate over whether reports that Maimonides himself ascended the Mount are reliable. One such report claims that he did so on Thursday, October 21, 1165, during the Crusader period. Some early scholars however, claim that entry onto certain areas of the Mount is permitted. It appears that Radbaz also entered the Mount and advised others how to do this. He permits entry from all the gates into the 135 x 135 cubits of the Women's Courtyard in the east, since the biblical prohibition only applies to the 187 x 135 cubits of the Temple in the west. There are also Christian and Islamic sources which indicate that Jews visited the site, but these visits may have been made under duress.\nThose persons who suffered a nocturnal emission and who have not yet immersed themselves in a ritual bath were permitted to enter the Court of the Israelites, but were prohibited from entering the Court of the Levites and the Court of the Priests until they had immersed. Entrance into the areas of the other two courts was strictly forbidden to those who had not immersed themselves and who had been defiled by corpse uncleanness and who had not yet been purified. Since the latter state of impurity is pervasive, and since there is an inability to be purified from its effects, many rabbis forbid entrance into the Temple Mount altogether as a safeguard.\nOpinions of contemporary rabbis concerning entry to the site.\nA few hours after the Temple Mount came under Israeli control during the Six-Day War, a message from the Chief Rabbis of Israel, Isser Yehuda Unterman and Yitzhak Nissim was broadcast, warning that Jews were not permitted to enter the site. This warning was reiterated by the Council of the Chief Rabbinate a few days later, which issued an explanation written by Rabbi Bezalel Jolti (Zolti) that \"Since the sanctity of the site has never ended, it is forbidden to enter the Temple Mount until the Temple is built.\" The signatures of more than 300 prominent rabbis were later obtained.\nA major critic of the decision of the Chief Rabbinate was Rabbi Shlomo Goren, the chief rabbi of the IDF. According to General Uzi Narkiss, who led the Israeli force that conquered the Temple Mount, Goren proposed to him that the Dome of the Rock be immediately blown up. After Narkiss refused, Goren unsuccessfully petitioned the government to close off the Mount to Jews and non-Jews alike. Later he established his office on the Mount and conducted a series of demonstrations on the Mount in support of the right of Jewish men to enter there. His behavior displeased the government, which restricted his public actions, censored his writings, and in August prevented him from attending the annual Oral Law Conference at which the question of access to the Mount was debated. Although there was considerable opposition, the conference consensus was to confirm the ban on entry to Jews. The ruling said \"We have been warned, since time immemorial [lit.\u2009'for generations and generations'], against entering the entire area of the Temple Mount and have indeed avoided doing so.\" According to Ron Hassner, the ruling \"brilliantly\" solved the government's problem of avoiding ethnic conflict, since those Jews who most respected rabbinical authority were those most likely to clash with Muslims on the Mount.\nRabbinical consensus in the post-1967 period, held that it is forbidden for Jews to enter any part of the Temple Mount, and in January 2005, a declaration was signed confirming the 1967 decision.\nMost Haredi rabbis are of the opinion that the Mount is off limits to Jews and non-Jews alike. Their opinions against entering the Temple Mount are based on the current political climate surrounding the Mount, along with the potential danger of entering the hallowed area of the Temple courtyard and the impossibility of fulfilling the ritual requirement of cleansing oneself with the ashes of a red heifer. The boundaries of the areas which are completely forbidden, while having large portions in common, are delineated differently by various rabbinic authorities.\nHowever, there is a growing body of Modern Orthodox and national religious rabbis who encourage visits to certain parts of the Mount, which they believe are permitted according to most medieval rabbinical authorities. These rabbis include: Shlomo Goren (former Ashkenazi Chief Rabbi of Israel); Chaim David Halevi (former Chief Rabbi of Tel Aviv and Yafo); Dov Lior (Rabbi of Kiryat Arba); Yosef Elboim; Yisrael Ariel; She'ar Yashuv Cohen (Chief Rabbi of Haifa); Yuval Sherlo (rosh yeshiva of the hesder yeshiva of Petah Tikva); Meir Kahane. One of them, Shlomo Goren, held that it is possible that Jews are even allowed to enter the heart of the Dome of the Rock in time of war, according to Jewish Law of Conquest. These authorities demand an attitude of veneration on the part of Jews ascending the Temple Mount, ablution in a mikveh prior to the ascent, and the wearing of non-leather shoes. Some rabbinic authorities are now of the opinion that it is imperative for Jews to ascend in order to halt the ongoing process of Islamization of the Temple Mount. Maimonides, perhaps the greatest codifier of Jewish Law, wrote in \"Laws of the Chosen House ch 7 Law 15\" \"One may bring a dead body in to the (lower sanctified areas of the) Temple Mount and there is no need to say that the ritually impure (from the dead) may enter there, because the dead body itself can enter\". One who is ritually impure through direct or in-direct contact of the dead cannot walk in the higher sanctified areas. For those who are visibly Jewish, they have no choice, but to follow a peripheral route as it has become unofficially part of the status quo on the Mount. Many of these recent opinions rely on archaeological evidence.\nIn December 2013, the two Chief Rabbis of Israel, David Lau and Yitzhak Yosef, reiterated the ban on Jews entering the Temple Mount. They wrote, \"In light of [those] neglecting [this ruling], we once again warn that nothing has changed and this strict prohibition remains in effect for the entire area [of the Temple Mount]\". In November 2014, the Sephardic chief rabbi Yitzhak Yosef reiterated the point of view held by many rabbinic authorities that Jews should not visit the Mount.\nOn the occasion of an upsurge in Palestinian knifing attacks on Israelis, associated with fears that Israel was changing the status quo on the Mount, the Haredi newspaper Mishpacha ran a notification in Arabic asking, 'their cousins', Palestinians, to stop trying to murder members of their congregation, since they were vehemently opposed to ascending the Mount and consider such visits proscribed by Jewish law.\nFeatures.\nCourtyard.\nThe large courtyard (\"sahn\") can host more than 400,000 worshippers, making it one of the largest mosques in the world.\nUpper platform.\nThe upper platform surrounds the Dome of the Rock, beneath which lies the Well of Souls, originally accessible only by a narrow hole in the Sakhrah, the foundation stone on which the Dome of the Rock site and after which it is named, until the Crusaders dug a new entrance to the cave from the south. The platform is accessible via eight staircases, each of which is topped by a free-standing arcade known in Arabic as the \"qanatir\" or \"mawazin\". The arcades were erected in different periods from the 10th to 15th centuries.\nThere is also a smaller domed building on the upper platform, to the east of the Dome of the Rock, known as the Dome of the Chain (\"Qubbat al-Sisila\" in Arabic). Its exact origin and purpose is uncertain but historical sources indicate it was built under the reign of Abd al-Malik, the same Umayyad caliph who built the Dome of the Rock. Two other small domes stand to the northwest of the Dome of the Rock. The Dome of the Ascension (\"Qubbat al-Miraj\" in Arabic) has an inscription with a date corresponding to 1201 CE. It may have been a former Crusader structure, possibly a baptistery, that was repurposed at this time, or it may be a structure that was built after Saladin's capture of the city and reused some Crusader-era materials, including its columns. Per its name, this dome commemorates the spot where, according to some, Muhammad ascended to heaven. The Dome of the Spirits or Dome of the Winds (\"Qubbat al-Arwah\" in Arabic) stands a little further north and is dated to the 16th century.\nIn the southwest corner of the upper platform is a quadrangular structure which includes a portion topped by another dome. It is known as the Dome of Literature (\"Qubba Nahwiyya\" in Arabic) and dated to 1208. Standing further east, close to one of the southern entrance arcades, is a stone \"minbar\" known as the \"Summer Pulpit\" or Minbar of Burhan al-Din, used for open-air prayers. It appears to be an older ciborium from the Crusader period, as attested by its sculptural decoration, which was then reused under the Ayyubids. Sometime after 1345, a Mamluk judge named Burhan al-Din (d. 1388) restored it and added a stone staircase, giving it its present form.\nLower platform.\nThe lower platform \u2013 which constitutes most of the surface of the Temple Mount \u2013 has at its southern end al-Aqsa Mosque, which takes up most of the width of the Mount. Gardens take up the eastern and most of the northern side of the platform; the far north of the platform houses an Islamic school.\nThe lower platform also houses an ablution fountain (known as \"al-Kas\"), originally supplied with water via a long narrow aqueduct leading from the so-called \"Solomon's Pools\" near Bethlehem, but now supplied from Jerusalem's water mains.\nThere are several cisterns beneath the lower platform, designed to collect rainwater as a water supply. These have various forms and structures, seemingly built in different periods, ranging from vaulted chambers built in the gap between the bedrock and the platform, to chambers cut into the bedrock itself. Of these, the most notable are (numbering traditionally follows Wilson's scheme):\nSealed gates\nGates.\nThe retaining walls of the platform contain several gateways, all now blocked. In the eastern wall is the Golden Gate, through which legend states the Jewish Messiah would enter Jerusalem. On the southern face are the Hulda Gates \u2013 the \"triple gate\" (which has three arches) and the \"double gate\" (which has two arches and is partly obscured by a Crusader building); these were the entrance and exit (respectively) to the Temple Mount from Ophel (the oldest part of Jerusalem), and the main access to the Mount for ordinary Jews. In the western face, near the southern corner, is the Barclay's Gate \u2013 only half visible due to a building (the \"house of Abu Sa'ud\") on the northern side. Also in the western face, hidden by later construction but visible via the recent Western Wall Tunnels, and only rediscovered by Warren, is Warren's Gate; the function of these western gates is obscure, but many Jews view Warren's Gate as particularly holy, due to its location due west of the Dome of the Rock. The current location of the Dome of the Rock is considered one of the possible locations where the Holy of Holies was placed; numerous alternative opinions exist, based on study and calculations, such as those of Tuvia Sagiv.\nWarren was able to investigate the inside of these gates. Warren's Gate and the Golden Gate simply head toward the centre of the Mount, giving access to the surface by steps. Barclay's Gate is similar, but abruptly turns south as it does so; the reason for this is unknown. The double and triple gates (the \"Huldah Gates\") are more substantial; heading into the Mount for some distance they each finally have steps rising to the surface just north of al-Aqsa Mosque. The passageway for each is vaulted, and has two aisles (in the case of the triple gate, a third aisle exists for a brief distance beyond the gate); the eastern aisle of the double gates and western aisle of the triple gates reach the surface, the other aisles terminating some way before the steps. Warren believed that one aisle of each original passage was extended when al-Aqsa Mosque blocked the original surface exits.\nIn the process of investigating Cistern 10, Warren discovered tunnels that lay \"under\" the Triple Gate passageway. These passages lead in erratic directions, some leading beyond the southern edge of the Temple Mount (they are at a depth below the base of the walls); their purpose is unknown \u2013 as is whether they predate the Temple Mount \u2013 a situation not helped by the fact that apart from Warren's expedition no one else is known to have visited them.\nAltogether, there are six major sealed gates and a postern, listed here counterclockwise, dating from either the Roman/Herodian, Byzantine, or Early Muslim periods:\nBab al-Rahma (Door of Mercy) is the southern opening,\nBab al-Tauba (Door of Repentance) is the northern opening\nOpen gates of the Haram\nThere are now eleven open gates offering access to the Muslim Haram al-Sharif.\nTwo twin gates follow south of the Ablution Gate, the Tranquility Gate and the Gate of the Chain:\nA twelfth gate still open during Ottoman rule is now closed to the public:\nSolomon's Stables/Marwani Mosque.\nEast of and joined to the triple gate passageway is a large vaulted area, supporting the southeastern corner of the Temple Mount platform \u2013 which is substantially above the bedrock at this point \u2013 the vaulted chambers here are popularly referred to as Solomon's Stables. They were used as stables by the Crusaders, but were built by Herod the Great \u2013 along with the platform they were built to support.\nNorthern and western porticos.\nThe complex is bordered on the south and east by the outer walls of the Old City of Jerusalem. On the north and west it is bordered by two long porticos (\"riwaq\"), built during the Mamluk period. A number of other structures were also built along these areas, mainly also from the Mamluk period. On the north side, they include the Isardiyya Madrasa, built before 1345, and the Almalikiyya Madrasa, dated to 1340. On the west side, they include the Ashrafiyya Madrasa, built by Sultan Qaytbay between 1480 and 1482, and the adjacent Uthmaniyya Madrasa, dated to 1437. The Sabil of Qaytbay, contemporary with the Ashrafiyya Madrasa, also stands nearby.\nMinarets.\nThe existing four minarets include three along the western perimeter of the esplanade and one along the northern wall. The earliest dated minaret was constructed on the northwest corner of the Temple Mount in 1298, with three other minarets added over the course of the 14th century.\nArchaeology, site alterations.\nDue to the extreme political sensitivity of the site, no real archaeological excavations have ever been conducted on the Temple Mount itself. Protests commonly occur whenever archaeologists conduct projects near the Mount. This sensitivity has not, however, protected both Jewish and Muslim works from accusations of destroying archeological evidence on a number of occasions. Aside from visual observation of surface features, most other archaeological knowledge of the site comes from the 19th-century survey carried out by Charles Wilson and Charles Warren and others. Since the Waqf is granted almost full autonomy on the Islamic holy sites, Israeli archaeologists have been prevented from inspecting the area, and are restricted to conducting excavations around the Temple Mount.\nAfter the Six-Day War of 1967, Israeli archeologists began a series of excavations near the site at the southern wall that uncovered finds from the Second Temple period through Roman, Umayyad and Crusader times. Israeli archaeological digs at the southwestern corner of Temple Mount discovered traces of four Muslim palaces built under the Umayyad Caliphate, though the remains have not been well preserved but instead had a museum built upon them. The former UN envoy to Jerusalem, Raymond M. Lemaire, criticised \"the construction of a metallic pergola in the middle of the courtyard of one of the Umayyad palaces, which disfigures the site.\" Upon visiting Jerusalem in September 1999, medieval art historian L\u00e9on Pressouyre noted that the palaces had lost their archaeological features due to neglect, \"for in the guise of highlighting the remains of previous periods [the Israeli authorities] trivialise the Umayyad palaces, major monuments in the area\".\nOver the period 1970\u20131988, a number of tunnels were excavated in the vicinity, including one that passed to the west of the Mount and became known as the Western Wall Tunnel, which was opened to the public in 1996. The same year the Waqf began construction of a new mosque in the structures known since Crusader times as Solomon's Stables. Many Israelis regarded this as a radical change of the status quo, which should not have been undertaken without first consulting the Israeli government. The project was done without attention to the possibility of disturbing historically significant archaeological material, with stone and ancient artifacts treated without regard to their preservation.\nIsraeli organizations such as the Committee to Prevent the Destruction of Antiquities on the Temple Mount argue that Palestinians are deliberately removing significant amounts of archaeological evidence about the Jewish past of the site and claim to have found significant artifacts in the fill removed by bulldozers and trucks from the Temple Mount. Since the late 1990s, the Temple Mount Sifting Project has been reclaiming earth from similar illegal excavations on the mount that had been dumped in the nearby Kidron Valley that had yielded important finds, including Iron Age figurines, an 8th or 7th centuries BCE clay sealing inscribed in Hebrew, Persian period YHD coins, Herodian opus sectile tiles, Byzantine tesserae, and arrowheads, mostly from the Crusader period.\nIn late 2002, a bulge of about was reported in the southern retaining wall part of the Temple Mount. A Jordanian team of engineers recommended replacing or resetting most of the stones in the affected area. In February 2004, the eastern wall of the Mount was damaged by an earthquake. The damage threatened to topple sections of the wall into the area known as Solomon's Stables. A few days later, a portion of retaining wall, supporting the earthen ramp that led from the Western Wall plaza to the Gate of the Moors on the Temple Mount, collapsed. In 2007 the Israel Antiquities Authority started construction of a temporary wooden pedestrian pathway to replace the Mugrabi Gate ramp after a landslide in 2005 made it unsafe and in danger of collapse. The works sparked condemnation from Arab leaders.\nIn July 2007 the Muslim religious trust which administers the Mount began digging a , trench from the northern side of the Temple Mount compound to the Dome of the Rock in order to replace 40-year-old electric cables in the area. Israeli archaeologists accused the waqf of a deliberate act of cultural vandalism. Accusations of vandalism at the site resurfaced in 2018 and again in 2022.\n\"Minaret proposal:\" Plans are mooted to build a new minaret on the mount, the first of its kind for 600 years. King Abdullah II of Jordan announced a competition to design a fifth minaret for the walls of the Temple Mount complex. He said it would \"reflect the Islamic significance and sanctity of the mosque\". The scheme, estimated to cost $300,000, is for a seven-sided tower \u2013 after the seven-pointed Hashemite star \u2013 and at , it would be taller than the next-largest minaret. The minaret would be constructed on the eastern wall of the Temple Mount near the Golden Gate.\nKnesset Member Danny Danon visited the Temple Mount in accordance with rabbinical views of Jewish Law on the ninth of the Hebrew Month of Av. The Knesset member condemned the conditions imposed by Muslims upon religious Jews at the site and vowed to work to improve conditions.\n\"Temple Mount shooting\": Three men from the Israeli-Arab city of Umm al-Fahm opened fire on two Israeli Druze policemen at the Lions' Gate. Gun attacks have been unusual at the Temple Mount in recent decades.\nFollowing the July 14 attack, the site was shut down, and reopened on July 16 with metal detector-equipped checkpoints, spurring calls for protests by Muslim leaders associated with the site.\n\"Al-Aqsa Mosque clashes\": On 15 April 2022, clashes erupted between Palestinians and Israeli Security Forces on the Temple Mount. The clashes began when Palestinians threw stones, firecrackers, and other heavy objects at Israeli police officers. The policemen responded with various riot control measures. Some Palestinians then barricaded themselves inside al-Aqsa Mosque and continued throwing stones at the policemen. In response, police raided the mosque, arresting those who had barricaded themselves inside. Some damage was done to the mosque's structure.\n\"Al-Aqsa Mosque clashes\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65723", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65723", "title": "Vibrato", "text": "Regular, pulsating change of pitch in music\nVibrato (Italian, from past participle of \"vibrare\", to vibrate) is a musical effect consisting of a regular, pulsating change of pitch. It is used to add expression to vocal and instrumental music. Vibrato is typically characterized in terms of two factors: the amount of pitch variation (\"extent of vibrato\") and the speed with which the pitch is varied (\"rate of vibrato\").\nIn singing, it can occur spontaneously through variations in the larynx. The vibrato of a string instrument and wind instrument is an imitation of that vocal function. Vibrato can also be reproduced mechanically (Leslie speaker) or electronically as an audio effect close to chorus.\nTerminology.\nHistory.\nDescriptions of what would now be characterised as vibrato go back to the 16th century. However, no evidence exists of authors using the term vibrato before the 19th century. Instead, authors used various descriptive terms interchangeably, including \"tremolo\", \"bebung\", or \"tremblement\", or descriptions such as \"wavering\", \"shake\" or \"trillo\". These \u201cterminological uncertainties\u201d continue to pervade modern definitions of vibrato.\nVibrato and tremolo.\nThe terms vibrato and tremolo are sometimes used interchangeably, although (in the classical world) they are properly defined as separate effects. Vibrato is defined as a periodic variation in the pitch (frequency) of a musical note that is perceived as one fundamental frequency. Tremolo, on the other hand, is defined as a fast repetition of the same note (usually a semiquaver) or alternation between two notes, especially on instruments which do not have the ability of producing long sustained notes, such as the guitar (for instance tremolo picking). \nHuman perception.\nCurrently, the leading understanding is that when vibrato is utilised, listeners are able to focus on the average pitch and hear it as a single fundamental as opposed to the alternation between two different fundamental frequencies. Carl Seashore (1967) conducted the first comprehensive studies on perceptions of vibrato in the context of classically trained singers, finding some individuals are 50-100 times more perceptive of the presence of vibrato than individuals with the least ability and that \u201cmuch of the most beautiful vibrato is below the threshold for vibrato hearing and is perceived merely as tone quality.\u201d This conclusion was confirmed by William Vennard (1967) who notes that the listener hears only the average pitch, and the fluctuation is interpreted as enhanced tonal quality. \nIn practice, it is difficult for a singer or musical instrument player to achieve only pitch vibrato (where only the pitch is varied), and variations in both pitch and volume will often be achieved at the same time. Electronic manipulation or generation of signals makes it easier to achieve or demonstrate pure tremolo or vibrato.\nAcoustic basis.\nThe use of vibrato is intended to add warmth to a note. In the case of many string instruments the sound emitted is strongly directional, particularly at high frequencies, and the slight variations in pitch typical of vibrato playing can cause large changes in the directional patterns of the radiated sound. This can add a shimmer to the sound; with a well-made instrument it may also help a solo player to be heard more clearly when playing with a large orchestra.\nThis directional effect is intended to interact with the room acoustics to add interest to the sound, in much the same way as an acoustic guitarist may swing the box around on a final sustain, or the rotating baffle of a Leslie speaker will spin the sound around the room.\nTypical extent of vibrato.\nThe extent of the variation in pitch during vibrato is controlled by the performer. The extent of vibrato for solo singers is usually less than a semitone (100 cents) either side of the note, while singers in a choir typically use narrower vibrato with an extent of less than a tenth of a semitone (10 cents) either side. Wind and bowed instruments generally use vibratos with an extent of less than half a semitone either side.\nUse in various musical genres.\nVibrato is sometimes thought of as an effect added onto the note itself, but in some cases it is so fully a part of the style of the music that it can be very difficult for some performers to play without it. The jazz tenor sax player Coleman Hawkins found he had this difficulty when requested to play a passage both with and without vibrato by Leonard Bernstein when producing his record album \"What is Jazz\" to demonstrate the difference between the two. Despite his technique, he was unable to play without vibrato. The featured saxophonist in Benny Goodman's Orchestra, George Auld, was brought in to play the part.\nMany classical musicians, especially singers and string players, have a similar problem. The violinist and teacher Leopold Auer, writing in his book \"Violin Playing as I Teach It\" (1920), advised violinists to practise playing completely without vibrato, and to stop playing for a few minutes as soon as they noticed themselves playing with vibrato in order for them to gain complete control over their technique.\nIn classical music.\nThe use of vibrato in classical music is a matter of some dispute. For much of the 20th century it was used almost continuously in the performance of pieces from all eras from the Baroque onwards, especially by singers and string players.\nThe rise of notionally historically informed (\"period\") performance from the 1970s onwards has dramatically changed its use, especially in music of the Baroque and Classical eras. However, there is no actual proof that singers performed without vibrato in the baroque era. Notably, composer Lodovico Zacconi advocated that vibrato \"ought always to be used\".\nVocal music of the renaissance is almost never sung with vibrato as a rule, and it seems unlikely it ever was; however, it should be understood that \"vibrato\" occurs over a wide range of intensities: slow, fast, wide, and narrow. Most sources in condemning the practice seem to be referring to a wide, slow, perceptible oscillation in pitch, usually associated with intense emotion, whereas the ideal for modern vibrato, and possibly in earlier times as well, was to imitate the natural timbre of the adult singing voice, from which a measure of vibrato (it has since been shown) is rarely absent.\nLeopold Mozart\u2019s \"Versuch einer gr\u00fcndlichen Violinschule\" (1756), for example, provides an indication of the state of vibrato in string playing at the end of the baroque period. In it, he concedes that \u201cthere are performers who tremble consistently on each note as if they had the permanent fever\u201d, condemning the practice, and suggesting instead that vibrato should be used only on sustained notes and at the ends of phrases when used as an ornament. This however, does not give anything more than an indication of Mozart's own personal taste, based on the fact that he was an educated late Rococo/Classical composer. Mozart acknowledges the difference between the heavy, ornamental vibrato that he finds objectionable, and a more continuous application of the technique less obtrusively for purposes of improving tone quality (in which case he does not refer to it as \"vibrato\" or \"tremolo\" at all; describing it as merely an aspect of correct fingering). In this respect he resembles his contemporary, Francesco Geminiani, who advocated using vibrato \"as frequently as possible\" on short notes for this purpose. Although there is no aural proof, as audio recordings were not around for more than 150 years, that string players in Europe did not use vibrato, its overuse was almost universally condemned by the leading musical authorities of the day.\nCertain types of vibrato, then, were seen as an ornament, but this does not mean that it was used sparingly. In wind playing too, it seems that vibrato in music up to the 20th century was seen as an ornament to be used selectively. Martin Agricola writing in his \"Musica instrumentalis deudsch\" (1529) writes of vibrato in this way. Occasionally, composers up to the baroque period indicated vibrato with a wavy line in the sheet music. Again, this does not suggest that it was not desired for the rest of the piece any more than the infrequent use of the term in 20th-century works suggests that it is not used elsewhere.\nVibrato wars.\nMusic by late-Romantic composers such as Richard Wagner and Johannes Brahms is now played with a fairly continuous vibrato. However, some musicians specialising in historically informed performances, such as the late conductor Roger Norrington, argue that it is unlikely that Brahms, Wagner, and their contemporaries would have expected it to be played in this way. This view has caused considerable controversy. The view that \"continuous vibrato\" was invented by Fritz Kreisler and some of his colleagues is held to be shown by early sound recordings, which allegedly demonstrate that this profuse use of vibrato appeared only in the 20th century.\nThe alleged growth of vibrato in 20th-century orchestral playing was traced by Norrington by studying early audio recordings but his opponents contend that his interpretations are not supported by the actual samples. Norrington asserted that vibrato in the earliest recordings is used only selectively, as an expressive device; the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra were not recorded using vibrato comparable to modern vibrato until 1935, and the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra not until 1940. French orchestras seem to have played with continuous vibrato somewhat earlier, from the 1920s.\nDefenders of vibrato claim that the sonic limitations of 78-rpm recordings, particularly with respect to overtones and high frequency information, make an uncontroversial assessment of earlier playing techniques difficult (although, it must be said, early recordings of operatic singers manage to show clearly the extent to which a vibrato is present [or not] in their voices). Moreover, defenders of vibrato maintain that a distinction needs to be made between the kind of vibrato used by a solo player and the sectional vibrato of an entire string ensemble, which cannot be heard as a uniform quantity as such, but rather, it manifests itself in terms of the warmth and amplitude of the sound produced, as opposed to a perceptible wavering of pitch. The fact that, as early as the 1880s, composers such as Richard Strauss (in his tone poems \"Don Juan\" and \"Death and Transfiguration\") as well as Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns (Symphony No. 3 \"Organ\") asked string players to perform certain passages \"without expression\" or \"without nuance\" somewhat suggests the general use of vibrato within the orchestra as a matter of course; by the same token, indications by Mahler and Debussy that specifically demand the use of vibrato in certain passages may suggest the opposite practice.\nIn Baroque music.\nOn the clavichord, tremolo (bebung) refers to a vibrato effect created by varying the depression of the keys.\nTheorists and authors of treatises on instrumental technique of the era regularly used tremolo or bebung to refer to vibrato on other instruments and in the voice; however, there was not uniform agreement in what the term meant.\nSome influential authors such as Matteson and Hiller believed the natural trembling in the voice occurred \"without making it higher or lower\". This could be achieved on string instruments by varying the speed of the bow, waving the hand, or rolling the bow in the fingers. On the organ, a similar effect is created by the tremulant. (Contradictory to his description, Hiller recommended string players vary the pitch by rolling the fingers to create the effect).\nOther authors seem to differentiate by degrees. Leopold Mozart includes tremolo in chapter 11 of his violin treatise, but describes an unnamed vibrato technique in chapter 5 on tone production. His son, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, appears to take the exact opposite definition as his father: in a letter to his father, Mozart criticizes singers for \"pulsing\" their voice beyond the natural fluctuation of the voice, the latter of which being pleasant should be imitated on the violin, winds, and clavichord (with bebung).\nTo other authors such as Tartini, Zacconi, and Bremner (student of Geminiani), there is no distinction between the two.\nFlute treatises of the era describe a variety of techniques for flattement as well as vibrato by shaking the flute with pitch fluctuations varying from nearly nothing to very large.\nIn opera.\nAll human voices can produce vibrato. This vibrato can be varied in width (and rapidity) through training.\nIn opera, as opposed to pop, vibrato begins at the start of the note and continues to the end of the note with slight variations in width during the note.\nTraditionally, however, the deliberate cultivation of a particularly wide, pervasive vibrato by opera singers from the Latin countries has been denounced by English-speaking music critics and pedagogues as a technical fault and a stylistic blot (see Scott, cited below, Volume 1, pp.\u00a0123\u2013127). They have expected vocalists to emit a pure, steady stream of clear sound \u2014 irrespective of whether they were singing in church, on the concert platform, or on the operatic stage.\nDuring the 19th century, for instance, New York and London based critics, including Henry Chorley, Herman Klein, and George Bernard Shaw, castigated a succession of visiting Mediterranean tenors for resorting to an excessive, constantly pulsating vibrato during their performances. Shaw called the worst offenders \"goat bleaters\" in his book \"Music in London 1890-1894\" (Constable, London, 1932). Among those censured for this failing were such celebrated figures as Enrico Tamberlik, Juli\u00e1n Gayarre, Roberto Stagno, Italo Campanini and Ernesto Nicolini\u2014not to mention Fernando Valero and Fernando De Lucia, whose tremulous tones are preserved on the 78-rpm discs that they made at the beginning of the 20th century.\nThe popularity of an exaggerated vibrato among many (but by no means all) Mediterranean tenors and singing teachers of this era has been traced back by musicologists to the influential example set by the early-19th-century virtuoso vocalist Giovanni Battista Rubini (1794\u20131854). Rubini had employed it with great success as an affecting device in the new Romantic operas of Gaetano Donizetti and Vincenzo Bellini. A host of young Italian tenors\u2014including the renowned Giovanni Matteo Mario (1810\u20131883) \u2014 copied Rubini's trend-setting innovation in order to heighten the emotional impact of the music that they were singing, and to facilitate the delivery of fioritura \"by, as it were, running up and down the vibrato\" (to quote Scott; see p.\u00a0126).\nPrior to the advent of the charismatic Rubini, every well-schooled opera singer had avoided using a conspicuous and continuous vibrato because, according to Scott, it varied the pitch of the note being sung to an unacceptable degree and it was considered to be an artificial contrivance arising from inadequate breath control. British and North American press commentators and singing teachers continued to subscribe to this view long after Rubini had come and gone.\nAccordingly, when Enrico Caruso (1873\u20131921) \u2014 the most emulated Mediterranean tenor of the 20th century \u2014 made his acclaimed New York Metropolitan Opera debut in November 1903, one of the specific vocal attributes for which he was praised by music reviewers was the absence of a disruptive vibrato from his singing. The scholarly critic William James Henderson wrote in \"The Sun\" newspaper, for example, that Caruso \"has a pure tenor voice and [it] is without the typical Italian bleat\". Caruso's gramophone recordings support Henderson's assessment. (Other prominent Mediterranean tenors of the late 19th century to early 20th century who, like Caruso, did not \"bleat\" were Angelo Masini, Francesco Tamagno, Francesco Marconi, Francisco Vi\u00f1as, Emilio De Marchi, Giuseppe Borgatti and Giovanni Zenatello, while the phenomenon was rare among French, German, Russian and Anglo-Saxon tenors of the same period\u2014see Scott.)\nThe intentional use of a pronounced vibrato by Mediterranean tenors is a practice that has died out over the course of the past 100 years, owing in no small measure to Caruso's example. The last really important practitioners of this style and method of singing were Alessandro Bonci (in the 1900-1925 period) and Giacomo Lauri-Volpi (in the 1920-1950 period). Both of them featured bel canto works, dating from Rubini's day, in their operatic repertoires, and both of them can be heard on recordings which faithfully capture the distinct shimmer inherent in their timbre.\nItalian or Spanish-trained operatic sopranos, mezzo-sopranos, and baritones exhibiting a pronounced vibrato did not escape censure, either, by British and North American arbiters of good singing. Indeed, Adelina Patti and Luisa Tetrazzini were the only Italian sopranos to enjoy star status in London and New York in the late-Victorian and Edwardian eras, while such well-known compatriots and coevals of theirs as Gemma Bellincioni and Eugenia Burzio (among several others) failed to please the Anglophones' ears because, unlike Patti and Tetrazzini, they possessed unsteady, vibrato-laden voices\u2014see Scott for evaluations of their respective techniques. To give an additional female example from a later date, whenever the vivacious mezzo-soprano of the 1920s and '30s, Conchita Superv\u00eda, performed in London, she was admonished in print for her exceedingly vibrant and fluttery tone, which was unkindly likened by her detractors to the chatter of a machine-gun or the rattle of dice in a cup.\nIn 1883, Giuseppe Kaschmann (n\u00e9 Josip Ka\u0161man) \u2014 a principal baritone at La Scala, Milan\u2014was criticised for his strong vibrato when he sang at the Met, and the theatre's management did not re-engage him for the following season, even though other aspects of his singing were admired. (Kaschmann never performed in Great Britain but he remained a popular artist in the Latin countries for several decades; in 1903, he made a few recordings which exhibit only too well his perpetual flutter.) Similarly, another one of Italy's leading baritones, Riccardo Stracciari, was unable to turn his pre-World War I London and New York operatic engagements into unambiguous triumphs due to an intrusive quiver in his tone. He subsequently moderated his vibrato, as the discs that he made for Columbia Records in 1917-1925 show, and this enabled him to pursue a significant career not only in his homeland but also at the Chicago opera.\nThere is another kind of vibrato-linked fault that can afflict the voices of operatic artists, especially aging ones\u2014namely the slow, often irregular wobble produced when the singer's vibrato has loosened from the effects of forcing, over-parting, or the sheer wear and tear on the body caused by the stresses of a long stage career.\nReferences: For more information about the historical employment of vibrato by classical vocalists, see Michael Scott's two-volume survey \"The Record of Singing\" (published by Duckworth, London, in 1977 and 1979); John Potter's \"Tenor: History of a Voice\" (Yale University Press, New Haven &amp; London, 2009); and Herman Klein's \"30 Years of Music in London\" (Century, New York, 1903).\nIn jazz.\nMost jazz players for the first half of the 20th century used vibrato more or less continuously. Since around the 1950s and the rise of bebop, continuous use of vibrato has largely fallen out of style in favor of more selective use.\nIn folk.\nFolk music singers and instrumentalists in the North American and Western European traditions rarely use vibrato, reserving it for occasional ornamentation. It also tends to be used by performers of transcriptions or reworkings of folk music that have been made by composers from a classical, music-school background such as Benjamin Britten or Percy Grainger. Vibrato of varying widths and speeds may be used in folk music traditions from other regions, such as Eastern Europe, the Balkans, the Middle East, East Asia, or India. \nIn pop.\nIn pop (as opposed to opera), the vibrato usually starts somewhere in the latter part of the note.\nIn the case of some pop balladists, the vibrato can be so wide as to constitute a pronounced wobble, although not as pronounced as that present in operatic voices. Many singers use pitch correction software in which the effect can be reduced or eliminated.\nTechniques for producing vibrato.\nNot all instruments can produce vibrato, as some have fixed pitches that cannot be varied by sufficiently small degrees. Most percussion instruments are examples of this, for instance, the xylophone.\nSinging.\nThere are three different voice vibrato processes that occur in different parts of the vocal tract. Peter-Michael Fischer has vibrato types defined by place of production:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This combination is relatively stable in the most beautiful voices. An important feature is that the partial functions can appear during the song as \"accents\": In the context of the presentation expressive wave dominates respirativa, lyrical character, but in an accelerated, or glottis wave, hard feature heroic, but in a slow way.\"\u2014\u200aSome studies have shown that vibrato is the result of a neuromuscular tremor in the vocal folds. In 1922, Max Schoen was the first to make the comparison of vibrato to a tremor due to the following similarities:\nKeyboard instruments.\nSome types of organ can produce vibrato by altering the pressure of the air passing through the pipes, or by various mechanical devices (see the Hammond or Wurlitzer Organs for example). The clavichord, though technically a fixed-pitch keyboard instrument, is capable of producing a type of vibrato known as \"Bebung\" by varying the pressure on the key as the note sounds. Some digital keyboards can produce an electronic vibrato effect, either by pressure on the keys, or by using a joystick or other MIDI controller.\nString instruments.\nThe method of producing vibrato on other instruments varies. On string instruments, for example, the finger used to stop the string can be wobbled on the fingerboard, or actually moved up and down the string for a wider vibrato.\nMany contemporary string players vary the pitch from below, only up to the nominal note and not above it, although great violin pedagogues of the past such as Carl Flesch and Joseph Joachim explicitly referred to vibrato as a movement towards the bridge, meaning upwards in pitch,\u2014and the cellist Diran Alexanian, in his 1922 treatise \"Trait\u00e9 th\u00e9orique et pratique du Violoncelle\", shows how one should practice vibrato as starting from the note and then moving upwards in a rhythmic motion. In a 1996 acoustic study by the Acoustical Society of America, along with Wellesley College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, found that the perceived pitch of a note with vibrato \"is that of its mean\", or the middle of the fluctuating pitch.\nWide vibrato, as wide as a whole-tone, is commonly used among electric guitar players and adds the signature vocal-like expressiveness to the sound. This effect can be achieved both by the movement of fingers on the fretboard and by the use of a vibrato tailpiece, a lever that adjusts the tension of the strings.\nSome violinists, like Leonidas Kavakos, use bow vibrato by moving the right hand up and down slightly to change the angle and pressure of the bow and thus oscillate the pitch and intensity of a note. The first known description of this technique on violin was by Francesco Geminiani. This technique was not limited to violin but was known to players of all string instruments in Italy, France, Germany, and England during the Baroque era. Sylvestro Ganassi dal Fontego is known to have described this technique for the viol da gamba as early as the 16th century.\nWoodwind.\nPlayers of woodwind instruments generally create vibrato by modulating their air flow into the instrument. This may be accomplished either through stomach vibrato, the pulsing of the diaphragm slightly up and down, or throat vibrato, a variation of vocal cord tension to manipulate air pressure as singers do. Players of other instruments may employ less common techniques. Although saxophonists and clarinetists can also use airflow, it is more common for them to create vibrato by repeatedly moving their jaw up and down slightly. However classical clarinetists rarely play with vibrato.\nBrass.\nBrass instrument players can produce vibrato by repeatedly and rapidly altering the embouchure, or use and shaping of the lips and facial muscles, essentially repeatedly \"bending\" the note. This is called lip-vibrato, and is probably the most commonly used technique of vibrato on a lower brass instrument. It is also known to give the best sound and timbre on a brass instrument and is encouraged in upper-level or militaristic style brass ensembles.\nPlayers may also produce vibrato by gently shaking the horn which varies the pressure of the mouthpiece against the lip. This is referred to as hand vibrato. It is more favored in higher brass, but does not possess the same sound quality as lip-vibrato and at upper levels and can be viewed as a technical mistake, most notable in military style brass training.\nOn a trombone, a player may provide a slightly more pronounced vibrato by gently moving the slide back and forth, centering on one note to give a lyrical effect. Often this is more of a jazz technique, and is called \"slide vibrato\". In brass playing, \"diaphragmatic vibrato\" is possible, but is viewed as an immature technique by collegiate or professional brass players as this technique interferes with proper airflow from the lungs to the instrument. The use of diaphragmatic vibrato in a brass setting is detrimental to the sound and stamina that a brass player can produce, and so is strongly discouraged at any level of musical training.\nAuto-vibrato.\nSome instruments can be played only with constant, mechanical vibrato (or none at all). This effect is notable in electric organists using a Leslie speaker, the most popular of which use a two-speed vibrato; a degree of expression is gained from the acceleration between speeds. Vibrato on the theremin, which is a continuously variable-pitch instrument with no \"stops\", can range from delicate to extravagant, and often serves to mask the small pitch adjustments that instrument requires.\nSome manufacturers also build vibrato effect pedals that imitate the natural vibrato but can also produce much faster speeds. The vibrato effect is close to a chorus effect.\nLeslie speaker.\nA Leslie speaker (best known through its historical and popular association with the Hammond organ) creates vibrato as a byproduct of tremolo production. As a Leslie speaker is moved by the rotating mechanism on which it is mounted, it moves closer to or farther away from any given object (such as a listener's ears) not also mounted on the mechanism. Because amplitude varies directly with sound pressure (\"A = k1P\") and sound pressure varies directly with distance (\"P = k2d\"), such that amplitude also varies directly with distance (\"A = k1(k2d) = k1k2d\"), the amplitude of the sound as perceived by the listener will be greatest when the speaker is at the point in its rotation closest to the listener and least when the speaker is farthest away. Because the speaker is constantly moving either toward or away from the listener, however, the mechanism's rotation is constantly affecting the listener-perceived sound's wavelength by either \"stretching\" the wave (increasing wavelength) or \"squeezing\" it (decreasing wavelength) \u2014 and because frequency, i.e., pitch, is inversely proportional to wavelength, such that increasing wavelength decreases frequency and vice versa, any listener for whom the speaker's motion changes the sound's perceived amplitude (\"i.e.\", any listener whose distance from the speaker is changing) must also perceive a change in frequency.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65724", "revid": "3932527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65724", "title": "Dome of the Rock", "text": "Islamic building in Al-Aqsa, Jerusalem\nThe Dome of the Rock () is an octagonal Islamic shrine at the center of the Al-Aqsa mosque compound on the Temple Mount in the Old City of Jerusalem. It is the world's oldest surviving work of Islamic architecture, the earliest archaeologically-attested religious structure to be built by a Muslim ruler and contains the earliest inscriptions proclaiming Islam and the prophet Muhammad.\nIts initial construction was undertaken by the Umayyad Caliphate on the orders of Abd al-Malik during the Second Fitna in 691\u2013692 CE, and it has since been situated on top of the site of the Second Jewish Temple (built in c.\u2009516 BCE to replace the destroyed Solomon's Temple and rebuilt by Herod the Great), which was destroyed by the Romans in 70 CE. The original dome collapsed in 1015 and was rebuilt in 1022\u201323.\nIts architecture and mosaics were patterned after nearby Byzantine churches and palaces. Its outside appearance was significantly changed during the Early Ottoman period, when brightly coloured, mainly blue-and-white Iznik-style tiles were applied to the exterior, and again in the modern period, notably with the addition of the gold-plated roof, in 1959\u201361 and again in 1993. The octagonal plan of the structure may have been influenced by the Byzantine-era Church of the Seat of Mary (also known as \"Kathisma\" in Greek and \"al-Qadismu\" in Arabic), which was built between 451 and 458 on the road between Jerusalem and Bethlehem.\nThe Foundation Stone (or Noble Rock) that the temple was built over bears great significance in the Abrahamic religions as the place where God created the world as well as the first human, Adam. It is also believed to be the site where Abraham attempted to sacrifice his son, and as the place where God's divine presence is manifested more than in any other place, towards which Jews turn during prayer. The site's great significance for Muslims derives from traditions connecting it to the creation of the world and the belief that the Night Journey of Muhammad began from the rock at the centre of the structure.\nDesignated by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site, it has been called \"Jerusalem's most recognizable landmark\" along with two nearby Old City structures: the Western Wall and the \"Resurrection Rotunda\" in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. Its Islamic inscriptions proved to be a milestone, as afterward they became a common feature in Islamic structures and almost always mention Muhammad. The Dome of the Rock remains a \"unique monument of Islamic culture in almost all respects\", including as a \"work of art and as a cultural and pious document\", according to art historian Oleg Grabar.\nArchitecture.\nStructure.\nThe Dome of the Rock's basic plan is essentially octagonal. It is capped at its center by a dome, approximately in diameter, mounted on an elevated circular drum standing on 16 supports (4 piers and 12 columns). Surrounding this circle is an octagonal arcade of 24 piers and columns. The inner circular row of drum supports and the octagonal arcade create an inner ambulatory that encircles the holy rock. The outer walls are also octagonal. They each measure approximately wide and high. The inner and outer octagon create a second, outer ambulatorium surrounding the inner one. Both the circular drum and the exterior walls contain many windows.\nInterior decoration.\nThe interior of the dome is lavishly decorated with mosaic, faience and marble, much of which was added several centuries after its completion. The inner colonnade features light and dark stone voussoirs in its arches. The origins of these marble treatments are controversial, with some scholars theorizing them to be from the original construction, and some saying they were later additions (and differing then as to the dates and identity of the builders).\nIt also contains Qur'anic inscriptions. They vary from today's standard text (mainly changes from the first to the third person) and are mixed with pious inscriptions not in the Quran. The dedicatory inscription in Kufic script placed around the dome contains the date believed to be the year the Dome was first completed, AH 72 (691/2 CE), while the name of the corresponding caliph and builder of the Dome, Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, was deleted and replaced by the name of Abbasid caliph Al-Ma'mun (r.\u2009813\u00a0\u2013\u00a0833) during whose reign renovations took place.\nExterior decoration.\nThe decoration of the outer walls went through two major phases: the initial Umayyad scheme comprised marble and mosaics, much like the interior walls. 16th-century Ottoman sultan Suleiman the Magnificent replaced it with Ottoman tile decoration. This tilework was of many different styles and techniques, including \"cuerda seca\" tiles, multi-coloured underglaze tiles, and blue-and-white tilework, resembling the Iznik tiles that were produced for the Ottoman capital. A small number of tiles were actual Iznik productions that were imported to Jerusalem. The original tiles were replaced in the 1960s with faithful copies produced in Italy.\n (the 'Heart of the Quran') is inscribed across the top of the tile work and was commissioned in the 16th century by Suleiman the Magnificent. 17, , which tells the story of the or Night Journey, is inscribed above this.\nHistory.\nPre-Islamic background.\nThe Dome of the Rock is situated in the center of the Temple Mount, the site of Solomon's Temple and the Second Jewish Temple, which had been greatly expanded under Herod the Great in the 1st century BCE. Herod's Temple was destroyed in 70 CE by the Romans, and after the Bar Kokhba revolt in 135 CE, a Roman temple to was built at the site by Emperor Hadrian.\nJerusalem was ruled by the Byzantine Empire throughout the 4th to 6th centuries. During this time, Christian pilgrimage to Jerusalem began to develop. The Church of the Holy Sepulchre was built under Constantine in the 320s, but the Temple Mount was left undeveloped after a failed project of restoration of the Jewish Temple under Emperor Julian.\nIn 638 CE, Byzantine Jerusalem was conquered by the Arab armies of Umar ibn al-Khattab, second Caliph of the Rashidun Caliphate. Umar was advised by Ka'b al-Ahbar, a Jewish rabbi who converted to Islam, that the site is identical with the site of the former Jewish Temples in Jerusalem. Among the first Muslims, Jerusalem was referred to as ('City of the Temple').\nUmayyads.\nOriginal construction.\nThe initial octagonal structure of the Dome of the Rock and its round wooden dome had basically the same shape as it does today. It was built by the order of the Umayyad caliph Abd al-Malik (r.\u2009685\u00a0\u2013\u00a0705). According to Sibt ibn al-Jawzi (1185\u20131256), construction started in 685/6, while al-Suyuti (1445\u20131505) holds that its commencement year was 688. A dedicatory inscription in Kufic script is preserved inside the dome. The date is recorded as AH 72 (691/2 CE), the year most historians believe the construction of the original Dome was completed. An alternative interpretation of the inscription claims that it indicates the year when construction started. In this inscription, the name of \"al-Malik\" was removed and replaced by the name of the Abbasid caliph al-Ma'mun (r.\u2009813\u00a0\u2013\u00a0833). This alteration of the original inscription was first noted by Melchior de Vog\u00fc\u00e9 in 1864. Some scholars have suggested that the dome was added to an existing building, built either by Muawiyah I (r.\u2009661\u00a0\u2013\u00a0680), or indeed a Byzantine building dating to before the Muslim conquest, built under Heraclius (r.\u2009610\u00a0\u2013\u00a0641).\nThe Dome of the Rock's architecture and mosaics were patterned after nearby Byzantine churches and palaces. The supervisor and engineer in charge of the project were Raja ibn Haywa, Yazid ibn Salam, and the latter's son Baha. Raja was a Muslim theologian and native of Beisan, and Yazid and Baha were (non-Arab, Muslim converts; clients) of Abd al-Malik from Jerusalem. Abd al-Malik was represented in the supervision of the construction by his son Sa'id al-Khayr. The Caliph employed expert works from across his domain, at the time restricted to Syria and Egypt, who were presumably Christians. Construction cost was reportedly seven times the yearly tax income of Egypt. The historian K. A. C. Creswell noted that those who built the shrine used the measurements of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre. The diameter of the dome of the shrine is and its height , while the diameter of the dome of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre is and its height .\nMotivations for construction.\nNarratives by the medieval sources about Abd al-Malik's motivations in building the Dome of the Rock vary. At the time of its construction, the Caliph was engaged in war with Christian Byzantium and its Syrian Christian allies on the one hand and with the rival caliph Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, who controlled Mecca, the annual destination of Muslim pilgrimage, on the other hand. Thus, one series of explanations was that Abd al-Malik intended for the Dome of the Rock to be a religious monument of victory over the Christians that would distinguish Islam's uniqueness within the common Abrahamic religious setting of Jerusalem, home of the two older Abrahamic faiths, Judaism and Christianity. The historian Shelomo Dov Goitein has argued that the Dome of the Rock was intended to compete with the many fine buildings of worship of other religions: \"The very form of a rotunda, given to the , although it was foreign to Islam, was destined to rival the many Christian domes\" - and more specifically, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, according to others.\nThe other main explanation holds that Abd al-Malik, in the heat of the war with Ibn al-Zubayr, sought to build the structure to divert the focus of the Muslims in his realm from the Ka'aba in Mecca, where Ibn al-Zubayr would publicly condemn the Umayyads during the annual pilgrimage to the sanctuary. Though most modern historians dismiss the latter account as a product of anti-Umayyad propaganda in the traditional Muslim sources and doubt that Abd al-Malik would attempt to alter the sacred Muslim requirement of fulfilling the pilgrimage to the Ka'aba, other historians concede that this cannot be conclusively dismissed.\nAbbasids and Fatimids.\nThe building was severely damaged by earthquakes in 808 and again in 846. The dome collapsed in an earthquake in 1015 and was rebuilt in 1022\u20131023. The mosaics on the drum were repaired in 1027\u20131028. The earthquake of 1033 resulted in the introduction of wooden beams to enforce the dome.\nCrusaders.\nFor centuries Christian pilgrims were able to come and experience the Temple Mount, but escalating violence against pilgrims to Jerusalem (Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah, who ordered the destruction of the Holy Sepulchre, was an example) resulted in the Crusades. The Crusaders captured Jerusalem in 1099 and the Dome of the Rock was given to the Augustinians, who turned it into a church, while the nearby Al-Aqsa main prayer hall or Qibli Mosque first became a royal palace for a while, and then for much of the 12th century the headquarters of the Knights Templar. The Templars, active from c.\u20091119, identified the Dome of the Rock as the site of the Temple of Solomon. The , as they called the Dome of the Rock, featured on the official seals of the Order's Grand Masters (such as Everard des Barres and Renaud de Vichiers), and soon became the architectural model for round Templar churches across Europe.\nAyyubids and Mamluks.\nJerusalem was recaptured by Saladin on 2 October 1187, and the Dome of the Rock was reconsecrated as a Muslim shrine. The cross on top of the dome was replaced by a crescent, and a wooden screen was placed around the rock below. Saladin's nephew al-Malik al-Mu'azzam Isa carried out other restorations within the building, and added the porch to the Jami'a Al-Aqsa.\nThe Dome of the Rock was the focus of extensive royal patronage by the sultans during the Mamluk period, which lasted from 1260 until 1516.\nOttoman period (1517\u20131917).\nDuring the Ottoman period, the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent (r.\u20091520\u00a0\u2013\u00a01566) brought Ottoman dynastic patronage to the city, around the same time that the sultan and his wife, Haseki H\u00fcrrem Sultan (Roxelana), were also commissioning works in the holy cities of Mecca and Medina. Suleiman initiated a major renovation of the Dome of the Rock. The most visible legacy of this work was the covering of the exterior with Ottoman-style tiles, which replaced the old Umayyad mosaics. This was likely part of an effort to impose a visibly Ottoman mark on this major Islamic holy site. Inscriptions on the tiles provide the dates 952 AH (1545\u20136 CE) and 959 AH (1552 CE), but work continued until the end of Suleiman's reign, if not later. Documents show repairs were still incomplete by the time of Murad III (r.\u20091574\u00a0\u2013\u00a01595) and the latter can probably be credited with finishing this work, which included repairs to the lead of the dome.\nThe tiles seem to have been fabricated locally rather than at centers like Iznik (famous for its production of Iznik pottery at this time), although there does not appear to have been a sophisticated ceramic production center in the region. Robert Hillenbrand remarks that the workshops that produced the tiles must have been dedicated to this project alone, because there is no evidence that similar tilework was produced for other monuments in Jerusalem during this period. The name of one of the craftsmen is recorded in an inscription as Abdallah of Tabriz. This may indicate that the tiles were commissioned from a workshop of Iranian craftsmen from Tabriz who are thought to have produced many earlier Ottoman tiles.\nThe Dome of the Chain, a free-standing structure next to the Dome of the Rock, was also renovated as part of Suleiman's project, in 1561\u20132. Also nearby, the Ottomans built the Dome of the Prophet in its current form sometime in the 16th or 17th century.\nFurther restorations to the building are recorded in 1720\u20131721, 1742,1754, 1780, 1817\u20131818, and 1853. In another major restoration project undertaken in 1874\u20131875 during the reign of the Ottoman Sultan Abd\u00fclaziz, all the tiles on the west and southwest walls of the octagonal part of the building were removed and replaced by copies that had been made in Turkey.\nBritish Mandate.\nHaj Amin al-Husseini, appointed Grand Mufti by the British in 1917, along with Yaqub al-Ghusayn, implemented the restoration of the Dome of the Rock and the Jami Al-Aqsa in Jerusalem.\nParts of the Dome of the Rock collapsed during the 11 July 1927 earthquake, and the walls were left badly cracked, damaging many of the repairs that had taken place over previous years.\nJordanian rule.\nIn 1955, an extensive program of renovation was begun by the government of Jordan, with funds supplied by Arab governments and Turkey. The work included replacement of large numbers of tiles dating back to the reign of Suleiman the Magnificent, which had become dislodged by heavy rain. In 1965, as part of this restoration, the dome was covered with a durable aluminium bronze alloy made in Italy that replaced the lead exterior. Before 1959, the dome was covered in blackened lead. In the course of substantial restoration carried out from 1959 to 1962, the lead was replaced by aluminum-bronze plates covered with gold leaf.\nIsraeli rule.\nA few hours after the Israeli flag was hoisted over the Dome of the Rock in 1967 during the Six-Day War, Israelis lowered it on the orders of Moshe Dayan and invested the Muslim (religious trust) with the authority to manage the Temple Mount in order to \"keep the peace\".\nIn 1993, the golden dome covering was refurbished following a donation of US$8.25million by King Hussein of Jordan, who sold one of his houses in London to fund the of gold required.\nAccessibility.\nThe Dome is maintained by the Ministry of Awqaf in Amman, Jordan.\nUntil the mid-20th century, non-Muslims were not permitted in the area. Since 1967, non-Muslims have been permitted limited access; however non-Muslims are not permitted to pray on the Temple Mount, bring prayer books, or wear religious apparel. The Israeli police help enforce this. Israel restricted access for a short time during 2012 of Palestinian residents of the West Bank to the Temple Mount. West Bank Palestinian men had to be over 35 to be eligible for a permit. Palestinian residents of Jerusalem, who hold Israeli residency cards, and Palestinians with Israeli citizenship are permitted unrestricted access.\nSome Orthodox rabbis encourage Jews to visit the site, while most forbid entry to the compound lest there be a violation of Jewish law. Even rabbis who encourage entrance to the Temple Mount prohibit entrance to the actual Dome of the Rock.\nReligious significance.\nThe location of the Dome of the Rock is believed by many Muslims to be the site mentioned in Sura 17 of the Qur'an, which tells the story of the Isra and Mi'raj, the mythical Night Journey of Muhammad from the Great Mosque of Mecca to the Masjid Al-Aqsa (\"the farthest place of prayer\") where he prayed, and then to visit heaven where he leads prayers and rises to heaven to receive instructions from Allah. Although the city of Jerusalem is not mentioned by any of its names in the Qur'an, it is mentioned in hadiths as the place of Muhammad's Night Journey.\nJudging though by the early Muslim sources, this does not seem to have been yet a fully formulated part of the beliefs shared by Muslims during the construction of the Dome in the 8th century, and the inscriptions inside the dome attributing the building to Caliph 'Abd al-Malik in the year 691/2 do not refer at all to the Night Journey, but contain only the Quranic view on the nature of the prophet Isa (Jesus) instead. The inscription is in a mosaic frieze that includes an explicit rejection of the divinity of Christ:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;33. \"So peace is upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the day I shall be raised alive!\" 34. Such is Jesus, son of Mary. It is a statement of truth, about which they doubt. 35. It is not befitting to (the majesty of) Allah that He should take himself a child. Glory be to Him! when He determines a matter, He only says to it, \"Be\", and it is.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to Goitein, the inscriptions decorating the interior clearly display a spirit of polemic against Christianity, whilst stressing at the same time the Qur'anic doctrine that Jesus was a true prophet. The formula ('God has no companion') is repeated five times; the verses from Sura Maryam 19:35\u201337, which strongly reaffirm Jesus' prophethood to God, are quoted together with the prayer: \u2013 \"O Lord, send your blessings to your Prophet and Servant Jesus son of Mary.\" He believes that this shows that rivalry with Christendom, together with the spirit of Muslim mission to the Christians, was at work at the time of construction.\nAt the beginning of the 8th century, Ibn Ishaq codified the earliest Arabic source pertaining to the Jerusalem Rock, as part of his , a biography of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, introducing the notion that right after his Night Journey from Mecca to Jerusalem (), he set off immediately and specifically from the Rock in his Ascension () to Heaven, where God instructed him in the doctrines of the new religion.\nToday, many Muslims believe the Dome serves for the commemoration of Muhammad's Ascension, in accordance to the views shared by some Islamic scholars, that the Rock is indeed the spot from which Muhammad ascended to Heaven accompanied by the angel Gabriel. Further, Muhammad was taken here by Gabriel to pray with Abraham, Moses, and Jesus.\nOther Islamic scholars believe that Muhammad ascended to Heaven from the Masjid Al-Aqsa, of which the Dome of the Rock is a part.\nIn traditional Jewish sources, it is believed to be the place from which the creation of the world began. Moreover, many Jews believe the site to be where Abraham prepared to sacrifice his son Isaac. The Foundation Stone and its surroundings which lie at the center of the dome, are considered the holiest site in Judaism. Jews traditionally regard the location of the stone as the holiest spot on Earth, the site of the Holy of Holies of the First and the Second Temple.\nThough Muslims now pray towards the Kaaba at Mecca, they once faced the Temple Mount as the Jews do; Islamic tradition holds that Muhammad led prayers towards Jerusalem until the 16th or 17th month after his migration from Mecca to Medina, when Allah directed him to instead turn towards the Kaaba in Mecca.\nThe Temple Institute wishes to relocate the Dome to another site and replace it with a Third Temple, a vision in line with the New Jerusalem prophecy. Some religious Jews, following rabbinic teaching, believe that the Temple should only be rebuilt in the messianic era, and that it would be presumptuous of people to force God's hand. However, some Evangelical Christians consider rebuilding of the Temple to be a prerequisite to Armageddon and the Second Coming. Jeremy Gimpel, a US-born candidate for The Jewish Home political party in the 2013 Israeli elections, caused a controversy when he was recorded telling a Fellowship Church evangelical group in Florida in 2011 to imagine the incredible experience that would follow were the Dome to be destroyed and the construction of the Third Temple begun. All evangelicals would immediately rush to go to Israel, he opined.\nInfluence and depiction.\nHomages in art and architecture.\nIt was long believed that the Dome of the Rock echoed the architecture of the Temple in Jerusalem, as can be seen in Raphael's \"The Marriage of the Virgin\" and in Perugino's \"Marriage of the Virgin\".\nFor the same reason, the Dome of the Rock has inspired the architecture of a number of buildings. These include the 15th-century octagonal Church of St. Giacomo in Italy, the 19th-century octagonal Moorish Revival-style Rumbach Street Synagogue in Budapest, as well as the Mausoleum of Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent in Istanbul and the New Synagogue in Berlin, Germany.\nOn banknotes.\nThe Dome of the Rock has been depicted on the obverse and reverse of several Middle Eastern currencies:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65726", "revid": "49890490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65726", "title": "Lost Gardens of Heligan", "text": "Botanical garden in Cornwall, England\nThe Lost Gardens of Heligan (, meaning \"willow tree garden\") are located near Mevagissey in Cornwall, England and are considered to be amongst the most popular in the UK. The gardens are typical of the 19th century Gardenesque style with areas of different character and in different design styles.\nThe gardens were created by members of the Cornish Tremayne family from the mid-18th century to the beginning of the 20th century, and still form part of the family's Heligan estate. The gardens were neglected after the First World War and restored only in the 1990s, a restoration that was the subject of several popular television programmes and books.\nThe gardens include aged and colossal rhododendrons and camellias, a series of lakes fed by a ram pump over 100 years old, highly productive flower and vegetable gardens, an Italian garden, and a wild area filled with subtropical tree ferns called \"The Jungle\". The gardens also have Europe's only remaining pineapple pit, warmed by rotting manure, and two figures made from rocks and plants known as the Mud Maid and the Giant's Head.\nThey are listed Grade II in Historic England's Register of Parks and Gardens.\nThe place name, properly pronounced , and not the commonly heard , is derived from the Cornish word \"helygen\", \"willow tree\".\nGeography.\nThe Lost Gardens of Heligan completely surround Heligan House and its private gardens. They lie some to the north-west of, and about above, the fishing village of Mevagissey. The gardens are by road from the town and railway station of St Austell and are principally in the civil parish of St Ewe, although elements of the eastern gardens are in Mevagissey parish.\nThe northern part of the gardens, which includes the main ornamental and vegetable gardens, are slightly higher than the house and slope gently down to it. The areas of the gardens to the west, south, and east of the house slope steeply down into a series of valleys that ultimately drain into the sea at Mevagissey. These areas are much wilder and include the Jungle and the Lost Valley.\nHistory.\nThe Heligan estate was originally bought by the Tremaynes in the 16th century, and earlier members of the family were responsible for Heligan House and the (still private) gardens that immediately surround it.\nHowever, the more extensive gardens now open to the public were largely the result of the efforts of four successive squires of Heligan. These were:\nTwo estate plans, dating from 1777 and sometime before 1810, show the changes wrought to the Heligan estate during Henry Hawkins' ownership. The first plan shows a predominantly parkland estate, with the site of today's Northern Gardens occupied by a field. The second plan shows the development of shelter belts of trees surrounding the gardens, and the main shape of the Northern Gardens, the Mellon Yard and the Flower Garden are all readily discernible.\nHenry Hawkins' descendants each made significant contributions to the development of the gardens, including the ornamental plantings along the estate's Long Drive, The Jungle, the hybridising of rhododendrons and their planting around Flora's Green, and the creation of the Italian Garden.\nBefore the First World War, the garden required the services of 22 gardeners to maintain it, but that war led to the deaths of 16 of those gardeners, and by 1916, the garden was being looked after by only eight men. By the 1920s, Jack Tremayne's love of Italy, which had earlier inspired the Italian Garden, led him to set up permanent home there, and lease out Heligan. The house was tenanted for most of the 20th century, used by the US Army during the Second World War, and then converted into flats and sold, without the gardens, in the 1970s. Against this background, the gardens fell into a serious state of neglect, and were lost to sight.\nAfter the childless death of Jack Tremayne, the Heligan estate came under the ownership of a trust to the benefit of several members of the extended Tremayne family. One of these, John Willis, lived in the area and was responsible for introducing record producer Tim Smit to the gardens. A group of fellow enthusiasts and he decided to restore the garden to its former glory, and eventually leased them from the Tremayne family.\nThe restoration, which was the subject of a six-part Channel 4 television series produced by Bamboo Productions and Cicada Films in 1996, proved to be an outstanding success, not only revitalising the gardens but also the local economy around Heligan by providing employment. The gardens are now leased by a company owned by their restorers, who continue to cultivate them and operate them as a visitor attraction.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65727", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65727", "title": "Christianity/monophysite", "text": ""}
{"id": "65728", "revid": "1086679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65728", "title": "Miskatonic University", "text": ""}
{"id": "65730", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65730", "title": "Arkham", "text": "Fictional city in H.P. Lovecraft's works\nArkham () is a fictional city situated in Massachusetts, United States. An integral part of the Lovecraft Country setting created by H. P. Lovecraft, Arkham is featured in many of his stories and those of other Cthulhu Mythos writers.\nArkham House, a publishing company started by two of Lovecraft's correspondents, August Derleth and Donald Wandrei, takes its name from this city as a tribute. Arkham Asylum, a fictional mental hospital in DC Comics' Batman mythos, is also named after Lovecraft's Arkham.\nIn Lovecraft's stories.\nArkham is the home of Miskatonic University, which features prominently in many of Lovecraft's works. The institution finances the expeditions in the novellas, \"At the Mountains of Madness\" (1936) and \"The Shadow Out of Time\" (1936). Walter Gilman, of \"The Dreams in the Witch House\" (1933), attends classes at the university. Other notable institutions in Arkham are the Arkham Historical Society and the Arkham Sanitarium. It is said in \"Herbert West\u2014Reanimator\" that the town was devastated by a typhoid outbreak in 1905.\nArkham's main newspaper is the \"Arkham Advertiser\", which has a circulation that reaches as far as Dunwich. In the 1880s, its newspaper is called the \"Arkham Gazette\".\nArkham's most notable characteristics are its gambrel roofs and the dark legends that have surrounded the city for centuries.\nLocation.\nThe precise location of Arkham is unspecified, although it may be surmised from Lovecraft's stories to be some distance to the north of Boston, probably in Essex County, Massachusetts. \nWill Murray places Arkham in central Massachusetts and suggests it is based on the village of Oakham. Robert D. Marten rejects this and equates Arkham with Salem, with its name coming from Arkwright, Rhode Island (now part of Fiskville).\nAugust Derleth describes Arkham as \"Lovecraft's own well-known, widely used place-name for legend-haunted Salem, Massachusetts\", and Lovecraft himself, in a letter to F. Lee Baldwin dated April 29, 1934, wrote that \"[my] mental picture of Arkham is of a town something like Salem in atmosphere [and] style of houses, but more hilly [and] with a college (which Salem [lacks]) ... I place the town [and] the imaginary Miskatonic [River] somewhere north of Salem\u2014perhaps near Manchester.\"\nArkham Sanitarium appears in the short story \"The Thing on the Doorstep\" and may have been inspired by the Danvers State Insane Asylum, (Danvers State Hospital) in Danvers, Massachusetts. Danvers State Hospital itself appears in Lovecraft's stories \"Pickman's Model\" and \"The Shadow over Innsmouth\".\nMiskatonic University.\nMiskatonic University is a fictional university located in Arkham, near the banks of the (fictional) Miskatonic River. Lovecraft concocted the word \"Miskatonic\" as a mixture of root words from the Algonquian languages, the source of many place-names throughout New England. Anthony Pearsall believes the name is based on the Housatonic River, which flows from the Berkshires of Western Massachusetts and western Connecticut to Long Island Sound.\nAfter first appearing in H. P. Lovecraft's 1922 story \"Herbert West\u2013Reanimator\", the school was mentioned in numerous Cthulhu Mythos stories by Lovecraft and other writers. The story \"The Dunwich Horror\" implies that Miskatonic University is an elite university on par with Harvard, and that Harvard and Miskatonic are the two most popular schools for the Massachusetts \"Old Gentry\". It is modeled on the northeastern Ivy League universities of Lovecraft's day, perhaps Brown University in his hometown Providence, which Lovecraft himself wished to attend. Miskatonic's student body is implied to be all-male like northeastern universities of Lovecraft's time. The only female student mentioned is Asenath Waite in \"The Thing on the Doorstep\" (1937). \nThe university library is famous for its collection of occult books, including one of the handful of genuine copies of the \"Necronomicon\". Other tomes include \"Unaussprechlichen Kulten\" and the fragmentary \"Book of Eibon\". Notable faculty members mentioned in Lovecraft's stories included doctors Henry Armitage and Francis Morgan in \"The Dunwich Horror\", and Professor William Dyer in \"At the Mountains of Madness\". Later authors would people the university with their own characters.\nAppearances.\nLovecraft's fiction.\n\"Dates are the year written.\"\nArkham first appeared in Lovecraft's short story \"The Picture in the House\" (1920), which is also the first to mention \"Miskatonic\".\nIt appears in other stories by Lovecraft, including:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65731", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65731", "title": "Korybantes", "text": "Ancient Greek deities\nAccording to Greek mythology, the Korybantes (; ), also spelled Corybantes or Corybants, were the armed and crested dancers who worshipped the Phrygian goddess Cybele with drumming and dancing. They are also called the Kurbantes in Phrygia.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Korybantes\" is of uncertain etymology. Edzard Johan Furn\u00e9e and R. S. P. Beekes have suggested a Pre-Greek origin.\nOthers refer the name to *\u03ba\u03bf\u03c1\u03c5\u03b2\u03ae (\"koryb\u00e9\"), the Macedonian version of \u03ba\u03bf\u03c1\u03c5\u03c6\u03ae (\"koryph\u00e9\") \"crown, top, mountain peak\", explaining their association with mountains, particularly Olympus.\nFamily.\nThe Korybantes were the offspring of Apollo by either the Muse Thalia, or the nymph Rhetia, or the nymph Danais. One account attests the parentage to Zeus and the Muse Calliope, or to Helios and Athena, or lastly, to Cronus.\nKouretes.\nThe Kouretes (), also spelled Kuretes were nine dancers who venerated Rhea, the Cretan counterpart of Cybele. A fragment from Strabo's Book VII gives a sense of the roughly analogous character of these male confraternities, and the confusion rampant among those not initiated: \nMany assert that the gods worshipped in Samothrace as well as the Kurbantes and the Korybantes and in like manner the Kouretes and the Idaean Daktyls are the same as the Kabeiroi, but as to the Kabeiroi they are unable to tell who they are.\nGrant Showerman in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" Eleventh Edition addressed the confusion, stating that the Korybantes \"are distinguished only [from the Kuretes] by their Asiatic origin and by the more pronouncedly orgiastic nature of their rites\".\nAccording to Oppian, the Curetes, who had been tasked with guarding the young Zeus, were turned into lions by Cronus. Zeus then made them into the kings of the animals, while his mother Rhea yoked them to her chariot.\nInitiatory dance.\nThese armored male dancers kept time to a drum and the rhythmic stamping of their feet. Dance, according to Greek thought, was one of the civilizing activities, like wine-making or music. The dance in armor (the \"Pyrrhic dance\" or pyrrhichios [\u03a0\u03c5\u03c1\u03c1\u03af\u03c7\u03b7]) was a male coming-of-age initiation ritual linked to a warrior victory celebration. Both Jane Ellen Harrison and the French classicist Henri Jeanmaire have shown that both the Kouretes (\u039a\u03bf\u03c5\u03c1\u1fc6\u03c4\u03b5\u03c2) and Cretan Zeus, who was called \"the greatest \"kouros\" (\u03ba\u03bf\u1fe6\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2)\", were intimately connected with the transition of boys into manhood in Cretan cities.\nThe English \"Pyrrhic Dance\" is a corruption of the original \"Pyrr\u00edkh\u0113\" or the \"Pyrr\u00edkhios Khor\u00f3s\" \"Pyrrhichian Dance\". It has no relationship with the king Pyrrhus of Epirus, who invaded Italy in the 3rd century BC, and who gave his name to the Pyrrhic victory, which was achieved at such cost that it was tantamount to a defeat.\nEcstatics.\nThe Phrygian Korybantes were often confused by Greeks with other ecstatic male confraternities, such as the Idaean Dactyls or the Cretan Kouretes, spirit-youths (\"kouroi\") who acted as guardians of the infant Zeus. In Hesiod's telling of Zeus's birth, when Great Gaia came to Crete and hid the child Zeus in a \"steep cave\", beneath the secret places of the earth, on Mount Aigaion with its thick forests; there the Cretan Kouretes' ritual clashing spears and shields were interpreted by Hellenes as intended to drown out the infant god's cries, and prevent his discovery by his cannibal father Cronus. Emily Vermeule observed,\nThis myth is Greek interpretation of mystifying Minoan ritual in an attempt to reconcile their Father Zeus with the Divine Child of Crete; the ritual itself we may never recover with clarity, but it is not impossible that a connection exists between the Kouretes' weapons at the cave and the dedicated weapons at Arkalochori\".\nAmong the offerings recovered from the cave, the most spectacular are decorated bronze shields with patterns that draw upon north Syrian originals and a bronze gong on which a god and his attendants are shown in a distinctly Near Eastern style.\nKorybantes also presided over the infancy of Dionysus, another god who was born as a babe, and of Zagreus, a Cretan child of Zeus, or child-doublet of Zeus. The wild ecstasy of their cult can be compared to the female Maenads who followed Dionysus.\nOvid, in \"Metamorphoses\", says the Kouretes were born from rainwater (Uranus fertilizing Gaia). This suggests a connection with the Hyades.\nOther functions.\nThe scholar Jane Ellen Harrison writes that besides being guardians, nurturers, and initiators of the infant Zeus, the Kouretes were primitive magicians and seers. She also writes that they were metal workers and that metallurgy was considered an almost magical art. There were several \"tribes\" of Korybantes, including the Cabeiri, the Korybantes Euboioi, the Korybantes Samothrakioi. Hoplodamos and his Gigantes were counted among Korybantes, and the Titan Anytos was considered a Kourete.\nHomer referred to select young men as \"kouretes\", when Agamemnon instructs Odysseus to pick out \"kouretes\", the bravest among the Achaeans to bear gifts to Achilles. The Greeks preserved a tradition down to Strabo's day, that the Kuretes of Aetolia and Acarnania in mainland Greece had been imported from Crete.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65732", "revid": "50584560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65732", "title": "Amos Kollek", "text": "Israeli film director, writer and actor (born 1947)\nAmos Kollek (; born 15 September 1947) is an Israeli film director, writer and actor.\nBiography.\nAmos Kollek was born in Jerusalem. He is the son of Teddy Kollek, the long-time mayor of Jerusalem. Kollek studied psychology and philosophy at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He became interested in film after working as a writer. He produced his first film, \"Goodbye, New York\", in 1985. His film \"Fast Food Fast Women\" was entered into the 2000 Cannes Film Festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65733", "revid": "47069993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65733", "title": "Solanum", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nSolanum is a large and diverse genus of flowering plants, which include three food crops of high economic importance: the potato, the tomato and the eggplant (aubergine, brinjal). It is the largest genus in the nightshade family Solanaceae, comprising around 1,500 species. It also contains the so-called horse nettles (unrelated to the genus of true nettles, \"Urtica\"), as well as numerous plants cultivated for their ornamental flowers and fruit.\n\"Solanum\" species show a wide range of growth habits, such as annuals and perennials, vines, subshrubs, shrubs, and small trees. Many formerly independent genera like \"Lycopersicon\" (the tomatoes) and \"Cyphomandra\" are now included in \"Solanum\" as subgenera or sections. Thus, the genus today contains roughly 1,500\u20132,000 species.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nName.\nThe generic name was first used by Pliny the Elder (AD 23\u201379) for a plant also known as , most likely \"S.\u00a0nigrum\". Its derivation is uncertain, possibly stemming from the Latin word , meaning \"sun\", referring to its status as a plant of the sun.\nSpecies having the common name \"nightshade\".\nThe species most commonly called nightshade in North America and Britain is \"Solanum dulcamara\", also called bittersweet or woody nightshade (so-called because it is a scandent shrub). Its foliage and egg-shaped red berries are poisonous, the active principle being solanine, which can cause convulsions and death if taken in large doses. Black nightshades (many species in the \"Solanum nigrum\" complex, \"Solanum\" sect. \"Solanum\") have varying levels of toxins and are considered too toxic to eat by many people in North America and Europe, but young stems and leaves or fully ripened fruit of various species are cooked and eaten by native people in North America, Africa, and Asia. Deadly nightshade (\"Atropa belladonna\") belongs, like \"Solanum\", to subfamily Solanoideae of the nightshade family, but, unlike that genus, is a member of tribe Hyoscyameae (\"Solanum\" belongs to tribe Solaneae). The chemistry of \"Atropa\" species is very different from that of \"Solanum\" species and features the very toxic tropane alkaloids, the best-known of which is atropine.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus was established by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. Its subdivision has always been problematic, but slowly some sort of consensus is being achieved.\nThe following list is a provisional lineup of the genus' traditional subdivisions, together with some notable species. Many of the subgenera and sections might not be valid; they are used here provisionally as the phylogeny of this genus is not fully resolved yet and many species have not been reevaluated.\nCladistic analyses of DNA sequence data suggest that the present subdivisions and rankings are largely invalid. Far more subgenera would seem to warrant recognition, with \"Leptostemonum\" being the only one that can at present be clearly subdivided into sections. Notably, it includes as a major lineage several members of the traditional sections \"Cyphomandropsis\" and the old genus \"Cyphomandra\".\nSubgenus \"Leptostemonum\".\nSection \"Androceras\".\n12 spp.\nSubgenus \"Solanum\".\nAlso known as: \"Solanum\" sensu stricto.\nSection \"Lycopersicon\".\nAlso known as: tomato lineage.\nSection \"Petota\".\nAlso known as the \"potato lineage\". Including: subsections Estolonifera and Potatoe.\nFormerly placed here.\nSome plants of other genera were formerly placed in \"Solanum\":\nPhylogeny.\nThe following phylogeny of Solanaceae is from Zhang et al. (2025) figure 1B. It is based on a consensus of 500 trees randomly sampled from 1-Mb genomic windows with 200-kb step size.\nThe non-italicized names inside of \"Solanum\" refer to the major clade names within \"Solanum\". These names usually include the similarly-named section but do not have taxonomic standing.\nEcology.\n\"Solanum\" species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species (butterflies and moths).\nToxicity.\nMost parts of the plants, especially the green parts and unripe fruit, are poisonous to humans (although not necessarily to other animals), with some species even being deadly.\nUses.\nMany species in the genus bear some edible parts, such as fruits, leaves, or tubers. Three crops in particular have been bred and harvested for consumption by humans for centuries, and are now cultivated on a global scale:\nOther species are significant food crops regionally, such as Ethiopian eggplant or scarlet eggplant (\"S. aethiopicum\"), naranjilla or lulo (\"S. quitoense\"), cocona (\"S. sessiliflorum\"), turkey berry (\"S. torvum\"), pepino or pepino melon (\"S. muricatum\"), tamarillo (\"S. betaceum\"), wolf apple (\"S. lycocarpum\"), garden huckleberry (\"S. scabrum\") and \"bush tomatoes\" (several Australian species).\nOrnamentals.\nThe species most widely seen in cultivation as ornamental plants are:\nMedicine.\nSeveral species are locally used in folk medicine, particularly by native people who have long employed them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nUpdated taxonomic treatments not yet integrated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65734", "revid": "50987275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65734", "title": "Bushido", "text": "Moral code of the samurai\n is a purported samurai moral code concerning samurai attitudes, behavior and lifestyle. Its origins date back to the Kamakura period, but it was formalized in the Edo period (1603\u20131868). There are multiple types of bushido which evolved significantly through history. Contemporary forms of bushido are still used in the social and economic organization of Japan. \"Bushido\" is also used as an overarching term for all the codes, practices, philosophies, and principles of samurai culture. It is loosely analogous to the European concept of chivalry, but with some major differences.\nOrigin.\nThe concept of a samurai code or codes was developed and refined centuries before the Edo period in the Kamakura period. Such ideas formalized earlier moral values and ethics, most commonly stressing a combination of sincerity, frugality, loyalty, martial arts mastery, honour until death, \"bravery\", and \"loyalty to the samurai's lord.\" Bushido proper developed between the 16th and 20th centuries, but this was debated by pundits who believed they were building on a legacy dating back to the 10th century.\nThe term bushido itself is \"rarely attested in pre-modern literature\", but a code of honor did exist among the writing elite and historians who were generally disgusted enough at the dishonorable activity of some fighters such as shinobi as to rarely mention them. Ideas of honor that led to bushido developed in response to the longstanding dishonorable behavior of samurai, emerging stealth and espionage techniques, and Zen Buddhist soldier tenets.\nThe relative peace in Japan during the Kamakura period favored ideas of honor in battle, expressed in customs such as announcing one's family name and/or lineages before fighting, attempting to limit fights among warrior nobles to horseback archery or sword duels with no subterfuge or trickery, and conducting oneself like a legendary character or renowned hero (tales of daring were popular in the Kamakura period). Pre-bushido honor codes during this time were also contributed to by commoners, who sometimes took on similar roles to samurai and often used their family names as introductions to fighting despite not being noble. However, even during the relatively small family and land quarrels of this time, as well as duels thought to be honorable, warriors often disregarded these norms of combat and the announcement of family names or lineages was mostly a way to brag and assert a right to fight and/or gain whatever a faction was looking for after a fight. Outright bragging was also known to happen. These already tenuous codes of honor were weakened when the Japanese, expecting the invading Mongols to be laid-back with their combat, humiliatingly sent an envoy that fired a noisemaker arrow to officially commence the start of what the Japanese assumed would be a series of small duels and skirmishes. Additionally, Mongols usually cut swathes through soldiers that attempted to announce their lineages before facing them. Despite ultimately winning against the Mongols, these honor norms, along with the shogunate, were weakened enough to cause endemic division that led to the end of the Kamakura period and the court wars of the Nanboku-ch\u014d period.\nBorn from Neo-Confucianism during times of peace in the Edo period and following Confucian texts, while also being influenced by Shinto and Zen Buddhism, it balanced violence with the therapeutic ideals of wisdom and peace accepted at the time. It was developed further during the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573) and formally defined and applied in law by the Tokugawa shogunate in the Edo period. There is no strict definition, and interpretations of the code have varied over time. Bushido has undergone many changes throughout Japanese history, and various Japanese clans interpreted it in their own way until the 19th century, enough for it to be most often a series of unwritten oral expectations that could be described as different codes, with further variations likely existing in the same warrior noble house, rather than a single code.\nOne of the earliest known usages of bushido is in the extremely influential late 16th century text \"The Military Mirror of Kai\", where it was used to describe unwritten rules in a complex metaphorical way that commoners could purportedly not live up to. Another early use of the written term is in the K\u014dy\u014d Gunkan in 1616 by K\u014dsaka Masanobu. In 1685, the ukiyo-e book by artist Hishikawa Moronobu included the term and artwork of samurai with simple descriptions meant for children. In 1642, the was written by samurai Saito Chikamori and included moral precepts which explained the theoretical aspects of bushido. It was written with accessible kana and intended for commoners, not warriors. It was very popular, demonstrating that the idea of bushido had spread among the population. The Kashoki shows that moral values were present in bushido by 1642.\nThe term, bushido, came into common international usage with the 1899 publication of Nitobe Inaz\u014d's \"\", which was read by many influential Western people. In \"Bushido\" (1899), Nitobe wrote:\nBushid\u014d, then, is the code of moral principles which the samurai were required or instructed to observe...More frequently it is a code unuttered and unwritten...It was an organic growth of decades and centuries of military career. In order to become a samurai, this code has to be mastered.\nIn \"Feudal and Modern Japan\" (1896), historian Arthur May Knapp wrote:\nThe samurai of thirty years ago had behind him a thousand years of training in the law of honor, obedience, duty, and self-sacrifice&amp;nbsp... It was not needed to create or establish them. As a child, he had but to be instructed, as indeed he was from his earliest years, in the etiquette of self-immolation.\nEtymology.\n is a Japanese word that literally means 'warrior way'. It is first attested in the 1616 work , a military chronicle recording the exploits of the Takeda clan. The term is a compound of , a Chinese-derived word first attested in Japanese in 712 with the \"on'yomi\" (Sino-Japanese reading), and . In modern usage, \"bushi\" is often used as a synonym for \"samurai\"; however, historical sources make it clear that \"bushi\" and \"samurai\" were distinct concepts, with the former referring to soldiers or warriors and the latter referring instead to a kind of hereditary nobility.\nIn the early 17th century, the term with its \"on'yomi\" reading was used alongside the synonymous alternative form , read using native Japanese vocabulary (\"kun'yomi\") as \"mono no fu no michi\". Another important term is .\nUsage.\nFor centuries, the samurai adhered to multiple types of the code, of which the interpretations varied per samurai clan and per member of the military nobility. This encompassed morality, their role in society, and how to live a life with honor and virtue. The samurai had some common values, but they did not have a single definition or path that all samurai were required to abide by. The samurai were as practical on the battlefield as any other warriors. These concepts, codes, and ideals were ingrained in the samurai since they rose to power in the Kamakura period (1185\u20131333). At certain eras, there were prevalent rules and unwritten customs such as the \"Way of the Bow and the Horse\" (\u5f13\u99ac\u306e\u9053, ky\u016bba no michi) since the 12th century and, in the Edo period, the code of the samurai was formalized with specific virtues and laws by the ruling Tokugawa Shogunate. Notable samurai, such as Miyamoto Musashi (1584\u20131645) and Yamamoto Tsunetomo (1659\u20131719)., wrote extensively about their interpretations of bushido. In the 1870s, the Meiji restoration abolished the samurai class, and they were transferred to professional, military, and business classes. However, the former samurai and their descendants continued to be influential in Japanese society because they occupied important positions. Bushido has continued to exist in various forms. Additional concepts and ideas were added to bushido so that it could evolve with the times. It was used in the Armed Forces of the Empire of Japan and symbolically by the successor Japan Self-Defense Forces. In the Taisho period, bushido was advocated as the way of the merchant. It can be dormant for years and revived during geopolitical instability. Centuries of rule by the samurai class have left a deep impact on Japanese society. Thus, various forms are still used today in e.g., Japanese culture, business, martial arts, and communication.\nMyth and reality.\nBushido is often described as a specific moral code that all members of the samurai class were obligated to follow. However, historically, the samurai adhered to multiple warrior codes, and the interpretations varied per samurai clan, individuals, and eras. These codes and philosophies changed dramatically during the different eras. The earliest proto-bushido type existed since the Kamakura period (1185). The degrees of devotion and interpretations varied between individuals. Since at least the Sengoku period, samurai didn't have compunction to use certain weapons. Retreating from battles did occur if it was unwinnable while others chose to fight till the end. Samurai did not actively seek an honorable death. However, it was honorable to die in the service of a daimyo only while furthering the daimyo's cause.\nSamurai had dark customs, the most notable: \"Kiri-sute gomen\" was the right to strike the lower class who dishonored them. \"Seppuku\" was ritual suicide, to die honorably or restore one's honor. \"Tsujigiri\" (crossroads killing) to attack a human opponent to test a weapon or skill became rampant in the early Edo period until a ban was issued. The exact frequency of tsujigiri is unknown, and it was never officially condoned by any samurai clan. However, it and other types of samurai-committed murder did happen enough to become a point of complaint among Europeans.\nSamurai did \"head collection\" with a ritual to beautify severed heads of worthy rivals and put them on display. The samurai applied various cruel punishments on criminals. The most common capital punishments up until the Meiji Restoration were (in order of severity): decapitation, decapitation with disgraceful exposure of head post-death, crucifixion (e.g. parricide), and death by burning with incendiaries. Members of the samurai class had the privilege to perform hara-kiri (suicide disemboweling). If it was not lethal, then a friend or relation performed decapitation (kaishaku). In 1597, Toyotomi Hideyoshi ordered the prosecution of 26 Martyrs of Japan. They were tortured, mutilated, paraded through villages, and executed by crucifixion, tied to crosses on a hill, and impaled by lances (spears). In the 17th century, the Tokugawa Shogunate executed over 400 Christians (Martyrs of Japan) for being more loyal to their faith than the Shogunate. The capital punishments were beheading, crucifixion, death by burning and .\nBushido has been described as Japanese chivalry, and samurai in general have been described as being like Western knights.. Notable similarities and differences depend on which bushido type is compared with chivalry. Christianity had a modifying influence on the virtues of chivalry, whereas bushido was influenced by Zen Buddhism, Shinto, and Confucianism. Bushido is commonly associated with the moral norms of Nitobe Inaz\u014d's \"\" (1900), because his book popularized the term bushido internationally. However, it is a romanticized interpretation of bushido that differs from other historical literature by the samurai. Thus, the morals defined by Nitobe do not represent all of bushido. Some researchers claim that chivalric bushido, as defined by Nitobe (a.k.a. Meiji Bushido), was invented in the 19th century. However, there is a plethora of historical literature about Japanese warrior codes, practices, philosophies since the Kamakura period. These types can be categorized by era into Sengoku, Edo, Meiji and Contemporary Bushido. Therefore the term \"bushido\" can be used as an \"overarching term\" for all the codes, practices, philosophies and principles of samurai culture.\nChinese politician Dai Jitao acknowledged the historical legitimacy of bushido and said it originated as a theory of a social order, but it had evolved considerably.14-15. In the Tokugawa period, bushido was used to describe an ethical theory, and it became a religious concept based on Shinto.14-15. In the Meiji period, bushido absorbed European ideals and formed the foundation of Japan's political ethics.14-15. Chinese writer Zhou Zuoren supported the historical legitimacy, although it was thought to be altered and corrupted in the modern period.\nHistorical development.\nThe values that became bushido evolved significantly over the centuries to the present.14-15. These first appeared as unwritten customs in the 12th century with shogun Minamoto Yoritomo. The written term \"bushido\" first appears in the Koyo Gunkan of roughly circa 1616, an account of the military exploits of the Takeda clan. Bushido evolved from being totally devoted to valor in battle into refined types that were more related to moral integrity. The samurai had different types of bushido in each era in history, reflecting changing requirements on the battlefield and in society. The era name should be used to describe the type of bushido.\nHeian period.\nThe first predecessor to bushido was the class morality system of the Heian period.\nKamakura period.\nThe first proper Japanese central government was established around the year 700. Japan was ruled by the Emperor (Tenn\u014d) with bureaucratic support of the aristocracy. They gradually lost control of their armed servants, the samurai. By the mid-12th century, the samurai class had seized control. The samurai (bushi) ruled Japan with the shogun (\u5c06\u8ecd) as the overlord until the mid-19th century. The shogun was originally the Emperor's military deputy. After the Genpei War (1180\u20131185), Minamoto no Yoritomo usurped power from the civil aristocracy by establishing a military government called the bakufu situated in Kamakura since 1192. The Emperor and his court became figureheads.\nThe appearance of bushido is linked to that of feudal Japan and the first shogun at the time of Minamoto no Yoritomo (1147\u20131199) in the 12th century. The own moral dimension of bushido gradually appears in the warrior culture and is landmarked in stories and military treaties only from the 14th and 15th centuries. Thus is noted a permanence of the modern representation of its antiquity in Japanese culture and its diffusion is noted.\nIn the 10th and 11th centuries, there was the \"Way of the Man-At-Arms\" (Tsuwamon no michi), and the \"Way of the Bow and Arrows\" (Ky\u00fbsen / ky\u00fbya no Michi). At the time of the Genpei War (1180\u20131185), it was called \"Way of the Bow and the Horse\" (\u5f13\u99ac\u306e\u9053, ky\u016bba no michi) because of the major importance of this style of combat for the warriors of the time, and because it was considered a traditional method, that of the oldest samurai heroes, such as Prince Sh\u014dtoku, Minamoto no Yorimitsu and Minamoto no Yoshiie (Hachimantar\u014d). According to Louis Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric, the ky\u016bba no michi appeared around the 10th century as a set of rules and unwritten customs that samurai were expected to comply with. There was also \"Yumiya toru mi no narai\" (customs for those who draw the bow). This shows there was an emerging sense of ideal warrior behavior that evolved from daily training and warfare experience.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Towards the 10th and 11th centuries, we began to use expressions such as the way of the man-at-arms (Tsuwamon no michi), the way of the bow and arrows (Ky\u00fbsen / ky\u00fbya no Michi), the way of the bow and the horse (Ky\u00fbba no Michi). These expressions refer to practices which are the ancestors of the way of the warrior (bushid\u00f4), but they did not then imply any relation whatsoever to a morality. These were only practices focused on training for real combat, and which therefore had to do with the samurai way of life in the broad sense.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The world of warriors which developed [\u2026] in the medieval period (12th \u2013 16th century) was [\u2026] placed under the domination of the Buddhist religion [\u2026]. Buddhism makes the prohibition of killing living beings one of its main principles. [\u2026] Faced with death, some samurai thought they had inherited bad karma [\u2026] others knew they were doing evil. The Buddhist notion of impermanence (Mujo) tended to express a certain meaning to the fragility of existence, [\u2026]. Beliefs in the pure land of Buddha Amida [\u2026] allowed some warriors to hope for an Amidist paradise [\u2026]. Zen Buddhism, with its doctrine of the oneness between life and death, was also appreciated by many samurai [\u2026]. The world of medieval warriors remained a universe still largely dominated by the supernatural, and the belief, in particular, in the tormented souls of warriors fallen in combat, who returned almost obsessively in the dreams of the living. This idea also ensured the success of the Noh theater.\n\"The Tale of the Heike\" depicts an idealized story of the Genpei War (1180\u20131185) with a struggle between two powerful samurai clans, the Minamoto and the Taira. Clearly depicted throughout the epic is the ideal of the cultivated warrior. During the early modern era, these ideals were vigorously pursued in the upper echelons of warrior society and recommended as the proper form of the Japanese man of arms. The influence of Shinto, Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism on bushido's early development instilled among those who live by the code a religious respect for it.\nMany early literary works of Japan talk of warriors, but the term \"bushid\u014d\" does not appear in text until the Edo period. The code which would become bushido was conceptualized during the late-Kamakura period (1185\u20131333) in Japan. Since the days of the Kamakura shogunate, the \"way of the warrior\" has been an integral part of Japanese culture. Scholars generally regard pre-modern Japan as a \"warrior nation\" since the medieval period. The samurai were role models for society since medieval times. In accordance with Confucianism, one of their duties was to serve as a role model for society. They balanced their martial arts skills with peaceful accomplishments such as literature, poetry, and the tea ceremony. Such as the medieval Japanese proverb \"Hana wa sakuragi, hito wa bushi\" (, literally \"the [best] blossom is the cherry blossom; the [best] man is the warrior\"). In 1843 Nakamura said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our nation is a nation of arms. The land to the west [China] is a nation of letters. Nations of letters value the pen. Nations of arms value the sword. That's the way it has been from the beginning... Our country and theirs are separated from one another by hundreds of miles, our customs are completely different, the temperaments of our people are dissimilar \u2013 so how could we possibly share the same Way? (Nakamura 1843 cited in Watanabe 2012: 285).\nMuromachi-Azuchi (1336\u20131603).\nDuring the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573), the way of the warrior began to \"refine\" by inserting in their daily activities, alongside martial training, Zen meditation, painting (monochrome style), ikebana, the tea ceremony, poetry such as the death poem (written by samurai before suicidal missions or battles) and literature.\nCarl Steenstrup noted that 13th- and 14th-century writings (\"gunki monogatari\") \"portrayed the \"bushi\" in their natural element, war, eulogizing such virtues as reckless bravery, fierce family pride, and selfless, at times senseless devotion of master and man\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Every farmer was basically also a warrior until Hideyoshi confiscated weapons through a nation-wide \"sword-hunt\" in 1588. Every ashigaru had his first lessons on the mentality of war from the biwa h\u014dshi. On the other hand, the Heike recitations also propagated civic virtues: loyalty, steadfastness in adversity, and pride of family honor. \nThe sayings of Sengoku-period retainers and warlords such as Kat\u014d Kiyomasa (1562\u20131611) and Nabeshima Naoshige were generally recorded or passed down to posterity around the turn of the 16th century, when Japan had entered a period of relative peace. In a handbook addressed to \"all \"samurai\", regardless of rank\", Kat\u014d states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If a man does not investigate into the matter of \"bushid\u014d\" daily, it will be difficult for him to die a brave and manly death. Thus, it is essential to engrave this business of the warrior into one's mind well.\nKat\u014d was a ferocious warrior who banned even the recitation of poetry, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One should put forth great effort in matters of learning. One should read books concerning military matters, and direct his attention exclusively to the virtues of loyalty and filial piety...Having been born into the house of a warrior, one's intentions should be to grasp the long and the short swords and to die.\"Nabeshima Naoshige (1538\u20131618) says similarly, that it is shameful for any man to die without having risked his life in battle, regardless of rank, and that \"\"bushid\u014d\" is in being crazy to die. Fifty or more could not kill one such a man. However, Naoshige also suggests that \"everyone should personally know exertion as it is known in the lower classes\".\nBy the mid-16th century, several of Japan's most powerful warlords began to vie for supremacy over territories amidst the Kyoto government's waning power. With Kyoto's capture by the warlord Oda Nobunaga in 1573, the Muromachi period concluded. In 1551 CE, one of the first Western people to visit Japan was the Roman Catholic missionary Francis Xavier. The description of Francis shows that honor, weaponry, and warfare were valued as of utmost importance in Japanese culture. &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Japanese are very ambitious of honors and distinctions, and think themselves superior to all nations in military glory and valor. They prize and honor all that has to do with war, and all such things, and there is nothing of which they are so proud as of weapons adorned with gold and silver. They always wear swords and daggers both in and out of the house, and when they go to sleep, they hang them at the head of the bed. In short, they value arms more than any people I have ever seen. They are excellent archers and usually fight on foot, though there is no lack of horses in the country. They are very polite to each other, but not to foreigners, whom they utterly despise. They spend their means on arms, bodily adornment, and on several attendants, and do not in the least care to save money. They are, in short, a very warlike people, and engaged in continual wars among themselves; the most powerful in arms bearing the most extensive sway. They have all one sovereign, although for one hundred and fifty years past the princes have ceased to obey him, and this is the cause of their perpetual feuds.\nThe practice of decapitating and collecting enemy heads is an example of honor in samurai culture. The severed heads were shown to a general as evidence that they killed wanted opponents and to collect rewards. More heads meant higher prestige, honor, and rewards. A beautification ritual of the severed heads called \"Ohaguro\" was performed. Prestigious heads were arranged on a table and presented in front of the warriors. All heads were identified and marked to prevent mistakes. The guards were left and right of the general and cited spells to transfix demonic spirits of the enemy. Then a samurai said his own name, lifted a box to show and describe the severed head. The general inspected the trophy heads while holding a fan so that the dead could not recognize his face. If the claimed head was correct, then the samurai received a payment; otherwise, he was dismissed.\nDespite the war-torn culmination of this era and the birth of the Edo period, Samurai codes of conduct continued to extend beyond the realms of warfare. Forms of bushido-related Zen Buddhism and Confucianism also emerged during this period. A Samurai adhering to bushido-like codes was expected to live a just and ethical social life, honoring the practices of the gentry in the absence of military campaigns.\nEdo (1603\u20131868).\nJapan enjoyed two and a half centuries of relative peace during the Edo period (1600 to the mid-19th century). Japan didn't have domestic or international conflict. These peaceful times in Tokugawa society enabled bushido to be refined from a focus on \"valor in battle\" to more \"moral integrity\".\nThe Tokugawa shogunate (1603\u20131867) codified aspects of the Samurai warrior values and formalized them into parts of the Japanese feudal law. In addition to the \"house codes\" issued in the context of the fiefdoms (han) and texts that described the right behavior of a warrior (such as the Hagakure), the first Buke shohatto (Laws for the Military Houses, \u6b66\u5bb6\u8af8\u6cd5\u5ea6) was issued by the government in 1615, which prescribed to the lords of the fiefdoms (daimyo) and the samurai warrior aristocracy responsibilities and activities, the rules of conduct, simple and decent clothing, the correct supply in case of official visits, etc. The edicts were reissued in 1629, and in 1635, by the third shogun Tokugawa Iemitsu. The new edicts made clear the shogunate's authority and its desire to assert control. The swordsmanship skills of the samurai developed into character-building martial arts.\nDuring this period, the \"samurai\" class played a central role in the policing and administration of the country. The \"bushid\u014d\" literature of this time contains much thought relevant to a warrior class seeking more general application of martial principles and experience in peacetime, as well as reflection on the land's long history of war. The literature of this time includes:\nThe first mention of the term \"bushido\" is in the scriptures Koyo Gunkan (\u7532\u967d\u8ecd\u9451) from Takeda-ry\u016b (martial arts school), written around 1616 by samurai K\u014dsaka Masanobu (1527\u20131578). It consists of 20 scrolls that mention bushido over 30 times. It contains the history of the Takeda family and their military tactics. The Koyo Gunkan describes valor and exploits in battle. For example, it is a waste of talent when a bushido practitioner takes on administrative roles in government or financial affairs (e.g., dealings in rice, money, timber, or forest land). It emphasizes that bushido lies only in \"becoming as a spear\" on the battlefield. The scrolls were widely disseminated as a martial arts instruction manual by the samurai class and helped to popularize the term.\nIn Koyo Gunkan (1616), bushido is a survival technique for individual fighters, and it aims to make the development of the self and the clan troupe advantageous by raising the samurai name. He also affirms that he seeks a lord who praises himself for wandering, as reflected in T\u014dd\u014d Takatora (1556\u20131630)'s deceased memoir that \"A samurai cannot be called a samurai until he has changed his lords seven times.\" Also, as symbolized by Asakura Norikage (1477\u20131555), \"The warrior may be called a beast or a dog; the main thing is winning.\" As symbolized by Asakura Norikage, it is essential to win the battle even with the slander of cowardice. The feature is that it also contains the cold-hearted philosophy. These are mainly related to the way of life as a samurai, and they are the teachings of each family, and they are also equivalent to the treatment of vassals.\nDr. Hiroko Willcock (senior lecturer at Griffith University, Australia) explained \"Koyo Gunkan is the earliest comprehensive extant work that provides a notion of bushido as a samurai ethos and the value system of the samurai tradition.\" However, it does not have a set of principles regarded as \"true\" or \"false\", but rather varying perceptions widely regarded as formidable throughout different centuries. Emphasized by Thomas Cleary, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Confucianism, Buddhism, and Shinto were each represented by a variety of schools, and elements of all three were commonly combined in Japanese culture and customs. As the embodiment of Samurai culture, bushido is correspondingly diverse, drawing selectively on elements of all these traditions to articulate the ethos and discipline of the warrior.\nDuring the Genna era (1615\u20131624) of the Edo period and later, the concept of \"the way of the gentleman\" (Shid\u014d) was newly established by the philosopher and strategist Yamaga Sok\u014d (1622\u20131685) and others who tried to explain this value in the morality of the Confucian Cheng\u2013Zhu school. For the first time, Confucian ethics (such as Honor and Humanity\", \"filial piety\") became the norm required by samurai. Yamaga Sok\u014d was widely viewed as the \"Sage of Bushid\u014d\" in early twentieth-century Japan.8-9, 12, 31-32, 86.\nMartial arts scholar Ogasawara Sakuun compiled 20 scrolls called Shoke no Hy\u014dj\u014d about the military arts in 1621. Therein, bushido is described as iji (willpower). The scrolls describe the essence of bushido as the strength to not yield to rewards or power, but adhere to personal convictions that dominate one's inner principles.\nIn 1642, the was written by samurai \"Sait\u014d Chikamori\" (\u658e\u85e4\u89aa\u76db, 1603\u20131674) (ex-vassal of the Mogami clan from Yamagata Domain) and published. Chikamori's pen name was Nyoraishi (\u5982\u5121\u5b50). The kashoki are 5 scrolls with wide-ranging content, including samurai knowledge with moral precepts, the knowledge of ordinary people, the teachings of Confucian Buddhism, and narrative ones. It has moral precepts that explain the theoretical aspects of bushido. The 5th scroll has an important definition that was made by a samurai: Thus, the first known description of morality in bushido and the \"bushido spirit\" was the Kashoki.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The essence of Bushid\u014d is: do not lie, do not be insincere, do not be obsequious, do not be superficial, do not be greedy, do not be rude, do not be boastful, do not be arrogant, do not slander, do not be unfaithful, be on good terms with comrades, do not be overly concerned with events, show concern for one another, be compassionate, with a strong sense of duty. Being a good samurai takes more than merely a willingness to lay down one's life.\nThe kashoki was important in promulgating the \"bushido spirit\" among the common population. Thus, it was written for commoners, not warriors. Its accessibility made it very popular, because it was written in kana (hiragana and katakana) rather than kanji which can be read by people with elementary school reading skills. There were many editions which had major influence on the behavior of commoners such as adults, adolescents, women and generations.\nMaster swordsman Miyamoto Musashi's life exemplifies bushido. Musashi (1584\u20131645) wrote The Book of Five Rings (Gorin no Sho) around 1643. It consists of five volumes (Earth, Water, Fire, Wind, and Void). The Book of Earth describes the general framework of bushid\u014d. For example: apply skills in any situation, always carry two swords, learn how to effectively use the lance, naginata, bow and arrow, and guns. A daimyo should know the strength of his troops and how to properly deploy them. Devote yourself to training to master a way, avoid evil acts and thoughts, broaden perspectives with arts and knowledge about different professions, make objective judgments, etc.\nIn 1685, the ukiyo-e book by artist Hishikawa Moronobu (1618\u20131694) was published. It features heroic popular tales of samurai warriors with simple descriptions per artwork. The title includes the word \"bushido,\" and it was meant for children, which shows that it had spread among the general population.\nThe Chinese politician Dai Jitao (1891\u20131949) attended Nihon University's law program in 1907. He was fluent in Japanese and learned about bushido. Dai criticized the supposedly violent nature of the traditional Japanese \"feudal class\" structure before the Meiji period. Dai said the samurai brutally exploited the class structure to abuse and kill people below them in the social order (and biasedly claimed the opposite for Chinese society as peace-loving). According to Dai, after Confucianism became influential in the 17th century, it brought ideas of benevolence and humanity that pacified the cruel samurai and set Japan upon the course to become a modern and civilized society. Dai also appreciated aspects of the samurai. For example, Dai said: Japan continued to benefit from its spirit of self-sacrifice, selfless loyalty, and\u2014after Confucianism was introduced\u2014compassion. Dai blamed the problems of modern Japan (post-Meiji restoration) on the loss of samurai virtues when the former merchant class gained power, and large corporations started to steer government policy. Dai said after the samurai class was heavily influenced by Confucian ideals of compassion, their bushido became a \"life of blood and tears essentially\", because they selflessly shed blood for their lords and cried tears of compassion for farmers and other lower-class people.16.\nThe \"Hagakure\" contains many sayings attributed to Sengoku-period retainer Nabeshima Naoshige (1537\u20131619) regarding \"bushid\u014d\" related philosophy early in the 18th century by Yamamoto Tsunetomo (1659\u20131719), a former retainer to Naoshige's grandson, Nabeshima Mitsushige. The Hagakure was compiled in the early 18th century, but was kept as a kind of \"secret teaching\" of the Nabeshima clan until the end of the Tokugawa \"bakufu\" (1867). His saying, \"\"I have found the way of the warrior is death\", was a summation of the focus on honour and reputation over all else that \"bushid\u014d\" codified. This is occasionally misinterpreted that bushido is a code of death. The true meaning is that by having a constant consciousness of death, people can achieve a state of freedom that transcends life and death, whereby \"it is possible to perfectly fulfill one's calling as a warrior.\"\"\nTokugawa-era r\u014dnin, scholar and strategist Yamaga Sok\u014d (1622\u20131685) wrote extensively on matters relating to \"bushid\u014d\", \"buky\u014d\" (a \"warrior's creed\"), and a more general \"shid\u014d\", a \"way of gentlemen\" intended for application to all stations of society. Sok\u014d attempts to codify a kind of \"universal \"bushid\u014d\"\" with a special emphasis on \"pure\" Confucian values (rejecting the mystical influences of Tao and Buddhism in Neo-Confucian orthodoxy), while at the same time calling for recognition of the singular and divine nature of Japan and Japanese culture. These radical concepts\u2014including ultimate devotion to the Emperor, regardless of rank or clan\u2014put him at odds with the reigning shogunate. He was exiled to the Ak\u014d domain (the future setting of the 47 R\u014dnin incident), and his works were not widely read until the rise of nationalism in the early 20th century.\nThe aging Yamamoto Tsunetomo's interpretation of \"bushid\u014d\" is perhaps more illustrative of the philosophy refined by his unique station and experience, at once dutiful and defiant, ultimately incompatible with the laws of an emerging civil society. Of the 47 \"r\u014dnin\"\u2014to this day, generally regarded as exemplars of \"bushid\u014d\"\u2014Tsunetomo felt they were remiss in hatching such a wily, delayed plot for revenge, and had been over-concerned with the success of their undertaking. Instead, Tsunetomo felt true \"samurai\" should act without hesitation to fulfill their duties, without regard for success or failure.\nThis romantic sentiment is, of course, expressed by warriors throughout history, though it may run counter to the art of war itself. This ambivalence is found in the heart of \"bushid\u014d\", and perhaps all such \"warrior codes\". Some combination of traditional \"bushid\u014d\"'s organic contradictions and more \"universal\" or \"progressive\" formulations (like those of Yamaga Sok\u014d) would inform Japan's disastrous military ambitions in the 20th century.\nAccording to the social psychologist Toshio Yamagishi (, 1948\u20132018), \"Bushido is the ideal human image formed mainly in the Edo period, in other words, a virtue in the groupism world.\" It was the perfect person who fitted the ideal control of the samurai administration in the Edo period.\nMeiji-Showa (1868\u20131945).\nRecent scholarship in both Japan and abroad has focused on differences between the samurai caste and the bushido theories that developed in modern Japan. Bushido evolved considerably over time. Bushido in the prewar period emphasized the role of the emperor and placed greater value on the imperial virtues of loyalty and self-sacrifice than many Tokugawa-era interpretations.\nProminent scholars consider the bushido prevalent since the Meiji era to be a simplification of the attributes of samurai. Samurai originally fought for personal matters and the honor of their family and clan. When Japan was unified, the role of samurai included public administrative responsibilities, such as public order preservation, judicial responsibility, infrastructure maintenance, disaster recovery, farmland development, healthcare administration, and industrial promotion.\nThe samurai class was abolished in the 1870s, and the role of those in it grew more bureaucratic, focusing on the formation of a modern nation-state. With the diminishing of social classes, some values were transferred to the whole population, such as loyalty to the emperor. The author Yukio Mishima asserted that \"invasionism or militarism had nothing to do with bushid\u014d from the outset.\" According to Mishima, a man of bushido is someone who has a firm sense of self-respect, takes responsibility for his actions, and sacrifices himself to embody that responsibility.\nDai Jitao credited the samurai with sole responsibility for the Meiji Restoration, which enabled Japan's modernization, while the populace merely allowed it to happen. Dai argued that Japanese combative tendency and militarism were purely founded in Japan's socio-religious superstitions centered on the notion of divine authority.33. It did not exist in Chinese or Indian thought.33.\nBushido was used as a propaganda tool by the government and military, who doctored it to suit their needs. The original Imperial Rescript to Soldiers and Sailors of 1882 uses the word \"h\u014dkoku\" (\u5831\u56fd), signifying the idea of indebtedness to one's nation because of one's birth. Such debt must be repaid through physical or mental exertion. This idea did not exist in earlier bushido.\nChinese writer Zhou Zuoren regarded the bushido promoted by the military as a corruption of a noble and ancient tradition. He discussed the act of seppuku and the importance of old samurai practices in his 1935 essay series, \"Riben guankui\". He named the story of the Forty-seven r\u014dnin of the Ak\u014d Domain, who were sentenced to seppuku after avenging their daimyo, and their legacy in the story Ch\u016bshingura (A Treasury of Loyal Retainers). He discussed the Sakai incident, in which 20 samurai from the Tosa Domain committed seppuku in 1868 for attacking French sailors. These examples were compared with the soft punishment given to the soldiers who assassinated Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi in 1932. Zhou condemned them for not taking responsibility by committing suicide like traditional samurai. In 1936, Zhou wrote about the loss of humanity and empathy of traditional bushido during the deterioration of the Second World War. He pointed to the samurai novel by Jun'ichir\u014d Tanizaki as an example where victors of a battle treated enemy corpses with dignity. 227.\nBushido regained popularity and became intertwined with Japan's nationalist expression in the mid-1800s in response to Britain's invasion of China in the First Opium War. Xenophobia toward Westerners rose in Japan during the 1850s and 1860s which contributed to the perceived legitimacy of the imperial restoration. Use of \"bushido\" in text increased during this period, and its concept was viewed with more positivity. While it disappeared during the 1870s, it reappeared in the 1880s to express the loss of traditional values during the rapid introduction of Western civilization and a renewed sense of urgency to defend Japanese traditions. The victory of Japan over China in 1895 restored a feeling of pride in bushido, which was considered the \"origin of military success.\"\nThe researcher Oleg Benesch argued that the concept of modern bushido changed throughout the modern era as a response to foreign stimuli in the 1880s, such as the English concept of the gentleman. Nitobe Inaz\u014d's bushido interpretations followed a similar trajectory, though he was following earlier trends. This relatively pacifistic bushido was hijacked and adapted by militarists and the government from the early 1900s as nationalism increased around the time of the Russo\u2013Japanese War.\nThe entrepreneur Fukuzawa Yukichi appreciated bushido and emphasized that maintaining the morale of scholars is the essence of eternal life. Nitoto Inazuke submitted his book, \"Bushido\", to Emperor Meiji and stated, \"Bushido is prosperous here, assists Komo, and promotes the national style, so that the public will return to the patriotic virtues of loyal ministers.\" He wrote that bushido has slightly different requirements for men and women. For women, bushido means guarding their chastity, educating their children, supporting their husbands, and maintaining their families.\nThe \"junshi\" suicide of General Nogi Maresuke and his wife on the death of Emperor Meiji earned praise as an example of opposition to the trend of decaying morals in Japan. It also earned criticism from those who believed that aspect of bushido should not be revived.\nAfter the Meiji Restoration, the martial arts etiquette represented by Ogasawara-ry\u016b (\u5c0f\u7b20\u539f\u6d41) popularized training. Bushido-influenced martial arts and education corresponded with nationalistic ideals prevalent before 1941. Honoring tradition through bushido-inspired martial skills enabled society to remain interconnected, harnessing society's reverence for ancestral practices for national strength. According to researcher William R. Patterson, \"The martial arts were seen as a way not to maintain ancient martial techniques but instead to preserve a traditional value system, Bushido, that could be used to nurture national spirit. In the midst of modernization, the Japanese were struggling to hold onto some traditions that were uniquely Japanese, and that could unify them as countrymen.\" For example, Kan\u014d Jigor\u014d argued, \"Because judo developed based on the martial arts of the past, if the martial arts practitioners of the past had things that are of value, those who practice judo should pass all those things on. Among these, the samurai spirit should be celebrated even in today's society.\"\nDuring interbellum and Second World War Sh\u014dwa Japan, bushido was pressed into use for militarism to present war as purifying, and death a duty. Bushido was pitched as revitalizing traditional values and \"transcending the modern\". Bushido would provide a spiritual shield to let soldiers fight to the end. When giving orders, General Hideki Tojo routinely slapped the faces of the men under his command, saying face-slapping was a \"means of training\" men who came from families that were not part of the samurai caste, and for whom bushido was not second nature. Tojo wrote a chapter in the book \"Hij\u014dji kokumin zensh\u016b\" (\"Essays in time of national emergency\") which the Army Ministry published in March 1934. It called for Japan to become a totalitarian \"national defense state\". It included 15 essays by senior generals and argued Japan defeated Russia in the Russo\u2013Japanese War because bushido gave the Japanese superior willpower: they did not fear death, unlike the Russians who wanted to live.\nAs the Second World War turned, the spirit of bushido was invoked to urge that all depended on the firm and united soul of the nation. When Japan lost the Battle of Attu, the government attempted to paint the more than two thousand Japanese deaths as an inspirational epic for the fighting spirit of the nation. Arguments that the plans for the Battle of Leyte Gulf, involving all Japanese ships, would expose Japan to danger if they failed, were countered with the plea that the Navy be permitted to \"bloom as flowers of death\". The Japanese believed that indoctrination in bushido would give them the edge as the Japanese longed to die for the emperor, while the Americans were afraid to die. However, superior American pilot training and airplanes meant the Japanese were outclassed by the Americans. The first proposals of organized suicide attacks met resistance. While bushido called for a warrior to be always aware of death, they were not to view it as the sole end. However, desperation brought about acceptance and such attacks were acclaimed as the true spirit of bushido.\nBushido regarded surrender as cowardly. Those who did forfeited their honor and lost dignity and respect:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As Japan continued its modernization in the early 20th century, its armed forces became convinced that success in battle would be assured if Japanese soldiers, sailors, and airmen had the \"spirit\" of \"Bushido\"... The result was that the \"Bushido\" code of behavior \"was inculcated into the Japanese soldier as part of his basic training\". Each soldier was indoctrinated to accept that it was the greatest honor to die for the Emperor, and it was cowardly to surrender to the enemy. ... \"Bushido\" therefore explains why the Japanese in the NEI so mistreated POWs in their custody. Those who had surrendered to the Japanese\u2014regardless of how courageously or honorably they had fought\u2014merited nothing but contempt; they had forfeited all honor and literally deserved nothing. Consequently, when the Japanese murdered POWs by shooting, beheading, and drowning, these acts were excused since they involved the killing of men who had forfeited all rights to be treated with dignity or respect. While civilian internees were certainly in a different category from POWs, it is reasonable to think that there was a \"spill-over\" effect from the tenets of \"Bushido\".\u2014\u200a\nThe practice of beheading captured soldiers and prisoners originates from samurai culture in the 14th century or earlier. Japanese propaganda claimed prisoners of war captured during the Second World War denied mistreatment, and declared they were treated well by virtue of bushido generosity. Broadcast interviews with prisoners were described as not propaganda and voluntarily given based on such sympathy for the enemy that only bushido could inspire.\nDuring the Second World War, many Japanese infantrymen were trapped on Guam, surrounded by Allied forces and low on supplies. Despite being outnumbered and in horrific conditions, many soldiers refused to surrender. Nitobe Inaz\u014d wrote, \"They continued to honor the Bushido code, believing that to rush into the thick of battle and to be slain in it, is easy enough... but, it is true courage to live when it is right to live, and to die only when it is right to die\".\nContemporary bushido.\nBushido is still present in the social and economic organization of Japan. The samurai spirit and the virtues can still be found in Japanese society. Notable Japanese consider bushido an important part of their culture.\nBusiness.\nBushido affects myriad aspects of Japanese society and culture. In addition to impacts on military performance, media, entertainment, martial arts, medicine, and social work, the bushido code has catalyzed corporate behavior. It is the mode of thought that historically structured the capitalist activity in the 20th century. Business relations, the close relationship between the individual and the group to which he or she belongs, the notions of trust, respect, and harmony within the Japanese business world are based on bushido. Therefore, this is at the origin of the () ideology of modern Japan. It allowed the country to become, with the Japanese economic miracle, the economic leader of Asia in the post-war years of the 1950s-1960s. The industrialist Eiichi Shibusawa preached bushido as necessary for future times, and the spirit of Japanese business from the Meiji era to the Taish\u014d Democracy was advocated, which became the backbone necessary for Japanese management.\nShinya Fujimura examines Samurai ethics in the academic article The Samurai Ethics: A Paradigm for Corporate Behavior. Bushido principles indicate that rapid economic growth does not have to be a goal of modern existence. Relatedly, economic contentment is attainable regardless of hegemonic gross domestic product statistics. In Fujimura's words, \"The tradition permeates the country's corporate culture and has informed many of its social developments\". Fujimura states egalitarian principles practiced by the Samurai have permeated through modern business society and culture. Principles like Honorable Poverty, \"Seihin,\" encourage those with power and resources to share their wealth, directly influencing national success. Bushido also provides enterprises with social meaning. Eloquently described by Fujimura, \"The moral purpose that bushido articulates transcends booms and busts ... it is often said that a Japanese company is like a family, with executives caring about employees and employees showing respect to executives. Bushido, then, is part of the basis for a sense of national identity and belonging\u2014an ideal that says the Japanese are one people, in it together. \nIn Taiwan, there continued to be positive views of bushido. Such as late ROC president Lee Teng-hui (1923\u20132020) admired traditional Japanese values and bushido influenced him. In Japanese Taiwan, Teng-hui learned kendo in school and he was deeply influenced by bushido and the Japanese \"Bushido spirit\", which had a significant impact on his future life. He wrote the 2003 Japanese book \"\"Bushido\" Precis: What is Noblesse oblige?\" which strived to boost Japan's morale during the economic stagnation by appealing to Japan's warrior spirit.\nCommunication.\nIn the utilization of bushido's seven virtues, the Samurai code has been renewed to contribute to the development of communication skills between adult Japanese couples. Composed in 2012, the empirical document \"The Bushido Matrix for Couple Communication\" identifies a methodology that can be employed by counseling agents to guide adults in self-reflection and share emotions with their partner. This activity centers on the \"Bushido Matrix Worksheet\" (BMW). The authors accentuate, \"practicing Bushido virtues can ultimately enhance intra- and interpersonal relationship, beginning with personal awareness and extending to couple awareness. When utilizing the matrix, a couple is asked to identify one of the seven virtues and apply it to their past and current perceptions surrounding its prevalence in their lives. If individuals identify their relationship to be absent that specific virtue, they may now ponder its inclusion for their benevolence.\nMartial arts.\nThe bushido spirit exists in Japanese martial arts. Modern bushido focuses more on self-defense, fighting, sports, tournaments, and just physical fitness training. While all of these things are important to the martial arts, a much more important thing is missing, which is personal development. Bushido's art taught soldiers the important secrets of life, how to raise children, how to dress, how to treat family and other people, how to cultivate personality, and things related to finances. All of these things are important to be a respected soldier. Although modern bushido is guided by eight virtues, that alone is not enough. Bushido not only taught one how to become a soldier, but also all the stages of life. The warrior described by bushido is not a profession but a way of life. It is not necessary to be in the army to be a soldier. The term \"warrior\" refers to a person who is fighting for something, not necessarily physically. Man is a true warrior because of what is in his heart, mind, and soul. Everything else is just tools in the creation to make it perfect. Bushido is a way of life that means living in every moment, honorably and honestly. All this is of great importance in the life of a soldier, both now and in the past.\nIn the book \"Kata \u2013 The true essence of Budo martial arts?\", Simon Dodd and David Brown state that \"bushido spiritualism\" led the martial art 'Bujutsu' to evolve into modern 'Bud\u014d' (\u6b66\u9053). For their analysis, they review the Kamakura period to reiterate the influence bushido held in martial arts evolution. They distinctly state, \"For clarity any reference to bushido is in relation to bujutsu within the Kamakura to pre-Meiji restoration period (pre-1868), and any links to budo are referring to the modern form of the martial arts.\" To supplement this affirmation Dodd and Brown discuss the variance between the meaning behind Bujutsu and Budo. According to Todd and Brown, Budo is a redevelopment of traditional Kamakura period martial arts principles; Budo defines the \"way of the warrior\" through roots in religious ethics and philosophy. The martial art form's translation binds it to Confucian and Buddhist concepts of bushido:\nRespected karate-ka Kousaku Yokota explains how Bujutsu could be considered the \"art of fighting or killing\" and encompasses a 'win at all costs' mentality required for battlefield survival (Yokota, 2010, p. 185). Conversely, Budo could be considered the \"art of living or life\" and enables a practitioner to live \"honestly and righteously or at least with principles\". Expanding on both these points, Deshimaru (1982, p. 11; p. 46) reports that the ideogram for bu means \"the cease the struggle\" and that \"in Budo the point is...to find peace and mastery of the self\"\nIaid\u014d, in its transmission and its practice, is the martial art that takes up, in its entirety, bushido by the etiquette, the code of honor, the dress, the carrying of the sword, and the fight against oneself rather than against the opponent. Modern combat sports like kendo derive their philosophy from bushido; unlike other martial arts, prolonged contact or multiple hits tend to be disadvantage in favor of simple, clean attacks on the body. Bushido has also inspired the code of honor for disciplines such as aikijutsu, aikido, aikibudo, judo, jujitsu, Kyudo, or the chanbara.\nKendo has the bushido spirit as epitomized by the motto \"Ken Zen Ichi Nyo\" (lit. \"the sword and Zen are one\") (\u5263 \u7985 \u4e00 \u5982). The philosopher Tetsuro Watsuji (1889\u20131960) wrote that kendo involves raising a struggle to a life-transcending level by freeing oneself from an attachment to life. Kendo inculcates moral instruction through strict adherence to a code of etiquette. There are kamidana (miniature Shinto shrine) in the dojo. The basic attitude in Kendo is noble by shunning base feelings, and the aim is to conquer the self.\nWay of life.\nSome people use bushido as a way of life. For example, the Japanese music artist Gackt said that his philosophical way of life is similar to bushido. In 2011, during interviews about his martial arts action movie Bunraku (2010), he said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Being Japanese, bushido is my roots, and is an important part of my country's culture. I believe it is my role to share this beautiful culture with the world. Bushido is a big part of me personally as well as in my professional career...Bushido is also the core of how I think, feel, and live so I felt this was a great opportunity for me to express to the world what \"Bushido\" really means.\u2014\u200a Other notable people who used bushido in life include Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek, who adopted Bushido during his education in Japan.\nIn October 2011, Spain's Prince of Asturias Award for Concord was given to the heroes of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster, aka the Fukushima 50. They were praised for their conduct, which \"embodied the values most deeply rooted in Japanese society\" and \"courage and exemplary behaviour\" with self-sacrifice. This was described by the media as \"samurai spirit\".\nJapan Self-Defense Forces.\nThe Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF) are the successor of the Armed Forces of the Empire of Japan, which existed from 1868 till 1947. The JSDF was officially established with the Self-Defense Forces Act in 1954 (Act No. 165 of 1954). It is primarily used for national defense due to limitations of Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution. Bushido is only used symbolically for example with names for combat exercises such as Exercise Bushido Guardian (2019). There are supporters and opposition for introducing bushido to the JSDF.\nSupporters.\nSince 2000, numerous general officers have proclaimed the importance of bushido with lectures. Bushido is useful for uniting troops with slogans such as \"bravery\", \"discipline\", and \"honesty\".\nTakashi Araya is an author, martial artist and JGSDF veteran (1982\u20132008) who established the first special forces of the JSDF. Araya wrote the 2015 book \"To those who Fight: Japan's Cause and Bushido\". He describes the essence of bushido which was created over a thousand years, and stresses the importance of training soldiers with bushido. He argues the purpose of Japanese martial arts is not to kill other people, but to cleanse their evil spirits and open the way for coexistence and co-prosperity. He says that by training soldiers with bushido, they can become the strongest fighting special forces. He wants JSDF members to inherit bushido to be brave and live dignifiedly. By using the action philosophy of bushido, they can become not only strong technologically, but also spiritually.\nOpposition.\nSome critics say that excessive praise of bushido could repeat the mistakes of the former Imperial Armed Forces. The old Japanese military officer training of the IJA emphasized courage under fire (assault) instead of scientific ability. This created close solidarity between the soldiers and officers, but the officers lacked the skills that the soldiers had. Japanese troops put high significance on dying bravely and spiritual value instead of long-term endurance. This resulted in \"an inclination toward spirituality that ignores reality.\" This ethos exists in the JSDF. By having officers act like soldiers to earn their loyalty with the courage of bushido, it causes sleep deprivation. It's disputed whether it has significance for modern warfare, such as space warfare and cyberwarfare.\nThere was a case of a National Police Reserve (1950\u20131954) member who committed seppuku to apologize for being unable to become an ideal soldier. Another example was a young squadron commander who failed an exercise due to repeatedly attacking rather than changing tactics. The pre-war Imperial Japanese Navy researcher Alexander Chiralfi said the Japanese mindset was subjective and had no interest in academically analysing unrelated maritime issues. Subjective and short-sighted discussions don't yield wise strategies. The ideal image of executives should change according to the times and strategic environment. Thus, feudal bushido may not fit in a modern strategic environment and culture. Critics argue that the Meiji Army defeated the Qing and the Imperial Russian Army, not because of bushido, but because it was a professional military organization. Therefore, Bushido should not become the values of the whole JSDF. Rather, the ideal image of JSDF executives should be defined to achieve national interests.\nBushido types and tenets.\nMultiple bushido types have existed through history. The code varied due to influences such as Zen Buddhism, Shinto, Confucianism, as well as changes in society and on the battlefield. The consistent ideal is martial spirit, including athletic, military skills, and valor: fearlessness toward the enemy in battle. Bushido is a path that the samurai of each era pursued for their entire existence.\nSengoku bushido.\nDuring this era, the daimyo expanded their territory by force and strategy. Battles occurred frequently in various places. The purpose was to expand one's power. The killing of the enemy in a battle led to an evaluation.\nCertain daimyos wrote about moral codes with influence from Zen Buddhism and Confucianism. There was not yet a strong attachment to moral values (apart from honor) in samurai society. Honor, weaponry, and warfare were valued as of the utmost importance in Japanese culture. Low priority was placed on monetary savings.\nEdo bushido.\nAfter the chaotic Sengoku period, politics were carried out in an orderly fashion, and peace was maintained. The samurai could no longer obtain merit on the battlefield. They found more significance in the samurai's existence in areas other than battle. As per Confucianism, it was valued to work for morals and the public, not for personal reasons. In addition, there were many martial arts that included religious boundaries, such as Buddhism and Shinto. A famous example is a passage in the \"Hagakure\": \"Bushido is realised in the presence of death. In the case of having to choose between life and death, you should choose death. There is no other reasoning. Move on with determination.\" It can be difficult to interpret, but it was radical at the time. That appeared in the Taihei era of the Edo period. The oral tradition of the Saga Domain feudal lord Nabeshima Mitsushige, Yamamoto Tsunetomo, is the main subject. Many expressions criticize the samurai who are associated with Confucianism and Buddhism, which were popular at the time. Many works guide the art of treatment while describing the spirit of the samurai of the Sengoku period.\nTenets.\n\"Bushid\u014d\" expanded and formalized the earlier code of the \"samurai\", and stressed sincerity, frugality, loyalty, mastery of martial arts, and honour to the death. Under the \"bushid\u014d\" ideal, if a \"samurai\" failed to uphold his honor he could only regain it by performing \"seppuku\" (ritual suicide). The core of bushido consists of a combination of teachings from Japan's three main philosophical traditions: 1. Buddhist precepts of serenity, stoicism, and non-attachment to life. 2. Shinto notions of fidelity and patriotism, and 3. Confucian morality. People imbued with can serenely carry out their work in the face of any adversity, and have the willpower to master themselves. Taira Shigesuke, Daid\u014dji Y\u016bzan wrote \"Bushido Shoshinshu\" (\u6b66\u9053\u521d\u5fc3\u96c6) (pre-1730), which provides practical and moral instructions for samurai to improve personal, social, and professional standards.\nIn an excerpt from his book \"Samurai: The World of the Warrior\", historian Stephen Turnbull describes the role of seppuku in feudal Japan:\nIn the world of the warrior, seppuku was a deed of bravery that was admirable in a samurai who knew he was defeated, disgraced, or mortally wounded. It meant that he could end his days with his transgressions wiped away and with his reputation not merely intact but actually enhanced. The cutting of the abdomen released the samurai's spirit most dramatically, but it was an extremely painful and unpleasant way to die, and sometimes the samurai who was performing the act asked a loyal comrade to cut off his head at the moment of agony. \"Bushid\u014d\" varied dramatically over time, and across the geographic and socio-economic backgrounds of the \"samurai\", who represented somewhere between 5% and 10% of the Japanese population. The first Meiji-era census at the end of the 19th century counted 1,282,000 members of the \"high \"samurai\"\", allowed to ride a horse, and 492,000 members of the \"low samurai\", allowed to wear two swords but not to ride a horse, in a country of about 25 million.\nSome versions of \"bushid\u014d\" include compassion for those of lower station, and for the preservation of one's name. Early \"bushid\u014d\" literature further enforces the requirement to conduct oneself with calmness, fairness, justice, and propriety. The relationship between learning and the way of the warrior is clearly articulated, one being a natural partner to the other. Other pundits pontificating on the warrior philosophy covered methods of raising children, appearance, and grooming, but all of this may be seen as part of one's constant preparation for death\u2014to die a good death with one's honor intact, the ultimate aim in a life lived according to \"bushid\u014d\". Indeed, a \"good death\" is its own reward, and by no means assurance of \"future rewards\" in the afterlife. Some \"samurai\", though certainly not all (e.g., Amakusa Shir\u014d), have throughout history held such aims or beliefs in disdain, or expressed the awareness that their station\u2014as it involves killing\u2014precludes such reward, especially in Buddhism. Japanese beliefs surrounding the \"samurai\" and the afterlife are complex and often contradictory, while the soul of a noble warrior suffering in hell or as a lingering spirit occasionally appears in Japanese art and literature, so does the idea of a warrior being reborn upon a lotus throne in paradise\nThe essence of bushido was defined by Sait\u014d Chikamori as:\nMeiji bushido.\nMeiji bushido added absolute subservience to the will of the Emperor with an emphasis on loyalty and self-sacrifice. The book \"\" by Nitobe Inaz\u014d popularized bushido internationally during the Meiji era. However, the morals that he described are romanticized interpretations and do not represent all of bushido through history.\nIn the Taish\u014d era, bushido as the way of the merchant was advocated by industrialist Shibusawa Eiichi (1840\u20131931), known as the \"father of Japanese capitalism\". Shibusawa was also a warrior who learned Shind\u014d Munen-ry\u016b and Hokushin Itt\u014d-ry\u016b. He spent some time as a vassal of Tokugawa Yoshinobu, and since the Meiji era, he was a businessman and involved in the establishment of hundreds of corporations.\nIn his book \"Theory and Arithmetic\" (\u8ad6\u8a9e\u3068\u7b97\u76e4), he advocated the word \"samurai business talent\" (\u58eb\u9b42\u5546\u624d). He linked the spirit of the samurai (bushido with the influence of Confucianism) to economic activity and denied immoral merchants for self-interest.\nEight virtues of bushido (as defined by Nitobe Inaz\u014d).\nAs mentioned above, historically there was no unified code, which varied from clan to clan, but the so-called \"bushid\u014d\" code was typified by eight virtues according to Nitobe Inaz\u014d, while he was in the United States, under obvious influence of western chivalry notions in the Meiji Period (1900): Nitobe defined bushido as \"the ways which fighting nobles should observe in their daily life as in their vocation.\"\nBe acutely honest throughout your dealings with all people. Believe in justice, not from other people, but from yourself. To the true warrior, all points of view are deeply considered regarding honesty, justice, and integrity. Warriors make a full commitment to their decisions.\nHiding like a turtle in a shell is not living at all. A true warrior must have heroic courage. It is absolutely risky. It is living life completely, fully, and wonderfully. Heroic courage is not blind. It is intelligent and strong.\nThrough intense training and hard work, the true warrior becomes quick and strong. They are not like most people. They develop a power that must be used for good. They have compassion. They help their fellow men at every opportunity. If an opportunity does not arise, they go out of their way to find one.\nTrue warriors have no reason to be cruel. They do not need to prove their strength. Warriors are not only respected for their strength in battle, but also for their dealings with others. The true strength of a warrior becomes apparent during difficult times.\nWhen warriors say that they will act, it is as good as done. Nothing will stop them from completing what they say they will do. They do not have to 'give their word'. They do not have to 'promise'. Speaking and doing are the same action.\nWarriors have only one judge of honor and character, and this is themselves. The decisions they make and how these decisions are carried out are a reflection of who they truly are. You cannot hide from yourself.\nWarriors are responsible for everything that they have done and everything that they have said, and all of the consequences that follow. They are immensely loyal to all of those in their care. To everyone that they are responsible for, they remain fiercely true.\nContemporary bushido.\nBushido continues to exist in various forms in for example business, communication, martial arts, and as a way of life. This is also called the bushido spirit.\nModern translations.\nModern Western translation of documents related to \"bushid\u014d\" began in the 1970s with Carl Steenstrup, who performed research into the ethical codes of famous \"samurai\" including H\u014dj\u014d S\u014dun and Imagawa Sadayo.\nPrimary research into \"bushid\u014d\" was later conducted by William Scott Wilson in his 1982 text \"Ideals of the Samurai: Writings of Japanese Warriors\". The writings span hundreds of years, family lineage, geography, social class, and writing style\u2014yet share a common set of values. Wilson's work also examined older Japanese writings unrelated to the warrior class: the Kojiki, Shoku Nihongi, the Kokin Wakash\u016b, and the Konjaku Monogatari, as well as the Chinese Classics (the Analects, the Great Learning, the Doctrine of the Mean, and the Mencius). In May 2008, Thomas Cleary translated a collection of 22 writings on \"bushid\u014d\" by warriors, scholars, political advisers, and educators, spanning 500 years from the 14th to the 19th centuries. Titled \"Training the Samurai Mind: A Bushido Sourcebook,\" it gave an insider's view of the samurai world: \"the moral and psychological development of the warrior, the ethical standards they were meant to uphold, their training in both martial arts and strategy, and the enormous role that the traditions of Shintoism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism had in influencing samurai ideals\".\nIn literature.\nExamples of important Japanese literature related to bushido from the 12th to the 21st century:\nMajor figures associated with bushido.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65735", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65735", "title": "The Rape of Nanking (book)", "text": "1997 non-fiction book by Iris Chang\nThe Rape of Nanking: The Forgotten Holocaust of World War II is a bestselling 1997 non-fiction book written by Iris Chang about the 1937\u20131938 Nanjing Massacre\u2014the mass murder and mass rape of Chinese civilians committed by the Imperial Japanese Army in Nanjing, the capital of the Republic of China, immediately after the Battle of Nanjing during the Second Sino-Japanese War. It describes the events leading up to the Nanjing Massacre, provides a graphic detail of the war crimes and atrocities committed by Japanese troops, and lambasts the Japanese government for its refusal to rectify the atrocities. It also criticizes the Japanese people for their ignorance about the massacre. It is one of the first major English-language books to introduce the Nanjing Massacre to Western and Eastern readers alike, and has been translated into several languages. The book significantly renewed public interest in Japanese wartime conduct in China, Korea, Southeast Asia (including the Philippines) and the Pacific.\nThe book received both acclaim and criticism by the public and by academics. It has been praised as a work that \"shows more clearly than any previous account\" the extent and brutality of the episode, while elements of Chang's analysis of the motivations for the events, Japanese culture, and her calculation of the total numbers killed and raped were criticized as inaccurate because of her lack of training as a historian. Chang's research on the book was credited with the finding of the diaries of John Rabe and Minnie Vautrin, both of whom played important roles in the Nanking Safety Zone, a designated area in Nanjing that protected Chinese civilians during the Nanjing Massacre.\nThe book prompted AOL executive Ted Leonsis to fund and produce \"Nanking\", a 2007 documentary film about the eponymous massacre.\nBackground.\nInspiration.\nAs a child, Chang was told by her parents that during the Nanjing Massacre, the Japanese \"sliced babies not just in half but in thirds and fourths.\" Her parents had escaped with their families from China to Taiwan and then to the United States after World War II. In the introduction of \"The Rape of Nanking,\" she wrote that throughout her childhood, the Nanjing Massacre \"remained buried in the back of [her] mind as a metaphor for unspeakable evil.\" When she searched the local public libraries in her school and found nothing, she wondered why no one had written a book about it.\nThe subject of the Nanjing Massacre entered Chang's life again almost two decades later when she learned of producers who had completed documentary films about it. One of the producers was Shao Tzuping, who helped produce \"Magee's Testament\", a film that contains footage of the Nanjing Massacre itself, shot by the missionary John Magee. The other producer was Nancy Tong, who, together with Christine Choy, produced and co-directed \"In The Name of the Emperor\", a film containing a series of interviews with Chinese, American, and Japanese citizens. Chang began talking to Shao and Tong, and soon she was connected to a network of activists who felt the need to document and publicize the Nanjing Massacre.\nIn December 1994, she attended a conference on the Nanjing Massacre, held in Cupertino, California, and what she saw and heard at the conference motivated her to write her 1997 book\".\" As she wrote in the book's introduction, while she was at the conference:I was suddenly in a panic that this terrifying disrespect for death and dying, this reversion in human social evolution, would be reduced to a footnote of history, treated like a harmless glitch in a computer program that might or might not again cause a problem, unless someone forced the world to remember it.\nResearch.\nChang spent two years on research for the book. She found source materials in the US, including diaries, films, and photographs of missionaries, journalists, and military officers who were in Nanjing at the time of the massacre. Additionally, she traveled to Nanjing to interview survivors of the Nanjing Massacre and to read Chinese accounts and confessions by Japanese army veterans. Also, she incorporated the most recent work on the subject by Chinese and Chinese-American historians by including many disturbing photographs and a myriad of translated documents.\nBefore publication, the book was reviewed by Rana Mitter and Christian Jessen-Klingenberg of the University of Oxford; Carol Gluck of Columbia University; and William C. Kirby of Harvard University. At the time of writing, the Japanese government classified Japan's World War 2 archives, making archival records unavailable to investigators.\nThe diaries.\nChang's research led her to make what one \"San Francisco Chronicle\" article called \"Significant Discoveries\" on the subject of the Nanjing Massacre, in the forms of the diaries of two Westerners who were in Nanjing leading efforts to save lives during the Japanese invasion. The diaries documented the events of the Nanjing Massacre from the perspectives of their writers, and provided detailed accounts of atrocities that they saw, as well as information surrounding the circumstances of the Nanking Safety Zone.\nOne diary was that of John Rabe, a German Nazi Party member who was the leader of the Nanking Safety Zone, a demilitarized zone in Nanjing that Rabe and other Westerners set up to protect Chinese civilians. Rabe's diary is over 800 pages, and contains one of the most detailed accounts of the Nanjing Massacre. Translated into English, it was published in 1998 by Random House as \"\".\nThe other diary belonged to Minnie Vautrin, the American missionary who saved the lives of about 10,000 women and children when she provided them with shelter in Ginling College. Vautrin's diary recounts her personal experience and feelings on the Nanjing Massacre; in it, an entry reads, \"There probably is no crime that has not been committed in this city today.\" It was used as source material by Hua-ling Hu for a biography of Vautrin and her role during the Nanjing Massacre, entitled \"\".\nChang dubbed Rabe the \"Oskar Schindler of Nanking\" and Vautrin the \"Anne Frank of Nanking.\"\nContents.\n\"The Rape of Nanking\" is structured into three main parts. The first uses a technique\u2014what Chang calls the \"Rashomon perspective\"\u2014to narrate the events of the massacre from three different perspectives: that of the Japanese military, the Chinese victims, and of the Westerners who tried to help Chinese civilians. The second part concerns the postwar reaction to the massacre, especially that of the American and European governments. The third part of the book examines the circumstances that, Chang believed, have kept knowledge of the massacre out of public consciousness decades after the war.\nAtrocities.\nThe book depicted in detail the killing, torture, and rape that occurred during the Nanjing Massacre. Chang listed and described the kinds of torture that were visited upon the residents, including live burials, mutilation, \"death by fire,\" \"death by ice,\" and \"death by dogs.\" Based on the testimony of a survivor of the massacre, Chang also describes a killing contest amongst a group of Japanese soldiers to determine who could kill the fastest. On the rape that occurred during the massacre, Chang wrote that \"certainly it was one of the greatest mass rapes in world history.\" She estimates that the number of women raped ranged from 20,000 to as many as 80,000, and states that women from all classes were raped, including Buddhist nuns. Furthermore, rape occurred in all locations and at all hours, and both very young and very old women were raped. Not even pregnant women were spared, Chang wrote, and that after gang rape, Japanese soldiers \"sometimes slashed open the bellies of pregnant women and ripped out the fetuses for amusement.\" Not all rape victims were women, according to the book, Chinese men were sodomized and forced to perform repulsive sexual acts. Some were forced to commit incest\u2014fathers to rape their own daughters, brothers their sisters, sons their mothers.\nDeath toll.\nChang wrote of the death toll estimates given by different sources:\nThe book discusses the research of historian Sun Zhaiwei of the Jiangsu Academy of Social Sciences. In his 1990 paper, \"The Nanking Massacre and the Nanking Population\", Sun estimated the total number of people killed at 377,400. Using Chinese burial records, he calculated that the number of dead exceeded the figure of 227,400. He then added estimates totaling 150,000 given by Japanese Imperial Army Major Ohta Hisao in a confessional report about the Japanese army's disposal efforts of dead bodies, arriving at the sum of 377,400 dead.\nChang wrote that there is \"compelling evidence\" that the Japanese themselves, at the time, believed that the death toll may have been as high as 300,000. She cited a message that Japan's foreign minister K\u014dki Hirota relayed to his contacts in Washington, DC in the first month of the massacre on January 17, 1938. The message acknowledged that \"not less than three hundred thousand Chinese civilians [were] slaughtered, many cases in cold blood.\"\nReception.\nAcclaim.\n\"The Rape of Nanking\" sold more than half a million copies when it was first published in the US, and according to \"The New York Times\", received general critical acclaim. The book remained on the \"New York Times\"' Best Seller list for 10 weeks and sold more than 125,000 copies in four months. Several leading historians said they believe that Chang's revelation of Japanese wartime crimes and the country's postwar attempts to cover up and distort history will help raise public awareness of the incident.\nChang became an instant celebrity in the US: she was awarded honorary degrees; invited to give lectures and to discuss the Nanjing Massacre on shows such as \"Good Morning America\", \"Nightline\", and \"The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer\"; profiled by \"The New York Times\"; and was featured on the cover of \"Reader's Digest\". Moreover, Hillary Clinton invited her to the White House; the American historian Stephen E. Ambrose described her as \"maybe the best young historian we've got;\" and the Organization of Chinese Americans named her National Woman of the Year. The book's popularity prompted a lengthy book tour, with Chang visiting 65 cities in over a year and a half.\nThe book also received praise from news media. \"The Wall Street Journal\" wrote that it was the \"first comprehensive examination of the destruction of this Chinese imperial city,\" and that Chang \"skillfully excavated from oblivion the terrible events that took place.\" \"The Atlantic Monthly\" described the book as \"a crushing indictment of the Japanese army's behavior.\" The \"Chicago Tribune\" called it \"a powerful new work of history and moral inquiry\" and stated that \"Chang takes great care to establish an accurate accounting of the dimensions of the violence.\" \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" wrote that it was a \"compelling account of a horrendous episode that, until recently, has been largely forgotten.\"\nAccording to William C. Kirby, Professor of History at Harvard University, Chang \"shows more clearly than any previous account just what [the Japanese] did,\" and that she \"draws connections between the slaughter in Europe and in Asia of millions of innocents during World War II.\" Ross Terrill, an associate in research at the Fairbank Center for East Asian Research at Harvard, wrote that the book is \"scholarly, an exciting investigation and a work of passion.\" Beatrice S. Bartlett, Emeritus Professor of History at Yale University, wrote, \"Iris Chang's research on the Nanking holocaust yields a new and expanded telling of this World War II atrocity and reflects thorough research.\" Frederic Wakeman, director of the Institute of East Asian Studies at the University of California, Berkeley, wrote that the book was \"Heartbreaking ... An utterly compelling book. The descriptions of the atrocities raise fundamental questions not only about imperial Japanese militarism but the psychology of the torturers, rapists, and murderers.\"\nCriticism.\nChang's critics alleged that she made an inappropriate and facile association between mass murder and Japanese culture, which included Japanese martial competitions and \"bushido\"; that her book contained incorrect historical dates and names because of her lack of training as a historian; that her personal feelings were evident in the book, making it lack intellectual rigor; that certain passages of her book were plagiarized; and that she placed an undue amount of attention to the actions of right-wing Japanese politicians and groups who refuse to acknowledge Japan's wartime crimes, while ignoring the contributions made by Japanese historians and groups who are preserving the memory of the massacre. Robert Entenmann, professor of history at St. Olaf College, disagreed with her description of the massacre. Entenmann opined that her explanations on why the massacre occurred were inadequate. Disagreements notwithstanding, he acknowledged that her book will help preserve the memory of the atrocity.\nSonni Efron of the \"Los Angeles Times\" opined that the bitter row over Iris Chang's book may leave Westerners with the misimpression that little has been written in Japan about the Nanjing Massacre, when in fact the National Diet Library holds at least 42 books about the Nanjing massacre and Japan's wartime misdeeds, 21 of which were written by liberals investigating Japan's wartime atrocities. In addition, Efron noted that geriatric Japanese soldiers have published their memoirs and have been giving speeches and interviews in increasing numbers, recounting the atrocities they committed or witnessed. After years of government-enforced denial, Japanese middle school textbooks now carry accounts of the Nanjing massacre as accepted truth. According to Efron, Japanese liberals alleged that the mistakes found in her book could undermine their endeavors, which include bringing the knowledge of the massacre to the Japanese public and pressuring the Japanese government into apologizing and atoning for the massacre.\n\"San Francisco Chronicle\" staff writer Charles Burress wrote that Chang's quote of a secret telegram sent by Japan's foreign minister in 1938 was incorrectly cited as \"compelling evidence\" that Japanese troops killed at least 300,000 Chinese civilians in Nanjing. According to Burress, the figure of 300,000 Chinese civilians killed actually came from a message sent by a British reporter, concerning deaths not only in Nanjing but in other places as well. Additionally, Burress questioned her motivation for writing the book\u2014whether she wrote it as an activist or as a historian, stating that the book \"draws its emotional impetus\" from her conviction to not let the Nanjing Massacre be forgotten by the world.\nBurress also cited Ikuhiko Hata, a Japanese history professor at Nihon University, who alleged that 11 photos in the book were misrepresented or fake. One particular photo shows women and children walking across a bridge with Japanese soldiers, and captioned as \"The Japanese rounded up thousands of women. Most were gang-raped or forced into military prostitution.\" Hata stated that the photo originally appeared in 1937 in a Japanese newspaper as part of a series of photos that showed peaceful scenes of Chinese villagers under Japanese occupation. He alleged that since she did not conduct research in Japan, she incorrectly portrayed Japan's postwar attitudes towards the atrocity.\nChang responded to Burress' criticism in a letter written to the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", but the letter was not published by the newspaper. In the letter, she offered criticism of her own concerning Burress's article. She said Hata is considered as an untrustworthy scholar because of his regular contributions to ultra right-wing Japanese publishing companies such as Bungeishunj\u016b, which published an article that promoted Holocaust denial and another that accused Chang, the MacArthur Foundation and Rupert Murdoch of being part of a conspiracy organized by the Chinese Communist Party. In regards to his allegations of her misrepresentation of photos and captions, she wrote that Hata provided insufficient evidence to support his suggestion that the photos proved a peaceful Japanese occupation.\nIn reference to the photo that shows women and children walking across a bridge with Japanese soldiers, she wrote: \"The Japanese, like the Nazis, relied on deception to make mass executions and mass rapes more manageable. The hapless Chinese men, women and children rounded up by the Japanese were usually kept ignorant about their fate until it was too late to escape. In Nanking, women were guided to \"marketplaces\" to buy ducks and chicken, only to find platoons of soldiers waiting to rape them. Men were assured of food, shelter and safety by Japanese soldiers, only to be lured to remote areas and used for bayonet practice or decapitation contests.\" She wrote that her book dealt with the \"horror of the Japanese invasion of China,\" and that the caption reading \"The Japanese rounded up thousands of women. Most were gang-raped or forced into military prostitution\" contained two statements of indisputable fact. Chang also issued a rejoinder to Burress's argument that she incorrectly cited a telegram sent by Japan's foreign minister. She wrote that while the original figure of 300,000 Chinese civilian deaths in Nanjing was reported by a British reporter, this figure was cited in a message that Japan's foreign minister sent to his contacts in Washington, D.C. Chang argued that figure's use by a high-ranking Japanese government official was evidence that the Japanese government recognized 300,000 as the number of Chinese civilian deaths. Finally, she criticized Burress for his \"nitpick\" of small details in order to draw attention away from the scope and magnitude of the Nanjing Massacre, writing that such was a \"common tactic\" of Holocaust deniers.\nIn an interview, Chang challenged her critics by saying:\"If the Japanese Foreign Ministry and the rest of the Japanese government truly care about historical truth, then they should open all their wartime archives to the rest of the world \u2026 They shouldn\u2019t mind inviting an international task force of historians \u2013 historians from the U.S., China, Japan, Korea, and other countries \u2013 to review all the high-level Japanese records from that era and publish them for general and scholarly consumptions. Trust me, if the newly released archival records disprove any of the facts in my book, I would be the first person to acknowledge this in the next edition of \"The Rape of Nanking\". Moreover, I would help the Japanese government publicize the new facts to the world media and find prestigious publishers in the U.S. to translate the documents into English.\" \nReaction in Japan.\n\"The Rape of Nanking\" has caused controversy in Japan. In 1999 Fujiwara said that:\u201cA campaign to deny the Nanking massacre itself by presenting the weaknesses of Iris Chang\u2019s book is being developed. The massacre denial groups have been using these kinds of tactics to maintain there was no massacre by presenting the contradictions in testimony quoted or by the use of inappropriate photos. Yet it is impossible to deny the occurrence of the incident itself because of these few mistakes. It is an illogical jump in reasoning to deny that the Nanking massacre ever happened by attacking her book.\u201d\nAssociate Professor David Askew of Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University said that Chang's book ignited an interest in Japan about the massacre, increasing the amount of publications about the massacre in Japan. He opined that a unified Japanese view of the massacre doesn't exist because of the internal debates and contentions surrounding the massacre, and that the different views can be categorized into mutually exclusive thought groups. He alleged that some aspects of her book undermined the argument put forth by the \"Great Massacre School of thought,\" which advocates for the validity of the findings at the Tokyo Trials and concludes that there were at least 200,000 casualties and at least 20,000 rape cases, and is considered to be the most sophisticated and credible thought group in Japan.\nIn an attempt to prevent her Japanese publisher from releasing a Japanese translation of her book, right-wing Japanese groups threatened and pilloried Chang, her publisher and Japanese historians. A Japanese literary agency informed her that several Japanese historians declined to review the translation; one professor backed out because of pressure placed on his family from \"an unknown organization\"; and her publisher said he was risking his life by publishing her book. According to Japan scholar Ivan P. Hall, revisionist historians in Japan organized a committee of right-wing scholars to condemn the book with repeated appearances at the Foreign Correspondents' Club in Tokyo and throughout Japan. Her Japanese publisher requested her to edit the book for the changes the right-wing Japanese scholars wanted made, which included deleting photographs, altering maps, and publishing a rebuttal to her book. According to the email correspondence between Chang and Soni Efron of the Los Angeles Times, Chang defended the veracity of her research. She said that she corrected 10 errors, including incorrect dates and misspelled names. She rejected the publisher's attempt to annotate about 65 items in the book, stating that the suggested changes were additional details, interpretations or assertions by right-wing critics for which no evidence was provided. She wrote, \u201cI can assure you that virtually none of these errors had anything to do with the historical description of the Nanking massacre itself.\u201d Since the editorial requests were against the publishing contract between Chang and her publisher, she decided to withdraw the Japanese publication of her book and criticized her publisher for capitulating to right-wing threats. A Japanese translation of her book was not published and circulated in Japan until December 2007.\nChang's death.\nAfter publishing the book, Chang received hate mail, primarily from Japanese ultranationalists, and threatening notes on her car and also believed her phone was tapped. Her mother said the book \"made Iris sad\". Suffering from depression, Chang was diagnosed with brief reactive psychosis in August 2004. She began taking medications to stabilize her mood. She wrote: I can never shake my belief that I was being recruited, and later persecuted, by forces more powerful than I could have imagined. Whether it was the CIA or some other organization I will never know. As long as I am alive, these forces will never stop hounding me. Chang committed suicide on November 9, 2004. A memorial service was held in China by Nanjing Massacre survivors coinciding with her funeral in Los Altos, California. The Memorial Hall of the Victims in the Nanjing Massacre, a memorial site in Nanjing built to commemorate the victims of the Nanjing Massacre, added a wing dedicated to her in 2005.\nIn the US, a Chinese garden in Norfolk, Virginia, which contains a memorial to Minnie Vautrin, added a memorial dedicated to Chang, including her as the latest victim of the Nanjing Massacre, and drawing parallels between Chang and Vautrin, who also took her own life. Vautrin exhausted herself trying to protect women and children during the Nanjing Massacre and subsequently during the Japanese occupation of Nanjing, finally suffering a nervous breakdown in 1940. She returned to the US for medical treatment and committed suicide a year later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65738", "revid": "48729834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65738", "title": "Georges Clemenceau", "text": "President of the Council of France (1906\u20131909, 1917\u20131920)\nGeorges Benjamin Clemenceau (28 September 1841 \u2013 24 November 1929) was a French statesman who was prime minister of France from 1906 to 1909 and again from 1917 until 1920. A physician turned journalist, he played a central role in the politics of the Third Republic, particularly amid the end of the First World War. He was a key figure of the Independent Radicals, advocating for the separation of church and state, as well as the amnesty of the Communards exiled to New Caledonia.\nAfter about 1,400,000 French soldiers were killed between the German invasion and Armistice, he demanded a total victory over the German Empire. Clemenceau stood for reparations, a transfer of colonies, strict rules to prevent a rearming process, as well as the restitution of Alsace\u2013Lorraine, which had been annexed to Germany in 1871. He achieved these goals through the Treaty of Versailles signed at the Paris Peace Conference (1919\u20131920). Nicknamed \"P\u00e8re la Victoire\" (\"Father Victory\") or \"Le Tigre\" (\"The Tiger\"), he continued his harsh position against Germany in the 1920s, although not quite so much as President Raymond Poincar\u00e9 or former Supreme Allied Commander Ferdinand Foch, who thought the treaty was too lenient on Germany, prophetically stating: \"This is not peace. It is an armistice for twenty years.\" Clemenceau obtained mutual defence treaties with the United Kingdom and the United States, to unite against possible future German aggression, but these never took effect due to the U.S. Senate's failure to ratify the treaty, which thus also nullified British obligation.\nEarly years.\nClemenceau was a native of Vend\u00e9e, born in Mouilleron-en-Pareds. During the period of the French Revolution, Vend\u00e9e had been a hotbed of monarchist sympathies. The department was remote from Paris, rural, and poor. His mother, Sophie Eucharie Gautreau (1817\u20131903), was of Huguenot descent. His father, Benjamin Clemenceau (1810\u20131897), came from a long line of physicians, but lived off his lands and investments and did not practice medicine. Benjamin was a political activist; he was arrested and briefly held in 1851 and again in 1858. He instilled in his son a love of learning, devotion to radical politics, and a hatred of Catholicism. The lawyer Albert Clemenceau (1861\u20131955) was his brother. His mother was a devout Protestant; his father was an atheist and insisted that his children should have no religious education. Clemenceau was interested in religious issues. He was a lifelong atheist with a sound knowledge of the Bible. He became a leader of anti-clerical or \"Radical\" forces that battled against the Catholic Church in France and the Catholics in politics. He stopped short of the more extreme attacks. His position was that if church and state were kept rigidly separated, he would not support oppressive measures designed to further weaken the Catholic Church.\nAfter his studies in the Lyc\u00e9e in Nantes, Clemenceau received his French baccalaureate of letters in 1858. He went to Paris to study medicine and eventually graduated with the completion of his thesis \"De la g\u00e9n\u00e9ration des \u00e9l\u00e9ments anatomiques\" in 1865.\nPolitical activism and American experience.\nIn Paris, the young Clemenceau became a political activist and writer. In December 1861, he and some friends co-founded a weekly newsletter, \"Le Travail\". On 23 February 1862, he was arrested by the imperial police for having placed posters summoning a demonstration. He spent 77 days in the Mazas Prison. Around the same time, Clemenceau also visited the old French revolutionary Auguste Blanqui and another Republican activist, Auguste Scheurer-Kestner, in jail, further deepening his hatred of the Napoleon III regime and advancing his fervent republicanism.\nHe was graduated as a doctor of medicine on 13 May 1865, founded several literary magazines, and wrote many articles, most of which attacked the imperial regime of Napoleon III. After a failed love affair, Clemenceau left France for the United States as the imperial agents began cracking down on dissidents and sending most of them to the \"bagne de Cayennes\" (Devil's Island Penal System) in French Guiana.\nClemenceau worked in New York City during the years 1865\u20131869, following the American Civil War. He maintained a medical practice, but spent much of his time on political journalism for a Parisian newspaper, \"Le Temps\". He taught French in Great Barrington, Massachusetts, and also taught and rode horseback at a private girls' school in Stamford, Connecticut, where he would meet his future wife. During this time, he joined French exile clubs in New York that were opposing the imperial regime.\nAs part of his journalistic activity, Clemenceau covered the country's recovery following the Civil War, the workings of American democracy, and the racial questions related to the end of slavery. From his time in America, he retained a strong faith in American democratic ideals as opposed to France's imperial regime, as well as a sense of political compromise that later would become a hallmark of his political career.\nMarriage and family.\nOn 23 June 1869, he married Mary Eliza Plummer (1849\u20131922), in New York City. She had attended the school where he taught horseback riding and was one of his students. She was the daughter of Harriet A. Taylor and William Kelly Plummer.\nFollowing their marriage, the Clemenceaus moved to France. They had three children together, Madeleine (born in 1870), Th\u00e9r\u00e8se (1872) and Michel (1873).\nAlthough Clemenceau had many mistresses, when his wife took a tutor of their children as her lover, Clemenceau had her put in jail for two weeks and then sent her back to the United States on a steamer in third class. The marriage ended in a contentious divorce in 1891. He obtained custody of their children. He then had his wife stripped of French nationality.\nBeginning of the Third Republic.\nClemenceau had returned to Paris after the French defeat at the Battle of Sedan in 1870 during the Franco-Prussian War and the fall of the Second French Empire. After returning to medical practice as a physician in Vend\u00e9e, he was appointed mayor of the 18th arrondissement of Paris, including Montmartre, and he also was elected to the National Assembly for the 18th arrondissement. When the Paris Commune seized power in March 1871, he tried unsuccessfully to find a compromise between the more radical leaders of the Commune and the more conservative French government. The Commune declared that he had no legal authority to be mayor and seized the city hall of the 18th arrondissement. He ran for election to the Paris Commune council, but received fewer than eight hundred votes and took no part in its governance. He was in Bordeaux when the commune was suppressed by the French Army in May 1871.\nAfter the fall of the commune, he was elected to the Paris municipal council on 23 July 1871 for the Clignancourt quarter and retained his seat until 1876. He first held the offices of secretary and vice-president, then he became president in 1875.\nChamber of Deputies.\nIn 1876, Clemenceau stood for the Chamber of Deputies (which replaced the National Assembly in 1875) and was elected for the 18th arrondissement. He joined the far left and his energy and mordant eloquence speedily made him the leader of the radical section. In 1877, after the Crisis of 16 May 1877, he was one of the republican majority who denounced the ministry of the Duc de Broglie. Clemenceau led resistance to the anti-republican policy of which the incident of 16 May was a manifestation. In 1879, his demand for the indictment of the Broglie ministry brought him prominence.\nFrom 1876 to 1880, Clemenceau was one of the main defenders of the general amnesty of thousands of Communards, members of the revolutionary government of the 1871 Paris Commune who had been deported to New Caledonia. Along with other radicals and figures such as poet and then-Senator Victor Hugo, as well as a growing number of republicans, he supported several unsuccessful proposals. Finally a general amnesty was adopted on 11 July 1880. The \"reconciliation\" envisaged by Clemenceau could begin, as the remaining deported Communards returned to France, including his friend Louise Michel.\nIn 1880, Clemenceau started his newspaper, \"La Justice\", which became the principal organ of Parisian Radicalism. From this time, throughout the presidency of Jules Gr\u00e9vy (1879\u20131887), he became widely known as a political critic and destroyer of ministries (\"le Tombeur de minist\u00e8res\") who avoided taking office himself. Leading the far left in the Chamber of Deputies, he was an active opponent of the colonial policy of Prime Minister Jules Ferry, which he opposed on moral grounds and also as a form of diversion from the more important goal of \"Revenge against Germany\" for the annexation of Alsace and Lorraine after the Franco-Prussian War. In 1885, his criticism of the conduct of the Sino-French War contributed strongly to the fall of the Ferry cabinet that year.\nDuring the French legislative elections of 1885, he advocated a strong radical programme and was returned both for his old seat in Paris and for the Var, district of Draguignan. He chose to represent the latter in the Chamber of Deputies. Refusing to form a ministry to replace the one he had overthrown, he supported the right in keeping Prime Minister Charles de Freycinet in power in 1886 and was responsible for the inclusion of Georges Ernest Boulanger in the Freycinet cabinet as war minister. When General Boulanger revealed himself as an ambitious pretender, Clemenceau withdrew his support and became a vigorous opponent of the heterogeneous Boulangist movement, although the radical press continued to patronize the general.\nBy his exposure of the Wilson scandal, and by his personal plain speaking, Clemenceau contributed largely to the resignation of Jules Gr\u00e9vy from the presidency of France in 1887. He had declined Gr\u00e9vy's request to form a cabinet upon the downfall of the cabinet of Maurice Rouvier by advising his followers not to vote for Charles Floquet, Jules Ferry, nor Charles de Freycinet, Clemenceau was primarily responsible for the election of an \"outsider\", Marie Fran\u00e7ois Sadi Carnot, as president.\nThe split in the Radical Party over Boulangism weakened his hand and its collapse meant that moderate republicans did not need his help. A further misfortune occurred in the Panama affair, as Clemenceau's relations with the businessman and politician Cornelius Herz led to his being included in the general suspicion. In response to accusations of corruption levelled by the nationalist politician Paul D\u00e9roul\u00e8de, Clemenceau fought a duel with him on 23 December 1892. Six shots were discharged, but neither participant was injured.\nClemenceau remained the leading spokesman for French radicalism, but his hostility to the Franco-Russian Alliance so increased his unpopularity that in the French legislative elections of 1893, he was defeated for his seat in the Chamber of Deputies after having held it continuously since 1876.\nDreyfus Affair.\nFor nearly a decade after his 1893 defeat, Clemenceau confined his political activities to journalism. His career was further clouded by the long-drawn-out Dreyfus case, in which he took an active part as a supporter of \u00c9mile Zola and an opponent of the anti-Semitic and nationalist campaigns. In all, during the affair Clemenceau published 665 articles defending Dreyfus.\nOn 13 January 1898, Clemenceau published \u00c9mile Zola's \"J'Accuse...!\" on the front page of the Paris daily newspaper, \"L'Aurore\", of which he was owner and editor. The controversial article, written in the form of an open letter to F\u00e9lix Faure, the president of France, would become a famous part of the Dreyfus Affair.\nIn 1900, he withdrew from \"La Justice\" to found a weekly review, \"Le Bloc\", to which he practically was the sole contributor. The publication of \"Le Bloc\" lasted until 15 March 1902. On 6 April 1902, he was elected senator for the Var district of Draguignan, although he had previously called for the suppression of the French Senate, as he considered it a strong-house of conservatism. He served as the senator for Draguignan until 1920.\nClemenceau sat with the Independent Radicals in the Senate and moderated his positions, although he still vigorously supported the Radical-Socialist ministry of Prime Minister \u00c9mile Combes, who spearheaded the anti-clericalist republican struggle. In June 1903, he undertook the direction of \"L'Aurore\", the journal that he had founded. In it, he led the campaign to revisit the Dreyfus affair and to create a separation of church and state in France. The latter was implemented by the 1905 French law on the Separation of the Churches and the State.\nAnother cause of social justice Clemenceau was involved in was supporting the Young Turks in their struggle against the Hamidian government. When French authorities elected to shutter Ahmet R\u0131za's \"Me\u015fveret\", many journalists, principally Clemenceau, choose to support his efforts against Y\u0131ld\u0131z's lawsuit. The French censors, heeding Clemenceau's mission for the protection of free speech, chose to only ban the Turkish version of the newspaper, with the French supplemental being allowed to continue publication.\nCabinet and office of Prime Minister.\nIn March 1906, the ministry of Maurice Rouvier fell as a result of civil disturbances provoked by the implementation of the law on the separation of church and state and the victory of radicals in the French legislative elections of 1906. The new ministry of Ferdinand Sarrien appointed Clemenceau as Minister of the Interior. On a domestic level, Clemenceau reformed the French police forces and ordered repressive policies toward the workers' movement. He supported the formation of scientific police by Alphonse Bertillon and founded the \"Brigades mobiles\" (\"mobile squads\") led by C\u00e9lestin Hennion. These squads were nicknamed \"Brigades du Tigre\" (\"The Tiger's Brigades\") after Clemenceau, who was nicknamed \"The Tiger\".\nThe miners' strike in the Pas de Calais, after the Courri\u00e8res mine disaster resulted in the death of more than one thousand persons, threatened widespread disorder on 1 May 1906. Clemenceau ordered the military against the strikers and also repressed the wine growers strike in Languedoc-Roussillon. His actions alienated the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) (the socialist party). He definitively broke with the SFIO in his notable reply in the Chamber of Deputies to SFIO leader Jean Jaur\u00e8s in June 1906. Clemenceau's speech positioned him as the strong man of the day in French politics; when the Sarrien ministry resigned in October, Clemenceau became premier.\nAfter a proposal by the deputy Paul Dussaussoy for limited women's suffrage in local elections, Clemenceau published a pamphlet in 1907 in which he declared that if women were given the vote France would return to the Middle Ages.\nAs the revolt of the Languedoc winegrowers developed Clemenceau at first dismissed the complaints, then sent in troops to keep the peace in June 1907.\nDuring 1907 and 1908, he led the development of a new \"Entente cordiale\" with Britain, which gave France a successful role in European politics. Difficulties with Germany and criticism by the Socialist party in connection with the handling of the First Moroccan Crisis in 1905\u201306 were settled at the Algeciras Conference.\nClemenceau's ministry fell on 20 July 1909. During a debate in the Chamber of Deputies on the state of the navy, he exchanged bitter words with Th\u00e9ophile Delcass\u00e9. Refusing to respond to Delcass\u00e9's technical questions, Clemenceau resigned after his motion for the order of the day was defeated. He was succeeded as premier by Aristide Briand, with a reconstructed cabinet.\nBetween 1909 and 1912, Clemenceau dedicated his time to travel, conferences, and the treatment of his illness. He went to South America in 1910, traveling to Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina (where he went as far as Santa Ana (Tucuman) in northwest Argentina). There, he was amazed by the influence of French culture and of the French Revolution on local elites.\nHe published the first issue of the \"Journal du Var\" on 10 April 1910. Three years later, on 6 May 1913, he founded the newspaper \"L'Homme libre\" (\"The Free Man\") in Paris, for which he wrote a daily editorial. In these media, Clemenceau focused increasingly on foreign policy and condemned the anti-militarism of the Socialists.\nFirst World War.\nAt the outbreak of World War I in France in August 1914, Clemenceau's newspaper was one of the first to be censored by the government. It was suspended from 29 September 1914 to 7 October. In response, Clemenceau changed the newspaper's name to \"L'Homme encha\u00een\u00e9\" (\"The Chained Man\") and criticized the government for its lack of transparency and its ineffectiveness, while defending the patriotic \"union sacr\u00e9e\" against the German Empire.\nIn spite of the censorship imposed by the French government on Clemenceau's journalism at the beginning of World War I, he still wielded considerable political influence. As soon as the war started, Clemenceau advised Interior Minister Malvy to invoke Carnet B, a list of known and suspected subversives who were supposed to be arrested upon mobilisation, in order to prevent the collapse of popular support for a war effort. The Prefect of Police gave the same advice, but the government did not follow it. In the end, 80% of the 2,501 people listed on Carnet B as subversives volunteered for service. In autumn 1914, Clemenceau declined to join the government of national unity as justice minister.\nHe was a vehement critic of the wartime French government, asserting that it was not doing enough to win the war. His stance was driven by a will to regain the province of Alsace-Lorraine, a view shared by public opinion. The autumn of 1917 saw the disastrous Italian defeat at the Battle of Caporetto, the Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia, and rumours that former Prime Minister Joseph Caillaux and Interior Minister Louis Malvy might have engaged in treason. Prime Minister Paul Painlev\u00e9 was inclined to open negotiations with Germany. Clemenceau argued that even German restitution of Alsace-Lorraine and the liberation of Belgium would not be enough to justify France abandoning her allies. This forced Alexandre Ribot and Aristide Briand (both the previous two prime ministers, of whom the latter was by far the more powerful politician who had been approached by a German diplomat) to agree in public that there would be no separate peace. For many years, Clemenceau was blamed for having blocked a possible compromise peace, but it is now clear from examination of German documents that Germany had no serious intention of handing over Alsace-Lorraine. The prominence of his opposition made him the best known critic and the last man standing when the others had failed. \"Messieurs, les Allemands sont toujours \u00e0 Noyon\" (Gentlemen, the Germans are still at Noyon) wrote Clemenceau's paper endlessly.\nSecond term as prime minister.\nIn November 1917, at one of the darkest hours for the French war effort in World War I, Clemenceau was appointed to the prime ministership. Unlike his predecessors, he discouraged internal disagreement and called for peace among the senior politicians.\n1917: return to power.\nClemenceau governed from the Ministry of War on Rue Saint-Dominique. Almost his first act as prime minister was to relieve General Maurice Sarrail from his command of the Salonika front. This was the main topic of discussion at the first meeting of the war committee on 6 December, at which Clemenceau stated, \"Sarrail cannot remain there\". The reason for Sarrail's dismissal was his links with the socialist politicians Joseph Caillaux and Louis Malvy (at that time suspected of treasonable contacts with the Germans)\nChurchill later wrote that Clemenceau \"looked like a wild animal pacing to and fro behind bars\" in front of \"an assembly which would have done anything to avoid putting him there, but, having put him there, felt they must obey\".\nWhen Clemenceau became prime minister in 1917 victory seemed to be elusive. There was little activity on the western front because it was believed that there should be limited attacks until the American support arrived. At this time, Italy was on the defensive, Russia virtually had stopped fighting \u2013 and it was believed that they would be making a separate peace with Germany &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. At home, the government had to deal with increasing demonstrations against the war, a scarcity of resources, and air raids that were causing huge physical damage to Paris as well as undermining the morale of its citizens. It also was believed that many politicians secretly wanted peace. It was a challenging situation for Clemenceau; after years of criticizing other men during the war, he suddenly found himself in a position of supreme power. He was isolated politically, however. He did not have close links with any parliamentary leaders (especially after he had antagonized them so relentlessly during the course of the war) and so, had to rely on himself and his own circle of friends.\nClemenceau's assumption of power meant little to the men in the trenches at first. They thought of him as \"just another politician\", and the monthly assessment of troop morale found that only a minority found comfort in his appointment. Slowly, however, as time passed, the confidence he inspired in a few, began to grow throughout all the fighting men. They were encouraged by his many visits to the trenches. This confidence began to spread from the trenches to the home front and it was said, \"We believed in Clemenceau rather in the way that our ancestors believed in Joan of Arc.\" After years of criticism against the French army for its conservatism and Catholicism, Clemenceau would need help to get along with the military leaders to achieve a sound strategic plan. He nominated General Henri Mordacq to be his military chief of staff. Mordacq helped to inspire trust and mutual respect from the army to the government which proved essential to the final victory.\nClemenceau also was well received by the media, because they felt that France was in need of strong leadership. It was widely recognized that throughout the war he was never discouraged and never stopped believing that France could achieve total victory. There were skeptics, however, who believed that Clemenceau, like other war-time leaders, would have a short time in office. It was said, \"Like everyone else\u00a0... Clemenceau will not last long \u2013 only long enough to clean up [the war].\"\n1918: crackdown.\nAs the military situation worsened in early 1918, Clemenceau continued to support the policy of total war \u2013 \"We present ourselves before you with the single thought of total war\" \u2013 and the policy of \"la guerre jusqu'au bout\" (war until the end). His speech of 8 March advocating this policy was so effective that it left a vivid impression on Winston Churchill, who would make similar speeches upon becoming British prime minister in 1940. Clemenceau's war policy encompassed the promise of victory with justice, loyalty to the fighting men, and immediate and severe punishment of crimes against France.\nJoseph Caillaux, a former French prime minister, disagreed with Clemenceau's policies. He wanted to surrender to Germany and negotiate a peace, thus Clemenceau viewed Caillaux as a threat to national security. Unlike previous ministers, Clemenceau moved against Caillaux publicly. As a result, a parliamentary committee decided that Caillaux would be arrested and imprisoned for three years. Clemenceau believed, in the words of Jean Ybarn\u00e9garay, that Caillaux's crime \"was not to have believed in victory [and] to have gambled on his nation's defeat\".\nThe arrest of Caillaux and others raised the issue of Clemenceau's harshness, who in turn argued that the only powers he assumed were those necessary for winning the war. The many trials and arrests aroused great public excitement. These trials, far from making the public fear the government, inspired confidence, as the public felt that for the first time in the war, action was being taken and they were being firmly governed. The claims that Clemenceau's \"firm government\" was a dictatorship found little support. Clemenceau was still held accountable to the people and media. He relaxed censorship on political views as he believed that newspapers had the right to criticize political figures: \"The right to insult members of the government is inviolable.\"\nIn 1918, Clemenceau thought that France should adopt Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points, mainly because of its point that called for the return of Alsace-Lorraine to France. This meant that victory would fulfil the war aim that was crucial for the French public. Clemenceau was sceptical about some other points, however, including those concerning the League of Nations, as he believed that the latter could succeed only in a utopian society.\n1918: German spring offensive.\nOn 21 March 1918, the Germans began their great spring offensive. The allies were caught off guard and a gap was created in the British and French lines that risked handing over access to Paris to the Germans. This defeat cemented Clemenceau's belief, and that of the other allies, that a coordinated, unified command was the best option. It was decided that Ferdinand Foch would be appointed as \"generalissimo\".\nThe German line continued to advance and Clemenceau believed that the fall of Paris could not be ruled out. Public opinions arose that if \"the Tiger\", as well as Foch and Philippe P\u00e9tain stayed in power for even another week, France would be lost and that a government headed by Aristide Briand would be beneficial to France, because he would make peace with Germany on advantageous terms. Clemenceau adamantly opposed these opinions and he gave an inspirational speech in the Chamber of Deputies; the chamber subsequently voted their confidence in him by 377 votes to 110.\nAs the allied counter-offensives began to push the Germans back, it became clear that the Germans could no longer win the war. Although they still occupied vast amounts of French territory, they did not have sufficient resources and manpower to continue their attack. As countries allied to Germany began to ask for an armistice, it was obvious that Germany would soon follow. On 11 November 1918, an armistice with Germany was signed. Clemenceau was embraced in the streets and attracted many admiring crowds.\nParis Peace Conference.\nTo settle the international political issues left over from the conclusion of World War I, it was decided that a peace conference would be held in Paris, France. Famously, the Treaty of Versailles between Germany and the Allied Powers to conclude the conflict was signed in the Palace of Versailles, but the deliberations on which it was based were conducted in Paris, hence the name given to the meeting of the victorious heads of state that produced the treaties signed with the defeated powers: the Paris Peace Conference of 1919. On 13 December 1918, United States president Woodrow Wilson received an enthusiastic welcome in France. His Fourteen Points and the concept of a League of Nations had made a big impact on the war-weary French. At their first meeting, Clemenceau realized that Wilson was a man of principle and conscience.\nThe powers agreed that since the conference was being held in France, Clemenceau would be the most appropriate president. Also, he spoke both English and French, the official languages of the conference. Clemenceau had an unassailable position of full control of the French delegation. Parliament gave him a vote of confidence on 30 December 1918, by a vote of 398 to 93. The rules of the conference allowed France five plenipotentiaries. They became Clemenceau and four others who were his pawns. He excluded all military men, especially Foch. He excluded the president of France, Raymond Poincar\u00e9, keeping him in the dark on the progress of negotiations. He excluded all parliamentary deputies, saying he would negotiate the treaty and it would be parliament's duty to vote it up or down, after it was finished.\nThe progress at the conference was much slower than anticipated and decisions were being tabled constantly. It was this slow pace that induced Clemenceau to give an interview showing his irritation to an American journalist. He said he believed that Germany had won the war industrially and commercially as its factories were intact and soon its debts would be overcome through \"manipulation\". In a short time, he believed, the German economy would once again be much stronger than the French.\nFrance's leverage was jeopardized repeatedly by Clemenceau's mistrust of Wilson and David Lloyd George, as well as his intense dislike of President Poincar\u00e9. When negotiations reached a stalemate, Clemenceau had a habit of shouting at the other heads of state and storming out of the room rather than participating in further discussion.\nAttempted assassination.\nOn 19 February 1919, as Clemenceau was leaving his apartment, a man fired several shots at the car. Clemenceau's assailant, anarchist \u00c9mile Cottin, was nearly lynched. Clemenceau's assistant found him pale, but conscious. \"They shot me in the back\", Clemenceau told him. \"They didn't even dare to attack me from the front.\" One bullet hit Clemenceau between the ribs, just missing his vital organs. Too dangerous to remove, the bullet remained with him for the rest of his life.\nClemenceau often joked about the \"assassin's\" bad marksmanship \u2013 \"We have just won the most terrible war in history, yet here is a Frenchman who misses his target six out of seven times at point-blank range. Of course this fellow must be punished for the careless use of a dangerous weapon and for poor marksmanship. I suggest that he be locked up for eight years, with intensive training in a shooting gallery.\"\nRhineland and the Saar.\nWhen Clemenceau returned to the Council of Ten on 1 March, he found that little had changed. One issue that had not changed at all was the long-running dispute over France's eastern frontier and control of the German Rhineland. Clemenceau believed that Germany's possession of this territory left France without a natural frontier in the east and thus, was vulnerable to invasion. The British ambassador reported in December 1918 on Clemenceau's views on the future of the Rhineland: \"He said that the Rhine was a natural boundary of Gaul and Germany and that it ought to be made the German boundary now, the territory between the Rhine and the French frontier being made into an Independent State whose neutrality should be guaranteed by the great powers.\"\nFinally, the issue was resolved when Lloyd George and Woodrow Wilson guaranteed immediate military assistance if Germany attacked without provocation. It also was decided that the allies would occupy the territory for fifteen years, and that Germany could never rearm the area. Lloyd George insisted on a clause allowing for the early withdrawal of allied troops if the Germans fulfilled the treaty; Clemenceau inserted Article 429 into the treaty that permitted allied occupation beyond the fifteen years if adequate guarantees for allied security against unprovoked aggression were not met. This was in case the U.S. Senate refused to ratify the Treaty of Guarantee, thereby making null and void the British guarantee as well, since that was dependent on the Americans being part of it. This is, in fact, what did occur. Article 429 ensured that a refusal of the U.S. Senate to ratify the treaties of guarantee would not weaken them.\nPresident Poincar\u00e9 and Marshal Ferdinand Foch both pressed repeatedly for an autonomous Rhineland state. Foch thought the Treaty of Versailles was too lenient on Germany, stating \"This is not peace. It is an armistice for twenty years.\" At a cabinet meeting on 25 April Foch spoke against the deal Clemenceau had brokered and pushed for a separate Rhineland. On 28 April Poincar\u00e9 sent Clemenceau a long letter detailing why he thought allied occupation should continue until Germany had paid all her reparations. Clemenceau replied that the alliance with America and Britain was of more value than an isolated France that held onto the Rhineland: \"In fifteen years I will be dead, but if you do me the honour of visiting my tomb, you will be able to say that the Germans have not fulfilled all the clauses of the treaty, and that we are still on the Rhine.\" Clemenceau said to Lloyd George in June, \"We need a barrier behind which, in the years to come, our people can work in security to rebuild its ruins. The barrier is the Rhine. I must take national feelings into account. That does not mean that I am afraid of losing office. I am quite indifferent on that point. But I will not, by giving up the occupation, do something which will break the willpower of our people.\" Later, he said to Jean Martel, \"The policy of Foch and Poincar\u00e9 was bad in principle. It was a policy no Frenchman, no republican Frenchman could accept for a moment, except in the hope of obtaining other guarantees, other advantages. We leave that sort of thing to Bismarck.\"\nThere was increasing discontent among Clemenceau, Lloyd George, and Woodrow Wilson about slow progress and information leaks surrounding the Council of Ten. They began to meet in a smaller group, called the Council of Four, Vittorio Orlando of Italy being the fourth, although less weighty, member. This offered greater privacy and security and increased the efficiency of the decision-making process. Another major issue that the Council of Four discussed was the future of the German Saar region. Clemenceau believed that France was entitled to the region and its coal mines after Germany deliberately damaged the coal mines in northern France. Wilson, however, resisted the French claim so firmly that Clemenceau accused him of being \"pro-German\". Lloyd George came to a compromise; the coal mines were given to France and the territory placed under French administration for 15 years, after which a vote would determine whether the region would rejoin Germany.\nAlthough Clemenceau had little knowledge of the defunct Austrian-Hungarian empire, he supported the causes of its smaller ethnic groups and his adamant stance led to the stringent terms in the Treaty of Trianon that dismantled Hungary. Rather than recognizing territories of the Austrian-Hungarian empire solely within the principles of self-determination, Clemenceau sought to weaken Hungary, just as Germany was, and to remove the threat of such a large power within Central Europe. The entire Czechoslovakian state was seen a potential buffer from Communism and this encompassed majority Hungarian territories.\nReparations.\nClemenceau was not experienced in the fields of economics or finance, and as John Maynard Keynes pointed out, \"he did not trouble his head to understand either the Indemnity or [France's] overwhelming financial difficulties\", but he was under strong public and parliamentary pressure to make Germany's reparations bill as large as possible. Generally, it was agreed that Germany should not pay more than it could afford, but the estimates of what it could afford varied greatly. Figures ranged between \u00a32,000\u00a0million and \u00a320,000\u00a0million. Clemenceau realised that any compromise would anger both the French and British citizens and that the only option was to establish a reparations commission that would examine Germany's capacity for reparations. This meant that the French government was not directly involved in the issue of reparations.\nDefence of the treaty.\nThe Treaty of Versailles was signed on 28 June 1919. Clemenceau now had to defend the treaty against critics who viewed the compromises he had negotiated as inadequate for French national interests. The French Parliament debated the treaty and Louis Barthou on 24 September claimed that the U.S. Senate would not vote for the Treaty of Guarantee or the Treaty of Versailles and therefore, it would have been wiser to have the Rhine as a frontier. Clemenceau replied that he was sure the Senate would ratify both and that he had inserted Article 429 into the treaty, providing for \"new arrangements concerning the Rhine\". This interpretation of Article 429 was disputed by Barthou.\nClemenceau's main speech on the treaty was delivered on 25 September. He said that he knew the treaty was not perfect, but that the war had been fought by a coalition and therefore, the treaty would express the lowest common denominator of those involved. He claimed criticisms of the details of the treaty were misleading; that critics should look at the treaty as a whole and see how they could benefit from it:\nThe treaty, with all its complex clauses, will only be worth what you are worth; it will be what you make it\u00a0... What you are going to vote to-day is not even a beginning, it is a beginning of a beginning. The ideas it contains will grow and bear fruit. You have won the power to impose them on a defeated Germany. We are told that she will revive. All the more reason not to show her that we fear her\u00a0... M. Marin went to the heart of the question, when he turned to us and said in despairing tones, \"You have reduced us to a policy of vigilance.\" Yes, M. Marin, do you think that one could make a treaty which would do away with the need for vigilance among the nations of Europe who only yesterday were pouring out their blood in battle? Life is a perpetual struggle in war, as in peace\u00a0... That struggle cannot be avoided. Yes, we must have vigilance, we must have a great deal of vigilance. I cannot say for how many years, perhaps I should say for how many centuries, the crisis which has begun will continue. Yes, this treaty will bring us burdens, troubles, miseries, difficulties, and that will continue for long years.\nThe Chamber of Deputies ratified the treaty by 372 votes to 53, with the Senate voting unanimously for its ratification. On 11 October Clemenceau gave his last parliamentary speech, addressed to the Senate. He said that any attempt to partition Germany would be self-defeating and that France must find a way of living with sixty million Germans. He also said that the bourgeoisie, like the aristocracy before them in the \"ancien r\u00e9gime\", had failed as a ruling class. It was now the turn of the working class to rule. He advocated national unity and a demographic revolution: \"The treaty does not state that France will have many children, but it is the first thing that should have been written there. For if France does not have large families, it will be in vain that you put all the finest clauses in the treaty, that you take away all the Germans guns, France will be lost because there will be no more French\".\nDomestic policies.\nClemenceau's final tenure as prime minister witnessed the implementation of various reforms aimed at regulating the hours of labour. A general eight-hour day law passed in April 1919 amending the French Labour Code, and in June that year, existing legislation concerning the duration of the working day in the mining industry was amended by extending the eight-hour day to all classes of workers, \"whether employed underground or on the surface\". Under a previous law of December 1913, the eight-hour limit had only applied to workers employed underground. In August 1919, a similar limit was introduced for all those employed in French vessels. Another law passed in 1919 (which came into operation in October 1920) prohibited employment in bakeries between the hours of 10 P.M. and 4 A.M.; this law is sometimes credited as the cause of the popularization if not the development of the baguette as a dominant form of bread in France, and the earliest written references to a \"baguette\" as a style of bread date from August 1920. A decree of May 1919 introduced the eight-hour day for workers on trams, railways, and in inland waterways, and a second of June 1919 extended this provision to the state railways. In April 1919, an enabling act was approved for an eight-hour day and a six-day work week, although farm workers were excluded from the act.\nPresidential bid.\nIn 1919, France adopted a new electoral system and the legislative election gave the National Bloc (a coalition of right-wing parties) a majority. Clemenceau only intervened once in the election campaign, delivering a speech on 4 November at Strasbourg, praising the manifesto and men of the National Bloc and he urged that the victory in the war needed to be safeguarded by vigilance. In private he was concerned at this huge swing to the right.\nHis friend, Georges Mandel, urged Clemenceau to stand for the presidency in the upcoming election and on 15 January 1920 he let Mandel announce that he would be prepared to serve if elected. However, Clemenceau did not intend to campaign for the post, instead he wished to be chosen by acclaim as a national symbol. The preliminary meeting of the republican caucus (a forerunner to the vote in the National Assembly) chose Paul Deschanel instead of Clemenceau by a vote of 408 to 389. In response, Clemenceau refused to be put forward for the vote in the National Assembly because he did not want to win by a small majority, but by a near-unanimous vote. Only then, he claimed, could he negotiate with confidence with the allies.\nIn his last speech to the cabinet on 18 January he said, \"We must show the world the extent of our victory, and we must take up the mentality and habits of a victorious people, which once more takes its place at the head of Europe. But all that will now be placed in jeopardy\u00a0... It will take less time and less thought to destroy the edifice so patiently and painfully erected than it took to complete it. Poor France. The mistakes have begun already.\"\nLast years.\nClemenceau resigned as prime minister as soon as the presidential election was held (17 January 1920) and took no further part in politics. In private, he condemned the unilateral occupation by French troops of the German city of Frankfurt in 1920 and said if he had been in power, he would have persuaded the British to join it.\nHe took a holiday in Egypt and the Sudan from February to April 1920, then embarked for the Far East in September, returning to France in March 1921. In June, he visited England and received an honorary degree from the University of Oxford. He met Lloyd George and said to him that after the armistice he had become the enemy of France. Lloyd George replied, \"Well, was not that always our traditional policy?\" He was joking, but after reflection, Clemenceau took it seriously. After Lloyd George's fall from power in 1922 Clemenceau remarked, \"As for France, it is a real enemy who disappears. Lloyd George did not hide it: at my last visit to London he cynically admitted it\".\nIn late 1922, Clemenceau gave a lecture tour in major cities of the American northeast. He defended the policy of France, including war debts and reparations, and condemned American isolationism. He was well received and attracted large audiences, but America's policy remained unchanged. On 9 August 1926, he wrote an open letter to US President Calvin Coolidge that argued against France paying all its war debts: \"France is not for sale, even to her friends\". This appeal went unheard.\nHe condemned Poincar\u00e9's occupation of the Ruhr in 1923 as an undoing of the entente between France and Britain.\nHe wrote two short biographies, one of the Greek orator Demosthenes and one of the French painter Claude Monet. He also penned a huge two-volume tome, covering philosophy, history, and science, entitled \"Au Soir de la Pens\u00e9e\". Writing this occupied most of his time between 1923 and 1927.\nDuring his last months, he wrote his memoirs, despite declaring previously that he would not write them. He was spurred into doing so by the appearance of Marshal Foch's memoirs, which were highly critical of Clemenceau, mainly for his policy at the Paris Peace Conference. Clemenceau only had time to finish the first draft and it was published posthumously as \"https://\" (\"https://\"). He was critical of Foch and also of his successors who had allowed the Treaty of Versailles to be undermined in the face of Germany's revival. He burned all of his private letters.\nClemenceau died on 24 November 1929 and was buried in a simple grave next to his father's at Mouchamps.\nClemenceau's first ministry, 25 October 1906 \u2013 24 July 1909.\nChanges\nClemenceau's second ministry, 16 November 1917 \u2013 20 January 1920.\nChanges\nPersonal life.\nClemenceau was a long-time friend and supporter of the impressionist painter Claude Monet. He was instrumental in persuading Monet to have a cataract operation in 1923. For more than a decade, Clemenceau encouraged Monet to complete his donation to the French state of the large \"Les Nymph\u00e9as\" (Water Lilies) paintings that now are on display in the Paris Mus\u00e9e de l'Orangerie. They are housed in specially constructed oval galleries that opened to the public in 1927.\nHaving fought a dozen duels against political opponents, Clemenceau knew the importance of exercise and practised fencing every morning even when he was an old man.\nClemenceau was an atheist.\nHe took an interest in Japanese art, especially Japanese ceramics. He collected approximately 3,000 small incense containers (\"k\u014dg\u014d\" \u9999\u5408), which are now in museums. The Montreal Museum of Fine Arts held a special exhibition of his collection in 1978.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources and further reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65741", "revid": "39166520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65741", "title": "Aratrum", "text": "Aratrum is the Latin word for ard, and \"arotron\" (\u1f04\u03c1\u03bf\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd) is the Greek word. The Greeks appear to have had several kinds of ard from the records. Hesiod advised the farmer to always have two ards handy, so that if one broke the other could replace it. These ards should be of two kinds. The first was the body- or crook-ard, called \"autoguos\" (\u03b1\u03c5\u03c4\u03bf\u03b3\u03c5\u03bf\u03c2, \"self-limbed\"), in which the stilt (Gk \"echetle\"; Lat \"stiva\") was of the same piece of timber as the ard-head (Gk \"elyma\"; Lat \"dentale\") and the draft-beam (Gk \"histoboeus\"; Lat \"buris\"). The second was the sole-ard, called \"pekton\" (\u03c0\u03b7\u03ba\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd, \"fixed\"), because in it three parts (stilt + sole (Gk \"gyes\") + beam), which were of three kinds of timber, were adjusted to one another and fastened together by nails.\nThe \"autoguos\" crook-ard was made from a sapling with two branches growing from its trunk in opposite directions. In ploughing, the trunk served as the draft-beam, one of the two branches stood upwards and became the stilt, and the other scratched the ground and, sometimes shod with bronze or iron, acted as the share (Gk \"hynis\"; L \"vomer\").\nSources.\nBased on an article from \"A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities,\" John Murray, London, 1875.\n\u1f04\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd"}
{"id": "65743", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65743", "title": "Freetekno", "text": "Cultural movement formed around loose collectives\nFreetekno is a cultural movement that is present in Europe, Australia and North America. Freetekno sound systems or tribes form in loose collectives, frequently with anarchist philosophies. These sound systems join to hold parties wherever a viable space can be found \u2013 typical locations include warehouses (also known as squat parties), fields, abandoned buildings or forests. Because freetekno parties are usually held illegally this sometimes leads to clashes with the police, as was the case at both the 2004 and 2005 Czechtek festivals and many other, smaller parties around the world at different times.\nMusic.\nTekno or hardtek is also a style of music which takes elements from both techno and hardcore, generally high-tempo and energetic. Speedbass, speedcore and other forms of underground music can be heard at freetekno parties. Not all Freetekno events play hardcore (especially the Frenchcore subgenre); psychedelic trance, happy hardcore, hardstyle, drum and bass, breakbeats, glitch, electro, world beat, house, techno, trance, and experimental fusion music are also present at freetekno events.\nHistory.\nThe freetekno movement appeared in first half of the 1990s in the United Kingdom and in the same decade was strong in Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Italy and the Netherlands. It also spread to Canada, Germany, the Pacific Northwest region of the United States, Poland, Slovakia, Spain, Switzerland and Romania.\nFreetekno parties are intended as an example of a Temporary Autonomous Zone. In summer, large Freetekno parties, known as teknivals, attract thousands of people and can last a week or longer, with dozens of sound systems attend. \nRegional scenes.\nUnited Kingdom.\nLondon in the United Kingdom plays host to \"free parties\" (term used by the squat party scene) thrown by an array of sound systems every week. A regular theme is (and always has been) tekno, although drum &amp; bass, breakbeat, hardcore and psytrance can be common. Parties will occur all over London from derelict/deserted buildings in the borough of Hackney to empty office blocks in the City of London. However, the South West of England is generally considered to have the best free party 'vibe' due to beautiful locations of the raves, as well as the welcoming nature of all those attending. In contrast to London, the music played in the south west is generally drum and bass, jungle, jungletek/raggatek, 4x4 and hardtek.\nGermany.\nTekk, also known as Tekke or Hardtekk is a musical genre primarily originating in the eastern part of Germany, gaining prominence in the 1990s. Known for its distinctive rhythm, Tekk, classified as a form of dance music, distinguishes itself by accentuating a pronounced rhythmic structure. The term \"Tekk\" evolved to become synonymous with hardcore dance music, with the conspicuous use of the letter \"k\" serving as an advertising strategy to signify the hardness of the sound at events and compilations (\"Tekno\", \"Tekkno\", \"Tekkkno\"). A parallel variant emerged with the rise of the Freetekno scene, creating a dynamic interplay with the evolving landscape of Tekk. The sonic identity of Tekk is often described as \"dumb\" or \"asozial/assi,\" characterized by heavy, monotone kicks and repetitive vocals, which can be compared to Schranz.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65747", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65747", "title": "Praetor", "text": "Magistrate of the Roman Republic\nPraetor ( , ), also pretor, was the title granted by the government of ancient Rome to a man acting in one of two official capacities: (i) the commander of an army, and (ii) as an elected \"magistratus\" (magistrate), assigned to discharge various duties. The functions of the magistracy, the \"praetura\" (praetorship), are described by the adjective itself: the \"praetoria potestas\" (praetorian power), the \"praetorium imperium\" (praetorian authority), and the \"praetorium ius\" (praetorian law), the legal precedents established by the \"praetores\" (praetors). \"Praetorium\", as a substantive, denoted the location from which the praetor exercised his authority, either the headquarters of his \"castra\", the courthouse (tribunal) of his judiciary, or the city hall of his provincial governorship. The minimum age for holding the praetorship was 39 during the Roman Republic, but it was later changed to 30 in the early Empire.\nHistory of the title.\nThe status of the \"praetor\" in the early republic is unclear. The traditional account from Livy claims that the praetorship was created by the Sextian-Licinian Rogations in 367\u00a0BC, but it was well known both to Livy and other Romans in the late republic that the chief magistrates were first called \"praetor\". For example, Festus \"refers to 'the praetors, who are now consuls'\".\nThe form of the republic changed substantially over its history and the accounts of the republic's development in the early imperial period are marred with anachronisms projecting then-current practices into the past. In the earliest periods of the republic, \"praetor\" \"may not have meant anything more than leader in the most basic sense\", deriving from \"praeire\" (to proceed) or \"praeesse\" (to be preeminent). These early praetors may have simply been clan leaders leading \"military forces privately and free from state control\" with a multitude of private leaders leading private armies.\nThese early military leaders were eventually institutionalised into fixed magistrate bodies elected by the people with clear state control over military activities. This was also probably assisted by \"the use of \"recuperatores\" to mediate disputes and fetial priests to control the declaration of war\". The effect to make it more difficult for private individuals to start wars against Rome's neighbours. Reforms in 449\u00a0BC also may have required \"for the first time that all military commanders be confirmed by a popular assembly [representing] the Roman people\".\nThe emergence of the classical praetorship was a long process that had been underway by 367\u00a0BC. This was when the Sextian-Licinian Rogations were passed, giving the Roman people substantially more power over the selection of their military commanders. While Livy claims that the rogations created the praetorship in 367\u00a0BC to relieve the consuls of their judicial responsibilities, \"few modern historians would accept [this] account as written\". Beyond the ancient knowledge that a title of praetor dated to the beginning of the republic, what became the classical praetorship was initially a military office with imperium and \"virtually identical in authority and capacity to the consulship\". Furthermore, a fully-formed praetorship without colleague, as Livy's account implies, would be a \"tremendous violation of Roman practice in which all regular magistracies were created in colleges consisting of at least two\".\n\"Scholars increasingly view the [rogations] as establishing a college of three (and only three) praetors, two of whom eventually developed into the historical consuls\". What became the classical praetorship in its early years also was not viewed as being less than the consuls, as \"it was common practice for men to hold the praetorship after a consulship... since [doing so] was simply a method of holding \"imperium\" for a second year\".\nLivy reports that until 337\u00a0BC the praetor was chosen only from among the patricians. In that year, eligibility for the \"praetura\" was opened to the plebeians, and one of them, Quintus Publilius Philo, won the office.\nOnly in the 125 years after the election of three military leaders did a clear distinction emerge between what became the consuls and what became the praetors due to the \"normal Roman practice to reserve one commander in or near the city for purposes of defence and (eventually) for civilian administration\". The glory and prestige won by the praetors fighting foreign wars, then still in Italy, is what led to the higher prestige of the consulship. Only in 180\u00a0BC with the passage of the \"lex Villia annalis\" was holding the praetorship after the consulship prohibited. Even after the consulship emerged from the praetorship with higher prestige and desirability, praetorian \"imperium\" was still not legally distinct (or inferior to consular \"imperium\") until the very end of the republic.\nStarting in 241\u00a0BC, praetors started to be prorogued, allowing former praetors to act in the place of a praetor (ie \"pro praetore\") with power only \"to conduct war in his assigned \"provincia\" [with] no other concerns or duties\". Prorogation, in effect, granted private individuals a legally fictitious power to act in the place of the normal magistrates, allowing them to continue to act within their assigned task (\"provincia\"). Prorogation allowed a magistrate, whose \"imperium\" did not expire with his term until crossing the pomerium or being stripped by the people, to continue in his assigned task or \"provincia\".\nPraetura.\nThe elected praetor was a curule magistrate, exercised \"imperium\", and consequently was one of the \"magistratus majores\". He had the right to sit in the \"sella curulis\" and wear the \"toga praetexta\". He was attended by six lictors. A praetor was a magistrate with \"imperium\" within his own sphere, subject only to the veto of the consuls (who outranked him).\nThe \"potestas\" and \"imperium\" (power and authority) of the consuls and the praetors under the Republic should not be exaggerated. They did not use independent judgment in resolving matters of state. Unlike today's executive branches, they were assigned high-level tasks directly by senatorial decree under the authority of the SPQR.\nLivy describes the assignments given to either consuls or praetors in some detail. As magistrates, they had standing duties to perform, especially of a religious nature. However, a consul or praetor could be taken away from his current duties at any time to head a task force, and there were many, especially military. Livy mentions that, among other tasks, these executive officers were told to lead troops against perceived threats (domestic or foreign), investigate possible subversion, raise troops, conduct special sacrifices, distribute windfall money, appoint commissioners and even exterminate locusts. Praetors could delegate at will. The one principle that limited what could be assigned to them was that their duties must not concern them with \"minima\", \"little things\". They were by definition doers of \"maxima\". This principle of Roman law became a principle of later European law: \"Non curat minima praetor\", that is, the details do not need to be legislated, they can be left up to the courts.\nPraetors and their duties.\nRepublican.\nA second praetorship was created around 241\u00a0BC, more clearly separating this office from that of the consulship. There were two reasons for this: to relieve the weight of judicial business and to give the Republic a magistrate with \"imperium\" who could field an army in an emergency when both consuls were fighting a far-off war.\n\"Praetor peregrinus\".\nBy the end of the First Punic War, a fourth magistrate entitled to hold \"imperium\" appears, the \"praetor qui inter peregrinos ius dicit\" (\"the praetor who administers justice among foreigners\"). Although in the later Empire the office was titled \"praetor inter cives et peregrinos\" (\"among citizens and foreigners\", that is, having jurisdiction in disputes between citizens and noncitizens), by the time of the 3rd century BC, Rome's territorial annexations and foreign populations were unlikely to require a new office dedicated solely to this task. T. Corey Brennan, in his two-volume study of the praetorship, argues that during the military crisis of the 240s the second praetorship was created to make another holder of \"imperium\" available for command and provincial administration \"inter peregrinos\". During the Hannibalic War, the \"praetor peregrinus\" was frequently absent from Rome on special missions. The urban praetor more often remained in the city to administer the judicial system.\n\"Praetor urbanus\".\nThe \"praetor urbanus\" presided in civil cases between citizens. The Senate required that some senior officer remain in Rome at all times. This duty now fell to the \"praetor urbanus\". In the absence of the consuls, he was the senior magistrate of the city, with the power to summon the Senate and to organize the defense of the city in the event of an attack. He was not allowed to leave the city for more than ten days at a time. He was therefore given appropriate duties in Rome. He superintended the Ludi Apollinares and was also the chief magistrate for the administration of justice and promulgated the Praetor's Edict. These Edicts were statements of praetor's policy as to judicial decisions to be made during his term of office. The praetor had substantial discretion regarding his Edict, but could not legislate. In a sense the continuing Edicts came to form a corpus of precedents. The development and improvement of Roman Law owes much to the wise use of this praetorial discretion.\nAdditional praetors.\nThe expansion of Roman authority over other lands required the addition of praetors. Two were created in 227 BC, for the administration of Sicily and Sardinia, and two more when the two Hispanic provinces were formed in 197 BC. The dictator Lucius Cornelius Sulla transferred administration of the provinces to former consuls and praetors, simultaneously increasing the number of praetors elected each year to eight, as part of his constitutional reforms. Julius Caesar raised the number to ten, then fourteen, and finally to sixteen.\nImperial.\nAugustus made changes that were designed to reduce the Praetor to being an imperial administrator rather than a magistrate. The electoral body was changed to the Senate, which was now an instrument of imperial ratification. To take a very simplistic view, the establishment of the principate can be seen as the restoration of monarchy under another name. The Emperor therefore assumed the powers once held by the kings, but he used the apparatus of the republic to exercise them. For example, the emperor presided over the highest courts of appeal.\nThe need for administrators remained just as acute. After several changes, Augustus fixed the number at twelve. Under Tiberius, there were sixteen. As imperial administrators, their duties extended to matters that the republic would have considered \"minima\". Two praetors were appointed by Claudius for matters relating to \"Fideicommissa\" (trusts), when the business in that department of the law had become considerable, but Titus reduced the number to one; and Nerva added a Praetor for the decision of matters between the \"fiscus\" (treasury) and individuals. Marcus Aurelius appointed a Praetor for matters relating to \"tutela\" (guardianship).\nPraetors as judges.\nRoman court cases fell into the two broad categories of civil or criminal trials. The involvement of a Praetor in either was as follows.\nActions.\nIn an \"actio\", which was civil, the Praetor could either issue an \"interdictum\" (interdict) forbidding some circumstance or appoint a \"iudex\" (judge). Proceedings before the praetor were technically said to be \"in iure\". At this stage, the Praetor would establish a \"formula\" directing the \"iudex\" as to the remedy to be given if he found that certain circumstances were satisfied; for instance, \"Let X be \"iudex\". If it appears that the defendant ought to pay 10,000 sesterces to the plaintiff, let the \"iudex\" condemn the defendant to pay 10,000 sesterces to the plaintiff. If it does not so appear, let the plaintiff absolve him.\" After they were handed over to the \"iudex\", they were no longer \"in iure\" before the Praetor, but \"apud iudicem\". The \"iudicium\" of the \"iudex\" was binding. By the time of Diocletian, however, this two-stage process had largely disappeared, and the Praetor would either hear the whole case in person or appoint a delegate (a \"iudex pedaneus\"), taking steps for the enforcement of the decision; the \"formula\" was replaced by an informal system of pleadings.\nDuring the time of the Roman Republic, the Urban Praetor allegedly issued an annual edict, usually on the advice of jurists (since the Praetor himself was not necessarily educated in the law), setting out the circumstances under which he would grant remedies. The legal provisions arising from the Praetor's Edict were known as \"ius honorarium\"; in theory the Praetor did not have power to alter the law, but in practice the Edict altered the rights and duties of individuals and was effectively a legislative document. In the reign of Hadrian, however, the terms of the Edict were made permanent and the Praetor's \"de facto\" legislative role was abolished.\n\"Quaestiones perpetuae\".\nThe Praetors also presided at the \"quaestiones perpetuae\" (which were criminal proceedings), so-called because they were of certain types, with a Praetor being assigned to one type on a permanent basis. The Praetors appointed judges who acted as jurors in voting for guilt or innocence. The verdict was either acquittal or condemnation.\nThese quaestiones looked into \"crimina publica\", \"crimes against the public\", such as were worthy of the attention of a Praetor. The penalty on conviction was usually death, but sometimes other severe penalties were used. In the late Republic, the public crimes were:\nThe last three were added by the Dictator Sulla in the early 1st century BC.\nOutdoor actions.\nWhen the Praetor administered justice in a tribunal, he sat on a \"sella curulis\", which was that part of the court reserved for the Praetor and his assessors and friends, as opposed to the \"subsellia\", the part occupied by the \"iudices\" (judges) and others who were present. In court, the Praetor was referred to as acting \"e tribunali\" or \"ex superiore loco\" (lit.\u2009'from a raised platform' or 'from a higher place') but he could also perform ministerial acts out of court, in which case he was said to be acting \"e plano\" or \"ex aequo loco\" (lit.\u2009'from the flat ground' or 'from an equal/level place'). For instance, he could in certain cases give validity to the act of manumission when he was out-of-doors, such as on his way to the bath or to the theatre.\nLater Roman era.\nBy 395 AD, the praetors' responsibilities had been reduced to a purely municipal role. Their sole duty was to manage the spending of money on the exhibition of games or on public works. However, with the decline of the other traditional Roman offices such as that of tribune, the praetorship remained an important portal through which aristocrats could gain access to either the Western or Eastern senates. The praetorship was a costly position to hold as praetors were expected to possess a treasury from which they could draw funds for their municipal duties.\nByzantine Empire.\nLike many other Roman institutions, the praetor (, \"prait\u014dr\") survived in the Eastern Roman Empire.\nEmperor Justinian I (r. 527\u2013565) undertook a major administrative reform beginning in 535, which involved the reunification of civil and military authority in the hands of the governor in certain provinces, and the abolition of the dioceses. The Diocese of Thrace had already been abolished by the end of the 5th century by Anastasius, and its \"vicarius\" became the new \"praetor Justinianus\" of Thrace, with authority over all the former Thracian provinces except for Lower Moesia and Scythia Minor, which became part of the \"quaestura exercitus\". Similarly, the governors of Pisidia and Lycaonia, as well as Paphlagonia (enlarged by merging it with Honorias) were upgraded to \"praetores Justiniani\", and received the rank of \"vir spectabilis\". In addition, in Constantinople he replaced the \"praefectus vigilum\", who was hitherto responsible for security, by a \"praetor populi\" (in Greek \u03c0\u03c1\u03b1\u03af\u03c4\u03c9\u03c1 [\u03c4\u1ff6\u03bd] \u03b4\u03ae\u03bc\u03c9\u03bd, \"prait\u014dr [t\u014dn] d\u0113m\u014dn\"), with wide-ranging police powers.\nIn the early 9th century, the \"prait\u014dr\" was a junior administrative official in the \"themata\", subordinate to the governing \"strat\u0113gos\". Gradually however, the civil functionaries assumed greater power, and by the late 10th century, the \"praitores\" (or \"kritai\", \"judges\") were placed at the head of the civil administration of a \"thema\". This division of civil and military duties was often abandoned in the 12th century, when the posts of civil \"prait\u014dr\" and military \"doux\" were frequently held in tandem. The provincial post fell out of use after the collapse of the Empire in 1204.\nAccording to Helene Ahrweiler, Emperor Nikephoros II (r. 963\u2013969) reinstituted a praetor in Constantinople, as a high-ranking judge. He is possibly identical to the Palaiologan-era post of the \"prait\u014dr tou dem\u014du\", whose holders are attested until 1355. According to the \"Book of Offices\" of pseudo-Kodinos, compiled around the same time, the \"prait\u014dr tou dem\u014du\" occupied the 38th place in the imperial hierarchy, between the \"megas tzaousios\" and the \"logothet\u0113s t\u014dn oikeiak\u014dn\", but held no official function. His court uniform consisted of a gold-brocaded hat (\"skiadion\"), a plain silk \"kabbadion\" tunic, and a plain, smooth wooden staff (\"dikanikion\").\nModern era.\nClassical Latin Praetor became medieval Latin Pretor; Praetura, Pretura, etc. During the interwar period the 71 counties of Romania were divided into a various numbers of \"pl\u0103\u0219i\" (singular: \"plas\u0103\"), headed by a \"Pretor\", appointed by the Prefect. The institution headed by the Pretor was called \"Pretur\u0103\". Currently, this office has survived only in the Republic of Moldova, where praetors are the heads of Chi\u015fin\u0103u's five sectors.\nIn Italy, until 1998, Praetor was a magistrate with particular duty (especially in civil branch).\nThe Italian-speaking Swiss canton of Ticino has \"pretori\" (singular: \"pretore\") which is the chief magistrate (civil branch) of a district, heading a \"pretura\" (a court). The \"pretori\" are appointed by the canton's parliament.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65748", "revid": "7183365", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65748", "title": "Avonlea (Anne of Green Gables)", "text": "Fictional community from Lucy Maud Montgomery novels\nAvonlea (; \"av-on-LEE\") is a fictional community located on Prince Edward Island, Canada, and is the setting of Lucy Maud Montgomery's 1908 novel \"Anne of Green Gables\", following the adventures of Anne Shirley, as well as its sequels, and the television series \"Road to Avonlea\".\nMontgomery drew much of her inspiration for Avonlea from her childhood experiences in the late 19th century farming communities surrounding Cavendish, New Glasgow, New London, Hunter River, and Park Corner on Prince Edward Island.\nIn Montgomery's works, Avonlea is located on the northern shore of Prince Edward Island on a small peninsula. Its primary industries are farming and lobster fishing. Neighbouring fictional communities include Carmody, White Sands (not to be confused with the modern White Sands, which is on the southern edge of Prince Edward Island), Grafton, Bright River, Newbridge, and Spencervale.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65750", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65750", "title": "Silent movie", "text": ""}
{"id": "65752", "revid": "44690822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65752", "title": "F1", "text": ""}
{"id": "65753", "revid": "28257679", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65753", "title": "Rational expectations", "text": "Economics concept\nRational expectations is an economic theory that seeks to infer the macroeconomic consequences of individuals' decisions based on all available knowledge. It assumes that individuals' actions are based on the best available economic theory and information.\nHistory.\nThe concept of rational expectations was first introduced by John F. Muth in his paper \"Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements\" published in 1961. Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent further developed the theory in the 1970s and 1980s which became seminal works on the topic and were widely used in microeconomics.\nSignificant Findings\nMuth\u2019s work introduces the concept of rational expectations and discusses its implications for economic theory. He argues that individuals are rational and use all available information to make unbiased, informed predictions about the future. This means that individuals do not make systematic errors in their predictions and that their predictions are not biased by past errors. Muth\u2019s paper also discusses the implication of rational expectations for economic theory. One key implication is that government policies, such as changes in monetary or fiscal policy, may not be as effective if individuals\u2019 expectations are not considered. For example, if individuals expect inflation to increase, they may anticipate that the central bank will raise interest rates to combat inflation, which could lead to higher borrowing costs and slower economic growth. Similarly, if individuals expect a recession, they may reduce their spending and investment, which could lead to a self-fulfilling prophecy.\nLucas\u2019 paper \u201cExpectations and the Neutrality of Money\u201d expands on Muth's work and sheds light on the relationship between rational expectations and monetary policy. The paper argues that when individuals hold rational expectations, changes in the money supply do not have real effects on the economy and the neutrality of money holds. Lucas presents a theoretical model that incorporates rational expectations into an analysis of the effects of changes in the money supply. The model suggests that individuals adjust their expectations in response to changes in the money supply, which eliminates the effect on real variables such as output and employment. He argues that a stable monetary policy that is consistent with individuals' rational expectations will be more effective in promoting economic stability than attempts to manipulate the money supply.\nIn 1973, Thomas J Sargent published the article \u201cRational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the Natural Rate of Unemployment\u201d, which was an important contribution to the development and application of the concept of rational expectations in economic theory and policy. By assuming individuals are forward-looking and rational, Sargent argues that rational expectations can help explain fluctuations in key economic variables such as the real interest rate and the natural rate of employment. He also suggests that the concept of the natural rate of unemployment can be used to help policymakers set macroeconomic policy. This concept suggests that there is a trade-off between unemployment and inflation in the short run, but in the long run, the economy will return to the natural rate of unemployment, which is determined by structural factors such as the skills of the labour force and the efficiency of the labour market. Sargent argues that policymakers should take this concept into account when setting macroeconomic policy, as policies that try to push unemployment below the natural rate will only lead to higher inflation in the long run.\nTheory.\nThe key idea of rational expectations is that individuals make decisions based on all available information, including their own expectations about future events. This implies that individuals are rational and use all available information to make decisions. Another important idea is that individuals adjust their expectations in response to new information. In this way, individuals are assumed to be forward-looking and able to adapt to changing circumstances. They will learn from past trends and experiences to make their best guess of the future.\nIt is assumed that an individual's predicted outcome do not differ systematically from the market equilibrium given that they do not make systematic errors when predicting the future. \nIn an economic model, this is typically modelled by assuming that the expected value of a variable is equal to the expected value predicted by the model. For example, suppose that \"P\" is the equilibrium price in a simple market, determined by supply and demand. The theory of rational expectations implies that the actual price will only deviate from the expectation if there is an 'information shock' caused by information unforeseeable at the time expectations were formed. In other words, \"ex ante\" the price is anticipated to equal its rational expectation:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the rational expectation and formula_4 is the random error term, which has an expected value of zero, and is independent of formula_3.\nMathematical derivation.\nIf rational expectations are applied to the Phillips curve analysis, the distinction between long and short term will be completely negated, that is, there is no Phillips curve, and there is no substitute relationship between inflation rate and unemployment rate that can be utilized.\nThe mathematical derivation is as follows:\nRational expectation is consistent with objective mathematical expectation: \nformula_6\nMathematical derivation (1)\nWe denote unemployment rate by formula_7. Assuming that the actual process is known, the rate of inflation (formula_8) depends on previous monetary changes (formula_9) and changes in short-term variables such as X (for example, oil prices):\n(1) formula_10\nTaking expected values,\n(2) formula_11\nOn the other hand, inflation rate is related to unemployment by the Phillips curve:\n(3) formula_12 , formula_13\nEquating (1) and (3):\n(4) formula_14\nCancelling terms and rearrangement gives\n(5) formula_15\nThus, even in the short run, there is no substitute relationship between inflation and unemployment. Random shocks, which are completely unpredictable, are the only reason why the unemployment rate deviates from the natural rate.\nMathematical derivation (2)\nEven if the actual rate of inflation is dependent on current monetary changes, the public can make rational expectations as long as they know how monetary policy is being decided:\n(1) formula_16\nDenote the change due to monetary policy by formula_17.\n(2) formula_18\nWe then substitute (2) into (1):\n(3) formula_19\nTaking expected value at time formula_20,\n(4) formula_21\nUsing the Phillips curve relation, cancelling terms on both sides and rearrangement gives\n(5) formula_22\nThe conclusion is essentially the same: random shocks that are completely unpredictable are the only thing that can cause the unemployment rate to deviate from the natural rate.\nImplications.\nRational expectations theories were developed in response to perceived flaws in theories based on adaptive expectations. Under adaptive expectations, expectations of the future value of an economic variable are based on past values. For example, it assumes that individuals predict inflation by looking at historical inflation data. Under adaptive expectations, if the economy suffers from a prolonged period of rising inflation, people are assumed to always underestimate inflation. Many economists suggested that it was an unrealistic and irrational assumption, as they believe that rational individuals will learn from past experiences and trends and adjust their predictions accordingly.\nThe rational expectations hypothesis has been used to support conclusions about economic policymaking. An example is the policy ineffectiveness proposition developed by Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace. If the Federal Reserve attempts to lower unemployment through expansionary monetary policy, economic agents will anticipate the effects of the change of policy and raise their expectations of future inflation accordingly. This will counteract the expansionary effect of the increased money supply, suggesting that the government can only increase the inflation rate but not employment.\nIf agents do not form rational expectations or if prices are not completely flexible, discretional and completely anticipated, economic policy actions can trigger real changes.\nCriticism.\nWhile the rational expectations theory has been widely influential in macroeconomic analysis, it has also been subject to criticism:\nUnrealistic assumptions: The theory implies that individuals are in a fixed point, where their expectations about aggregate economic variables on average are correct. This is unlikely to be the case, due to limited information available and human error.\nLimited empirical support: While there is some evidence that individuals do incorporate expectations into their decision-making, it is unclear whether they do so in the way predicted by the rational expectations theory.\nMisspecification of models: The rational expectations theory assumes that individuals have a common understanding of the model used to make predictions. However, if the model is misspecified, this can lead to incorrect predictions.\nInability to explain certain phenomena: The theory is also criticized for its inability to explain certain phenomena, such as 'irrational' bubbles and crashes in financial markets.\nLack of attention to distributional effects: Critics argue that the rational expectations theory focuses too much on aggregate outcomes and does not pay enough attention to the distributional effects of economic policies.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65755", "revid": "34792401", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65755", "title": "Yeti", "text": "Alleged ape-like creature from Asia\nThe Yeti () is an ape-like creature purported to inhabit the Himalayan mountain range in Asia. In Western popular culture, the creature is commonly referred to as the Abominable Snowman. Many dubious articles have been offered in an attempt to prove the existence of the Yeti, including anecdotal visual sightings, disputed video recordings, photographs, and plaster casts of large footprints. Some of these are speculated or known to be hoaxes.\nFolklorists trace the origin of the Yeti to a combination of factors, including Sherpa folklore and misidentified fauna such as bear or yak. The Yeti is commonly compared to Bigfoot of North America, as the two subjects often have similar physical descriptions.\nDescription.\nThe Yeti is often described as being a large, bipedal ape-like creature that is covered with brown, grey, or white hair, and it is sometimes depicted as having large, sharp teeth.\nEtymology and alternative names.\nThe word \"Yeti\" is derived from Tibetan: \u0f42\u0f61\u0f60\u0f0b\u0f51\u0fb2\u0f7a\u0f51\u0f0b, Wylie: \"g.ya' dred\", ZWPY: \"Yach\u00ea\", a compound of the words Tibetan: \u0f42\u0f61\u0f60\u0f0b, Wylie: \"g.ya\"', ZWPY: \"ya\" \"rocky\", \"rocky place\" and (Tibetan: \u0f51\u0fb2\u0f7a\u0f51\u0f0b, Wylie: \"dred\", ZWPY: \"ch\u00ea\") \"bear\". Pranavananda states that the words \"ti\", \"te\" and \"teh\" are derived from the spoken word 'tre' (spelled \"dred\"), Tibetan for bear, with the 'r' so softly pronounced as to be almost inaudible, thus making it \"te\" or \"teh\".\nTibetan lore describes three main varieties of Yetis\u2014the Nyalmo, which has black fur and is the largest and fiercest, standing around fifteen feet tall; the Chuti, which stands around eight feet tall and lives above sea level; and the Rang Shim Bombo, which has reddish-brown fur and is only between tall.\nOther terms used by Himalayan peoples do not translate exactly the same, but refer to legendary and indigenous wildlife:\nOther names and locations.\nIn Russian folklore, the \"Chuchuna\" is an entity said to dwell in Siberia. It has been described as six to seven feet tall and covered with dark hair. According to the native accounts from the nomadic Yakut and Tungus tribes, it is a well built, Neanderthal-like man wearing pelts and bearing a white patch of fur on its forearms. It is said to occasionally consume human flesh, unlike their close cousins, the \"Almastis\". Some witnesses reported seeing a tail on the creature's corpse. It is described as being roughly six to seven feet tall. There are additional tales of large, reclusive, bipedal creatures worldwide, notably including both \"Bigfoot\" and the \"Abominable Snowman.\"\nThe Abominable Snowman.\nThe name \"Abominable Snowman\" was coined in 1921, the year Lieutenant-Colonel Charles Howard-Bury led the 1921 British Mount Everest reconnaissance expedition, which he chronicled in \"Mount Everest The Reconnaissance, 1921\". In the book, Howard-Bury includes an account of crossing the Lhagpa La at where he found footprints that he believed \"were probably caused by a large 'loping' grey wolf, which in the soft snow formed double tracks rather like those of a bare-footed man\". He adds that his Sherpa guides \"at once volunteered that the tracks must be that of 'The Wild Man of the Snows', to which they gave the name 'metoh-kangmi'\". \"Metoh\" translates as \"man-bear\" and \"kang-mi\" translates as \"snowman\".\nConfusion exists between Howard-Bury's recitation of the term \"metoh-kangmi\" and the term used in Bill Tilman's book \"Mount Everest, 1938\" where Tilman had used the words \"metch\", which does not exist in the Tibetan language, and \"kangmi\" when relating the coining of the term \"Abominable Snowman\". Further evidence of \"metch\" being a misnomer is provided by Tibetan language authority Professor David Snellgrove from the School of Oriental and African Studies at the University of London (ca. 1956), who dismissed the word \"metch\" as impossible, because the consonants \"t-c-h\" cannot be conjoined in the Tibetan language. Documentation suggests that the term \"metch-kangmi\" is derived from one source (from the year 1921). It has been suggested that \"metch\" is simply a misspelling of \"metoh\".\nThe use of \"Abominable Snowman\" began when Henry Newman, a longtime contributor to \"The Statesman\" in Calcutta, writing under the pen name \"Kim\", interviewed the porters of the \"Everest Reconnaissance expedition\" on their return to Darjeeling. Newman mistranslated the word \"metoh\" as \"filthy\", substituting the term \"abominable\", perhaps out of artistic licence. As author Bill Tilman recounts, \"[Newman] wrote long after in a letter to \"The Times\": The whole story seemed such a joyous creation I sent it to one or two newspapers\".\nHistory and sightings.\nPre-19th century.\nAccording to H. Siiger, the Yeti was a part of the pre-Buddhist beliefs of several Himalayan people. He was told that the Lepcha people worshipped a \"Glacier Being\" as a God of the Hunt. He also reported that followers of the B\u00f6n religion once believed the blood of the \"mi rgod\" or \"wild man\" had use in certain spiritual ceremonies. The being was depicted as an ape-like creature who carries a large stone as a weapon and makes a whistling swoosh sound.\nYeti was adopted into Tibetan Buddhism, where it is considered a nonhuman animal (\"tiragyoni\") that is nonetheless human enough to sometimes be able to follow Dharma. Several stories feature Yetis becoming helpers and disciples to religious figures. In Tibet, images of Yetis are paraded and occasionally worshipped as guardians against evil spirits. However, because Yetis sometimes act as enforcers of Dharma, hearing or seeing one is often considered a bad omen, for which the witness must accumulate merit.\n19th century.\nIn 1832, James Prinsep's \"Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal\" published trekker B. H. Hodgson's account of his experiences in northern Nepal. His local guides spotted a tall bipedal creature covered with long dark hair, which seemed to flee in fear. Hodgson concluded it was an orangutan.\nAn early record of reported footprints appeared in 1899 in Laurence Waddell's \"Among the Himalayas\". Waddell reported his guide's description of a large apelike creature that left the prints, which Waddell thought were made by a bear. Waddell heard stories of bipedal, apelike creatures but wrote that \"none, however, of the many Tibetans I have interrogated on this subject could ever give me an authentic case. On the most superficial investigation, it always resolved into something that somebody heard tell of.\"\n20th century.\nThe frequency of reports increased during the early 20th century when Westerners began making determined attempts to scale the many mountains in the area and occasionally reported seeing odd creatures or strange tracks.\nIn 1925, N. A. Tombazi, a photographer and member of the Royal Geographical Society, writes that he saw a creature at about near Zemu Glacier. Tombazi later wrote that he observed the creature from about , for about a minute. \"Unquestionably, the figure in outline was exactly like a human being, walking upright and stopping occasionally to pull at some dwarf rhododendron bushes. It showed up dark against the snow, and as far as I could make out, wore no clothes.\" About two hours later, Tombazi and his companions descended the mountain and saw the creature's prints, described as \"similar in shape to those of a man, but only long by wide... The prints were undoubtedly those of a biped.\"\nDuring the autumn of 1937, John Hunt and Pasang Sherpa (later Pasang Dawa Lama) encountered footprints on the approaches to and at the Zemu Gap above the Zemu Glacier that were thought to belong to a pair of Yetis.\nIn June 1944, C.R. Cooke, his wife Maragaret, and a group of porters encountered very large bipedal prints in soft mud at just below the Singalila Ridge, which the porters said were of the \"Jungli Admi\" (wild man). The creature had come up through bushes on the steep hillside from Nepal and crossed the track before continuing up to the ridge. Cooke wrote \"We laid Maragaret's sunglasses beside each print to indicate its size and took photographs. These prints were strange and larger than any normal human foot, heel to toe, with the great toe set back to one side, a first toe, also large, and three little toes closely bunched together.\"\nPeter Byrne reported finding a yeti footprint in 1948, in northern Sikkim, near the Zemu Glacier, while on holiday from a Royal Air Force assignment in India.\nWestern interest in the Yeti peaked dramatically in the 1950s. While attempting to scale Mount Everest in 1951, Eric Shipton took photographs of a number of large prints in the snow, at about above sea level. Shipton took three photographs, one depicting the tracks, and other two of one particular print which was size compared by a pickaxe, and boot. The footprints had distinct two large toes, and three smaller digits close together. These photos have been subject to intense scrutiny and debate. Some argue they are the best evidence of Yeti's existence, while others contend the prints are those of a mundane creature that have been distorted by the melting snow. Jeffrey Meldrum examined a reconstructed form of the print in 2008, noting that one of the large toes was the result of Macrodactyly. He also stated the alignment of the toes matched that of a great ape, and the Yeti would likely spend more time in the subtropical region of the Himalayas. Meldrum stated it was hard to conclusively say the prints were genuine since Shipton only took two photos of a single track.\nIn 1953, Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay reported seeing large footprints while scaling Mount Everest. Hillary would later discount Yeti reports as unreliable. In his first autobiography Tenzing said that he believed the Yeti was a large ape, and although he had never seen it himself his father had seen one twice, but in his second autobiography he said he had become much more sceptical about its existence.\nDuring the \"Daily Mail\" Snowman Expedition of 1954, the mountaineering leader John Angelo Jackson made the first trek from Everest to Kanchenjunga in the course of which he photographed symbolic paintings of the Yeti at Tengboche gompa. Jackson tracked and photographed many footprints in the snow, most of which were identifiable. However, there were many large footprints which could not be identified. These flattened footprint-like indentations were attributed to erosion and subsequent widening of the original footprint by wind and particles.\nOn 19 March 1954, the \"Daily Mail\" printed an article which described expedition teams obtaining hair specimens from what was alleged to be a Yeti scalp found in the Pangboche monastery. The hairs were black to dark brown in colour in dim light, and fox red in sunlight. The hair was analysed by Professor Frederic Wood Jones, an expert in human and comparative anatomy. During the study, the hairs were bleached, cut into sections and analysed microscopically. The research consisted of taking microphotographs of the hairs and comparing them with hairs from known animals such as bears and orangutans. Jones concluded that the hairs were not actually from a scalp. He contended that while some animals do have a ridge of hair extending from the pate to the back, no animals have a ridge (as in the Pangboche scalp) running from the base of the forehead across the pate and ending at the nape of the neck. Jones was unable to pinpoint exactly the animal from which the Pangboche hairs were taken. He was, however, convinced that the hairs were not from a bear or anthropoid ape, but instead from the shoulder of a coarse-haired hoofed animal.\nS\u0142awomir Rawicz claimed in his book \"The Long Walk\", published in 1956, that as he and some others were crossing the Himalayas in the winter of 1940, their path was blocked for hours by two bipedal animals that were doing seemingly nothing but shuffling around in the snow.\nBeginning in 1957, the Texas oil businessman and adventurer Tom Slick led an expedition to the Nepal Himalayas to investigate Yeti reports, with the anthropologist prof. Carleton S. Coon as one of its members. In 1959, supposed Yeti feces were collected by one of Slick's expeditions; fecal analysis found a parasite which could not be classified. The United States government thought that finding the Yeti was likely enough to create three rules for American expeditions searching for it: obtain a Nepalese permit, do not harm the Yeti except in self-defense, and let the Nepalese government approve any news reporting on the animal's discovery. In 1959, actor James Stewart, while visiting India, reportedly smuggled the so-called Pangboche Hand, by concealing it in his luggage when he flew from India to London.\nIn 1960, Sir Edmund Hillary mounted the 1960\u201361 Silver Hut expedition to the Himalayas, which was to collect and analyse physical evidence of the Yeti. Hillary borrowed a supposed Yeti scalp from the Khumjung monastery then himself and Khumjo Chumbi (the village headman), brought the scalp back to London where a small sample was cut off for testing. Marca Burns made a detailed examination of the sample of skin and hair from the margin of the alleged Yeti scalp and compared it with similar samples from the serow, blue bear and black bear. Burns concluded the sample \"was probably made from the skin of an animal closely resembling the sampled specimen of Serow, but definitely not identical with it: possibly a local variety or race of the same species, or a different but closely related species.\"\nUp to the 1960s, belief in the yeti was relatively common in Bhutan and in 1966 a Bhutanese stamp was made to honour the creature. However, in the 21st century, belief in the being has declined.\nIn 1970, British mountaineer Don Whillans claimed to have witnessed a creature when scaling Annapurna. He reported that he once saw it moving on all fours.\nIn 1983, Himalayan conservationist Daniel C. Taylor and Himalayan natural historian Robert L. Fleming Jr. led a yeti expedition into Nepal's Barun Valley (suggested by discovery in the Barun in 1972 of footprints alleged to be yeti by Cronin &amp; McNeely). The Taylor-Fleming expedition also discovered similar yeti-like footprints (hominoid appearing with both a hallux and bipedal gait), intriguing large nests in trees, and vivid reports from local villagers of two bears, \"rukh bhalu\" ('tree bear', small, reclusive, weighing about ) and \"bhui bhalu\" ('ground bear', aggressive, weighing up to ). Further interviews across Nepal gave evidence of local belief in two different bears. Skulls were collected, these were compared to known skulls at the Smithsonian Institution, American Museum of Natural History, and British Museum, and confirmed identification of a single species, the Asiatic black bear, showing no morphological difference between 'tree bear' and 'ground bear.' (This despite an intriguing skull in the British Museum of a 'tree bear' collected in 1869 by Oldham and discussed in the \"Annals of the Royal Zoological Society\".)\n21st century.\nIn 2004, Henry Gee, editor of the journal \"Nature\", mentioned the Yeti as an example of folk belief deserving further study, writing, \"The discovery that \"Homo floresiensis\" survived until so very recently, in geological terms, makes it more likely that stories of other mythical, human-like creatures such as Yetis are founded on grains of truth.\"\nIn early December 2007, American television presenter Joshua Gates and his team (Destination Truth) reported finding a series of footprints in the Everest region of Nepal resembling descriptions of Yeti. Each of the footprints measured in length with five toes that measured a total of across. Casts were made of the prints for further research. The footprints were examined by Jeffrey Meldrum of Idaho State University, who believed them to be too morphologically accurate to be fake or man-made, before changing his mind after making further investigations. Later in 2009, in a TV show, Gates presented hair samples with a forensic analyst concluding that the hair contained an unknown DNA sequence. A cast of the footprint is kept in the queue of Expedition Everest.\nOn 25 July 2008, the BBC reported that hairs collected in the remote Garo Hills area of North-East India by Dipu Marak had been analysed at Oxford Brookes University in the UK by primatologist Anna Nekaris and microscopy expert Jon Wells. These initial tests were inconclusive, and ape conservation expert Ian Redmond told the BBC that there was similarity between the cuticle pattern of these hairs and specimens collected by Edmund Hillary during Himalayan expeditions in the 1950s and donated to the Oxford University Museum of Natural History, and announced planned DNA analysis. This analysis has since revealed that the hair came from the Himalayan goral.\nA group of Chinese scientists and explorers in 2010 proposed to renew searches in the Shennongjia Forestry District of Hubei province, which was the site of expeditions in the 1970s and 1980s.\nAt a 2011 conference in Russia, participating scientists and enthusiasts declared having \"95% evidence\" of the Yeti's existence. However, this claim was disputed later; American anthropologist and anatomist Jeffrey Meldrum, who was present during the Russian expedition, claimed the \"evidence\" found was simply an attempt by local officials to drum up publicity.\nA yeti was reportedly captured in Russia in December 2011. Initially the story claimed that a hunter reported having seen a bear-like creature trying to kill one of his sheep but, after he fired his gun, the creature ran into a forest on two legs. The story then claimed that border patrol soldiers captured a hairy two-legged female creature similar to a gorilla that ate meat and vegetation. This was later revealed as a hoax or possibly a publicity stunt for charity.\nIn April 2019, an Indian army mountaineering expedition team claimed to have spotted mysterious 'Yeti' footprints, measuring , near the Makalu base camp.\nProposed explanations.\nThe misidentification of Himalayan wildlife has been proposed as an explanation for some Yeti sightings, including the \"chu-teh\", a langur monkey living at lower altitudes; the Tibetan blue bear; or the Himalayan brown bear or \"dzu-teh\", also known as the Himalayan red bear.\nSimilarly, it is possible that sightings have been deliberate hoaxes. Sceptic James Randi notes that convincing costumes of gorillas or other apes have been used in films, which are more convincing than any representations of the Yeti provided by believers. Randi also argues that there would need to be \"many\" creatures in order to maintain the gene pool, and given the proposed size of the Yeti, it is hard to imagine that they have been so elusive if they are real.\nA well publicised expedition to Bhutan initially reported that a hair sample had been obtained, which by DNA analysis by Professor Bryan Sykes could not be matched to any known animal. Analysis completed after the media release, however, clearly showed the samples were from a brown bear (\"Ursus arctos\") and an Asiatic black bear (\"Ursus thibetanus\").\nIn 1986, South Tyrolean mountaineer Reinhold Messner claimed in his autobiography \"My Quest for the Yeti\" that the Yeti is actually the endangered Himalayan brown bear, \"Ursus arctos isabellinus\", or Tibetan blue bear, \"U. a. pruinosus\", which can walk both upright or on all fours.\nAsiatic black bear theory.\nThe 1983 Barun Valley discoveries prompted three years of research on the 'tree bear' possibility by Taylor, Fleming, John Craighead and Tirtha Shrestha. From that research, the conclusion was that the Asiatic black bear, when about two years old, spends much time in trees to avoid attack by larger male bears on the ground ('ground bears'). During this tree period (that may last two years), young bears train their inner claw outward, allowing an opposable grip. The imprint in the snow of a hind paw coming over the front paw that appears to have a hallux, especially when the bear is going slightly uphill so the hind pawprint extends the overprint backward, makes a hominid-appearing track, both in that it is elongated like a human foot, but with a \"thumb\", and in that a four-footed animal's gait now appears bipedal. This \"yeti discovery\", in the words of \"National Geographic Magazine\" editor Bill Garrett, \"[by] on-site research sweeps away much of the 'smoke and mirrors' and gives us a believable yeti\".\nThis fieldwork in Nepal's Barun Valley led directly to the initiation of the Makalu-Barun National Park that protected over half a million acres in 1991, and across the border with China, the Qomolangma national nature preserve in the Tibet Autonomous Region that protected over six million acres. In the words of Honorary President of the American Alpine Club, Robert H. Bates, this yeti discovery \"has apparently solved the mystery of the yeti, or at least part of it, and in so doing added to the world's great wildlife preserves\", so that the shy animal, and the mysteries and myths of the Himalayas that it represents, can continue to live within a protected area nearly the size of Switzerland.\nDNA analysis.\nIn 2013, a call was put out by scientists from the universities of Oxford and Lausanne for people claiming to have samples from these sorts of creatures. A mitochondrial DNA analysis of the 12S RNA gene was undertaken on samples of hair from an unidentified animal from Ladakh in northern India on the west of the Himalayas, and one from Bhutan. These samples were compared with those in GenBank, the international repository of gene sequences, and matched a sample from an ancient polar bear jawbone found in Svalbard, Norway that dates back to between 40,000 and 120,000 years ago. The result suggests that, barring hoaxes of planted samples or contamination, bears in these regions may have been taken to be yeti. Professor of evolutionary genetics at the University of Cambridge, Bill Amos, doubted the samples were of polar bears in the Himalayas, but was \"90% convinced that there is a bear in these regions that has been mistaken for a yeti\". Professor Bryan Sykes, whose team carried out the analysis of the samples at Oxford, has his own theory. He believes that the samples may have come from a hybrid species of bear produced from a mating between a brown bear and a polar bear. A research of 12S rRNA published in 2015 revealed that the hair samples collected are most likely those of brown bears. In 2017, a new analysis compared mtDNA sequences of bears from the region with DNA extracted from hair and other samples claimed to have come from yeti. It included hair thought to be from the same preserved specimen as the anomalous Sykes sample, and showed it to have been a Himalayan brown bear, while other purported yeti samples were actually from the Tibetan blue bear, Asiatic black bear and a domestic dog.\nLinguistics.\nIn 2003, Japanese researcher and mountaineer Dr. Makoto Nebuka published the results of his twelve-year linguistic study, postulating that the word \"Yeti\" is a corruption of the word \"meti\", a regional dialect term for a \"bear\". Nebuka claims that ethnic Tibetans fear and worship the bear as a supernatural being. Nebuka's claims were subject to almost immediate criticism, and he was accused of linguistic carelessness. Dr. Raj Kumar Pandey, who has researched both Yetis and mountain languages, said \"it is not enough to blame tales of the mysterious beast of the Himalayas on words that rhyme but mean different things.\"\nIn 2017, Daniel C. Taylor published a comprehensive analysis of the century-long Yeti literature, giving added evidence to the Asian black bear (\"Ursus thibetanus\") explanation, building on the initial Barun Valley discoveries. His book gave a meticulous explanation for the iconic Yeti footprint photographed by Eric Shipton in 1950, the 1972 Cronin-McNeely print, as well all other unexplained Yeti footprints. To complete this explanation, Taylor also located a never-before published photograph in the archives of the Royal Geographical Society, taken in 1950 by Eric Shipton, that included scratches that are clearly bear nail marks. Alleged Yeti footprints have been generally interpreted as bear-made.\nApe theory.\nSome speculate these reported creatures could be present-day specimens of the extinct giant ape \"Gigantopithecus\". However, the Yeti is generally described as bipedal, and most scientists believe \"Gigantopithecus\" to have been quadrupedal, and so massive that, unless it evolved specifically as a bipedal ape (like the hominids), walking upright would have been even more difficult for the now extinct primate than it is for its extant quadrupedal relative, the orangutan.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65756", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65756", "title": "Abominable Snowman", "text": ""}
{"id": "65758", "revid": "47668471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65758", "title": "Western (genre)", "text": "Multimedia genre\nThe Western is a genre of fiction typically set in the American frontier (commonly referred to as the \"Old West\" or the \"Wild West\") between the California Gold Rush of 1849 and the closing of the frontier in 1890. The genre is commonly associated with folk tales of the Western United States, particularly the Southwestern United States, as well as Northern Mexico and Western Canada.7\nThe frontier is depicted in Western fiction as a sparsely populated, hostile region patrolled by cowboys, outlaws, sheriffs, and numerous other stock gunslinger characters. Western narratives often concern the gradual attempts to tame the crime-ridden American West using wider themes of justice, freedom, rugged individualism, manifest destiny, and the national history and identity of the United States. Native American populations were often portrayed as averse foes or savages.\nOriginating in vaquero heritage and Western fiction, the genre popularized the Western lifestyle, country-Western music, and Western wear globally. Throughout the history of the genre, it has seen popular revivals and been incorporated into various subgenres.\nCharacteristics.\nStories and characters.\nThe classic Western is a morality drama, presenting the conflict between wilderness and civilization. Stories commonly center on the life of a male drifter, cowboy, or gunslinger who rides a horse and is armed with a revolver or rifle. The male characters typically wear broad-brimmed and high-crowned Stetson hats, neckerchief bandannas, vests, and cowboy boots with spurs. While many wear conventional shirts and trousers, alternatives include buckskins and dusters.\nWomen are generally cast in secondary roles as love interests for the male lead; or in supporting roles as saloon girls, prostitutes or as the wives of pioneers and settlers. The wife character often provides a measure of comic relief. Other recurring characters include Native Americans of various tribes described as Indians or Red Indians, African Americans, Chinese Americans, Spaniards, Mexicans, law enforcement officers, bounty hunters, outlaws, bartenders, merchants, gamblers, soldiers (especially mounted cavalry), and settlers (farmers, ranchers, and townsfolk).\nThe ambience is usually punctuated with a Western music score, including American folk music and Spanish/Mexican folk music such as country, Native American music, New Mexico music, and rancheras. \nLocations.\nWesterns often stress the harshness of the wilderness and frequently set the action in an arid, desolate landscape of deserts and \nmountains. Often, the vast landscape plays an important role, presenting a \"mythic vision of the plains and deserts of the American West\". Specific settings include ranches, small frontier towns, saloons, railways, wilderness, and isolated military forts of the Wild West. Many Westerns use a stock plot of depicting a crime, then showing the pursuit of the wrongdoer, ending in revenge and retribution, which is often dispensed through a shootout or quick draw duel.\nThemes.\nThe Western genre sometimes portrays the conquest of the wilderness and the subordination of nature in the name of civilization or the confiscation of the territorial rights of the original, Native American, inhabitants of the frontier. The Western depicts a society organized around codes of honor and personal, direct or private justice\u2014\"frontier justice\"\u2014dispensed by gunfights. These honor codes are often played out through depictions of feuds or individuals seeking personal revenge or retribution against someone who has wronged them (e.g., \"True Grit\" has revenge and retribution as its main themes). This Western depiction of personal justice contrasts sharply with justice systems organized around rationalistic, abstract law that exist in cities, in which social order is maintained predominantly through relatively impersonal institutions such as courtrooms. The popular perception of the Western is a story that centers on the life of a seminomadic wanderer, usually a cowboy or a gunfighter. A showdown or duel at high noon featuring two or more gunfighters is a stereotypical scene in the popular conception of Westerns.\nIn some ways, such protagonists may be considered the literary descendants of the knights-errant, who stood at the center of earlier extensive genres such as the Arthurian romances. Like the cowboy or gunfighter of the Western, the knight-errant of the earlier European tales and poetry was wandering from place to place on his horse, fighting villains of various kinds, and bound to no fixed social structures, but only to his own innate code of honor. Like knights-errant, the heroes of Westerns frequently rescue damsels in distress. Similarly, the wandering protagonists of Westerns share many characteristics with the \"ronin\" in modern Japanese culture.\nThe Western typically takes these elements and uses them to tell simple morality tales, although some notable examples (e.g. the later Westerns of John Ford or Clint Eastwood's \"Unforgiven\", about an old contract killer) are more morally ambiguous. Westerns often stress the harshness and isolation of the wilderness, and frequently set the action in an arid, desolate landscape. Western films generally have specific settings, such as isolated ranches, Native American villages, or small frontier towns with a saloon. Oftentimes, these settings appear deserted and without much structure. Apart from the wilderness, the saloon usually emphasizes that this is the Wild West; it is the place to go for music (raucous piano playing), women (often prostitutes), gambling (draw poker or five-card stud), drinking (beer, whiskey, or tequila if set in Mexico), brawling, and shooting. In some Westerns, where civilization has arrived, the town has a church, a general store, a bank, and a school; in others, where frontier rules still hold sway, it is, as Sergio Leone said, \"where life has no value\".\nPlots.\nAuthor and screenwriter Frank Gruber identified seven basic plots for Westerns:\nGruber noted that good writers use dialogue and plot development to expand these basic plots into believable stories.\nMedia.\nFilm.\nThe American Film Institute defines Western films as those \"set in the American West that [embody] the spirit, the struggle, and the demise of the new frontier\". Originally, these films were called \"Wild West dramas\", a reference to Wild West shows like Buffalo Bill Cody's. The term \"Western\", used to describe a narrative film genre, appears to have originated with a July 1912 article in \"Motion Picture World\" magazine.\nMost of the characteristics of Western films were part of 19th-century popular Western fiction, and were firmly in place before film became a popular art form. Western films commonly feature protagonists such as cowboys, gunslingers, and bounty hunters, who are often depicted as seminomadic wanderers who wear Stetson hats, bandannas, spurs, and buckskins, use revolvers or rifles as everyday tools of survival and as a means to settle disputes using frontier justice. Protagonists ride between dusty towns and cattle ranches on their trusty steeds.\nThe first films that belong to the Western genre are a series of short single reel silents made in 1894 by Edison Studios at their Black Maria studio in West Orange, New Jersey. These featured veterans of \"Buffalo Bill's Wild West\" show exhibiting skills acquired by living in the Old West \u2013 they included Annie Oakley (shooting) and members of the Sioux (dancing).\nThe earliest known Western narrative film is the British short \"Kidnapping by Indians\", made by Mitchell and Kenyon in Blackburn, England, in 1899. \"The Great Train Robbery\" (1903, based on the earlier British film \"A Daring Daylight Burglary\"), Edwin S. Porter's film starring Broncho Billy Anderson, is often erroneously cited as the first Western, though George N. Fenin and William K. Everson point out (as mentioned above) that the \"Edison company had played with Western material for several years prior to \"The Great Train Robbery\"\". Nonetheless, they concur that Porter's film \"set the pattern\u2014of crime, pursuit, and retribution\u2014for the Western film as a genre\". The film's popularity opened the door for Anderson to become the screen's first Western star; he made several hundred Western film shorts. So popular was the genre that he soon faced competition from Tom Mix and William S. Hart.\nWestern films were enormously popular in the silent film era (1894\u20131927). With the advent of sound in 1927\u20131928, the major Hollywood studios rapidly abandoned Westerns, leaving the genre to smaller studios and producers. These smaller organizations churned out countless low-budget features and serials in the 1930s. An exception was The Big Trail, a 1930 American pre-Code Western early widescreen film shot on location across the American West starring 23-year-old John Wayne in his first leading role and directed by Raoul Walsh. The epic film noted for its authenticity was a financial failure due to Depression era theatres not willing to invest in widescreen technology. By the late 1930s, the Western film was widely regarded as a pulp genre in Hollywood, but its popularity was dramatically revived in 1939 by major studio productions such as \"Dodge City\" starring Errol Flynn, \"Jesse James\" with Tyrone Power, \"Union Pacific\" with Joel McCrea, \"Destry Rides Again\" featuring James Stewart and Marlene Dietrich, and especially John Ford's landmark Western adventure \"Stagecoach \" starring John Wayne, which became one of the biggest hits of the year. Released through United Artists, \"Stagecoach\" made John Wayne a mainstream screen star in the wake of a decade of headlining B Westerns. Wayne had been introduced to the screen 10 years earlier as the leading man in director Raoul Walsh's spectacular widescreen \"The Big Trail\", which failed at the box office in spite of being shot on location across the American West, including the Grand Canyon, Yosemite, and the giant redwoods, due in part to exhibitors' inability to switch over to widescreen during the Great Depression. After renewed commercial successes in the late 1930s, the popularity of Westerns continued to rise until its peak in the 1950s, when the number of Western films produced outnumbered all other genres combined.\nThe period from 1940 to 1960 has been called the \"Golden Age of the Western\". It is epitomized by the work of several prominent directors including Robert Aldrich, Budd Boetticher, Delmer Daves, John Ford, and others. Some of the popular films during this era include \"Apache\" (1954), \"Broken Arrow\" (1950), and \"My Darling Clementine\" (1946).\nThe changing popularity of the Western genre has influenced worldwide pop culture over time. During the 1960s and 1970s, Spaghetti Westerns from Italy became popular worldwide; this was due to the success of Sergio Leone's storytelling method. \nAfter having been previously pronounced dead, a resurgence of Westerns occurred during the 1990s with films such as \"Dances with Wolves\" (1990), \"Unforgiven\" (1992), and \"Geronimo\" (1993), as Westerns once again increased in popularity.\nTelevision.\nWhen television became popular in the late 1940s and 1950s, Television Westerns quickly became an audience favorite. Beginning with rebroadcasts of existing films, a number of movie cowboys had their own TV shows. As demand for the Western increased, new stories and stars were introduced. A number of long-running TV Westerns became classics in their own right, such as: \"The Cisco Kid\" (1950\u20131956), \"The Lone Ranger\" (1949\u20131957), \"Death Valley Days\" (1952\u20131970), \"The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp\" (1955\u20131961), \"Cheyenne\" (1955\u20131962), \"Gunsmoke\" (1955\u20131975), \"Maverick\" (1957\u20131962), \"Have Gun \u2013 Will Travel\" (1957\u20131963), \"Wagon Train\" (1957\u20131965), \"The Rifleman\" (1958\u20131963), \"Rawhide\" (1959\u20131966), \"Bonanza\" (1959\u20131973), \"The Virginian\" (1962\u20131971), and \"The Big Valley\" (1965\u20131969). \"The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp\" was the first Western television series written for adults, premiering four days before \"Gunsmoke\" on September 6, 1955.\nThe peak year for television Westerns was 1959, with 26 such shows airing during primetime. At least six of them were connected in some extent to Wyatt Earp: \"The Life and Legend of Wyatt Earp\", \"Bat Masterson\", \"Tombstone Territory\", \"Broken Arrow\", \"Johnny Ringo\", and \"Gunsmoke\". Increasing costs of American television production weeded out most action half-hour series in the early 1960s, and their replacement by hour-long television shows, increasingly in color. Traditional Westerns died out in the late 1960s as a result of network changes in demographic targeting along with pressure from parental television groups. Future entries in the genre would incorporate elements from other genera, such as crime drama and mystery whodunit elements. Western shows from the 1970s included \"Hec Ramsey\", \"Kung Fu\", \"Little House on the Prairie\", \"McCloud\", \"The Life and Times of Grizzly Adams\", and the short-lived but highly acclaimed \"How the West Was Won\" that originated from a miniseries with the same name. In the 1990s and 2000s, hour-long Westerns and slickly packaged made-for-TV movie Westerns were introduced, such as \"Lonesome Dove\" (1989) and \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\". Also, new elements were once again added to the Western formula, such as the space Western, \"Firefly\", created by Joss Whedon in 2002. \"Deadwood\" was a critically acclaimed Western series that aired on HBO from 2004 through 2006. \"Hell on Wheels\", a fictionalized story of the construction of the first transcontinental railroad, aired on AMC for five seasons between 2011 and 2016. \"Longmire\" is a Western series that centered on Walt Longmire, a sheriff in fictional Absaroka County, Wyoming. Originally aired on the A&amp;E network from 2012 to 2014, it was picked up by Netflix in 2015 until the show's conclusion in 2017.\nAMC and Vince Gilligan's critically acclaimed \"Breaking Bad\" is a much more modern take on the Western genre. Set in New Mexico, it follows Walter White (Bryan Cranston), a chemistry teacher diagnosed with Stage III Lung Cancer who cooks and sells crystal meth to provide money for his family after he dies, while slowly growing further and further into the illicit drug market, eventually turning into a ruthless drug dealer and killer. While the show has scenes in a populated suburban neighborhood and nearby Albuquerque, much of the show takes place in the desert, where Walter often takes his RV car out into the open desert to cook his meth, and most action sequences occur in the desert, similar to old-fashioned Western movies. The clash between the Wild West and modern technology like cars and cellphones, while also focusing primarily on being a crime drama makes the show a unique spin on both genres. Walter's reliance on the desert environment makes the Western-feel a pivotal role in the show, and would continue to be used in the spinoff series \"Better Call Saul\".\nThe neo-Western drama \"Yellowstone\" was streamed from 2018\u20132024.\nLiterature.\nWestern fiction is a genre of literature set in the American Old West, most commonly between 1860 and 1900. The first critically recognized Western was \"The Virginian\" (1902) by Owen Wister. Other well-known writers of Western fiction include Zane Grey, from the early 1900s, Ernest Haycox, Luke Short, and Louis L'Amour, from the mid 20th century. Many writers better known in other genres, such as Leigh Brackett, Elmore Leonard, and Larry McMurtry, have also written Western novels. The genre's popularity peaked in the 1960s, due in part to the shuttering of many pulp magazines, the popularity of televised Westerns, and the rise of the spy novel. Readership began to drop off in the mid- to late 1970s and reached a new low in the 2000s. Most bookstores, outside of a few Western states, now only carry a small number of Western novels and short-story collections.\nLiterary forms that share similar themes include stories of the American frontier, the \"gaucho\" literature of Argentina, and tales of the settlement of the Australian Outback.\nVisual arts.\nA number of visual artists focused their work on representations of the American Old West. American West-oriented art is sometimes referred to as \"Western Art\" by Americans. This relatively new category of art includes paintings, sculptures, and sometimes Native American crafts. Initially, subjects included exploration of the Western states and cowboy themes. Frederic Remington and Charles M. Russell are two artists who captured the \"Wild West\" in paintings and sculpture. After the death of Remington Richard Lorenz became the preeminent artist painting in the Western genre.\nSome art museums, such as the Buffalo Bill Center of the West in Wyoming and the Autry National Center in Los Angeles, feature American Western Art.\nAnime and manga.\nWith anime and manga, the genre tends towards the science-fiction Western \u2013 e.g., \"Cowboy Bebop\" (1998 anime), \"Trigun\" (1995\u20132007 manga), and \"Outlaw Star\" (1996\u20131999 manga). Although contemporary Westerns also appear, such as \"Koya no Shonen Isamu\", a 1971 \"shonen \"manga about a boy with a Japanese father and a Native American mother, or \"El Cazador de la Bruja\", a 2007 anime television series set in modern-day Mexico. Part 7 of the manga series \"JoJo's Bizarre Adventure\" is based in the American Western setting. The story follows racers in a transcontinental horse race, the \"Steel Ball Run\". \"Golden Kamuy\" (2014\u20132022) shifts its setting to the fallout of the Russo-Japanese War, specifically focusing on Hokkaido and Sakhalin, and featuring the Ainu people and other local tribes instead of Native Americans, as well other recognizable Western tropes.\nComics.\nWestern comics have included serious entries, (such as the classic comics of the late 1940s and early 1950s (namely \"Kid Colt, Outlaw\", \"Rawhide Kid\", and \"Red Ryder\") or more modern ones as \"Blueberry\"), cartoons, and parodies (such as \"Cocco Bill\" and \"Lucky Luke\"). In the 1990s and 2000s, Western comics leaned towards the fantasy, horror and science fiction genres, usually involving supernatural monsters, or Christian iconography as in \"Preacher\". More traditional Western comics are found throughout this period, though (e.g., \"Jonah Hex\" and \"Loveless\").\nVideo games.\nVideo game Westerns emerged in the 1970s. These games drew on the imagery of a mythic West portrayed in stories, films, television shows, and other assorted Western-themed toys.\nWhen game developers went to the imaginary West to create new experiences, they often drew consciously or unconsciously from Western stories and films. The 1971 text-based, Mainframe computer game \"The Oregon Trail\" was first game to use the West as a setting, where it tasked players to lead a party of settlers moving westward in a covered wagon from Independence, Missouri to Oregon City, Oregon. The game only grew popular in the 1980s and 1990s as an educational game. The first video game Westerns to engage the mass public arrived in arcade games focused on the gunfighter in Westerns based on depictions in television shows, films and Electro-mechanical games such as \"Dale Six Shooter\" (1950), and Sega's \"Gun Fight\" (1970). The first of these games was Midway's \"Gun Fight\", an adaptation of Taito's \"Western Gun\" (1975) which featured two players against each other in a duel set on a sparse desert landscape with a few cacti and a moving covered wagon to hide behind. Atari's \"Outlaw\" (1976) followed which explicitly framed the shootouts between \"good guys\" and \"outlaws\" also borrowing from gunfighter themes and imagery. Early console games such as \"Outlaw\" (1978) for the Atari 2600 and \"Gun Fight\" (1978) for the Bally Astrocade were derivative of Midway's \"Gun Fight\". These early video games featured limited graphical capabilities, which had developers create Westerns to the most easily recognizable and popular tropes of the gunfighter shootouts.\nRockstar Games' Western-themed game \"Red Dead Redemption 2\" (2018) had sold over 64 million copies by 2025, making it one of the best-selling video games of all time.\nRadio dramas.\nWestern radio dramas were very popular from the 1930s to the 1960s. There were five types of Western radio dramas during this period: anthology programs, such as \"Empire Builders\" and \"Frontier Fighters\"; juvenile adventure programs such as \"Red Ryder\" and \"Hopalong Cassidy\"; legend and lore like \"Red Goose Indian Tales\" and \"Cowboy Tom's Round-Up\"; adult Westerns like \"Fort Laramie\" and \"Frontier Gentleman\"; and soap operas such as \"Cactus Kate\".8 Some popular shows include \"The Lone Ranger\" (first broadcast in 1933), \"The Cisco Kid\" (first broadcast in 1942), \"Dr. Sixgun\" (first broadcast in 1954), \"Have Gun\u2013Will Travel\" (first broadcast in 1958), and \"Gunsmoke\" (first broadcast in 1952). Many shows were done live, while others were transcribed.\nWeb series.\nWesterns have been showcased in short-episodic web series. Examples include \"League of STEAM\", \"Red Bird\", and \"Arkansas Traveler\".\nSubgenres.\nWithin the larger scope of the Western genre, there are several recognized subgenres. Some subgenres, such as spaghetti Westerns, maintain standard Western settings and plots, while others take the Western theme and archetypes into different supergenres, such as neo-Westerns or space Westerns. For a time, Westerns made in countries other than the United States were often labeled by foods associated with the culture, such as spaghetti Westerns (Italy), meat pie Westerns (Australia), ramen Westerns (Asia), and masala Westerns (India).\nInfluence on other genres.\nBeing period drama pieces, both the Western and samurai genre influenced each other in style and themes throughout the years. \"The Magnificent Seven\" was a remake of Akira Kurosawa's film \"Seven Samurai\", and \"A Fistful of Dollars\" was a remake of Kurosawa's \"Yojimbo\", which itself was inspired by \"Red Harvest\", an American detective novel by Dashiell Hammett. Kurosawa was influenced by American Westerns and was a fan of the genre, most especially John Ford.\nDespite the Cold War, the Western was a strong influence on Eastern Bloc cinema, which had its own take on the genre, the so-called Red Western or Ostern. Generally, these took two forms: either straight Westerns shot in the Eastern Bloc, or action films involving the Russian Revolution, the Russian Civil War, and the Basmachi rebellion.\nMany elements of space-travel series and films borrow extensively from the conventions of the Western genre. This is particularly the case in the space Western subgenre of science fiction. Peter Hyams's \"Outland\" transferred the plot of \"High Noon\" to Io, moon of Jupiter. More recently, the space opera series \"Firefly\" used an explicitly Western theme for its portrayal of frontier worlds. Anime shows such as \"Cowboy Bebop\", \"Trigun\" and \"Outlaw Star\" have been similar mixes of science-fiction and Western elements. The science fiction Western can be seen as a subgenre of either Westerns or science fiction. Elements of Western films can be found also in some films belonging essentially to other genres. For example, \"Kelly's Heroes\" is a war film, but its action and characters are Western-like.\nThe character played by Humphrey Bogart in noir films such as \"Casablanca\" and \"To Have and Have Not\"\u2014an individual bound only by his own private code of honor\u2014has a lot in common with the classic Western hero. In turn, the Western has also explored noir elements, as with films such as Colorado Territory and \"Pursued.\"\nIn many of Robert A. Heinlein's books, the settlement of other planets is depicted in ways explicitly modeled on American settlement of the West. For example, in his \"Tunnel in the Sky\", settlers set out to the planet New Canaan, via an interstellar teleporter portal across the galaxy, in Conestoga wagons, their captain sporting mustaches and a little goatee and riding a Palomino horse\u2014with Heinlein explaining that the colonists would need to survive on their own for some years, so horses are more practical than machines.\nStephen King's \"The Dark Tower\" is a series of seven books that meshes themes of Westerns, high fantasy, science fiction, and horror. The protagonist Roland Deschain is a gunslinger whose image and personality are largely inspired by the Man with No Name from Sergio Leone's films. In addition, the superhero fantasy genre has been described as having been derived from the cowboy hero, only powered up to omnipotence in a primarily urban setting. \nThe Western genre has been parodied on a number of occasions, famous examples being \"Support Your Local Sheriff!\", \"Cat Ballou\", Mel Brooks's \"Blazing Saddles\", and \"Rustler's Rhapsody\".\nGeorge Lucas's \"Star Wars\" films use many elements of a Western, and Lucas has said he intended for \"Star Wars\" to revitalize cinematic mythology, a part the Western once held. The Jedi, who take their name from Jidaigeki, are modeled after samurai, showing the influence of Kurosawa. The character Han Solo dressed like an archetypal gunslinger, and the Mos Eisley cantina is much like an Old West saloon.\nMeanwhile, films such as \"The Big Lebowski\", which plucked actor Sam Elliott out of the Old West and into a Los Angeles bowling alley, and \"Midnight Cowboy\", about a Southern-boy-turned-gigolo in New York (who disappoints a client when he does not measure up to Gary Cooper), transplanted Western themes into modern settings for both purposes of parody and homage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65759", "revid": "35019008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65759", "title": "Al-Aqsa Mosque", "text": "Mosque compound in Jerusalem\nThe Aqsa Mosque, also known as the Qibli Mosque or Qibli Chapel, is the main congregational mosque or prayer hall in the Al-Aqsa mosque compound in the Old City of Jerusalem. In some sources the building is also named \"al-Masjid al-Aq\u1e63\u0101\", but this name primarily applies to the whole compound in which the building sits, which is itself also known as \"Al-Aqsa Mosque\". The wider compound is known as Al-Aqsa or Al-Aqsa mosque compound, also known as al-\u1e24aram al-Shar\u012bf.\nAccording to Islamic tradition, a small prayer hall (musalla), what would later become the Al-Aqsa Mosque, was built by Umar, the second caliph of the Rashidun Caliphate. In the reign of the caliph Mu'awiyah I of the Umayyad Caliphate (founded in AD 661), a quadrangular mosque for a capacity of 3,000 worshipers is recorded somewhere on the Haram ash-Sharif. \nThe present-day mosque, located on the south wall of the compound, was originally built by the fifth Umayyad caliph Abd al-Malik (r.\u2009685\u00a0\u2013\u00a0705) or his successor al-Walid I (r.\u2009705\u00a0\u2013\u00a0715) (or both) as a congregational mosque on the same axis as the Dome of the Rock, a commemorative Islamic monument. After being destroyed in an earthquake in 746, the mosque was rebuilt in 758 by the Abbasid caliph al-Mansur. It was further expanded upon in 780 by the Abbasid caliph al-Mahdi, after which it consisted of fifteen aisles and a central dome. However, it was again destroyed during the 1033 Jordan Rift Valley earthquake. The mosque was rebuilt by the Fatimid caliph al-Zahir (r. 1021\u20131036), who reduced it to seven aisles but adorned its interior with an elaborate central archway covered in vegetal mosaics; the current structure preserves the 11th-century outline.\nDuring the periodic renovations undertaken, the ruling Islamic dynasties constructed additions to the mosque and its precincts, such as its dome, fa\u00e7ade, minarets, and minbar and interior structure. Upon its capture by the Crusaders in 1099, the mosque was used as a palace; it was also the headquarters of the religious order of the Knights Templar. After the area was conquered by Saladin in 1187, the structure's function as a mosque was restored. More renovations, repairs, and expansion projects were undertaken in later centuries by the Ayyubids, the Mamluks, the Ottomans, the Supreme Muslim Council of British Palestine, and during the Jordanian rule of the West Bank. Since the beginning of the ongoing Israeli occupation of the West Bank, the mosque has remained under the independent administration of the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf.\nDefinition.\nThe \"Al-Aqsa Mosque\" translates into \"the Farthest Mosque\" in English.\nThe Arabic term \"Al-Aqsa Mosque\" is the translation of both \"al-Masjid al-Aq\u1e63\u0101\" and \"J\u0101mi\u02bf al-Aq\u1e63\u0101\", which have distinct meanings in Arabic. The former (\"al-Masjid al-Aq\u1e63\u0101\") refers to the Quran's \"Surah 17\" \u2013 \"the furthest mosque\" \u2013 and thus is used for the whole compound of the Temple Mount, also known as the Haram al-Sharif, while the latter name (\"J\u0101mi\u02bf al-Aq\u1e63\u0101\") is used for the subject of this article \u2013 the silver-domed congregational mosque building. Arabic and Persian writers such as 10th-century geographer al-Muqaddasi, 11th-century scholar Nasir Khusraw, 12th-century geographer al-Idrisi and 15th-century Islamic scholar Mujir al-Din, as well as 19th-century American and British Orientalists Edward Robinson, Guy Le Strange and Edward Henry Palmer explained that the term Masjid al-Aqsa refers to the entire esplanade plaza also known as the Temple Mount or Haram al-Sharif ('Noble Sanctuary') \u2013 i.e. the entire area including the Dome of the Rock, the fountains, the gates, and the four minarets \u2013 because none of these buildings existed at the time the Quran was written. Al-Muqaddasi referred to the southern building (the subject of this article) as \"Al Mughatt\u00e2\" (\"the covered-part\") and Nasir Khusraw referred to it with the Persian word \"Pushish\" (also the \"covered part\", exactly as \"Al Mughatta\") or the \"Maqsurah\" (a part-for-the-whole synecdoche).\nThe building is also referred to as (al-)Qibli Mosque or (al-)Qibli Chapel (\"Mu\u1e63all\u0101 al-Qibl\u012b\"), in reference to its location on the southern end of the compound as a result of the Islamic qibla being moved from Jerusalem to Mecca. \"Qibli\" is the name used in official publications by the governmental organization which administers the site, the Jerusalem Islamic Waqf (part of the Jordanian government), and the Jordanian government more widely. It is also the official name used by the Palestine Liberation Organization. It has been used by numerous international organizations such as the United States State Department the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (whose role is to act as \"the collective voice of the Muslim world\"), and UNESCO, as well as various scholars and media organizations.\nHistory.\nPre-construction.\nThe mosque is located on the southern part of the Temple Mount or Haram al-Sharif, an enclosure expanded by King Herod the Great beginning in 20\u00a0BCE during his reconstruction of the Second Jewish Temple. The mosque resides on an artificial platform that is supported by arches constructed by Herod's engineers to overcome the difficult topographic conditions resulting from the southward expansion of the enclosure into the Tyropoeon and Kidron valleys. During the late Second Temple period, the present site of the mosque was occupied by the Royal Stoa, a basilica running the southern wall of the enclosure. The Royal Stoa was destroyed along with the Temple during the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans in 70\u00a0CE.\nIt was once thought that Emperor Justinian's \"Nea Ekklesia of the Theotokos\", lit.\u2009'the New Church of the God-Bearer' and commonly known as the Nea Church, dedicated to the God-bearing Virgin Mary, consecrated in 543, was situated where al-Aqsa Mosque was later constructed. However, remains identified as those of the Nea Church were uncovered in the south part of the Jewish Quarter in 1973.\nAnalysis of the wooden beams and panels removed from the mosque during renovations in the 1930s shows they are made from Lebanese cedar and cypress. Radiocarbon dating gave a large range of ages, some as old as the 9th century BCE, showing that some of the wood had previously been used in older buildings. However, reexamination of the same beams in the 2010s gave dates in the Byzantine period.\nDuring his excavations in the 1930s, Robert Hamilton uncovered portions of a multicolor mosaic floor with geometric patterns, but did not publish them. The date of the mosaic is disputed: Zachi Dvira considers that they are from the pre-Islamic Byzantine period, while Baruch, Reich and Sandhaus favor a much later Umayyad origin on account of their similarity to a mosaic from an Umayyad palace excavated adjacent to the Temple Mount's southern wall. By comparing the photographs to Hamilton's excavation report, Di Cesare determined that they belong to the second phase of mosque construction in the Umayyad period. Moreover, the mosaic designs were common in Islamic, Jewish and Christian buildings from the 2nd to the 8th century. Di Cesare suggested that Hamilton didn't include the mosaics in his book because they were destroyed to explore beneath them.\nUmayyad period.\nA mostly wooden, rectangular mosque on the Temple Mount site with a capacity for 3,000 worshippers is attested by the Gallic monk Arculf during his pilgrimage to Jerusalem in c.\u2009679\u2013682. Its precise location is not known. The art historian Oleg Grabar deems it likely that it was close to the present mosque, while the historian Yildirim Yavuz asserts it stood at the present site of the Dome of Rock. The architectural historian K. A. C. Creswell notes that Arculf's attestation lends credibility to claims by some Islamic traditions and medieval Christian chronicles, which he otherwise deems legendary or unreliable, that the second Rashidun caliph, Umar (r.\u2009634\u00a0\u2013\u00a0644), ordered the construction of a primitive mosque on the Temple Mount. However, Arculf visited Palestine during the reign of Caliph Mu'awiya I (r.\u2009661\u00a0\u2013\u00a0680), founder of the Syria-based Umayyad Caliphate. Mu'awiya had been governor of Syria, including Palestine, for about twenty years before becoming caliph and his accession ceremony was held in Jerusalem. The 10th-century Jerusalemite scholar Ibn Tahir claims Mu'awiya built a mosque on the Haram.\nThere is disagreement as to whether the present al-Aqsa Mosque was originally built by the Umayyad caliph Abd al-Malik (r.\u2009685\u00a0\u2013\u00a0705) or his successor, his son al-Walid I (r.\u2009705\u00a0\u2013\u00a0715). Several architectural historians hold that Abd al-Malik commissioned the project and that al-Walid finished or expanded it. Abd al-Malik inaugurated great architectural works on the Temple Mount, including construction of the Dome of the Rock in c.\u2009691. A common Islamic tradition holds that Abd al-Malik simultaneously commissioned the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aqsa Mosque. As both were intentionally built on the same axis, Grabar comments that the two structures form \"part of an architecturally thought-out ensemble comprising a congregational and a commemorative building\", the al-Aqsa Mosque and the Dome of the Rock, respectively. Guy le Strange claims that Abd al-Malik used materials from the destroyed Church of Our Lady to build the mosque and points to possible evidence that substructures on the southeast corners of the mosque are remains of the church.\nThe earliest source indicating al-Walid's work on the mosque is the Aphrodito Papryi. These contain the letters between al-Walid's governor of Egypt in December 708\u2013June 711 and a government official in Upper Egypt which discuss the dispatch of Egyptian laborers and craftsmen to help build the al-Aqsa Mosque, referred to as the \"Mosque of Jerusalem\". The referenced workers spent between six months and a year on the construction. Several 10th and 13th-century historians credit al-Walid for founding the mosque, though the historian Amikam Elad doubts their reliability on the matter. In 713\u2013714, a series of earthquakes ravaged Jerusalem, destroying the eastern section of the mosque, which was subsequently rebuilt by al-Walid's order. He had gold from the Dome of the Rock melted to use as money to finance the repairs and renovations. He is credited by the early 15th-century historian al-Qalqashandi for covering the mosque's walls with mosaics. Grabar notes that the Umayyad-era mosque was adorned with mosaics, marble, and \"remarkable crafted and painted woodwork\". The latter are preserved partly in the Palestine Archaeological Museum and partly in the Islamic Museum.\nEstimates of the size of the Umayyad-built mosque by architectural historians range from to . The building was rectangular. In the assessment of Grabar, the layout was a modified version of the traditional hypostyle mosque of the period. Its \"unusual\" characteristic was that its aisles laid perpendicular to the \"qibla\" wall. The number of aisles is not definitively known, though fifteen is cited by a number of historians. The central aisle, double the width of the others, was probably topped by a dome.\nThe last years of Umayyad rule were turbulent for Jerusalem. The last Umayyad caliph, Marwan II (r.\u2009744\u00a0\u2013\u00a0750), punished Jerusalem's inhabitants for supporting a rebellion against him by rival princes, and tore down the city's walls. In 746, the al-Aqsa Mosque was ruined in an earthquake. Four years later, the Umayyads were toppled and replaced by the Iraq-based Abbasid Caliphate.\nAbbasid period.\nThe Abbasids generally exhibited little interest in Jerusalem, though the historian Shelomo Dov Goitein notes they \"paid special tribute\" to the city during the early part of their rule, and Grabar asserts that the early Abbasids' work on the mosque suggests \"a major attempt to assert Abbasid sponsorship of holy places\". Nevertheless, in contrast to the Umayyad period, maintenance of the al-Aqsa Mosque during Abbasid rule often came at the initiative of the local Muslim community, rather than from the caliph. The second Abbasid caliph, al-Mansur (r.\u2009754\u00a0\u2013\u00a0775), visited Jerusalem in 758, on his return from the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca. He found the structures on the Haram in ruins from the 746 earthquake, including the al-Aqsa Mosque. According to the tradition cited by Mujir al-Din, the caliph was beseeched by the city's Muslim residents to fund the buildings' restoration. In response, he had the gold and silver plaques covering the mosque's doors converted into dinars and dirhams to finance the reconstruction.\nA second earthquake damaged most of al-Mansur's repairs, except for the southern portion near the \"mihrab\" (prayer niche indicating the \"qibla\"). In 780, his successor, al-Mahdi, ordered its reconstruction, mandating that his provincial governors and other commanders each contribute the cost of a colonnade. Al-Mahdi's renovation is the first known to have written records describing it. The Jerusalemite geographer al-Muqaddasi, writing in 985, provided the following description:\nThis mosque is even more beautiful than that of Damascus ... the edifice [after al-Mahdi's reconstruction] rose firmer and more substantial than ever it had been in former times. The more ancient portion remained, even like a beauty spot, in the midst of the new ... the Aqsa mosque has twenty-six doors ... The centre of the Main-building is covered by a mighty roof, high pitched and gable-wise, over which rises a magnificent dome.\nAl-Muqaddasi further noted that the mosque consisted of fifteen aisles aligned perpendicularly to the \"qibla\" and possessed an elaborately decorated porch with the names of the Abbasid caliphs inscribed on its gates. According to Hamilton, al-Muqaddasi's description of the Abbasid-era mosque is corroborated by his archaeological findings in 1938\u20131942, which showed the Abbasid construction retained some parts of the older structure and had a broad central aisle topped by a dome. The mosque described by al-Muqaddasi opened to the north, toward the Dome of the Rock, and, unusually according to Grabar, to the east.\nOther than al-Mansur and al-Mahdi, no other Abbasid caliphs visited Jerusalem or commissioned work on the al-Aqsa Mosque, though Caliph al-Ma'mun (r.\u2009813\u00a0\u2013\u00a0833) ordered significant work elsewhere on the Haram. He also contributed a bronze portal to the mosque's interior, and the geographer Nasir Khusraw noted during his 1047 visit that al-Ma'mun's name was inscribed on it. Abd Allah ibn Tahir, the Abbasid governor of the eastern province of Khurasan (r.\u2009828\u00a0\u2013\u00a0844), is credited by al-Muqaddasi for building a colonnade on marble pillars in front of the fifteen doors on the mosque's front (north) side.\nFatimid period.\nIn 970, the Egypt-based Fatimid Caliphate conquered Palestine from the Ikhshidids, nominal allegiants of the Abbasids. Unlike the Abbasids and the Muslim inhabitants of Jerusalem, who were Sunnis, the Fatimids followed Shia Islam in its Isma'ili form. In 1033, another earthquake severely damaged the mosque. The Fatimid caliph al-Zahir (r.\u20091021\u00a0\u2013\u00a01036) had the mosque reconstructed between 1034 and 1036, though work was not completed until 1065, during the reign of Caliph al-Mustansir (r.\u20091036\u00a0\u2013\u00a01094).\nThe new mosque was considerably smaller, reduced from fifteen aisles to seven, probably a reflection of the local population's significant decline by this time. Excluding the two aisles on each side of the central nave, each aisle was made up of eleven arches running perpendicular to the \"qibla\". The central nave was twice the breadth of the other aisles and had a gabled roof with a dome. The mosque likely lacked the side doors of its predecessor.\nA prominent and distinctive feature of the new construction was the rich mosaic program endowed to the drum of the dome, the pendentives leading to the dome, and the arch in front of the \"mihrab\". These three adjoining areas covered by the mosaics are collectively referred to as the \"triumphal arch\" by Grabar or the \"\"maqsura\" by Pruitt. Mosaic designs were rare in Islamic architecture in the post-Umayyad era and al-Zahir's mosaics were a revival of this Umayyad architectural practice, including Abd al-Malik's mosaics in the Dome of the Rock, but on a larger scale. The drum mosaic depicts a luxurious garden inspired by the Umayyad or Classical style. The four pendentives are gold and characterized by indented roundels with alternating gold and silver planes and patterns of peacock's eyes, eight-pointed stars, and palm fronds. On the arch are large depictions of vegetation emanating from small vases.\nAtop the \"mihrab\" arch is a lengthy inscription in gold directly linking the al-Aqsa Mosque with Muhammad's Night Journey (the \"isra\" and \"mi'raj\") from the \"masjid al-haram\" to the \"masjid al-aqsa\"\". It marked the first instance of this Quranic verse being inscribed in Jerusalem, leading Grabar to hypothesize that it was an official move by the Fatimids to magnify the site's sacred character. The inscription credits al-Zahir for renovating the mosque and two otherwise unknown figures, Abu al-Wasim and a \"sharif\", al-Hasan al-Husayni, for supervising the work.\nNasir Khusraw described the mosque during his 1047 visit. He deemed it \"very large\", measuring 420 by 150 cubits on its western side. The distance between each \"sculptured\" marble column, 280 in number, was six cubits. The columns were supported by stone arches and lead joints. He noted the following features:\n ... the mosque is everywhere flagged with coloured marble ... The Maksurah [or space railed off for the officials] is facing the centre of the south wall [of the Mosque and Haram Area], and is of such size as to contain sixteen columns. Above rises a mighty dome that is ornamented with enamel work.\nAl-Zahir's substantial investment in the Haram, including the al-Aqsa Mosque, amid the political instability in the capital Cairo, rebellions by Bedouin tribes, especially the Jarrahids of Palestine, and plagues, indicate the caliph's \"commitment to Jerusalem\", in Pruitt's words. Although the city had experienced decreases in its population in the preceding decades, the Fatimids attempted to build up the magnificence and symbolism of the mosque, and the Haram in general, for their own religious and political reasons. The present-day mosque largely retains al-Zahir's plan.\nFatimid investment in Jerusalem ground to a halt toward the end of the 11th century as their rule became further destabilized. In 1071, a Turkish mercenary, Atsiz, was invited by the city's Fatimid governor to rein in the Bedouin, but he turned on the Fatimids, besieging and capturing Jerusalem that year. A few years later, the inhabitants revolted against him, and were slaughtered by Atsiz, including those who had taken shelter in the al-Aqsa Mosque. He was killed by the Turkish Seljuks in 1078, establishing Seljuk rule over the city, which lasted until the Fatimids regained control in 1098.\nCrusader, Ayyubid and Mamluk periods.\nJerusalem was captured by the Crusaders in 1099, during the First Crusade. They named the mosque \"Templum Solomonis\" (Solomon's Temple), distinguishing it from the Dome of the Rock, which they named \"Templum Domini\" (Temple of God). While the Dome of the Rock was turned into a Christian church under the care of the Augustinians, the al-Aqsa Mosque was used as a royal palace and also as a stable for horses. In 1119, the Crusader king accommodated the headquarters of the Knights Templar next to his palace within the building. During this period, the mosque underwent some structural changes, including the expansion of its northern porch, and the addition of an apse and a dividing wall. A new cloister and church were also built at the site, along with various other structures. The Templars constructed vaulted western and eastern annexes to the building; the western currently serves as the women's mosque and the eastern as the Islamic Museum.\nAfter the Ayyubids under the leadership of Saladin reconquered Jerusalem following the siege of 1187, several repairs and renovations were undertaken at al-Aqsa Mosque. In order to prepare the mosque for Friday prayers, within a week of his capture of Jerusalem Saladin had the toilets and grain stores installed by the Crusaders at al-Aqsa removed, the floors covered with precious carpets, and its interior scented with rosewater and incense. Saladin's predecessor\u2014the Zengid sultan Nur al-Din\u2014had commissioned the construction of a new \"minbar\" or \"pulpit\" made of ivory and wood in 1168\u201369, but it was completed after his death; Nur ad-Din's \"minbar\" was added to the mosque in November 1187 by Saladin. The Ayyubid sultan of Damascus, al-Mu'azzam, built the northern porch of the mosque with three gates in 1218. In 1345, the Mamluk sultan al-Kamil Sha'ban added two naves and two gates to the mosque's eastern side.\nOttoman/modern period.\nAfter the Ottomans assumed power in 1517, they did not undertake any major renovations or repairs to the mosque. They made architectural contributions elsewhere on the Haram, including building the Fountain of Qasim Pasha (1527) and three free-standing domes\u2014the most notable being the Dome of the Prophet built in 1538, and restoring the Pool of Raranj. These constructions were commissioned by the Ottoman governors of Jerusalem, rather than the sultans, whose contributions were limited to additions to the existing minarets.\nIn 1816, the mosque was restored by Sulayman Pasha al-Adil, the Acre-based governor of Sidon, after having been in a dilapidated state.\nThe first renovation in the 20th century occurred in 1922, when the Supreme Muslim Council under Amin al-Husayni (the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem) commissioned Turkish architect Ahmet Kemalettin Bey to restore al-Aqsa Mosque and the monuments in its precincts. The council also commissioned British architects, Egyptian engineering experts and local officials to contribute to and oversee the repairs and additions which were carried out in 1924\u201325 by Kemalettin. The renovations included reinforcing the mosque's ancient Umayyad foundations, rectifying the interior columns, replacing the beams, erecting a scaffolding, conserving the arches and drum of the main dome's interior, rebuilding the southern wall, and replacing timber in the central nave with a slab of concrete. The renovations also revealed Fatimid-era mosaics and inscriptions on the interior arches that had been covered with plasterwork. The arches were decorated with gold and green-tinted gypsum and their timber tie beams were replaced with brass. A quarter of the stained glass windows also were carefully renewed so as to preserve their original Abbasid and Fatimid designs.\nSevere damage was caused by the 1837 and 1927 earthquakes. The damage from the 1927 earthquake and a small tremor in the summer of 1937 caused the roof of the mosque to collapse. Repairs were undertaken in 1938 and 1942. The upper part of the north wall of the mosque was reconstructed and the whole interior of the roofing was refaced. Other repairs included the partial reconstruction of the jambs and lintels of the central doors, the refacing of the front of five bays of the porch, and the demolition of the vaulted buildings that formerly adjoined the east side of the mosque. Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini donated Carrara marble columns in the late 1930s.\nOn 20 July 1951, King Abdullah I was shot three times by a Palestinian gunman as he entered the mosque, killing him. His grandson Prince Hussein, was at his side and was also hit, though a medal he was wearing on his chest deflected the bullet.\nThe site fell under Israeli control on 7 June 1967, during the Six Day War.\nOn 21 August 1969, a fire was started by a visitor from Australia named Denis Michael Rohan, an evangelical Christian who hoped that by burning down al-Aqsa Mosque he would hasten the Second Coming of Jesus. In response to the incident, a summit of Islamic countries was held in Rabat that same year, hosted by Faisal of Saudi Arabia, the then king of Saudi Arabia. The al-Aqsa fire is regarded as one of the catalysts for the formation of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC, now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) in 1972.\nFollowing the fire, the dome was reconstructed in concrete and covered with anodized aluminium, instead of the original ribbed lead enamel work sheeting. In 1983, the aluminium outer covering was replaced with lead to match the original design by az-Zahir.\nIn the 1980s, Ben Shoshan and Yehuda Etzion, both members of the Gush Emunim Underground, plotted to blow up the al-Aqsa mosque and the Dome of the Rock. Etzion believed that blowing up the two mosques would cause a spiritual awakening in Israel, and would solve all the problems of the Jewish people. They also hoped the Third Temple of Jerusalem would be built on the location of the mosque.\nOn 5 November 2014, Israeli police entered Al-Aqsa for the first time since capturing Jerusalem in 1967, said Sheikh Azzam Al-Khatib, director of the Islamic Waqf. Previous media reports of 'storming Al-Aqsa' referred to the Haram al-Sharif compound rather than the Al-Aqsa mosque itself.\nArchitecture.\nThe rectangular al-Aqsa Mosque and its precincts cover , although the mosque itself is about in area and can hold up to 5,000 worshippers. It is long, wide. Unlike the Dome of the Rock, which reflects classical Byzantine architecture, the Aqsa Mosque is characteristic of early Islamic architecture.\nDome.\nNothing remains of the original dome built by Abd al-Malik. The present-day dome mimicks that of az-Zahir, which consisted of wood plated with lead enamelwork, but which was destroyed by fire in 1969. Today it is made of concrete with lead sheeting.\nAl-Aqsa's dome is one of the few domes to be built in front of the \"mihrab\" during the Umayyad and Abbasid periods, the others being the Umayyad Mosque in Damascus (715) and the Great Mosque of Sousse (850). The interior of the dome is painted with 14th-century-era decorations. During the 1969 burning, the paintings were assumed to be irreparably lost, but were completely reconstructed using the \"trateggio\" technique, a method that uses fine vertical lines to distinguish reconstructed areas from original ones.\nFacade and porch.\nThe facade of the mosque was built in 1065 CE on the instructions of the Fatimid caliph al-Mustansir Billah. It was crowned with a balustrade consisting of arcades and small columns. The Crusaders damaged the facade, but it was restored and renovated by the Ayyubids. One addition was the covering of the facade with tiles. The second-hand material of the facade's arches includes sculpted, ornamental material taken from Crusader structures in Jerusalem. The facade consists of fourteen stone arches, most of which are of a Romanesque style. The outer arches added by the Mamluks follow the same general design. The entrance to the mosque is through the facade's central arch.\nThe porch is located at the top of the facade. The central bays of the porch were built by the Knights Templar during the First Crusade, but Saladin's nephew al-Mu'azzam Isa ordered the construction of the porch itself in 1217.\nInterior.\nThe al-Aqsa Mosque has seven aisles of hypostyle naves with several additional small halls to the west and east of the southern section of the building. There are 121 stained glass windows in the mosque from the Abbasid and Fatimid eras. About a fourth of them were restored in 1924. The spandrels of the arch opposite the main entrance include a mosaic decoration and inscription dating back to Fatimid period.\nThe mosque's interior is supported by 45 columns, 33 of which are white marble and 12 of stone. The column rows of the central aisles are heavy and stunted. The remaining four rows are better proportioned. The capitals of the columns are of four different kinds: those in the central aisle are heavy and primitively designed, while those under the dome are of the Corinthian order, and made from Italian white marble. The capitals in the eastern aisle are of a heavy basket-shaped design and those east and west of the dome are also basket-shaped, but smaller and better proportioned. The columns and piers are connected by an architectural rave, which consists of beams of roughly squared timber enclosed in a wooden casing.\nA great portion of the mosque is covered with whitewash, but the drum of the dome and the walls immediately beneath it are decorated with mosaics and marble. Some paintings by an Italian artist were introduced when repairs were undertaken at the mosque after an earthquake ravaged the mosque in 1927. The ceiling of the mosque was painted with funding by King Farouk of Egypt.\nMinbar.\nThe \"minbar\" of the mosque was built by a craftsman named Akhtarini from Aleppo on the orders of the Zengid sultan Nur ad-Din. It was intended to be a gift for the mosque when Nur ad-Din would capture Jerusalem from the Crusaders and took six years to build (1168\u201374). Nur ad-Din died and the Crusaders still controlled Jerusalem, but in 1187, Saladin captured the city and the \"minbar\" was installed. The structure was made of ivory and carefully crafted wood. Arabic calligraphy, geometrical and floral designs were inscribed in the woodwork.\nAfter its destruction by Rohan in 1969, it was replaced by a much simpler \"minbar\". In January 2007, Adnan al-Husayni\u2014head of the Islamic \"waqf\" in charge of al-Aqsa\u2014stated that a new \"minbar\" would be installed; it was installed in February 2007. The design of the new \"minbar\" was drawn by Jamil Badran based on an exact replica of the Saladin Minbar and was finished by Badran within a period of five years. The \"minbar\" itself was built in Jordan over a period of four years and the craftsmen used \"ancient woodworking methods, joining the pieces with pegs instead of nails, but employed computer images to design the pulpit [\"minbar\"].\"\nCurrent situation.\nAdministration.\nThe administrative body responsible for the whole Al-Aqsa Mosque compound is known as \"the Jerusalem Waqf\", an organ of the Jordanian government.\nThe Jerusalem Waqf is responsible for administrative matters in the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound. Religious authority on the site, on the other hand, is the responsibility of the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, appointed by the government of the State of Palestine.\nAfter the 1969 arson attack, the \"waqf\" employed architects, technicians and craftsmen in a committee that carry out regular maintenance operations. The Islamic Movement in Israel and the \"waqf\" have attempted to increase Muslim control of the Temple Mount as a way of countering Israeli policies and the escalating presence of Israeli security forces around the site since the Second Intifada. Some activities included refurbishing abandoned structures and renovating.\nOwnership of the al-Aqsa Mosque is a contentious issue in the Israel-Palestinian conflict. During the negotiations at the 2000 Camp David Summit, Palestinians demanded complete ownership of the mosque and other Islamic holy sites in East Jerusalem.\nAccess.\nMuslims who are residents of Israel or visiting the country and Palestinians living in East Jerusalem are normally allowed to enter the Temple Mount and pray at al-Aqsa Mosque without restrictions. Due to security measures, the Israeli government occasionally prevents certain groups of Muslims from reaching al-Aqsa by blocking the entrances to the complex; the restrictions vary from time to time. At times, restrictions have prevented all men under 45, unmarried men under 50 and women under 45 from entering. Sometimes the restrictions are enforced on the occasion of Friday prayers, other times they are over an extended period of time. Restrictions are most severe for Gazans, followed by restrictions on those from West Bank. The Israeli government states that the restrictions are in place for security reasons.\nUntil 2000, non-Muslim visitors could enter the Aqsa Mosque by getting a ticket from the Waqf. That procedure ended when the Second Intifada began. Over two decades later, the Waqf still hopes negotiations between Israel and Jordan may result in allowing visitors to enter once again.\nExcavations.\nSeveral excavations outside the Temple Mount took place following the 1967 War. In 1970, Israeli authorities commenced intensive excavations outside the walls next to the mosque on the southern and western sides. Palestinians believed that tunnels were being dug under the Aqsa Mosque in order to undermine its foundations, which was denied by Israelis, who claimed that the closest excavation to the mosque was some to its south. The Archaeological Department of the Israeli Ministry of Religious Affairs dug a tunnel near the western portion of the mosque in 1984. According to UNESCO's special envoy to Jerusalem Oleg Grabar, buildings and structures on the Temple Mount are deteriorating due mostly to disputes between the Israeli, Palestinian and Jordanian governments over who is actually responsible for the site.\nIn February 2007, the department started to excavate a site for archaeological remains in a location where the government wanted to rebuild a collapsed pedestrian bridge leading to the Mughrabi Gate, the only entrance for non-Muslims into the Temple Mount complex. This site was away from the mosque. The excavations provoked anger throughout the Islamic world, and Israel was accused of trying to destroy the foundation of the mosque. Ismail Haniyeh\u2014then Prime Minister of the Palestinian National Authority and Hamas leader\u2014called on Palestinians to unite to protest the excavations, while Fatah said they would end their ceasefire with Israel. Israel denied all charges against them, calling them \"ludicrous\".\nConflicts.\nIn April 2021, during both Passover and Ramadan, the site was a focus of tension between Israeli settlers and Palestinians. Jewish settlers broke an agreement between Israel and Jordan and performed prayers and read from the Torah inside the compound, an area normally off limits to non-Muslims. On 14 April, Israeli police entered the area and forcibly cut wires to speakers in minarets around the mosque, silencing the call to prayer, claiming the sound was interfering with an event by the Israeli president at the Western Wall. On 16 April, seventy thousand Muslims prayed in the compound around the mosque, the largest gathering since the beginning of the COVID pandemic; police barred most from entering the structure itself. In May 2021, hundreds of Palestinians were injured following clashes in the compound after reports of Israel's intention to proceed to evict Palestinians from land claimed by Israeli settlers.\nOn 15 April 2022, Israeli forces entered the Temple Mount and used tear gas shells and sound bombs to disperse Palestinians who, they said, were throwing stones at policemen. Some Palestinians barricaded themselves inside the Al-Aqsa mosque, where they were detained by Israeli police. Over 150 people ended up injured and 400 arrested.\nOn April 5, 2023, Israeli police raided the temple, saying \"agitators\" who had thrown stones and fired fireworks at the police, had barricaded themselves and worshippers inside. Following the incident, militants fired rockets from Gaza into southern Israel.\nOn 22 April 2024 Israeli police arrested 13 for incitement to violence after they were caught in the act of smuggling goats onto the site for ritual sacrifice, 3 had been arrested in 2023 for trying to smuggle lambs and goats onto the site.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65761", "revid": "13220696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65761", "title": "List of narrative techniques", "text": "List of methods used to convey information in a narrative\nA narrative technique (also, in fiction, a fictional device) is any of several storytelling methods the creator of a story uses, thus effectively relaying information to the audience or making the story more complete, complex, or engaging. Some scholars also call such a technique a narrative mode, though this term can also more narrowly refer to the particular technique of using a commentary to deliver a story. Other possible synonyms within written narratives are literary technique or literary device, though these can also broadly refer to non-narrative writing strategies, as might be used in academic or essay writing, as well as poetic devices such as assonance, metre, or rhyme scheme. Furthermore, narrative techniques are distinguished from narrative elements, which exist inherently in all works of narrative, rather than being merely optional strategies.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65762", "revid": "3071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65762", "title": "Sportscar Racing", "text": ""}
{"id": "65764", "revid": "3071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65764", "title": "Alfa-Romeo", "text": ""}
{"id": "65765", "revid": "10051437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65765", "title": "Duncan Forbes (linguist)", "text": "Scottish linguist (1798\u20131868)\nDuncan Forbes (28 April 1798 \u2013 17 August 1868) was a Scottish linguist and orientalist.\nBiography.\nForbes was born in Kinnaird, Perthshire and was brought up by his grandfather from the age of three after his parents and younger brother emigrated to the United States. Illiterate until 13, he showed no early signs of linguistic ability but despite this late start, at age 17 he was appointed schoolmaster of the village of Stralock.\nShortly after this he attended Kirkmichael school followed by Perth Grammar School and the University of St. Andrews, gaining a master's degree from the latter.\nIn 1823 he took a post at Calcutta Academy, but because of poor health he was forced to return to Europe in 1826. In 1837 he became professor of Oriental languages at King's College London and stayed at this post until his retirement in 1861. During his time at King's College London he also worked at the British Museum, cataloguing the collection of Persian manuscripts.\nDuring his lifetime he wrote a number of books and it is for these that he is most remembered. He had a hand in translating or editing a number of books in Urdu, Persian and Arabic, including a translation of Mir Amman's Urdu \"Bagh o Bahar, or Tales of the Four Darweshes\", (which is itself a translation from the Persian of Amir Khusro), and of the Persian \"Adventures of Hatim Tai\"."}
{"id": "65766", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65766", "title": "Tardis", "text": ""}
{"id": "65767", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65767", "title": "Mass Media", "text": ""}
{"id": "65771", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65771", "title": "Theatre technique", "text": "Theatre techniques facilitate presentation of performances by actors. Improvisational theatre techniques involve spontaneous enactments of stories on the spot.\nThe playwright's craft.\nTheatre technique is part of the playwright's creative writing of drama, as a kind of mimesis rather than mere illusion or imitation of life, in that the playwright is able to present a reality to the audience that is different, yet recognisable to that which they usually identify with in their everyday lives.\nAnother aspect of this is that of creating the kind of dialogue that makes the playwright's characters come alive and allows for their development in the course of his dramatization.\nThe playwright's art also consists in the ability to convey to the audience the ideas that give essence to the drama within the frame of its structure. \nFinally, the feeling for the natural divisions of a play\u2014including acts, scenes, and changes of place\u2014its entries and exits, and the positioning of the cast are integral to playwriting technique.\nOne of the playwright's functions is that concerned with adaptations of existing traditional drama, such as Charles Marowitz\u2019s collages of \"Hamlet\" and \"Macbeth\" and other re-interpretations of Shakespeare's works, as well as Tom Stoppard\u2019s approaches in \"Rosencrantz &amp; Guildenstern Are Dead\", \"Dogg's Hamlet\", and \"Cahoot's Macbeth\".\nThe director\u2019s craft.\nThe director these days is responsible for the actual production of a play, as opposed to earlier days when it was the producer who, at least in Britain until the 1950s, had this task. In earlier centuries it was the author, an actor-manager, or a leading actor with whom the responsibilities of staging a drama were invested.\nThe director produces the play in the way he envisages how it ought to be seen as he interprets what the playwright intended within the drama; he takes care of the effectiveness of the rehearsals of the actors; and coordinates the work of designers and technicians in the production. \nHowever, the playwright's work is still reflected in the director's prompt copy, a separate form of stage instructions worked out in detail by the director, in which each actor is given details as to what is happening onstage, where exactly he has to be in relation to the back, front, left, or right of the stage, and what he is to do at any one time during the play.\nStage management and stagecraft.\nThe stage manager has to work with the director, and ascertain whether both the director's objectives and the perceptions of the stage designers are compatible and realistic. They are usually the link between the director and the rest of the company, and are responsible for the director's visions being passed down to each actor and member of the running crew. They are also responsible for safety and running an orderly backstage area. They maintain the prompt book and the call board, to which rehearsal schedule notes are affixed for the cast.\nStagecraft overall has to address the various shortcomings of the stage's spatial and physical limitations. For example, the stage alone cannot be expected to provide wide and distant vistas, or vast spaces where armies gather or huge masses of people congregate. Natural phenomena such as thunderstorms or winds, that are often part of the drama, cannot be recreated in their original form. Furthermore, because of the distance involved, it is difficult for actors to portray the feelings, tensions and passions of their characters to the audience with much distinctiveness.\nIt is for these reasons that special technologies and techniques have been developed from classical times onward to supplement and augment the effects that are to be realised. Technical specialists help to implement these techniques by providing expertise in various areas of the production. The stage manager and their team must ultimately draw all these separate techniques together to create an effective and successful stage production.\nTrends and movements.\nThe three unities.\nThe \"Classical unities\" of time, action and place were the main principles of French neo-classical drama during part of the 17th century.&lt;br&gt;They were introduced by Jean Mairet after a misreading of Aristotle's \"Poetics\", and the critic Castelvetro insisted that playwrights and directors adhere to the unities. In the \"Poetics\" Aristotle had merely recommended that action should consist only of the main plot without any subplots, and that the time represented by action should not stretch beyond the length of one day. Time merely entered into his recommendations as a hint as to the limits of the attention span the audience could be expected to have. The unity of place, that of the confinement of the action in a play to one locality only, was not mentioned at all.&lt;br&gt;The effect of the three unities on French drama during this period was that their presentation became very restrictive, and it was only when later dramatists began to avoid mentioning specific times and places that the presentation of plays became more creative again.\nThe Fourth Unity.\nIn 1944, the Bengal playwright Natyaguru Nurul Momen, introduced the fourth unity in his pioneering tragedy play, Nemesis. In this epoch-making one character play (in other words, Monodrama), Nurul Momen immaculately maintained all the three Aristotelian unities of classical Greek theatre --- and added the fourth unity for the first time in world theatre. \nIn the preface of Nemesis the Natyaguru wrote, \" In this play a fourth Unity is added to the traditional three unities of The Greek Tragedies -- Time, Place &amp; Action. A new experimentation has been done by introducing a new unity --- \"Unity of Person\" despite maintaining the format of The three unities. \"\nTheatre presentation.\nSome dramatists and dramaturgists try to achieve particular effects that are not normally sought in a theatre presentation.\nDefamiliarization effect (Verfremdungseffekt).\nBertolt Brecht coined the term \"defamiliarization effect\" (sometimes called \"estrangement effect\" or \"alienation effect\"; German \"Verfremdungseffekt\") for an approach to theater that focused on the central ideas and decisions in the play, and discouraged involving the audience in an illusory world and in the emotions of the characters. Brecht thought the audience required an emotional distance to reflect on what is being presented. See epic theater.\nTeichoscopy.\nOne of the oldest techniques that has been used often, is that of \"teichoscopy\" or the \"viewing from the wall\", in which actors observe events beyond the confines of the stage, such as a distant battle, and discuss it on stage while the battle is taking place, as opposed to the event being reported by messengers at a later time after the event has happened. Shakespeare uses this technique in the final scenes of the play \"The Tragedy of Julius Caesar\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65773", "revid": "15959272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65773", "title": "The Hitch-Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy", "text": ""}
{"id": "65775", "revid": "15959273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65775", "title": "The Hitch Hiker's Guide to the Galaxy", "text": ""}
{"id": "65776", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65776", "title": "Metcalfe's law", "text": "Value of a communication network in terms of its connections\nMetcalfe's law states that the financial value or influence of a telecommunications network is proportional to the square of the number of connected users of the system (n2). The law is named after Robert Metcalfe and was first proposed in 1980, albeit not in terms of users, but rather of \"compatible communicating devices\" (e.g., fax machines, telephones). It later became associated with users on the Ethernet after a September 1993 \"Forbes\" article by George Gilder.\nNetwork effects.\nMetcalfe's law characterizes many of the network effects of communication technologies and networks such as the Internet, social networking and the World Wide Web. Former Chairman of the U.S. Federal Communications Commission Reed Hundt said that this law gives the most understanding to the workings of the present-day Internet. Mathematically, Metcalfe's Law shows that the number of unique possible connections in an formula_1-node connection can be expressed as the triangular number formula_2, which is asymptotically proportional to formula_3.\nThe law has often been illustrated using the example of fax machines: a single fax machine on its own is useless, but the value of every fax machine increases with the total number of fax machines in the network, because the total number of people with whom each user may send and receive documents increases. This is common illustration to explain network effect. Thus, in any social network, the greater the number of users with the service, the more valuable the service becomes to the community.\nHistory and derivation.\nMetcalfe's law was conceived in 1983 in a presentation to the 3Com sales force.\u00a0It stated V would be proportional to the total number of possible connections, or approximately n-squared.\nThe original incarnation was careful to delineate between a linear cost (Cn), non-linear growth(n2) and a non-constant proportionality factor affinity (A). The break-even point point where costs are recouped is given by:formula_4At some size, the right-hand side of the equation V, value, exceeds the cost, and A describes the relationship between size and net value added.\u00a0For large n, net network value is then:formula_5Metcalfe properly dimensioned A as \"value per user\". Affinity is also a function of network size, and Metcalfe correctly asserted that A must decline as n grows large. In a 2006 interview, Metcalfe stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There may be diseconomies of network scale that eventually drive values down with increasing size. So, if \"V\"\u00a0=\u00a0\"An\"2, it could be that \"A\" (for \u201caffinity,\u201d value per connection) is also a function of \"n\" and heads down after some network size, overwhelming\u00a0\"n\"2.\nGrowth of n.\nNetwork size, and hence value, does not grow unbounded but is constrained by practical limitations such as infrastructure, access to technology, and bounded rationality such as Dunbar's number. It is almost always the case that user growth n reaches a saturation point. With technologies, substitutes, competitors and technical obsolescence constrain growth of n. Growth of n is typically assumed to follow a sigmoid function such as a logistic curve or Gompertz curve.\nDensity.\n\"A\" is also governed by the connectivity or \"density\" of the network topology. In an undirected network, every \"edge\" connects two nodes such that there are 2\"m\" nodes per edge. The proportion of nodes in actual contact are given by formula_6.\nThe maximum possible number of edges in a simple network (i.e. one with no multi-edges or self-edges) is formula_7. \nTherefore the density \"\u03c1\" of a network is the faction of those edges that are actually present is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_8\nwhich for large networks is approximated by formula_9.\nLimitations.\nMetcalfe's law assumes that the value of each node formula_1 is of equal benefit. If this is not the case, for example because one fax machine serves 60 workers in a company, the second fax machine serves half of that, the third one third, and so on, then the relative value of an additional connection decreases. Likewise, in social networks, if users that join later use the network less than early adopters, then the benefit of each additional user may lessen, making the overall network less efficient if costs per users are fixed.\nModified models.\nWithin the context of social networks, many, including Metcalfe himself, have proposed modified models in which the value of the network grows as formula_11 rather than formula_3. Reed and Andrew Odlyzko have sought out possible relationships to Metcalfe's Law in terms of describing the relationship of a network and one can read about how those are related. Tongia and Wilson also examine the related question of the costs to those excluded.\nValidation in data.\nFor more than 30 years, there was little concrete evidence in support of the law. Finally, in July 2013, Dutch researchers analyzed European Internet-usage patterns over a long-enough time and found formula_3 proportionality for small values of formula_1 and formula_11 proportionality for large values of formula_1. A few months later, Metcalfe himself provided further proof by using Facebook's data over the past 10 years to show a good fit for Metcalfe's law.\nIn 2015, Zhang, Liu, and Xu parameterized the Metcalfe function in data from Tencent and Facebook. Their work showed that Metcalfe's law held for both, despite differences in audience between the two sites (Facebook serving a worldwide audience and Tencent serving only Chinese users). The functions for the two sites were formula_17 and formula_18 respectively.\nOne of the earliest mentions of the Metcalfe Law in the context of Bitcoin was by a Reddit post by Santostasi in 2014. He compared the observed generalized Metcalfe behavior for Bitcoin to the Zipf's Law and the theoretical Metcalfe result.\nThe Metcalfe's Law is a critical component of Santostasi's Bitcoin Power Law Theory.\nIn a working paper, Peterson linked time-value-of-money concepts to Metcalfe value using Bitcoin and Facebook as numerical examples of the proof, and in 2018 applied Metcalfe's law to Bitcoin, showing that over 70% of variance in Bitcoin value was explained by applying Metcalfe's law to increases in Bitcoin network size.\nIn a 2024 interview, mathematician Terence Tao emphasized the importance of universality and networking within the mathematics community, for which he cited the Metcalfe's Law. Tao believes that a larger audience leads to more connections, which ultimately results in positive developments within the community. For this, he cited Metcalfe's law to support this perspective. Tao further stated, \"my whole career experience has been sort of the more connections equals just better stuff happening\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65777", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65777", "title": "Buzz Aldrin", "text": "American astronaut (born 1930)\nBuzz Aldrin ( ; born Edwin Eugene Aldrin Jr.; January 20, 1930) is an American former astronaut, aeronautical engineer, and fighter pilot. He made three spacewalks as pilot of the 1966 Gemini 12 mission, and was the Lunar Module \"Eagle\" pilot on the 1969 Apollo 11 mission. He was the second person to walk on the Moon after mission commander Neil Armstrong. Following the deaths of Armstrong in 2012 and pilot Michael Collins in 2021, he is the last surviving Apollo 11 crew member. Following Jim Lovell's death in 2025, Aldrin became the oldest living astronaut.\nBorn in Glen Ridge, New Jersey, Aldrin graduated third in the class of 1951 from the United States Military Academy at West Point with a degree in mechanical engineering. He was commissioned into the United States Air Force and served as a jet fighter pilot during the Korean War. He flew 66 combat missions and shot down two MiG-15 fighter jets.\nAfter earning a Doctor of Science degree in astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Aldrin was selected as a member of NASA's Astronaut Group 3, making him the first astronaut with a doctoral degree. His doctoral thesis, \"Line-of-Sight Guidance Techniques for Manned Orbital Rendezvous\", earned him the nickname \"Dr. Rendezvous\" from fellow astronauts. His first space flight was in 1966 on Gemini 12, during which he spent over five hours on extravehicular activity. Three years later, Aldrin set foot on the Moon at 03:15:16 on July 21, 1969 (UTC), nineteen minutes after Armstrong first touched the surface, while command module pilot Michael Collins remained in lunar orbit. A Presbyterian elder, Aldrin became the first person to hold a religious ceremony on the Moon, when he privately took communion, which was the first food and liquid to be consumed there.\nAfter leaving NASA in 1971, Aldrin became Commandant of the U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School. He retired from the Air Force in 1972 after 21 years of service. His autobiographies \"Return to Earth\" (1973) and \"Magnificent Desolation\" (2009) recount his struggles with clinical depression and alcoholism in the years after leaving NASA. Aldrin continues to advocate for space exploration, particularly a human mission to Mars. He developed the Aldrin cycler, a special spacecraft trajectory that makes travel to Mars more efficient in terms of time and propellant. He has been accorded numerous honors, including the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1969.\nEarly life and education.\nAldrin was born Edwin Eugene Aldrin Jr. on January 20, 1930, at Mountainside Hospital in Glen Ridge, New Jersey. His parents, Edwin Eugene Aldrin Sr. and Marion Aldrin (n\u00e9e Moon), lived in neighboring Montclair. His father was an Army aviator during World War I and the assistant commandant of the Army's test pilot school at McCook Field, Ohio, from 1919 to 1922, but left the Army in 1928 and became an executive at Standard Oil. Aldrin had two sisters: Madeleine, who was four years older, and Fay Ann, who was a year and a half older. His nickname, which became his legal first name in 1988, arose as a result of Fay's mispronouncing \"brother\" as \"buzzer\", which was then shortened to \"Buzz\". He was a Boy Scout, achieving the rank of Tenderfoot Scout.\nAldrin did well in school, maintaining an A average. He played football and was the starting center for Montclair High School's undefeated 1946 state champion team. His father wanted him to go to the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland, and enrolled him at nearby Severn School, a preparatory school for Annapolis, and even secured him a Naval Academy appointment from Albert W. Hawkes, one of the United States senators from New Jersey. Aldrin attended Severn School in 1946, but had other ideas about his future career. He suffered from seasickness and considered ships a distraction from flying airplanes. He faced down his father and told him to ask Hawkes to change the nomination to the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York.\nAldrin entered West Point in 1947. He did well academically, finishing first in his class his plebe (first) year. Aldrin was also an excellent athlete, competing in pole vault for the academy track and field team. In 1950, he traveled with a group of West Point cadets to Japan and the Philippines to study the military government policies of Douglas MacArthur. During the trip, the Korean War broke out. On June 5, 1951, Aldrin graduated third in the class of 1951 with a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering.\nMilitary career.\nAmong the top of his class, Aldrin had his choice of assignments. He chose the United States Air Force, which had become a separate service in 1947 while Aldrin was still at West Point and did not yet have its own academy. He was commissioned as a second lieutenant and underwent basic flight training in T-6 Texans at Bartow Air Base in Florida. His classmates included Sam Johnson, who later became a prisoner of war in Vietnam; the two became friends. At one point, Aldrin attempted a double Immelmann turn in a T-28 Trojan and suffered a grayout. He recovered in time to pull out at about , averting what would have been a fatal crash.\nWhen Aldrin was deciding what sort of aircraft he should fly, his father advised him to choose bombers, because command of a bomber crew gave an opportunity to learn and hone leadership skills, which could open up better prospects for career advancement. Aldrin chose instead to fly fighters. He moved to Nellis Air Force Base in Las Vegas, where he learned to fly the F-80 Shooting Star and the F-86 Sabre. Like most jet fighter pilots of the era, he preferred the latter.\nIn December 1952, Aldrin was assigned to the 16th Fighter-Interceptor Squadron, which was part of the 51st Fighter-Interceptor Wing. At the time it was based at Suwon Air Base, about south of Seoul, and was engaged in combat operations as part of the Korean War. During an acclimatization flight, his main fuel system froze at 100percent power, which would have soon used up all his fuel. He was able to override the setting manually, but this required holding a button down, which in turn made it impossible to also use his radio. He barely managed to make it back under enforced radio silence. He flew 66 combat missions in F-86 Sabres in Korea and shot down two MiG-15 aircraft.\nThe first MiG-15 he shot down was on May 14, 1953. Aldrin was flying about south of the Yalu River, when he saw two MiG-15 fighters below him. Aldrin opened fire on one of the MiGs, whose pilot may never have seen him coming. The June 8, 1953, issue of \"Life\" magazine featured gun camera footage taken by Aldrin of the pilot ejecting from his damaged aircraft.\nAldrin's second aerial victory came on June 4, 1953, when he accompanied aircraft from the 39th Fighter-Interceptor Squadron in an attack on an airbase in North Korea. Their newer aircraft were faster than his and he had trouble keeping up. He then spotted a MiG approaching from above. This time, Aldrin and his opponent spotted each other at about the same time. They went through a series of scissor maneuvers, attempting to get behind the other. Aldrin was first to do so, but his gun sight jammed. He then manually sighted his gun and fired. He then had to pull out, as the two aircraft had gotten too low for the dogfight to continue. Aldrin saw the MiG's canopy open and the pilot eject, although Aldrin was uncertain whether there was sufficient time for a parachute to open. For his service in Korea, he was awarded two Distinguished Flying Crosses and three Air Medals.\nAldrin's year-long tour ended in December 1953, by which time the fighting in Korea had ended. Aldrin was assigned as an aerial gunnery instructor at Nellis. In December 1954 he became an aide-de-camp to Brigadier General Don Z. Zimmerman, the Dean of Faculty at the nascent United States Air Force Academy, which opened in 1955. That same year, he graduated from the Squadron Officer School at Maxwell Air Force Base in Alabama. From 1956 to 1959 he flew F-100 Super Sabres equipped with nuclear weapons as a flight commander in the 22nd Fighter Squadron, 36th Fighter Wing, stationed at Bitburg Air Base in West Germany. Among his squadron colleagues was Ed White, who had been a year behind him at West Point. After White left West Germany to study for a master's degree at the University of Michigan in aeronautical engineering, he wrote to Aldrin encouraging him to do the same.\nThrough the Air Force Institute of Technology, Aldrin enrolled as a graduate student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1959 intending to earn a master's degree. Richard Battin was the professor for his astrodynamics class. Two other USAF officers who later became astronauts, David Scott and Edgar Mitchell, took the course around this time. Another USAF officer, Charles Duke, also took the course and wrote his 1964 master's degree at MIT under the supervision of Laurence R. Young.\nAldrin enjoyed the classwork and soon decided to pursue a doctorate instead. In January 1963, he earned a Sc.D. degree in astronautics. His doctoral thesis was \"Line-of-Sight Guidance Techniques for Manned Orbital Rendezvous\", the dedication of which read: \"In the hopes that this work may in some way contribute to their exploration of space, this is dedicated to the crew members of this country's present and future manned space programs. If only I could join them in their exciting endeavors!\" Aldrin chose his doctoral thesis in the hope that it would help him be selected as an astronaut, although it meant foregoing test pilot training, which was a prerequisite at the time.\nAfter completing his doctorate Aldrin was assigned to the Gemini Target Office of the Air Force Space Systems Division in Los Angeles, working with the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation on enhancing the maneuver capabilities of the Agena target vehicle which was to be used by NASA's Project Gemini. He was then posted to the Space Systems Division's field office at NASA's Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston, where he was involved in integrating Department of Defense experiments into Project Gemini flights.\nNASA career.\nAldrin initially applied to join the astronaut corps when NASA's Astronaut Group 2 was selected in 1962. His application was rejected on the grounds that he was not a test pilot. Aldrin was aware of the requirement and asked for a waiver but the request was turned down. On May 15, 1963, NASA announced another round of selections, this time with the requirement that applicants had either test pilot experience or 1,000 hours of flying time in jet aircraft. Aldrin had over 2,500 hours of flying time, of which 2,200 was in jets. His selection as one of fourteen members of NASA's Astronaut Group 3 was announced on October 18, 1963. This made him the first astronaut with a doctoral degree which, combined with his expertise in orbital mechanics, earned him the nickname \"Dr. Rendezvous\" from his fellow astronauts. Although Aldrin was both the most educated and the rendezvous expert in the astronaut corps, he was aware that the nickname was not always intended as a compliment. Upon completion of initial training, each new astronaut was assigned a field of expertise; in Aldrin's case, it was mission planning, trajectory analysis, and flight plans.\nGemini program.\nJim Lovell and Aldrin were selected as the backup crew of Gemini 10, commander and pilot respectively. Backup crews usually became the prime crew of the third following mission, but the last scheduled mission in the program was Gemini 12. The February 28, 1966, deaths of the Gemini 9 prime crew, Elliot See and Charles Bassett, in an air crash, led to Lovell and Aldrin being moved up one mission to backup for Gemini 9, which put them in position as prime crew for Gemini 12. They were designated its prime crew on June 17, 1966, with Gordon Cooper and Gene Cernan as their backups.\nGemini 12.\nInitially, Gemini 12's mission objectives were uncertain. As the last scheduled mission, it was primarily intended to complete tasks that had not been successfully or fully carried out on earlier missions. While NASA had successfully performed rendezvous during Project Gemini, the gravity-gradient stabilization test on Gemini 11 was unsuccessful. NASA also had concerns about extravehicular activity (EVA). Cernan on Gemini9 and Richard Gordon on Gemini11 had suffered from fatigue carrying out tasks during EVA, but Michael Collins had a successful EVA on Gemini 10, which suggested that the order in which he had performed his tasks was an important factor.\nIt therefore fell to Aldrin to complete Gemini's EVA goals. NASA formed a committee to give him a better chance of success. It dropped the test of the Air Force's astronaut maneuvering unit (AMU) that had given Gordon trouble on Gemini11 so Aldrin could focus on EVA. NASA revamped the training program, opting for underwater training over parabolic flight. Aircraft flying a parabolic trajectory had given astronauts an experience of weightlessness in training, but there was a delay between each parabola which gave astronauts several minutes of rest. It also encouraged performing tasks quickly, whereas in space they had to be done slowly and deliberately. Training in a viscous, buoyant fluid gave a better simulation. NASA also placed additional handholds on the capsule, which were increased from nine on Gemini9 to 44 on Gemini12, and created workstations where he could anchor his feet.\nGemini 12's main objectives were to rendezvous with a target vehicle, and fly the spacecraft and target vehicle together using gravity-gradient stabilization, perform docked maneuvers using the Agena propulsion system to change orbit, conduct a tethered stationkeeping exercise and three EVAs, and demonstrate an automatic reentry. Gemini12 also carried 14 scientific, medical, and technological experiments. It was not a trailblazing mission; rendezvous from above had already been successfully performed by Gemini 9, and the tethered vehicle exercise by Gemini 11. Even gravity-gradient stabilization had been attempted by Gemini 11, albeit unsuccessfully.\nGemini12 was launched from Launch Complex 19 at Cape Canaveral on 20:46 UTC on November 11, 1966. The Gemini Agena Target Vehicle had been launched about an hour and a half before. The mission's first major objective was to rendezvous with this target vehicle. As the target and Gemini12 capsule drew closer together, radar contact between the two deteriorated until it became unusable, forcing the crew to rendezvous manually. Aldrin used a sextant and rendezvous charts he helped create to give Lovell the right information to put the spacecraft in position to dock with the target vehicle. Gemini12 achieved the fourth docking with an Agena target vehicle.\nThe next task was to practice undocking and docking again. On undocking, one of the three latches caught, and Lovell had to use the Gemini's thrusters to free the spacecraft. Aldrin then docked again successfully a few minutes later. The flight plan then called for the Agena main engine to be fired to take the docked spacecraft into a higher orbit, but eight minutes after the Agena had been launched, it had suffered a loss of chamber pressure. The Mission and Flight Directors therefore decided not to risk the main engine. This would be the only mission objective that was not achieved. Instead, the Agena's secondary propulsion system was used to allow the spacecraft to view the solar eclipse of November 12, 1966, over South America, which Lovell and Aldrin photographed through the spacecraft windows.\nAldrin performed three EVAs. The first was a standup EVA on November 12, in which the spacecraft door was opened and he stood up, but did not leave the spacecraft. The standup EVA mimicked some of the actions he would do during his free-flight EVA, so he could compare the effort expended between the two. It set an EVA record of two hours and twenty minutes. The next day Aldrin performed his free-flight EVA. He climbed across the newly installed hand-holds to the Agena and installed the cable needed for the gravity-gradient stabilization experiment. Aldrin performed numerous tasks, including installing electrical connectors and testing tools that would be needed for Project Apollo. A dozen two-minute rest periods prevented him from becoming fatigued. His second EVA concluded after two hours and six minutes. A third, 55-minute standup EVA was conducted on November 14, during which Aldrin took photographs, conducted experiments, and discarded some unneeded items.\nOn November 15, the crew initiated the automatic reentry system and splashed down in the Atlantic Ocean, where they were picked up by a helicopter, which took them to the awaiting aircraft carrier . After the mission, his wife realized he had fallen into a depression, something she had not seen before.\nApollo program.\nLovell and Aldrin were assigned to an Apollo crew with Neil Armstrong as commander, Lovell as command module pilot (CMP), and Aldrin as lunar module pilot (LMP). Their assignment as the backup crew of Apollo 9 was announced on November 20, 1967. Due to design and manufacturing delays in the lunar module (LM), Apollo 8 and Apollo9 swapped prime and backup crews, and Armstrong's crew became the backup for Apollo 8. Under the normal crew rotation scheme, Armstrong was expected to command Apollo 11.\nMichael Collins, the CMP on the Apollo8 prime crew, required surgery to remove a bone spur on his spine. Lovell took his place on the Apollo8 crew. When Collins recovered he joined Armstrong's crew as CMP. In the meantime, Fred Haise filled in as backup LMP, and Aldrin as backup CMP for Apollo 8. While the CMP usually occupied the center couch on launch, Aldrin occupied it rather than Collins, as he had already been trained to operate its console on liftoff before Collins arrived.\nApollo11 was the second American space mission made up entirely of astronauts who had already flown in space, the first being Apollo 10. The next would not be flown until STS-26 in 1988. Deke Slayton, who was responsible for astronaut flight assignments, gave Armstrong the option to replace Aldrin with Lovell, since some thought Aldrin was difficult to work with. Armstrong thought it over for a day before declining. He had no issues working with Aldrin, and thought Lovell deserved his own command.\nEarly versions of the EVA checklist had the lunar module pilot as the first to step onto the lunar surface. However, when Aldrin learned that this might be amended, he lobbied within NASA for the original procedure to be followed. Multiple factors contributed to the final decision, including the physical positioning of the astronauts within the compact lunar lander, which made it easier for Armstrong to be the first to exit the spacecraft. Furthermore, there was little support for Aldrin's views among senior astronauts who would command later Apollo missions. Collins has commented that he thought Aldrin \"resents not being first on the Moon more than he appreciates being second\".\nAldrin and Armstrong did not have time to perform much geological training. The first lunar landing focused more on landing on the Moon and making it safely back to Earth than the scientific aspects of the mission. The duo was briefed by NASA and USGS geologists. They made one geological field trip to West Texas. The press followed them, and a helicopter made it hard for Aldrin and Armstrong to hear their instructor.\nApollo 11.\nOn the morning of July 16, 1969, an estimated one million spectators watched the launch of Apollo11 from the highways and beaches in the vicinity of Cape Canaveral, Florida. The launch was televised live in 33 countries, with an estimated 25 million viewers in the United States alone. Millions more listened to radio broadcasts. Propelled by a Saturn V rocket, Apollo11 lifted off from Launch Complex 39 at the Kennedy Space Center on July 16, 1969, at 13:32:00 UTC (9:32:00 EDT), and entered Earth orbit twelve minutes later. After one and a half orbits, the S-IVB third-stage engine pushed the spacecraft onto its trajectory toward the Moon. About thirty minutes later, the transposition, docking, and extraction maneuver was performed: this involved separating the command module \"Columbia\" from the spent S-IVB stage; turning around; and docking with, and extracting, the lunar module \"Eagle\". The combined spacecraft then headed for the Moon, while the S-IVB stage continued on a trajectory past the Moon.\nOn July 19 at 17:21:50 UTC, Apollo11 passed behind the Moon and fired its service propulsion engine to enter lunar orbit. In the thirty orbits that followed, the crew saw passing views of their landing site in the southern Sea of Tranquillity about southwest of the crater Sabine D. At 12:52:00 UTC on July 20, Aldrin and Armstrong entered \"Eagle\", and began the final preparations for lunar descent. At 17:44:00 \"Eagle\" separated from the \"Columbia\". Collins, alone aboard \"Columbia\", inspected \"Eagle\" as it pirouetted before him to ensure the craft was not damaged and that the landing gear had correctly deployed.\nThroughout the descent, Aldrin called out navigation data to Armstrong, who was busy piloting the \"Eagle\". Five minutes into the descent burn, and above the surface of the Moon, the LM guidance computer (LGC) distracted the crew with the first of several unexpected alarms that indicated that it could not complete all its tasks in real time and had to postpone some of them. Due to the 1202/1201 program alarms caused by spurious rendezvous radar inputs to the LGC, Armstrong manually landed the \"Eagle\" instead of using the computer's autopilot. The \"Eagle\" landed at 20:17:40 UTC on Sunday July 20 with about 25 seconds of fuel left.\nAs a Presbyterian elder, Aldrin was the first and only person to hold a religious ceremony on the Moon. He radioed Earth: \"I'd like to take this opportunity to ask every person listening in, whoever and wherever they may be, to pause for a moment and contemplate the events of the past few hours, and to give thanks in his or her own way.\" Using a kit given to him by his pastor, he took communion and read Jesus's words from the New Testament's John 15:5, as Aldrin records it: \"I am the vine. You are the branches. Whoever remains in me, and I in him, will bear much fruit; for you can do nothing without me.\" But he kept this ceremony secret because of a lawsuit over the reading of Genesis on Apollo 8. In 1970 he commented: \"It was interesting to think that the very first liquid ever poured on the Moon, and the first food eaten there, were communion elements.\"\nOn reflection in his 2009 book, Aldrin said, \"Perhaps, if I had it to do over again, I would not choose to celebrate communion. Although it was a deeply meaningful experience for me, it was a Christian sacrament, and we had come to the moon in the name of all mankind \u2013 be they Christians, Jews, Muslims, animists, agnostics, or atheists. But at the time I could think of no better way to acknowledge the enormity of the Apollo11 experience than by giving thanks to God.\" Aldrin shortly hit upon a more universally human reference on the voyage back to Earth by publicly broadcasting his reading of the Old Testament's Psalm 8:3\u20134, as Aldrin records: \"When I considered the heavens, the work of Thy fingers, the moon and the stars which Thou hast ordained, what is man that Thou art mindful of him.\" Photos of these liturgical documents reveal the conflict's development as Aldrin expresses faith.\nPreparations for the EVA began at 23:43. Once Armstrong and Aldrin were ready to go outside, \"Eagle\" was depressurized, and the hatch was opened at 02:39:33 on July 21. Aldrin set foot on the Moon at 03:15:16 on July 21, 1969 (UTC), nineteen minutes after Armstrong first touched the surface. Armstrong and Aldrin became the first and second people, respectively, to walk on the Moon. Aldrin's first words after he set foot on the Moon were \"Beautiful view\", to which Armstrong asked \"Isn't that something? Magnificent sight out here.\" Aldrin answered, \"Magnificent desolation.\" Aldrin and Armstrong had trouble erecting the Lunar Flag Assembly, but with some effort secured it into the surface. Aldrin saluted the flag while Armstrong photographed the scene. Aldrin positioned himself in front of the video camera and began experimenting with different locomotion methods to move about the lunar surface to aid future moonwalkers. During these experiments, President Nixon called the duo to congratulate them on the successful landing. Nixon closed with, \"Thank you very much, and all of us look forward to seeing you on the \"Hornet\" on Thursday.\" Aldrin replied, \"I look forward to that very much, sir.\"\nAfter the call, Aldrin began photographing and inspecting the spacecraft to document and verify its condition before their flight. Aldrin and Armstrong then set up a seismometer, to detect moonquakes, and a laser beam reflector. While Armstrong inspected a crater, Aldrin began the difficult task of hammering a metal tube into the surface to obtain a core sample. Most of the iconic photographs of an astronaut on the Moon taken by the Apollo11 astronauts are of Aldrin; Armstrong appears in just two color photographs. \"As the sequence of lunar operations evolved,\" Aldrin explained, \"Neil had the camera most of the time, and the majority of the pictures taken on the Moon that include an astronaut are of me. It wasn't until we were back on Earth and in the Lunar Receiving Laboratory looking over the pictures that we realized there were few pictures of Neil. My fault perhaps, but we had never simulated this during our training.\"\nAldrin reentered \"Eagle\" first but, as he tells it, before ascending the module's ladder he became the first person to urinate on the Moon. With some difficulty they lifted film and two sample boxes containing of lunar surface material to the hatch using a flat cable pulley device. Armstrong reminded Aldrin of a bag of memorial items in his sleeve pocket, and Aldrin tossed the bag down. It contained a mission patch for the Apollo 1 flight that Ed White never flew due to his death in a cabin fire during the launch rehearsal; medallions commemorating Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space (who had died the previous year in a test flight accident), and Vladimir Komarov, the first man to die in a space flight, and a silicon disk etched with goodwill messages from 73 nations. After transferring to LM life support, the explorers lightened the ascent stage for the return to lunar orbit by tossing out their backpacks, lunar overshoes, an empty Hasselblad camera, and other equipment. The hatch was closed again at 05:01, and they repressurized the lunar module and settled down to sleep.\nAt 17:54 UTC, they lifted off in \"Eagle\"'s ascent stage to rejoin Collins aboard \"Columbia\" in lunar orbit. After rendezvous with \"Columbia\", the ascent stage was jettisoned into lunar orbit, and \"Columbia\" made its way back to Earth. It splashed down in the Pacific east of Wake Island at 16:50 UTC (05:50 local time) on July 24. The total mission duration was 195 hours, 18 minutes, 35 seconds.\nBringing back pathogens from the lunar surface was considered a possibility, albeit remote, so divers passed biological isolation garments (BIGs) to the astronauts, and assisted them into the life raft. The astronauts were winched on board the recovery helicopter, and flown to the aircraft carrier , where they spent the first part of the Earth-based portion of 21 days of quarantine. On August 13, the three astronauts rode in ticker-tape parades in their honor in New York and Chicago, attended by an estimated six million people. An official state dinner that evening in Los Angeles celebrated the flight. President Richard Nixon honored each of them with the highest American civilian award, the Presidential Medal of Freedom (with distinction).\nOn September 16, 1969, the astronauts addressed a joint session of Congress where they thanked the representatives for their past support and implored them to continue funding the space effort. The astronauts embarked on a 38-day world tour on September 29 that brought the astronauts to 22 foreign countries and included visits with leaders of multiple countries. The last leg of the tour included Australia, South Korea, and Japan; the crew returned to the US on November 5, 1969.\nAfter Apollo 11, Aldrin was kept busy giving speeches and making public appearances. In October 1970, he joined Soviet cosmonauts Andriyan Nikolayev and Vitaly Sevastyanov on their tour of the NASA space centers. He was also involved in the design of the Space Shuttle. With the Apollo program coming to an end, Aldrin, now a colonel, saw few prospects at NASA, and decided to return to the Air Force on July 1, 1971. During his NASA career, he had spent 289 hours and 53 minutes in space, of which 7 hours and 52 minutes was in EVA.\nPost-NASA activities.\nAerospace Research Pilot School.\nAldrin hoped to become Commandant of Cadets at the United States Air Force Academy, but the job went to his West Point classmate Hoyt S. Vandenberg Jr. Aldrin was made Commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School at Edwards Air Force Base, California. Aldrin had neither managerial nor test pilot experience, but a third of the training curriculum was devoted to astronaut training and students flew a modified F-104 Starfighter to the edge of space. Fellow Group 3 astronaut and moonwalker Alan Bean considered him well qualified for the job.\nAldrin did not get along well with his superior, Brigadier General Robert M. White, who had earned his USAF astronaut wings flying the X-15. Aldrin's celebrity status led people to defer to him more than the higher-ranking general. There were two crashes at Edwards, of an A-7 Corsair II and a T-33. No people died, but the aircraft were destroyed and the accidents were attributed to insufficient supervision, which placed the blame on Aldrin. What he had hoped would be an enjoyable job became a highly stressful one.\nAldrin went to see the base surgeon. In addition to signs of depression, he experienced neck and shoulder pains, and hoped that the latter might explain the former. He was hospitalized for depression at Wilford Hall Medical Center for four weeks. His mother had committed suicide in May 1968, and he was plagued with guilt that his fame after Gemini12 had contributed. His mother's father had also committed suicide, and he believed he inherited depression from them. At the time there was great stigma related to mental illness and he was aware that it could not only be career-ending, but could result in his being ostracized socially.\nIn February 1972, General George S. Brown paid a visit to Edwards and informed Aldrin that the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School was being renamed the USAF Test Pilot School and the astronaut training was being dropped. With the Apollo program winding down, and Air Force budgets being cut, the Air Force's interest in space diminished. Aldrin elected to retire as a colonel on March 1, 1972, after 21 years of service. His father and General Jimmy Doolittle, a close friend of his father, attended the formal retirement ceremony.\nPost retirement.\nAldrin's father died on December 28, 1974, from complications following a heart attack. Aldrin's autobiographies, \"Return to Earth\" (1973) and \"Magnificent Desolation\" (2009), recounted his struggles with clinical depression and alcoholism in the years after leaving NASA. Encouraged by a therapist to take a regular job, Aldrin worked selling used cars, at which he had no talent. Periods of hospitalization and sobriety alternated with bouts of heavy drinking. Eventually he was arrested for disorderly conduct. Finally, in October 1978, he quit drinking for good. Aldrin attempted to help others with drinking problems, including actor William Holden. Holden's girlfriend Stefanie Powers had portrayed Marianne, a woman with whom Aldrin had an affair, in the 1976 TV movie version of \"Return to Earth\". Aldrin was saddened by Holden's alcohol-related death in 1981.\nBart Sibrel incident.\nOn September 9, 2002, Aldrin was lured to a Beverly Hills hotel on the pretext of being interviewed for a Japanese children's television show on the subject of space. When he arrived, Moon landing conspiracy theorist Bart Sibrel accosted him with a film crew and demanded he swear on a Bible that the Moon landings were not faked. After a brief confrontation, during which Sibrel followed Aldrin despite being told to leave him alone, and called him \"a coward, a liar, and a thief\" the 72-year-old Aldrin punched Sibrel in the jaw, an act caught on camera by Sibrel's film crew. Aldrin said he had acted to defend himself and his stepdaughter. Witnesses said Sibrel had aggressively poked Aldrin with a Bible. Additional mitigating factors were that Sibrel sustained no visible injury and did not seek medical attention, and that Aldrin had no criminal record. The police declined to press charges against Aldrin, and the deputy district attorney of the Beverly Hills office declared that Sibrel had provoked him.\nDetached adapter panel sighting.\nIn 2005, while being interviewed for a Science Channel documentary titled \"First on the Moon: The Untold Story\", Aldrin told an interviewer the Apollo 11 crew had seen an unidentified flying object (UFO). The documentary makers omitted the crew's conclusion that they probably saw one of the four detached spacecraft adapter panels from the upper stage of the SaturnV rocket. The panels had been jettisoned before the separation maneuver so they closely followed the spacecraft until the first mid-course correction. When Aldrin appeared on \"The Howard Stern Show\" on August 15, 2007, Stern asked him about the supposed UFO sighting. Aldrin confirmed that there was no such sighting of anything deemed extraterrestrial and said they were, and are, \"99.9 percent\" sure the object was the detached panel. According to Aldrin his words had been taken out of context. He made a request to the Science Channel to make a correction, but was refused.\nPolar expedition.\nIn December 2016, Aldrin was part of a tourist group visiting the Amundsen\u2013Scott South Pole Station in Antarctica when he fell ill and was evacuated, first to McMurdo Station and from there to Christchurch, New Zealand. At 86 years of age, Aldrin's visit made him the oldest person to reach the South Pole. He had traveled to the North Pole in 1998.\nMission to Mars advocacy.\nAfter leaving NASA, Aldrin continued to advocate for space exploration. In 1985 he joined the University of North Dakota (UND)'s College of Aerospace Sciences at the invitation of John D. Odegard, the dean of the college. Aldrin helped to develop UND's Space Studies program and brought David Webb from NASA to serve as the department's first chair. To further promote space exploration, and to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the first lunar landing, Aldrin teamed up with Snoop Dogg, Quincy Jones, Talib Kweli, and Soulja Boy to create the rap single and video \"Rocket Experience\", proceeds from which were donated to Aldrin's non-profit foundation, ShareSpace. He is also a member of the Mars Society's Steering committee.\nIn 1985, Aldrin proposed a special spacecraft trajectory now known as the Aldrin cycler. Cycler trajectories offer reduced cost of repeated travel to Mars by using less propellant. The Aldrin cycler provided a five and a half month journey from the Earth to Mars, with a return trip to Earth of the same duration on a twin cycler orbit. Aldrin continues to research this concept with engineers from Purdue University. In 1996 Aldrin founded Starcraft Boosters, Inc. (SBI) to design reusable rocket launchers.\nIn December 2003, Aldrin published an opinion piece in \"The New York Times\" criticizing NASA's objectives. In it, he voiced concern about NASA's development of a spacecraft \"limited to transporting four astronauts at a time with little or no cargo carrying capability\" and declared the goal of sending astronauts back to the Moon was \"more like reaching for past glory than striving for new triumphs\".\nIn a June 2013 opinion piece in \"The New York Times\", Aldrin supported a human mission to Mars and which viewed the Moon \"not as a destination but more a point of departure, one that places humankind on a trajectory to homestead Mars and become a two-planet species.\" In August 2015, Aldrin, in association with the Florida Institute of Technology, presented a master plan to NASA for consideration where astronauts, with a tour of duty of ten years, establish a colony on Mars before the year 2040.\nAwards and honors.\nAldrin was awarded the Air Force Distinguished Service Medal (DSM) in 1969 for his role as Lunar Module pilot on Apollo 11. He was awarded an oak leaf cluster in 1972 in lieu of a second DSM for his role in both the Korean War and in the space program, and the Legion of Merit for his role in the Gemini and Apollo programs. During a 1966 ceremony marking the end of the Gemini program, Aldrin was awarded the NASA Exceptional Service Medal by President Johnson at LBJ Ranch. He was awarded the NASA Distinguished Service Medal in 1970 for the Apollo11 mission. Aldrin was one of ten Gemini astronauts inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1982. He was also inducted into the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame in 1993, the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 2000, and the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2008.\nThe \"Toy Story\" character Buzz Lightyear was named in honor of Buzz Aldrin.\nIn 1999, while celebrating the 30th anniversary of the lunar landing, Vice President Al Gore, who was also the vice-chancellor of the Smithsonian Institution's Board of Regents, presented the Apollo11 crew with the Smithsonian Institution's Langley Gold Medal for aviation. After the ceremony, the crew went to the White House and presented President Bill Clinton with an encased Moon rock. The Apollo11 crew was awarded the New Frontier Congressional Gold Medal in the Capitol Rotunda in 2011. During the ceremony, NASA administrator Charles Bolden said, \"Those of us who have had the privilege to fly in space followed the trail they forged.\"\nThe Apollo11 crew were awarded the Collier Trophy in 1969. The National Aeronautic Association president awarded a duplicate trophy to Collins and Aldrin at a ceremony. The crew was awarded the 1969 General Thomas D. White USAF Space Trophy. The National Space Club named the crew the winners of the 1970 Dr. Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, awarded annually for the greatest achievement in spaceflight. They received the international Harmon Trophy for aviators in 1970, conferred to them by Vice President Spiro Agnew in 1971. Agnew also presented them the Hubbard Medal of the National Geographic Society in 1970. He told them, \"You've won a place alongside Christopher Columbus in American history\". In 1970, the Apollo11 team were co-winners of the Iven C. Kincheloe award from the Society of Experimental Test Pilots along with Darryl Greenamyer who broke the world speed record for piston engine airplanes. For contributions to the television industry, they were honored with round plaques on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.\nIn 2001, President George W. Bush appointed Aldrin to the Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry. Aldrin received the 2003 Humanitarian Award from Variety, the Children's Charity, which, according to the organization, \"is given to an individual who has shown unusual understanding, empathy, and devotion to mankind.\" In 2006, the Space Foundation awarded him its highest honor, the General James E. Hill Lifetime Space Achievement Award.\nAldrin received honorary degrees from six colleges and universities, and was named as the Chancellor of the International Space University in 2015. He was a member of the National Space Society's Board of Governors, and has served as the organization's chairman. In 2016, his hometown middle school in Montclair, New Jersey, was renamed Buzz Aldrin Middle School. The Aldrin crater on the Moon near the Apollo11 landing site and Asteroid 6470 Aldrin are named in his honor.\nIn 2019, Aldrin was awarded the Starmus Festival's Stephen Hawking Medal for Science Communication for Lifetime Achievement. On his 93rd birthday he was honored by Living Legends of Aviation. On May 5, 2023, he received an honorary promotion to the rank of brigadier general in the United States Air Force, as well as being made an honorary Space Force guardian.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nAldrin has been married four times. His first marriage was on December 29, 1954, to Joan Archer (1930\u20132015), a Rutgers University and Columbia University alumna with a master's degree. They filed for divorce in 1974. They had three children, James, Janice and Andrew. As of 2025,[ [update]] he had one grandson, Jeffrey Schuss, born to his daughter Janice, and three great-grandsons and one great-granddaughter. \nHis second wife was Beverly Van Zile, whom he married on December 31, 1975, and divorced in 1978. \nHis third wife was Lois Driggs Cannon (1929\u20132018), whom he married on February 14, 1988. Their divorce was finalized in December 2012. The settlement included 50percent of their $475,000 bank account and $9,500 a month plus 30percent of his annual income, estimated at more than $600,000. \nOn January 20, 2023, his 93rd birthday, Aldrin married for the fourth time, to his 63-year-old companion, Anca Faur. She died peacefully on October 28, 2025, at the age of 66. Aldrin described Faur as \"the love of [his] life.\"\nLegal disputes.\nIn 2018, Aldrin was involved in a legal dispute with his children Andrew and Janice and former business manager Christina Korp over their claims that he was mentally impaired through dementia and Alzheimer's disease. His children alleged that he made new friends who were alienating him from the family and encouraging him to spend his savings at a high rate. They sought to be named legal guardians so they could control his finances. In June, Aldrin filed a lawsuit against Andrew, Janice, Korp, and businesses and foundations run by the family. Aldrin alleged that Janice was not acting in his financial interest and that Korp was exploiting the elderly. He sought to remove Andrew's control of Aldrin's social media accounts, finances, and businesses. The situation ended when his children withdrew their petition and he dropped the lawsuit in March 2019, several months before the 50th anniversary of the Apollo11 mission.\nPolitics.\nAldrin is an active supporter of the Republican Party, headlining fundraisers for its members of Congress and endorsing its candidates. He appeared at a rally for George W. Bush in 2004 and campaigned for Paul Rancatore in Florida in 2008, Mead Treadwell in Alaska in 2014 and Dan Crenshaw in Texas in 2018. He appeared at the 2019 State of the Union Address as a guest of President Donald Trump.\nIn the 2024 presidential election, he endorsed Trump. Aldrin cited Trump's promotion of space exploration policy as a reason for his endorsement, claiming that interest in it has waned in previous years. He was quoted with saying \"For me, for the future of our Nation, to meet enormous challenges, and for the proven policy accomplishments above, I believe the nation is best served by voting for Donald J. Trump\". He added, \"I wholeheartedly endorse him for President of the United States. Godspeed President Trump, and God Bless the United States of America\".\nFreemasonry.\nBuzz Aldrin is the first Freemason to set foot on the Moon. Aldrin was initiated into Freemasonry at Oak Park Lodge No. 864 in Alabama and raised at Lawrence N. Greenleaf Lodge, No. 169 in Colorado.\nBy the time Aldrin stepped onto the lunar surface, he was a member of two Masonic lodges: Montclair Lodge No. 144 in New Jersey and Clear Lake Lodge No. 1417 in Seabrook, Texas, where he was invited to serve on the High Council and was ordained in the 33rd degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite.\nAldrin is also a member of York Rite and Arabia Shrine Temple of Houston.\nOther.\nIn 2007, Aldrin confirmed to \"Time\" magazine that he had recently had a face-lift, joking that the g-forces he was exposed to in space \"caused a sagging jowl that needed some attention\".\nFollowing the 2012 death of his Apollo11 colleague Neil Armstrong, Aldrin said he was\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAldrin has primarily resided in the Los Angeles area, including Beverly Hills and Laguna Beach since 1985. In 2014, he sold his Westwood condominium; this was after his third divorce in 2012. He also lives in Satellite Beach, Florida.\nAldrin has been a teetotaler since 1978.\nIn the media.\nPortrayed by others.\nAldrin has been portrayed by:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65780", "revid": "50574392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65780", "title": "Vladimir Komarov", "text": "Soviet test pilot (1927\u20131967)\nVladimir Mikhaylovich Komarov (, ; 16 March 1927 \u2013 24 April 1967) was a Soviet test pilot, aerospace engineer, and cosmonaut. In October 1964, he commanded Voskhod 1, the first spaceflight to carry more than one crew member. He became the first Soviet cosmonaut to fly in space twice when he was selected as the solo pilot of Soyuz 1, its first crewed test flight. A parachute failure caused his Soyuz capsule to crash into the ground after re-entry on 24 April 1967, making him the first human to die in a space flight.\nHe was declared medically unfit for training or spaceflight twice while in the program but continued playing an active role. During his time at the cosmonaut training center, he contributed to space vehicle design, cosmonaut training, evaluation and public relations.\nEarly life.\nKomarov was born on 16 March 1927 in Moscow and grew up with his half-sister Matilda (born in 1915). His father was a labourer who worked at various low-paid jobs to support the family. In 1935, Komarov began his formal education in the local elementary school. Here he showed a natural aptitude for mathematics. In 1941, Komarov left school because of World War\u00a0II and the German invasion of the Soviet Union, and he became a laborer on a collective farm. He showed an interest in aeronautics from an early age, and he collected magazines and pictures about aviation, in addition to making model aircraft and his own propeller. At the age of fifteen in 1942, Komarov entered the \"1st Moscow Special Air Force School\" to pursue his dream of becoming an aviator. Shortly thereafter, his family learned that Komarov's father had been killed in an \"unknown war action\". Of necessity because of the German invasion, the flight school was soon moved to the Tyumen region in Siberia for the duration of the war. Students there learned a wide variety of subjects besides aviation\u2014including zoology and foreign languages. In 1945, Komarov graduated from flight school with honors. World War II hostilities ended before Komarov was called on to enter combat.\nIn 1946, Komarov completed his first year of training at the Chkalov Higher Air Force School in Borisoglebsk in Voronezh Oblast. He then completed his training at the A.K. Serov Military Aviation College in Bataisk. Komarov's mother died in 1948, seven months before his graduation in 1949, at which he received his pilot's wings and commission as a lieutenant in the Soviet Air Force.\nCareer in the Soviet Air Force.\nIn December 1949, Komarov served as the pilot of a fighter plane with the 383rd Regiment of the 42nd North Caucasian Fighter Air Division that was based in Grozny.\nKomarov married Valentina Yakovlevna Kiselyova in October 1950. He was promoted to senior lieutenant in 1952, and he was later assigned as the chief pilot of the 486th Fighter Aviation Regiment of the 279th Fighter Air Division in the Prikarpate Region. Komarov continued to fly in that position until 1954, and then he enrolled in an engineering course at the Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy. In 1959, Komarov was promoted to the rank of senior engineer-lieutenant. Later that year he achieved his goal of becoming a test pilot at the Central Scientific Research Institute at Chkalovsky.\nCosmonaut selection.\nAir Force Group One.\nIn September 1959, Komarov was promoted to engineer-captain and invited to participate in the selection process for cosmonaut candidate along with approximately 3,000 other pilots. He was one of twenty candidates selected for \"Air Force Group One\"; he and the others reported to the newly formed TsPK (Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center) just outside Moscow for assignment on 13 March 1960.\nAlthough eminently qualified, Komarov was not chosen in the top six candidates, because he did not meet the age, height, and weight restrictions specified by the Chief Designer of Russia's space program, Sergei Korolev. \"If the criteria had been different,\" the cosmonaut trainer Mark Gallai noted in an interview, \"Certainly Komarov, who was very intelligent, would have been in the group. He had Air Force Academy flight experience. He greatly influenced the design of the 'Vostok' and [the] 'Voskhod'.\" At age 32, Komarov was the second oldest of the pilots chosen; Korolev had specified a maximum age of 27. Only two members of the first group, Pavel Belyayev (Voskhod 2) and Komarov himself, were also graduates of the Soviet Air Force Academy. In addition, only Komarov had experience as a flight test engineer on new aircraft.\nTraining.\nShortly after beginning his training Komarov was hospitalised for a minor operation in May 1960, which left him medically unfit for physical training for approximately six months. At the time, the selection criteria placed a heavy emphasis on the physical condition of cosmonauts and any imperfection led to instant disqualification. Since Komarov already held engineering qualifications, he was allowed to remain in the program after assuring the administration he would be able to catch up. He continued with the required academic studies while recovering. He returned to training in October, because his recovery was more rapid than medical staff had expected. During that time he assisted his younger peers with their academic studies; earning him the casual nickname of \"The Professor,\" which he shared with Belyayev, who was two years his senior. In 1961 the first space flights began. By 1962, Komarov was the third-highest-paid cosmonaut, due to his qualifications, rank and experience. He earned 528 rubles a month, with only cosmonauts 1 and 2, Yuri Gagarin and Gherman Titov, being more highly paid.\nWhen Georgi Shonin demonstrated an unacceptable level of g-force susceptibility in the centrifuge, Komarov replaced him in May 1962 for planned dual Vostok missions.\nKomarov was selected as back up for Pavel Popovich (Vostok 4), but subsequent routine ECG testing of Komarov revealed a heart irregularity and he was pulled from the program and replaced by Boris Volynov. The same heart irregularity grounded American astronaut Deke Slayton. After Komarov persistently lobbied medical and military personnel for re-admittance to the program, they allowed him to return to training.\nIn 1963, cosmonaut training was conducted in six Groups, with Komarov being selected in Group 2 with Valery Bykovsky and Volynov. This group was to train for missions of up to five days in duration scheduled for the latter part of 1963. In May 1963, Alekseyev proposed to General Kamanin that Komarov be named backup for Vostok 5 rather than Khrunov because his suit was ready. Komarov was later named in a further group for planned missions in 1964 with Belyaev, Shonin, Khrunov, Zaikin, Gorbatko, Volynov, and Leonov. The training groups were formed for later Vostok missions (Vostok 7\u201313), but no actual crews were assigned and the missions did not occur under the auspices of the original Vostok program. In December 1963, Komarov was shortlisted for flight by Kamanin with Volynov and Leonov, having completed two years of training.\nIn April 1964 Komarov was declared space-flight ready with Bykovsky, Popovich, Titov, Volynov, Leonov, Khrunov, Belyayev, and Lev Demin. From this group the commander of the planned Voskhod mission scheduled for late 1964 would be chosen. In May the group was reduced to Volynov, Komarov, Leonov and Khrunov.\nDuring training, Komarov lived at the TsPK with his wife Valentina and their two children Yevgeny and Irina. There, he enjoyed hunting, cross country skiing, ice hockey, and other social activities with his fellow trainees in their leisure time. Komarov was well liked by his peers, who referred to him as \"Volodya\" (a diminutive of his first name). Pavel Popovich noted that Komarov was respected for his humility and experience: \"he was already an engineer when he joined us, but he never looked down on the others. He was warm-hearted, purposeful and industrious. Volodya's prestige was so high that people came to him to discuss all questions: personal as well as questions of our work.\"\nFellow cosmonaut Alexei Leonov described him as \"very serious. He was a first-class test pilot.\"\nSpaceflights.\nVoskhod 1.\nBy July 1964, only seven cosmonauts remained eligible for the Voskhod crew after some were disqualified on medical grounds. On 6 July, Komarov was named as the commander of the back-up crew for Voskhod 1. After several months of much heated debate between Kamanin and Korolev over the selection of the crew, Komarov was named as prime crew commander by the State Commission on 4 October 1964, just eight days before its scheduled launch. Kamanin played tennis with the Voskhod crew that evening and noted that Komarov played poorly in comparison to his crew: Boris Yegorov and Konstantin Feoktistov.\nOn 9 October, Komarov and the crew inspected the Voskhod with Korolev and other members of the administration. Later that day they were interviewed by the state press and played tennis for the benefit of photographers.\nOn the morning of 11 October, Komarov was given various communist relics to take with him into space the following day. In the afternoon the crew again inspected the capsule and were given their final instructions by Korolev. Komarov was the only member of the crew to have undertaken extensive training and was the only member with any flight experience; the two other crewmen being civilians. His call sign was \"Ruby\" (Russian: \u0420\u0443\u0431\u0438\u043d).\nDuring the mission Komarov performed various tasks with the other crew members, including medical and navigational tests and observing the Aurora Borealis. Komarov alone carried out tests with ion thrusters that had been attached to the Voskhod. He also made a number of radio transmissions, including a greeting to the Tokyo Olympics, which had opened on 10 October. The mission lasted just over twenty-four hours. After the crew landed safely they were flown back to the launch site at Tyuratam (also known as Baikonur to disguise its true location). Kamanin noted in his diary that while his crew were in good spirits, Komarov was fatigued. On 19 October, Komarov and his crew made reports in Red Square and attended an audience at the Kremlin. After the success of this short but scientifically important mission he was promoted to colonel. The success of the mission earned Komarov the awards of the \"Order of Lenin\" and \"Hero of the Soviet Union\".\nIn December 1964, the RVSN (Strategic Rocket Forces) requested that Komarov be transferred from the VVS (Soviet Air Force) to the RVSN, in a move possibly motivated by the poor record of the RVSN in producing successful rockets compared to the VVS. The request was opposed by Kamanin.\nIn 1965, Komarov worked with Gagarin in supervising preparations for the flight of Voskhod 2, which carried out the first attempt of an extravehicular activity in outer space. These preparations included fitting of space suits on the cosmonauts and briefings for the spaceflight. In April of that year, Komarov toured Leningrad with Kamanin, Gagarin, Titov, Belyayev, and Leonov. Komarov also visited Petropavlovsk Fortress with Valentin Glushko where Glushko had conducted early rocket experiments in the early 1930s. In September that year, Komarov toured West Germany.\nSoyuz 1.\nKomarov was assigned to the Soviet Soyuz program along with Gagarin and Leonov. In July 1966, Komarov was reprimanded by Kamanin for his unauthorised disclosure, while in Japan, that \"the Soviet Union will, at the scheduled time, fly an automated spacecraft around the Moon and return it to (the) Earth, to be followed by a dog flight, then a manned circumlunar flight.\" The following month Komarov clashed with other engineers over ongoing design problems in which zero-G tests showed that the Soyuz module hatch was too small to allow the safe exit of a fully suited cosmonaut. Meanwhile, Komarov and his fellow cosmonauts had their groups and assignments constantly revised, and they became increasingly anxious about the lack of response to their concerns about the design and manufacture of the spacecraft, which Gagarin had raised in a letter on their behalf to Leonid Brezhnev.\nKomarov was selected to command the Soyuz 1, in 1967, with Gagarin as his backup cosmonaut. During the preparations for the spaceflight, both cosmonauts were working twelve- to fourteen-hour days. On orbital insertion, the solar panels of the Soyuz module failed to fully deploy thereby preventing the craft from being fully powered and obscuring some of the navigation equipment. Komarov reported: \"Conditions are poor. The cabin parameters are normal, but the left solar panel didn't deploy. The electrical bus is at only 13 to 14 amperes. The HF (high frequency) communications are not working. I cannot orient the spacecraft to the sun. I tried orienting the spacecraft manually using the DO-1 orientation engines, but the pressure remaining on the DO-1 has gone down to 180.\" Komarov tried unsuccessfully to orient the Soyuz module for five hours. The craft was transmitting unreliable status information, and lost communications on orbits 13 through 15 due to the failure of the high frequency transmitter that should have maintained radio contact while the craft was out of range of the ultra high frequency (UHF) ground receivers.\nAs a result of the problems with the craft, the Soviets did not launch the second Soyuz module, from which cosmonauts were to perform an extra-vehicular activity (EVA) to the Soyuz 1, and cut the mission short.\nKomarov was ordered to re-orient the craft using the ion flow sensors on orbits 15 to 17. The ion sensors failed. Komarov did not have enough time to attempt a manual re-entry until orbit 19. Manual orientation relied on using the equipped Vzor periscope device, but to do this, Komarov had to be able to see the Sun. To reach the designated landing site at Orsk, the retro-fire had to take place on the night side of the Earth. Komarov oriented the spacecraft manually on the dayside then used the gyro-platform as a reference so that he could orient the craft for a night side retro-fire. He successfully re-entered the Earth's atmosphere on his 19th orbit, but the module's drogue and main braking parachute failed to deploy correctly. The module crashed into the ground at terminal velocity, killing Komarov, at 6.24 a.m.\nDuring interviews, former KGB agent Venyamin Russayev made claims contested by some space historians. Among them, Russayev claimed that prior to the launch, Soyuz 1 engineers reported 203 design faults to party leaders, but their concerns \"were overruled by political pressures for a series of space feats to mark the anniversary of Lenin's birthday\". He also claimed that Yuri Gagarin was the backup pilot for Soyuz 1, and was aware of the design problems and the pressures from the Politburo to proceed with the flight, and that Gagarin attempted to \"bump\" Komarov from the mission, knowing that the Soviet leadership would not risk a national hero on the flight. At the same time, he claimed that Komarov refused to pass on the mission, even though he believed it to be doomed, explained that he could not risk Gagarin's life.\nResponse to Komarov's death.\nIn his diary, Kamanin recorded that the Soyuz 1 capsule crashed into the ground at and that the remains of Komarov's body were an irregular lump in diameter and long. Three hours after the capsule's crash, Keldysh, Tyulin, Rudenko, and other State Commission members visited the site. At 21:45 Kamanin accompanied Komarov's remains to the Orsk aerodrome, where they were loaded on an Il-18. Ten minutes before departure an An-12 landed with Kuznetsov and several cosmonauts. Kamanin's aircraft arrived in Moscow in the early hours of the next morning. The aircraft had to divert to Sheremetyevo since all the other airfields around Moscow were closed to takeoffs or landings due to weather. Konstantin Vershinin's orders were that Komarov's remains were to be photographed, then immediately cremated so that a state burial in the Kremlin wall could take place. The remains underwent a quick autopsy that morning, then were cremated.\nOn 25 April, a response to Komarov's death by his fellow cosmonauts was published in \"Pravda\":\n\"For the forerunners it is always more difficult. They tread the unknown paths and these paths are not straight, they have sharp turns, surprises and dangers. But anyone who takes the pathway into orbit never wants to leave it. And no matter what difficulties or obstacles there are, they are never strong enough to deflect such a man from his chosen path. While his heart beats in his chest, a cosmonaut will always continue to challenge the universe. Vladimir Komarov was one of the first on this treacherous path.\"\nWhen interviewed on 17 May by the newspaper \"Komsomolskaya Pravda\", Gagarin alluded to the failure of the administration to listen to the concerns about the Soyuz module that the cosmonaut corps had identified, and maintained that Komarov's death should teach the establishment to be more rigorous in its testing and evaluation of \"all the mechanisms of the spaceship, even more attentive to all stages of checking and testing, even more vigilant in our encounter with the unknown. He has shown us how dangerous the pathway to space is. His flight and his death will teach us courage.\" In May 1967, Gagarin and Leonov criticised program head Vasily Mishin's \"poor knowledge of the Soyuz spacecraft and the details of its operation, his lack of cooperation in working with the cosmonauts in flight and training activities,\" and asked Kamanin to cite him in the official crash report.\nHonours and awards.\nPosthumous honours.\nOn 26 April 1967, Komarov was given a state funeral in Moscow, and his ashes were interred in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis at Red Square. The American astronauts requested the Soviet government to allow a representative to attend, but were turned down.\nKomarov was posthumously awarded his second Order of Lenin and also Hero of the Soviet Union.\nOn 25 April 1968, a memorial service was held for Komarov at the crash site near Orsk . Kamanin noted in his diary that over 10,000 people were present at this service, \"some driving hundreds of kilometres for the event.\"\nKomarov is commemorated with other prominent figures from the early Russian space program with a bust on \"Cosmonauts Alley\" in Moscow, and he is also honored with a monument at the crash site near Orsk.\nBefore leaving the Moon on Apollo 11's Lunar Module, Neil Armstrong's final task was to place a small package of memorial items to honor Soviet cosmonauts Komarov, Yuri Gagarin, and the Apollo 1 astronauts Gus Grissom, Ed White, and Roger Chaffee. Komarov's name also appears on a commemorative plaque left at Hadley Rille on the Moon by David Scott, commander of Apollo 15, in memory of 14 deceased NASA astronauts and USSR cosmonauts, along with a small sculpture entitled \"Fallen Astronaut\", on 1 August 1971. This plaque and the sculpture represent those astronauts and cosmonauts who died in the quest to reach outer space and the Moon.\nThe asteroid 1836 Komarov, discovered in 1971, was named in the honor of Komarov, as was a crater on the Moon.\nThis asteroid and the cosmonaut inspired the composer Brett Dean to write a piece of symphonic music commissioned by conductor Simon Rattle in 2006. The composition is named \"Komarov's Fall\", and it can be found on the EMI Classics Album of Simon Rattle's \"The Planets\".\nThe F\u00e9d\u00e9ration A\u00e9ronautique Internationale's \"V.M. Komarov Diploma\" is named in Komarov's honor.\nThere was formerly a Soviet satellite-tracking ship named for Komarov, the \"Kosmonaut Vladimir Komarov\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65781", "revid": "44044758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65781", "title": "Ellesmere Island", "text": "Island of the Arctic Archipelago in Nunavut, Canada\nEllesmere Island (; ) is Canada's northernmost and third largest island, and the tenth largest in the world. It comprises an area of , slightly smaller than Great Britain, and the total length of the island is .\nLying within the Arctic Archipelago, Ellesmere Island is considered part of the Queen Elizabeth Islands. Cape Columbia at is the most northerly point of land in Canada and one of the most northern points of land on the planet (the most northerly point of land on Earth is the nearby Kaffeklubben Island of Greenland).\nThe Arctic Cordillera mountain system covers much of Ellesmere Island, making it the most mountainous in the Arctic Archipelago. More than one-fifth of the island is protected as Quttinirpaaq National Park.\nIn 2021, the population of Ellesmere Island was recorded at 144. There are three settlements: Alert, Eureka, and Grise Fiord. Ellesmere Island is administered as part of the Qikiqtaaluk Region in the Canadian territory of Nunavut.\nGeology.\nEllesmere Island has three major geological regions. The Grant Land Highlands is a large belt of fold mountains which dominate the northern face of the island. It is part of the Franklinian mobile belt, a zone of Cretaceous volcanic and intrusive rock. South of this is the Greely-Hazen Plateau, a large tableland composed of sedimentary and volcanic rocks. Covering most of the island, the coastal sedimentary plateau is a succession of highly eroded sedimentary peaks which are part of the Franklinian Shield with an extension of the Canadian Shield (Precambrian igneous and metamorphic rocks) in the island's southeastern corner. In addition, there are syntectonic clastics which comprise the Ellesmere Island Volcanics of the Sverdrup Basin Magmatic Province.12\u201314\nA period of uplift and faulting prior to the Pleistocene epoch (&gt;2.6 Ma) established the overall features of the island. Additional uplift occurred due to isostatic rebound following the last glacial period. Land features were then shaped by erosion from glacial ice, meltwaters, and scouring by sea ice.12\nHistory.\nIt is believed that each of the pre-contact peoples who migrated through the High Arctic approached Ellesmere Island from the south and west. They were able to travel along Ellesmere's coasts or overland to Nares Strait, and some of them crossed the strait to populate Greenland.9\u201311\nThe archaeological record of past Arctic cultures is quite complete, as artefacts deteriorate very slowly. Items exposed to the cold, dry winds become naturally freeze-dried while items that become buried are preserved in the permafrost. Artefacts are in a similar condition to when they were left or lost, and settlements abandoned thousands of years ago can be seen much as they were the day their inhabitants left. From these sites and artefacts, archaeologists have been able to construct a history of these cultures.8 However, the research is incomplete and only a small proportion of the details of excavations have been published.72\nSmall tool cultures.\nThe Arctic small tool tradition peoples (a.k.a. Paleo-Eskimos) in the High Arctic had small populations organized as hunting bands, spread from Axel Heiberg Island to the northern extremity of Greenland,49 where the Independence\u00a0I culture was active from 2700\u00a0BCE.28 On Ellesmere, they chiefly hunted in the Eureka Upland and the Hazen Plateau. Six different small-tool cultures have been identified at the Smith Sound region: Independence I, Independence I / Saqqaq, Pre-Dorset, Saqqaq, early Dorset, and late Dorset.49 They chiefly hunted muskoxen: more than three-quarters of their known archeological sites on Ellesmere are located in the island's interior and their winter dwellings were skin tents, suggesting a need for mobility to follow the herds. There is evidence at Lake Hazen of a trade network c.\u20091500\u20131000\u00a0BCE, including soapstone lamps from Greenland and incised lance heads from cultures to the south.50\nThule culture.\nThe Thule moved into the High Arctic at the time of a warming trend, c.\u00a01000\u00a0CE.28 Their major population centre was the Smith Sound area (on both the Ellesmere and Greenland sides) due to its proximity to polynyas and its position on transportation routes.54 From settlements at Smith Sound, the Thule sent summer hunting parties to harvest marine mammals in Nansen Strait. Their summer camps are evidenced by tent rings as far north as Archer Fiord, with clusters of stone dwellings around Lady Franklin Bay and at Lake Hazen which suggest semi-permanent occupations.28\nThe Thule genetically and culturally completely replaced the Dorset people some time after 1300 CE. The Thule displaced the small-tool cultures, having a number of technological advantages which notably included effective weapons, kayaks and umiaks for hunting marine mammals, and sled dogs for surface transport and pursuit.51 The Thule also had an extensive trade network, evidenced by meteoritic iron from Greenland which was exported through Ellesmere Island to the rest of the archipelago and to the North American mainland.52, 105\nMore than fifty Norse artefacts have been found in Thule archeological sites on the Bache Peninsula, including pieces of chain mail. It is uncertain if Ellesmere Island was directly visited by Norse Greenlanders who sailed from the south or if the items were traded through a network of middlemen.54 It is also possible the items may have been taken from a shipwreck.46 A bronze set of scales discovered in western Ellesmere Island has been interpreted as indicating the presence of a Norse trader in the region.62 The Norse artefacts date from c.\u00a01250 to 1400\u00a0CE.\nBetween 1400 and 1600 CE, the Little Ice Age developed and conditions for hunting became increasingly difficult, forcing the Thule to withdraw from Ellesmere and the other northern islands of the archipelago.29 The Thule who remained in northern Greenland became isolated, specialized at hunting a diminishing number of game animals, and lost the ability to make boats. Thus, the waters around Ellesmere were not navigated again until the arrival of large European vessels after 1800.21\nEarly European exploration.\nMuch of the initial phase of European exploration of the North American Arctic was centred on a search for the Northwest Passage and undertaken by Britain.334 The 1616 expedition of William Baffin were the first Europeans to record sighting the then-unnamed Ellesmere Island (Baffin named Jones and Smith Sounds on the island's south and southeast coasts). However, the onset of the Little Ice Age interrupted the progress of explorations for two centuries.\nIn 1818, an ice jam in Baffin Bay broke, allowing European vessels access to the High Arctic (whalers had been active in Davis Strait, about southeast of Ellesmere, since 1719).29\u201330 Baffin Bay was then navigable in the summers due to the presence of an ice dam in Smith Sound, which prevented Arctic drift ice from flowing south. The other channels of the archipelago remained congested with ice.37\nThat year, John Ross led the first recorded European expedition to Cape York,65 at which time there were reportedly only 140 Inughuit.61 (The Inughuit of North Greenland, the Kalaallit of West Greenland, and Inuit of the archipelago are descendants of the Thule culture, which had diverged during the isolation imposed by the Little Ice Age.) Knowledge of Ellesmere persisted in the oral histories of the Inuit of Baffin Island and the Inughuit of northern Greenland,55 who each called it .\nEuro-American exploration and contact.\nThe search for Franklin's lost expedition \u2013 also searching for the Northwest Passage and to establish claims to the Far North \u2013 involved more than forty expeditions to the High Arctic over two decades, and represented the peak period of Euro-American Arctic exploration.33419 Edward Augustus Inglefield led an 1852 expedition which surveyed the coastlines of Baffin Bay and Smith Sound, being stopped by ice in Nares Strait.339 He named Ellesmere Island for the president of the Royal Geographical Society (1849\u20131852), Francis Egerton, 1st Earl of Ellesmere. The Second Grinnell expedition (1853\u20131855) made slightly further progress before becoming trapped in the ice. Over two winters the expedition charted both sides of Kane Basin to about 80\u00b0N, from where Elisha Kent Kane claimed to have sighted the conjectured Open Polar Sea.339\u2013340\nDuring this period, as the Little Ice Age abated and the hunting of marine mammals became more feasible again, Aboriginal peoples began to return to Ellesmere Island. The most well-known of these migrations in both Inuit and European accounts is the journey of Qitlaq, who led a group of Inuit families from Baffin Island to northwestern Greenland, via Ellesmere Island, in the 1850s. This journey reestablished contact between Inuit who had been separated for two centuries and reintroduced vital technologies to the Inughuit.99\u2013101 Other groups followed and by the 1870s Inuit were living on Ellesmere Island and had regular contact with those on the neighbouring islands.109\nContact between Inuit and Europeans or Americans was often indirect, as the Inuit happened upon shipwrecks or abandoned base camps which provided wood and metal resources. European goods were also obtained through inter-group trade. Long-term contact began in the 1800s through whaling stations and trading posts, which frequently relocated.12 Euro-American expeditions employed Inughuit, Inuit and west Greenlander guides, hunters and labourers, gradually blending their knowledge with European technology to conduct effective exploration.30\nBritish and United States Arctic expeditions had been interrupted for some years due to the priorities of the Crimean War and the American Civil War, respectively.340 By about 1860, the focus of Arctic exploration had shifted to the North Pole. As earlier attempts at the pole via Svalbard or eastern Greenland had reached impasses, numerous expeditions came to Ellesmere Island to pursue the route through Nares Straight.334\nThe United States expedition led by Adolphus Greely in 1881 crossed the island from east to west,631 establishing Fort Conger in the northern part of the island. The Greely expedition found fossil forests on Ellesmere Island in the late 1880s. Stenkul Fiord was first explored in 1902 by Per Schei, a member of Otto Sverdrup's 2nd Norwegian Polar Expedition.\nThe Ellesmere Ice Shelf was documented by the British Arctic Expedition of 1875\u201376, in which Lieutenant Pelham Aldrich's party went from Cape Sheridan () west to Cape Alert (), including the Ward Hunt Ice Shelf. In 1906 Robert Peary led an expedition in northern Ellesmere Island, from Cape Sheridan along the coast to the western side of Nansen Sound (93\u00b0W). During Peary's expedition, the ice shelf was continuous; it has since been estimated to have covered . The ice shelf broke apart in the 20th century, presumably due to climate change.\nEstablishment of Canadian sovereignty.\nIn 1880, the British Arctic Territories were transferred to Canada. Canada did little to solidify its legal possession of the islands until prompted by foreign action in 1902\u201303: Otto Sverdrup claimed three islands west of Ellesmere for Norway, the Alaska boundary dispute was settled against Canada's interests, and Roald Amundsen set out to sail the Northwest Passage.101\u2013104 To establish an official government presence in the Far North, the North-West Mounted Police (NWMP) were sent on sovereignty patrols. A NWMP detachment sailed to the Arctic whaling stations in 1903, where they forbade whalers from killing muskox or trading skins, in order to prevent overhunting and protect the Inuit's ability to sustain themselves. In 1904 a NWMP detachment sailed to Cape Herschel at the east end of Sverdrup Pass, where they could intercept hunters accessing the interior of Ellesmere.101\u2013104\nWhile the fur trade was brought under control, American exploration parties to the Far North had acted with autonomy and intensively hunted terrestrial mammals to sustain their expeditions. Peary's parties had heavily hunted muskoxen on Ellesmere and had nearly brought the extinction of caribou in northern Greenland; the Crocker Land Expedition (1913\u20131916) also extensively hunted muskoxen. In response to these and other trespasses, the government amended the \"Northwest Game Act\" to prohibit the killing of muskoxen except for Native inhabitants who otherwise faced starvation.102\nIn 1920, the government learned that Inughuit from Greenland had been annually visiting Ellesmere Island for polar bear and muskox hunting \u2013 in violation of Canadian law \u2013 and selling the skins at Knud Rasmussen's trading post at North Star Bay (known as Thule). The Danish government stated that North Greenland was a \"no man's land\" outside their administration and Rasmussen, as the \"de facto\" sole authority, refused to stop the trade, which the Inughuit needed to support themselves. In response, Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) detachments were established on Ellesmere Island at Craig Harbour in 1922 and at Bache Post in 1926, positioned to guard the coastal and overland routes to the hunting grounds on the western side of Ellesmere.102\u2013104315\u2013316 In addition to intercepting illegal hunting and fur-trading, the RCMP conducted patrols and encouraged the Inuit to maintain their traditional lifestyle.25\u201326 The posts were closed in the mid-1930s, after the sovereignty issues had been settled.105\nGeography.\nEllesmere Island is the northernmost island of the Arctic Archipelago in Canada's Far North and one of the world's northernmost land masses. It is exceeded in this regard only by neighbouring Greenland, which extends about closer to the north pole. Ellesmere's northernmost point, Cape Columbia (at ), is less than from the north pole, while its southern coasts at 77\u00b0N are well within the Arctic Circle.7\nEllesmere has the highest and longest mountain ranges in eastern North America and is the most mountainous island in the Arctic Archipelago. It has over half of the archipelago's ice cover, with ice caps and glaciers across 40% of its surface. Its extensive coastline includes some of the world's longest fiords.7\u20139\nTo the west, Ellesmere is separated from Axel Heiberg Island by Nansen and Eureka Sounds, the latter of which narrows to . Devon Island is to the south across Jones Sound; at the west end of the sound, they are separated by North Kent Island and two channels which narrow to . Greenland is to the east across Nares Strait; the strait narrows to at Cape Isabella on Smith Sound and further north narrows to at Robeson Channel. These channels and straits typically freeze over in winter,9\u201311 though winds and currents leave pockets of open water (temporary leads and persistent polynyas) in Nares Strait.20\u201321 To the north of Ellesmere is the Arctic Ocean, with Lincoln Sea to the northeast.7\nProtected areas.\nMore than one-fifth of the island is protected as Quttinirpaaq National Park (formerly Ellesmere Island National Park Reserve), which includes seven fjords and a variety of glaciers, as well as Lake Hazen, North America's largest lake north of the Arctic Circle. Barbeau Peak, the highest mountain in Nunavut () is located in the British Empire Range on Ellesmere Island. The most northern mountain range in the world, the Challenger Mountains, is located in the northeast region of the island. The northern lobe of the island is called Grant Land.\nThe Arctic willow is the only woody species to grow on Ellesmere Island.\nIn July 2007, a study noted the disappearance of habitat for waterfowl, invertebrates, and algae on Ellesmere Island. According to John Smol of Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario, and Marianne S. V. Douglas of the University of Alberta in Edmonton, warming conditions and evaporation have caused low water levels and changes in the chemistry of ponds and wetlands in the area. The researchers noted that \"In the 1980s they often needed to wear hip waders to make their way to the ponds...while by 2006 the same areas were dry enough to burn.\"\nClimate.\nEllesmere Island has a tundra climate (K\u00f6ppen \"ET\") and an ice cap climate (K\u00f6ppen \"EF\") with the temperature being cold year-round. Two semi-permanent air systems dominate the weather: the high-pressure northern polar vortex and a low-pressure area which forms in different sites between Baffin Bay and the Labrador Sea.25 Prevailing winds on Ellesmere are northwesterly, cold, and of low humidity due to ice cover over the Arctic Ocean.32\u201333 Seasonal shifts on Ellesmere are sudden and striking: winters are long and harsh, summers short and relatively abundant, with spring and autumn being brief intervals of transition.42\nFog regularly occurs near open water in September.22 While the major air systems strengthen towards their annual peak in winter, the Arctic and Atlantic air masses collide in autumn to produce severe storms at Ellesmere.22, 25 The storm season peaks in October and persists until the sea freezes.46 The polar vortex strengthens during the polar night and gives rise to easterly winds which are major hazards for populations, especially given the very low temperatures. January winds have been recorded at with gusts to at Fort Conger and at Lake Hazen.25 Very cold temperatures continue until April and no month passes without experiencing freezing temperatures.33\nSnowfall begins in late August and does not melt until the June thaw. The seasonal shift in daylight is also extreme.42 The polar night lasts from four-and-a-half months in the north to about three months in the south.44\nRegional variation.\nEllesmere's Arctic marine climate is strongly affected in the north by Arctic Ocean currents and the polar vortex, while the climate of the southeastern coast is influenced by the warm Atlantic water of the West Greenland Current.23 Interior regions shielded by the island's high mountain ranges experience distinctive quasi-continental microclimates.9\nThe highest precipitation is on the northern coast, averaging . On the south side of the Grant Land mountains, only reaches the Hazen Plateau.32\u201333\nThe average number of snow-free days varies from 45 days on the north coast to 77 days in the Eureka\u2013Tanquary corridor.33\nWinters are considerably colder in the interior. At Lake Hazen, Peary's expedition recorded daytime temperatures of in February\u00a01900, and a Defence Research Board party recorded temperatures as low as in the winter of 1957\u201358. Nonetheless, there are archaeological remains of winter dwellings of both Independence and Thule cultures in the interior.43\u201344\nClimate change.\nA paleolimnological study of algae in the sediments of shallow ponds on Cape Herschel (which faces Smith Sound on Ellesmere's eastern coast) found that the ponds had been permanent and relatively stable for several millennia until experiencing ecological changes associated with warming, beginning around 1850 and accelerating in the early 2000s. During the 23-year study period, an ecological threshold was crossed as several of the study ponds had completely desiccated while others had very reduced water levels. In addition, the wetlands surrounding the ponds were severely affected and dried vegetation could be easily burned.\nGlaciers, ice caps and ice shelves.\nLarge portions of Ellesmere Island are covered with glaciers and ice, with Manson Icefield () and Sydkap () in the south; Prince of Wales Icefield () and Agassiz Ice Cap () along the central-east side of the island, and the Northern Ellesmere icefields ().\nThe northwest coast of Ellesmere Island was covered by a massive, long ice shelf until the 20th century. The Ellesmere Ice Shelf shrank by 90 per cent in the 20th century due to warming trends in the Arctic,133 particularly in the 1930s and 1940s, a period when the largest ice islands (the T1 and the T2 ice islands) were formed leaving the separate Alfred Ernest, Ayles, Milne, Ward Hunt, and Markham Ice Shelves. The Ward Hunt Ice Shelf, the largest remaining section of thick (&gt;10\u00a0m, &gt;30\u00a0ft) landfast sea ice along the northern coastline of Ellesmere Island, lost almost of ice in a massive calving in 1961\u20131962. Five large ice islands which resulted account for 79% of the calved material. It further decreased by 27% in thickness () between 1967 and 1999. A 1986 survey of Canadian ice shelves found that or of ice calved from the Milne and Ayles ice shelves between 1959 and 1974.\nThe breakup of the Ellesmere Ice Shelves has continued in the 21st century: the Ward Ice Shelf experienced a major breakup during the summer of 2002; the Ayles Ice Shelf calved entirely on 13\u00a0August 2005; the largest breakoff of the ice shelf in 25 years, it may pose a threat to the oil industry in the Beaufort Sea. The piece is . In April 2008, it was discovered that the Ward Hunt shelf was fractured, with dozens of deep, multi-faceted cracks and in September 2008 the Markham shelf () completely broke off to become floating sea ice.\nA 2018 study measured a 5.9% reduction in area amongst 1,773 glaciers in Northern Ellesmere island in the 16-year period 1999\u20132015 based on satellite data. In the same period, 19 out of 27 ice tongues disintegrated to their grounding lines and ice shelves suffered a 42% loss in surface area.\nPaleontology.\nSchei and later Alfred Gabriel Nathorst described the Paleocene-Eocene (ca. 55 Ma) fossil forest in the Stenkul Fiord sediments. The Stenkul Fiord site represents a series of deltaic swamp and floodplain forests. The trees stood for at least 400 years. Individual stumps and stems of &gt;1 m (&gt;3\u00a0ft) diameter were abundant, and are identified as \"Metasequoia\" and possibly \"Glyptostrobus\". Well preserved Pliocene peats containing abundant vertebrate and plant macrofossils characteristic of a boreal forest have been reported from Strathcona Fiord.\nIn 2006, University of Chicago paleontologist Neil Shubin and Academy of Natural Sciences paleontologist Ted Daeschler reported the discovery of the fossil of a Paleozoic (ca. 375 Ma) fish, named \"Tiktaalik roseae\", in the former stream beds of Ellesmere Island. The fossil exhibits many characteristics of fish, but also indicates a transitional creature that may be a predecessor of amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, including humans.\nIn 2011, Jason P. Downs and co-authors described the sarcopterygian \"Laccognathus embryi\" from specimens collected from the same locality that \"Tiktaalik\" was found.\nEcology.\nThe ecosystems of the High Arctic are considered to be young and underdeveloped, having only emerged since the glacial retreat of 8,000 to 6,000\u00a0BCE. There is a lack of species diversity, with a small number of animal species and short food chains.30\nThese species have adapted to take advantage of the productive summer while surviving through winter scarcity. Zooplankton, for example, grow to a larger body size and produce larger eggs in greater numbers than in other regions.42\u201343\nAside from the polar desert conditions of much of the island, there are remarkably productive ecological zones in the arctic oasis of the Lake Hazen area and the polynyas of the island's coastal waters.33\nInsect ecology.\nEllesmere Island is noted as being the northernmost occurrence of eusocial insects; specifically, the bumblebee \"Bombus polaris\". There is a second species of bumblebee occurring there, \"Bombus natvigi\", which is a parasite in the nests of \"B. polaris\".\nWhile non-eusocial, the Arctic woolly bear moth (\"Gynaephora groenlandica\") can also be found at Ellesmere Island. While this species generally has a 10-year life cycle, its life is known to extend to up to 14 years at both the Alexandra Fiord lowland and Ellesmere Island.\nEarth's magnetism.\nIn 2015, the Earth's geomagnetic north pole was located at approximately , on Ellesmere Island. It is forecast to remain on Ellesmere Island in 2020, shifting to .\nPopulation.\nAll groups occupying the island settled on the coast, particularly those relying on maritime resources, while modern-era government-funded settlements were initially supplied by sea.16\nIn 2021, the population of Ellesmere Island was recorded as 144. There are three settlements on Ellesmere Island: Alert (permanent pop. 0, but home to a small temporary population), Eureka (permanent pop. 0), and Grise Fiord (pop. 144). Politically, it is part of the Qikiqtaaluk Region. Part of the year there are also Parks Canada staff stationed at Camp Hazen and Tanquary Fiord Airport.\nAlert.\nCanadian Forces Station (CFS) Alert is the northernmost continuously inhabited settlement in the world. With the end of the Cold War and the advent of new technologies allowing for remote interpretation of data, the overwintering population has been reduced to 62 civilians and military personnel as of 2016.\nEureka.\nEureka (the third northernmost settlement in the world) consists of three areas: Eureka Aerodrome, which includes Fort Eureka (the quarters for military personnel maintaining the island's communications equipment); the Environment Canada Weather Station; and the Polar Environment Atmospheric Research Laboratory (PEARL), formerly the Arctic Stratospheric Ozone (AStrO) Observatory. Eureka has the lowest average annual temperature and least precipitation of any weather station in Canada.\nGrise Fiord.\nGrise Fiord (Inuktitut: , Romanized: , place that never thaws\") is an Inuit hamlet that, despite a population of only 144, is the largest community on Ellesmere Island.\nLocated at the southern tip of Ellesmere Island, Grise Fiord lies north of the Arctic Circle. Grise Fiord is the northernmost civilian settlement in Canada. It is also one of the coldest inhabited places in the world, with an average yearly temperature of .\nGrise Fiord is cradled by the Arctic Cordillera mountain range.\nTransportation.\nTransportation along coastal waters has been historically important for hunting and trade, whether on the sea ice or in small boats.21 The ice foot, a belt of level and secure ice around the shoreline between the high and low water marks, can be used from mid-September to July.17 In contrast, the pack ice does not stabilize and freeze fast until February, and presents a much rougher surface for travel.19\u201320\nThe navigation season for seagoing vessels is from late July to September, but is often considered treacherous due to currents, persistent shore ice, sea ice, and massive icebergs calved off of the many glaciers. September also marks a change in the weather with regular fog and the beginning of the autumn storm season.21\u201322\nIn popular culture.\nEllesmere Island is the setting of much of Melanie McGrath's \"The Long Exile: A True Story of Deception and Survival Amongst the Inuit of the Canadian Arctic\" about the High Arctic relocation, and also of her Edie Kiglatuk mystery series.\nIn the 2013 American superhero film \"Man of Steel\", Ellesmere Island is the site of a combined United States-Canadian scientific expedition to recover an ancient Kryptonian spaceship buried in the glacial ice pack.\nThe island is the location for the 2014 BBC programme \"Snow Wolf Family and Me\".\nThe 2008 documentary \"Exile\" by Zacharias Kunuk documents the experiences of Inuit families who were forcibly relocated to Ellesmere island in the 1950s to settle it for the Canadian government. The families discuss being deceived by the government about the conditions and terms of where they were going and having to endure years of surviving in inhospitable conditions with little food or water.\nIn 2022, the US National Museum of Wildlife Art debuted the travelling exhibit \"Wolves: Photography by Ronan Donovan.\" The exhibit was developed in collaboration with the National Geographic Society and features images and videos of the Arctic wolves living on Ellesmere Island. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65782", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65782", "title": "Teichoscopy", "text": "Narrative device in classical literature\nTeichoscopy or teichoscopia (), meaning \"viewing from the walls\", is a recurring narrative strategy in ancient Greek literature. One famous instance of teichoscopy occurs in Homer's \"Iliad,\" Book 3, lines 121\u2013244.\nThe passage begins with Helen approached in her chamber by Iris, disguised as her sister-in-law Laodice, the daughter of Priam. Helen is then led to the walls of the Skaian gates, where she is summoned by Priam, who asks her to point out the Achaean heroes she sees on the Trojan plain. Below her, the two armies are preparing for the duel between Menelaus and Paris. Helen identifies Agamemnon, Odysseus, Telamonian (Greater) Ajax, and Idomeneus. She also mentions that she does not see her brothers Castor and Pollux, who unbeknownst to her are already dead back in Greece. After this scene, the duel commences, with both armies praying to Zeus and the rest of the gods on Olympus to open the action.\nAnalysis.\nAccording to Maria C. Pantelia, Helen becomes the 'author' of a catalog when she describes for Priam the qualities of the most important Greek warriors. It has been suggested that the teichoscopy, as well as the duel between Paris and Menelaus, would have more likely occurred at the beginning of the war rather than during its tenth year. However, although Homer is not at the beginning of the Trojan War, he is at the beginning of the poem and therefore uses the teichoscopia as a poetic structure that provides information and suspense important for the remainder of the play and the duel to come.\nAlthough teichoscopy can be viewed as simply a vignette that surveys the major Greek warriors, it has been suggested that Homer is also trying to reveal something about Helen. Helen's open admiration of both the Greek and Trojan warriors is viewed as ironic, as it seems odd that the major cause of a war that has brought devastation to the Trojans should praise the enemy. However, by doing this, Homer is, according to Frederic Will, \u201cinsisting on the importance, and centrality, of Helen\u2019s viewpoint. He is integrating a traditional form artistically.\u201d\nThe main object of teichoscopy is the synchronous discussion of events, as opposed to events being reported later by messengers or other eyewitnesses. It is a well-established technique in dramaturgy. For example, teichoscopeia is a key device in the drama \"Penthesilea\" by Heinrich von Kleist. At the time of writing (1808) the work was considered unsuitable for stage production because of the unusually high frequency of teichoscopic events, and the first stage production was not undertaken until half a century later. However, in the twentieth century further stage productions as well as opera, radio and film versions followed (cf. Penthesilea (Kleist)).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65783", "revid": "49679309", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65783", "title": "Central Baseball League", "text": "Independent baseball league\nThe Central Baseball League, formerly the Texas\u2013Louisiana League, was an independent baseball league whose member teams were not affiliated with any Major League Baseball (MLB) franchises.\nIn 1991, potential owners, Dallas businessman Byron Pierce and U. S. Congressman John Bryant, became frustrated that the Texas League had no plans to expand into other Texas locations, and formed The Texas\u2013Louisiana League. The league began play in 1994. After further expansion into Missouri and Mississippi, the Texas\u2013Louisiana League changed its name to the Central Baseball League. In 12 seasons, the league produced 10 different champions; Alexandria and Edinburg were the only teams to win a title twice.\nAfter the 2005 season, the eight-team Central Baseball League disbanded. Five teams joined the American Association: Pensacola, Shreveport, Fort Worth, Coastal Bend and El Paso; and one joined the United League, San Angelo. Edinburg also received a franchise in the United League, unrelated to the now-defunct Roadrunners of the Central League.\nTeams.\nThe following teams were, at one time, either a member of the Central Baseball League or the Texas\u2013Louisiana League.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65784", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65784", "title": "Alexandria Aces", "text": "American minor-league professional baseball team\nThe Alexandria Aces were a baseball team based in Alexandria, Louisiana. The last version of the Aces played in the United League Baseball in 2013. The Aces have played their home games at historic Bringhurst Field, which was built in 1933 for the original Alexandria Aces.\nHistory.\nThat team started in 1934 as a member of the old Evangeline League and ceased operations with the league in 1942 due to World War II. This early era was highlighted by the presence of Hal Newhouser and Virgil Trucks, future Detroit Tigers' stars who headed the pitching staff of the 1939 Aces. The Aces (and the league) were revived after the war but once again ceased operations in 1957. Alexandria was the only city to field a team every year the Evangeline League operated. The Aces appeared regularly in the league's Shaughnessy playoffs and took the Evangeline pennant twice \u2014 in 1936 and 1940.\nBaseball returned to Alexandria again from 1972, with the Aces as the San Diego Padres' AA farm club, and while it only lasted four years, many major league notables passed through Alexandria \u2013 in particular All-Star pitcher Randy Jones and longtime Cleveland Indians first baseman John Grubb. Duke Snider also managed the team during this period.\nThe new Aces were a charter member of the independent Texas\u2013Louisiana League in 1994, and the Aces won back-to-back titles in 1997 and 1998 before the league changed its name to the Central Baseball League. In the first season of the new United League in 2006, the Aces won the inaugural ULB championship before pulling off another repeat as they would win the title once again in 2007. In 2009 the Aces joined the Continental Baseball League when the ULB went bankrupt. The Aces are the 2009 CBL Champions, beating the Big Bend Cowboys 2\u20130. In 2010, the Aces ended their contract with the CBL, citing travel costs among other reasons before joining the college wooden bat league, the Texas Collegiate League.\nOn March 12, 2011 the front office announced that there would be a change to the team's logo for the first time since the team returned in 1994.\nIn 2013, the Aces joined United League Baseball and slightly past the halfway mark of the season, with a 24\u201320 record and in second place, the United League cancelled the remaining games for the Aces. Four scheduled road games were forfeited, giving the Aces an official record of 24-24. According to league CEO John Bryant, the league could not justify spending at least $100,000 for the remainder of the season because of low attendance, averaging 333 fans a game.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65785", "revid": "50179377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65785", "title": "Tremolo", "text": "Trembling sound effect\nIn music, tremolo (), or tremolando (), is a trembling effect. There are multiple types of tremolo. It is either the rapid repetition of a note, alternation between two different notes, or variation in volume.\nTremolos may be either \"measured\", in which the exact rate of repetition or oscillation is specified, or \"unmeasured\", in which it is not (the understanding being in that case that it should be performed as rapidly as possible).\nTypes of tremolo.\nRapid reiteration or oscillation.\nThe rapid reiteration of a single note is a characteristic effect of bowed string instruments, obtained by rapidly moving the bow back and forth. However, the technique may be performed on any instrument on which it is practicable. (Indeed, a slow measured tremolo is simply a shorthand notation for an ordinary repetition of notes; thus, tremolo notation may appear in written music for any instrument.)\nThe notation for this effect consists of one or more strokes drawn through the stem of a note (or, if the note lacks a stem, through the position that a hypothetical stem would occupy); the strokes correspond to the beams that would connect the individual repeated notes if they were to be written out, thereby representing the rate of repetition (the speed of the tremolo).\nSome special cases are worth noting:\nA rapid alternation between two different pitches is another type of tremolo. On bowed string instruments, this is referred to as a \"fingered tremolo\" to distinguish it from the \"bowed tremolo\" discussed above; but once again it may be performed on any instrument. It is notated by writing the pitches to be alternated as a melodic interval, with both notes receiving the rhythmic value of the total duration of the tremolo (e.g. two half-notes for a tremolo lasting a half-note), and then either connecting them with beams, or else interpolating strokes, with the number of beams or strokes corresponding to the speed of the tremolo (e.g. a tremolo in thirty-second notes lasting a half-note would be written either as two open noteheads connected by three beams, or as two half-notes with three strokes interpolated).\nThis type of tremolo includes the trill as a special case: a trill is simply an unmeasured tremolo between two notes separated by the interval of a major or minor second (whole- or half step). Thus, a tremolo in this sense is a generalization of a trill to any interval, and to include measured durations.\nAmplitude variation.\nA separate type of tremolo is a variation in amplitude:\nTremolo is sometimes used interchangeably with vibrato. However, a tremolo is a variation of volume (or amplitude); as contrasted with vibrato, which is a variation of pitch (or frequency).\nSome electric guitars (in particular the Fender Stratocaster) use a lever branded a \"tremolo arm\" or \"whammy bar\" that allows a performer to lower or (usually, to some extent) raise the pitch of a note or chord, an effect properly termed vibrato or \"pitch bend\". This non-standard misuse of the term \"tremolo\" refers to pitch rather than amplitude. However, the term \"trem\" or \"tremolo\" is still misused to refer to a bridge system built for a whammy bar, or the bar itself. True tremolo for an electric guitar, electronic organ, or any electronic signal would normally be produced by a simple amplitude modulation electronic circuit, or in terms of analog synthesis, a VCA under control of an LFO. Electronic tremolo effects were available on many early guitar amplifiers. Fender labeled them Vibrato, adding to the confusion between the two terms. Tremolo effects pedals are also widely used to achieve this effect.\nMost settings on a tremolo effects pedal include depth of the tremolo (sometimes called intensity) and speed of the tremolo. Some models allow to choose the shape of the waveform (sine wave, triangle wave, square wave).\nHistory.\nAlthough it had already been employed as early as 1617 by Biagio Marini and again in 1621 by Giovanni Battista Riccio, the bowed tremolo was invented in 1624 by the early 17th-century composer Claudio Monteverdi, and, written as repeated semiquavers (sixteenth notes), used for the \"stile concitato\" effects in \"Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda\". The \"measured tremolo\", presumably played with rhythmic regularity, was invented to add dramatic intensity to string accompaniment and contrast with regular tenuto strokes. However, it was not till the time of Gluck that the real tremolo became an accepted method of tone production. Four other types of historical tremolos include the obsolete \"undulating tremolo\", the \"bowed tremolo\", the \"fingered tremolo\" (or slurred tremolo), and the \"bowed-and-fingered tremolo\".\nThe undulating tremolo was produced through the fingers of the right hand alternately exerting and relaxing pressure upon the bow to create a \"very uncertain\u2013undulating effect ... But it must be said that, unless violinists have wholly lost the art of this particular stroke, the result is disappointing and futile in the extreme,\" though it has been suggested that rather than as a legato stroke it was done as a series of \"jet\u00e9s\".\nThere is some speculation that tremolo was employed in medieval Welsh harp music, as indicated in the transcription by Robert ap Huw.\nNotation.\nIn musical notation, unmeasured tremolo is usually notated as regular repeated notes (measured tremolo) of very short duration: so short as to preclude confusion with an actual measured tremolo. Commonly, for example, the duration used will be demisemiquavers (thirty-second notes). In this case, there will be three strokes through the stems of the notes, except on notes which already have beams or flags: quavers (eighth notes) then take two slashes, and semiquavers (sixteenth notes) take one.\nIn the case of semibreves (whole notes), which lack stems, the strokes or slashes are drawn above or below the note, where the stem would be if there were one.\nIn slower tempos (and/or meters with larger denominators), notes of shorter duration (corresponding to additional strokes) would be used. To eliminate ambiguity as to whether an unmeasured tremolo or regular repeated demisemiquavers (thirty-second notes) should be played, the word \"tremolo\" or the abbreviation \"trem.\", is sometimes added.\nIf the tremolo is between two or more notes, both notes are given the full value of the passage and the bars are drawn between them:\nAs shown above, a minim (half note)-based tremolo is sometimes drawn with beams connecting the two notes together rather than interpolated bars (strokes).\nBowed string instruments.\nViolin fingered tremolo; notice the joining of strokes and stems is different for different time values, and that some notes shorter than eighth notes are written out, such as the last thirty-second notes on the last beat of measure three:\nViolin bowed-and-fingered tremolo, notated the same as fingered tremolo but without slurs and with \"staccato\" above the staff:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65786", "revid": "48576020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65786", "title": "Anti-Arab racism", "text": "Discrimination against Arab people\nAnti-Arab racism, also called Anti-Arabism, Anti-Arab sentiment, or Arabophobia, refers to feelings and expressions of hostility, hatred, discrimination, fear, or prejudice toward Arab people, the Arab world or the Arabic language on the basis of an irrational disdain for their ethnic and cultural affiliation.\nNotable historical instances of anti-Arab racism include the expulsion of the Moriscos from 1609 to 1614, the pacification of Algeria from 1830 to 1875, the Libyan Genocide from 1929 to 1934, the Nakba in Mandatory Palestine since 1947, and the Zanzibar massacre in 1964. In the modern era, anti-Arabism is apparent in many nations, including the United States and Israel, as well as parts of Europe, Asia, Africa and the Americas. In the United States, anti-Arab racism surged after the September 11 attacks, resulting in widespread racial profiling and hate crimes against Arab Americans. Arab citizens of Israel and Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied Palestinian territories face institutionalized segregation and discrimination, which several scholars have characterized as a form of apartheid. Various advocacy organizations have been formed to protect the civil rights of individuals of Arab descent in the United States, such as the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee and the Council on American\u2013Islamic Relations.\nDefinition of Arab.\nArabs are people whose native language is Arabic. People of Arabic origin, in particular native English and French speakers of Arab ancestry in Europe and the Americas, often identify themselves as Arabs. Due to widespread practice of Islam among Arab populations, Anti-Arabism is commonly confused with Islamophobia.\nThere are prominent Arab non-Muslim minorities in the Arab world. These minorities include the Arab Christians in Lebanon, Syria, Palestine, Jordan, Egypt, Iraq, Kuwait and Bahrain, among other Arab countries. There are also sizable minorities of Arab Jews, Druze, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed, and nonreligious people.\nHistorical anti-Arabism.\nAnti-Arab prejudice is suggested by many events in history. In the Iberian Peninsula, when the \"Reconquista\" by the indigenous Christians from the Moorish colonists was completed with the fall of Granada, all non-Catholics were expelled. In 1492, Arab converts to Christianity, called Moriscos, were expelled from Spain to North Africa after being condemned by the Spanish Inquisition. The Spanish word \"moro\", meaning \"moor\", today carries a negative meaning.\nAfter the annexation of the Muslim-ruled state of Hyderabad by India in 1948, about 7,000 Arabs were interned and deported.\nThe Zanzibar Revolution of January 12, 1964, ended the local Arab dynasty. As many as 17,000 Arabs were exterminated by black African revolutionaries, according to reports, and thousands of others fled the country.\nIn \"The Arabic Language and National Identity: a Study in Ideology\", Yasir Suleiman notes of the writing of Tawfiq al-Fikayki that he uses the term \"shu'ubiyya\" to refer to movements he perceives to be anti-Arab, such as the Turkification movement in the Ottoman Empire, extreme-nationalist and Pan-Iranist movements in Iran and communism. The economic boom in Iran which lasted until 1979 led to an overall increase of Iranian nationalism sparking thousands of anti-Arab movements. In al-Fikayki's view, the objectives of anti-Arabism are to attack Arab nationalism, pervert history, emphasize Arab regression, deny Arab culture, and generally be hostile to all things Arab. He concludes that, \"In all its various roles, anti-Arabism has adopted a policy of intellectual conquest as a means of penetrating Arab society and combatting Arab nationalism.\"\nIn early 20th and late 19th century when Palestinians and Syrians migrated to Latin America Arabophobia was common in these countries.\nModern anti-Arabism.\nAlgeria.\nAnti-Arabism is a major element of a movement known as Berberism that is widespread mainly amongst Algerians of Kabyle and other Berber origin. It has historic roots in French colonialist policy propagating the Kabyle myth, with Arabs depicted as invaders that occupied Algeria and destroyed its late Roman and early medieval civilization that was considered an integral part of the West; this invasion is considered to have been the source of the resettlement of Algeria's Berber population in Kabylie and other mountainous areas. Regardless, the Kabyles and other Berbers have managed to preserve their culture and achieve high standards of living and education. Furthermore, many Berbers speak their language and French; are non religious, secular, or Evangelical Christian; and openly identify with the Western World. Many Berber Nationalists view Arabs as a hostile people intent on eradicating their own culture and nation. Berber social norms restrict marriage to someone of Arab ethnicity, although it is permitted to marry someone from other ethnic groups.\nAccording to Lawrence Rosen, ethnic background is not a crucial factor in marriage between members of each group in North Africa, when compared to social and economic backgrounds. There are regular hate incidents between Arabs and Berbers, and Anti-Arabism has been accentuated by the Algerian government's anti-Berber policies. Contemporary relations between Berbers and Arabs are sometimes tense, particularly in Algeria, where Berbers rebelled (1963\u201365, 2001) against Arab rule and have demonstrated and rioted against their cultural marginalization in the newly founded state.\nThe Anti-Arab sentiments among Algerian Berbers (mainly from Kabylie) were always related to the reassertion of Kabyle identity. It began as an intellectual militant movement in schools, universities, and popular culture (mainly nationalistic songs). In addition to that, the authorities' efforts to promote development in Kabylie contributed to a boom of sorts in Tizi Ouzou, whose population almost doubled between 1966 and 1977, and to a greater degree of economic and social integration within the region had the contrary effect of strengthening a collective Berber consciousness and Anti-Arab sentiments.\nArabophobia can be seen at different levels of intellectual, social, and cultural life of some Berbers. After the Berberist crisis in 1949, a new radical intellectual movement emerged under the name \"L'Acad\u00e9mie Berb\u00e8re\". This movement was known by its adoption and promotion of Anti-Arab and Anti-Islam ideologies especially amongst immigrant Kabyles in France and achieved a relative success at the time.\nIn 1977, the final game of the national soccer championship pitting a team from Kabylie against one from Algiers turned into an Arab-Berber conflict. The Arab national anthem of Algeria was overwhelmed by the shouting of Anti-Arab slogans such as \"A bas les arabes\" (\"down with the Arabs\").\nThe roots of modern-day Arabophobia in Algeria can be traced back to multiple factors. For some, Anti-Arabism movement among Berbers is part of the legacy of French Colonization or manipulation of North Africa. As from the beginning, the French understood that to attenuate Muslim resistance to their presence, mainly in Algeria, they had to resort to the divide and rule doctrine. The most obvious divide that could be instrumentalized in this perspective was the ethnic one. Therefore, France employed some official colonial practices to tighten its control over Algeria by creating racial tensions between Arabs and Berbers and between Jews and Muslims.\nOthers argue that the Berber language and traditions are deeply rooted in the North African cultural mosaic; for centuries, Berber culture has survived conquests, repression, and exclusion from different invaders: Romans, Arabs, and French. Hence, believing that its identity and specificity were threatened, the Berbers took note of the political and ideological implications of Arabism as defended by successive governments. Gradual radicalization and Anti-Arab sentiments began to emerge in Algeria and among the hundreds of thousands of Berbers in France who had been in the forefront of the Berber cultural movement.\nAustralia.\nThe Cronulla riots in Sydney, Australia in December 2005 have been described as \"anti-Arab racism\" by community leaders. NSW Premier Morris Iemma said the violence revealed the \"ugly face of racism in this country\".\nA 2004 report by the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission said that more than two-thirds of Muslim and Arab Australians say they have experienced racism or racial vilification since the September 11 attacks and that 90% of female respondents experienced racial abuse or violence.\nAdam Houda, a Lebanese Muslim lawyer, has been repeatedly harassed by the New South Wales police force. Houda has been arrested or detained six times in 11 years and has sued the police force for malicious prosecution and harassment three times. Houda claims that the police's motivation is racism which he says is \"alive and well\" in Bankstown. He has been stopped going to prayers, with relatives and friends and has been subjected to a humiliating body search. He has been the object of several groundless accusations of robbery or holding a knife. A senior lawyer told the Sydney Morning Herald that the police harassment was due to the police enmity against Houda's clients and the Australian Arab community. He was first falsely arrested in 2000 for which he was awarded $145,000 damages by a judge who described his persecution as \"shocking\". Constable Lance Stebbing was found to have maliciously arrested Houda, as well as using profanities against him and approaching him in a \"menacing manner\". Stebbing was supported by other police, against the testimony of many eyewitnesses. In 2005, Houda accused the police of disabling his mobile phone making it difficult to perform his work as a criminal defense lawyer.\nIn 2010, Houda, his lawyer Chris Murphy, and Channel Seven journalist Adam Walters claimed that Frank Menilli, a senior New South Wales police officer, behaved in a corrupt fashion by trying to alter Channel Seven's coverage of the Houda Case by promising Walters inside information in exchange for presenting the case in the police's favour. Walters regarded the offer as an \"attempted bribe\". The latest incident occurred in 2011, when Houda was arrested for refusing a frisk search and resisting arrest after having been approached by police suspecting him of involvement in a recent robbery. These charges were thrown out of court by Judge John Connell who stated \"At the end of the day, here were three men of Middle Eastern appearance walking along a suburban street, for all the police knew, minding their own business at an unexceptional time of day, in unexceptional clothing, except two of the men had hooded jumpers. The place they were in could not have raised a reasonable suspicion they were involved in the robberies\" Houda is currently suing the six police officers involved for false imprisonment, unlawful arrest, assault and battery and defamation. One of the six is an assistant commissioner. He is seeking $5 million in damages.\nFrance.\nFrance used to be a colonial empire, with still great post-colonial power over its former colonies, using Africa as a reservoir for labor, especially in moments of dire need. During World War I, reconstruction and shortages made France bring thousands of North African workers. Out of a total of 116,000 workers from 1914 to 1918, 78,000 Algerians, 54,000 Moroccans, and Tunisians were requisitioned. Two hundred and forty thousand Algerians were mobilized or drafted, and two thirds of these were soldiers who served mostly in France. This constituted more than one-third of the men of those nations from ages 20\u201340. According to historian Abdallah Laroui, Algeria sent 173,000 soldiers, 25,000 of whom were killed. Tunisia sent 56,000, of whom 12,000 were killed. Moroccan soldiers helped defend Paris and landed at Bordeaux in 1916.\nAfter the war, reconstruction and labor shortages necessitated even larger number of Algerian laborers. Migration (or the need for labor) was reestablished at a high level by 1936. This was partly the result of collective recruitments in the villages conducted by French officers and representatives of companies. Labor recruitment continued throughout the 1940s. North Africans were mostly recruited for dangerous and low-wage jobs, unwanted by ordinary French workers.\nThis large number of immigrants was of great help for France's rapid post\u2013World War II economic growth. The 1970s were marked by recession followed by the cessation of labor migration programs and crackdowns on illegal immigration. During the 1980s, political disfavor with President Mitterrand's social programs led to the rise of Jean-Marie Le Pen and other far right French nationalists. The public increasingly blamed immigrants for French economic problems. In March 1990, according to a poll reported in \"Le Monde\", 76% of those polled said that there were too many Arabs in France while 39% said they had an \"aversion\" to Arabs. In the following years, Interior Minister Charles Pasqua was noted for dramatically toughening immigration laws.\nIn May 2005, riots broke out between North Africans and Romani people in Perpignan, after a young Arab man was shot dead and another Arab man was lynched by a group of Roma.\nChirac's controversial \"Hijab ban\" law, presented as secularization of schools, was interpreted by its critics as an \"indirect legitimization of anti-Arab stereotypes, fostering rather than preventing racism.\"\nA higher rate of racial profiling is conducted on Blacks and Arabs by the French police.\nIran.\nHuman rights group Amnesty International says that in practice, Arabs are among a number of ethnic minorities that are disadvantaged and suffer discrimination by the authorities. Separatist tendencies in Khuzestan exacerbate this. How far the situation facing Arabs in Iran is related to racism or simply a result of policies suffered by all Iranians is a matter of debate (\"see: Politics of Khuzestan\"). Iran is a multi-ethnic society with its Arab minority mainly located in the south.\nIt is claimed by some that anti-Arabism in Iran may be related to the notion that Arabs forced some Persians to convert to Islam in 7th century AD (\"See: Muslim conquest of Persia\"). Author Richard Foltz in his article \"Internationalization of Islam\" states \"Even today, many Iranians perceive the Arab destruction of the Sassanid Empire as the single greatest tragedy in Iran's long history. Following the Muslim conquest of Persia, many Iranians (also known as \"mawali\") came to despise the Umayyads due to discrimination against them by their Arab rulers. The Shu'ubiyah movement was intended to reassert Iranian identity and resist attempts to impose Arab culture while reaffirming their commitment to Islam.\nMore recently, anti-Arabism has arisen as a consequence of aggression against Iran by the regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq. During a visit to Khuzestan, which has most of Iran's Arab population, a British journalist, John R. Bradley, wrote that despite the fact that the majority of Arabs supported Iran in the war, \"ethnic Arabs complain that, as a result of their divided loyalties during the Iran\u2013Iraq War, they are viewed more than ever by the clerical regime in Tehran as a potential fifth column, and suffer from a policy of discrimination.\" However, Iran's Arab population played an important role in defending Iran during the Iran-Iraq War and most refused to heed Saddam Hussein's call for an uprising and instead fought against their fellow Arabs. Furthermore, Iran's former defense minister Ali Shamkhani, a Khuzestani Arab, was chief commander of the ground force during the Iran-Iraq War as well as serving as first deputy commander of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.\nThe Arab minority of southern Iran has been subject to discriminations, persecution in Iran. In a report published in February 2006, Amnesty International stated that the \"Arab population of Iran is one of the most economically and socially deprived in Iran\" and that Arabs have \"reportedly been denied state employment under the \"gozinesh\" [job placement] criteria.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Furthermore, land expropriation by the Iranian authorities is reportedly so widespread that it appears to amount to a policy aimed at dispossessing Arabs of their traditional lands. This is apparently part of a strategy aimed at the forcible relocation of Arabs to other areas while facilitating the transfer of non-Arabs into Khuzestan and is linked to economic policies such as zero-interest loans which are not available to local Arabs.\u2014\u200a\nCritics of such reports have pointed out that they are often based on sketchy sources and are not always to be trusted at face value (see: Criticism of human rights reports on Khuzestan). Furthermore, critics point out that Arabs have social mobility in Iran, with a number of famous Iranians from the worlds of arts, sport, literature, and politics having Arab origins (see: Iranian Arabs) illustrating Arab-Iranian participation in Iranian economics, society, and politics. They contend that Khuzestan province, where most of Iran's Arabs live, is actually one of the more economically advanced provinces of Iran, more so than many of the Persian-populated provinces.\nSome critics of the Iranian government contend that it is carrying out a policy of anti-Arab ethnic cleansing. While there has been large amounts of investment in industrial projects such as the \"Razi Petrochemical Complex\", local universities, and other national projects such as hydroelectric dams (such as the Karkheh Dam, which cost $700 million to construct) and nuclear power plants, many critics of Iran's economic development policies have pointed to the poverty suffered by Arabs in Khuzestan as proof of an anti-Arab policy agenda. Following his visit to Khuzestan in July 2005, UN Special Rapporteur for Adequate Housing Miloon Kothari spoke of how up to 250,000 Arabs had been displaced by such industrial projects and noted the favorable treatment given to settlers from Yazd compared to the treatment of local Arabs.\nHowever, it is also true that non-Arab provinces such as Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad Province, Sistan and Baluchestan Province, and neighboring \u012al\u0101m Province also suffer high levels of poverty, indicating that government policy is not disadvantaging Arabs alone but other regions, including some with large ethnically Persian populations. Furthermore, most commentators agree that Iran's state-controlled and highly subsidized economy is the main reason behind the inability of the Iranian government to generate economic growth and welfare at ground levels in all cities across the nation, rather than a state ethnic policy targeted specifically at Arabs; Iran is ranked 156th on The Heritage Foundation's 2006 Index of Economic Freedom.\nIn the Iranian education system, after primary education cycle (grades 1-5 for children 6 to 11 years old), passing some Arabic courses is mandatory until the end of secondary education cycle (grade 6 to Grade 12, from age 11 to 17). In higher education systems (universities), passing Arabic language courses is selective.\nPersians use slurs like \"Tazi Kaseef\" (lit. \"Dirty Taazi\"), \"Arabe malakh-khor\" (\u0639\u0631\u0628 \u0645\u0644\u062e\u200c\u062e\u0648\u0631) (lit. \"Locust-eater Arab\"), \"soosmar-khor\" (\u0633\u0648\u0633\u0645\u0627\u0631\u062e\u0648\u0631) (\"lizard eater\") and call Arabs \"\u067e\u0627\u0628\u0631\u0647\u0646\u0647\" (lit. \"barefoot\"), \"\u0628\u06cc\u200c\u062a\u0645\u062f\u0646\" (lit. \"uncivilized\"), \"\u0648\u062d\u0634\u06cc\" (lit. \"barbarians\") and \"\u0632\u06cc\u0631\u0635\u062d\u0631\u0627\u06cc\u06cc\" (lit \"sub-saharan\"). Anti-Islamist government Persians refer to Persian Islamic Republic supporters from Hezbollahi families as Arab-parast (\u0639\u0631\u0628\u200c\u067e\u0631\u0633\u062a) (lit. \"Arab Worshipper\"). Arabs use slurs against Persians by calling them \"Fire-worshipers\" and \"majoos\", \"Majus\" (\u0645\u062c\u0648\u0633) (Zoroastrians, Magi).\nNegative views Persians have of Arabs include eating habits such as Arabs eating lizards.\nIn Iran, there is a saying, \"The Arab of the desert eats locusts, while the dogs of Isfahan drink ice-cold water.\" (). In Iran \"to be outright Arab\" () means \"to be a complete idiot\".\nRelations are uneasy between specifically Iran and the Persian Gulf Arab countries in particular. Persians and Arabs dispute the name of the Persian Gulf. The Greater and Lesser Tunbs are disputed between the two countries. A National Geographic reporter who interviewed Iranians reported that many of them frequently said \"We are not Arabs!\" \"We are not terrorists!\"\".\nThe Iranian rap artist Behzad Pax released a song in 2015 called \"Arab-Kosh\" (\u0639\u0631\u0628\u200c\u0643\u0634) (Arab-killer) which was widely reported on the Arab media who claimed that it was released with the approval of the Iranian Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance. The Iranian Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance denied that it gave approval to the song and condemned it as a product of a \"sick mind\".\nIsrael.\nAs a consequence of the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict, there is a high level of hostility between sections of the Jewish and Arab societies in Israel, as well as outside the country. A group of men in Pisgat Ze'ev started patrolling the neighborhood to stop Jewish women from dating Arab men. The municipality of Petah Tikva has a telephone hotline to inform on Jewish girls who date Arab men, as well as a psychological counseling service. Kiryat Gat launched a school programme to warn Jewish girls against dating local Bedouin men.\nGeography textbooks used in Israeli schools were found to portray Arabs as primitive and backwards, with the Nakba, the destruction of Palestinian society in the 1948 Palestine war, disregarded entirely. History textbooks likewise portrayed the Palestinian population negatively, showing them as primitive and collectively to be an enemy. Contrasted with the portrayal of Jews, who were shown to be heroic and progressive, Israeli textbooks delegitimized Arabs and used negative stereotyping of Arabs nearly uniformly.\nThe Bedouin representatives submitted a report to the United Nations claiming that they are not treated as equal citizens and Bedouin towns are not provided the same level of services, land and water as Jewish towns of the same size are. The city of Beersheba refused to recognize a Bedouin holy site despite a High Court recommendation.\nIn 1994, a Jewish settler in the West Bank and follower of the Kach party, Baruch Goldstein, massacred 29 Palestinian Muslim worshipers at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron. It was known that, prior to the massacre, Goldstein, a physician, refused to treat Arabs, including Arab soldiers with the Israeli army. During his funeral, a rabbi declared that even one million Arabs are \"not worth a Jewish fingernail\". Goldstein was immediately \"denounced with shocked horror even by the mainstream Orthodox\", and many in Israel classified Goldstein as insane. The Israeli government condemned the massacre and made Kach illegal. The Israeli army killed a further nine Palestinians during riots following the massacre, and the Israeli government severely restricted Palestinian freedom of movement in Hebron, while letting settlers and foreign tourists roam free, although Israel also forbade a small group of Israeli settlers from entering Palestinian towns and demanded that those settlers turn in their army-issued rifles. Goldstone's grave has become a pilgrimage site for Jewish extremists.\nIn a number of occasions, Israeli Jewish demonstrators and rioters used racist anti-Arab slogans. For example, during the Arab riots in October 2000 events, Israelis counter-rioted in Nazareth and Tel Aviv, throwing stones at Arabs, destroying Arab property, with some chanting \"death to Arabs\". Some Israeli-Arab soccer players face chants from the crowd when they play such as \"no Arabs, no terrorism\". In the most radical event, Abbas Zakour, an Arab member of the Knesset, was stabbed and wounded by unidentified men, who shouted anti-Arab chants. The attack was described as a \"hate crime\". Among the Israeli teams, Beitar Jerusalem is considered emblematic of Jewish racism; the fans are infamous for their 'Death to Arabs' chant and the team has a ban on Arab players, a policy that is in violation of FIFA's guidelines, though the team has never faced suspension from the football organization. In March 2012, supporters of the team were filmed raiding a Jerusalem mall and beating up Arab employees.\nThe Israeli political party Yisrael Beiteinu, whose platform includes the redrawing of Israel's borders so that 500,000 Israeli Arabs would be part of a future Palestinian State, won 15 seats in the 2009 Israeli elections, increasing its seats by 4 compared to the 2006 Israeli elections. This policy, also known as the Lieberman Plan, was described as \"anti-Arab\" by \"The Guardian\". In 2004, Yehiel Hazan, a member of the Knesset, described the Arabs as worms: \"You find them everywhere like worms, underground as well as above.\"\nIn 2004, then Deputy Defense Minister Ze'ev Boim asked \"What is it about Islam as a whole and the Palestinians in particular? Is it some form of cultural deprivation? Is it some genetic defect? There is something that defies explanation in this continued murderousness.\"\nIn August 2005, Israeli soldier Eden Natan-Zada traveled to an Israeli Arab town and massacred four civilians. Israeli Arabs said they would draw up a list of grievances after the terrorist attack of Eden Natan-Zada. \"This was a planned terror attack and we find it extremely difficult to treat it as an individual action,\" Abed Inbitawi, an Israeli-Arab spokesman, told \"The Jerusalem Post\". \"It marks a certain trend that reflects a growing tendency of fascism and racism in Israeli society generally as well as the establishment towards the minority Arab community,\" he said.\nAccording to a 2006 poll conducted by Geocartographia for the Centre for the Struggle Against Racism, 41% of Israelis support Arab-Israeli segregation at entertainment venues, 40% believed \"the state needs to support the emigration of Arab citizens\", and 63% believed Arabs to be a \"security and demographic threat\" to Israel. The poll found that more than two thirds would not want to live in the same building as an Arab, 36% believed Arab culture to be inferior, and 18% felt hatred when they heard Arabic spoken.\nIn 2007, the Association for Civil Rights in Israel reported that anti-Arab views had doubled, and anti-Arab racist incidents had increased by 26%. The report quoted polls that suggested 50% of Jewish Israelis do not believe Arab citizens of Israel should have equal rights, 50% said they wanted the government to encourage Arab emigration from Israel, and 75% of Jewish youths said Arabs were less intelligent and less clean than Jews. The Mossawa Advocacy Center for Arab Citizens in Israel reported a tenfold increase in racist incidents against Arabs in 2008. Jerusalem reported the highest number of incidents. The report blamed Israeli leaders for the violence, saying \"These attacks are not the hand of fate, but a direct result of incitement against the Arab citizens of this country by religious, public, and elected officials.\"\nIn March 2009, following the Gaza War, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) drew criticism when several young soldiers had T-shirts printed up privately with slogans and caricatures portraying dead babies, weeping mothers, and crumbled mosques.\nIn June 2009, \"Haaretz\" reported that Israel's Public Security Minister, Yitzhak Aharonovich, called an undercover police officer a \"dirty Arab\" whilst touring Tel Aviv.\nSince the 2000s, groups such as Lehava have been formed in Israel to prevent that Israeli Arab men form relationships with Jewish women. Some of the material promoted to discourage Jewish women to be with Arab men, are sanctioned by local governments and police departments. Lehava has received permission from Israeli courts to picket the weddings uniting a Palestinian and a Jewish partner.\nIn 2010, dozens of Israel's top rabbis went on to sign a document forbidding that Jews rent apartments to Arabs, saying that \"racism originated in the Torah\".\nIn January 2012, the Israeli High Court upheld a decision, deemed racist, preventing the Palestinian espouses of Israeli Arabs from obtaining Israeli citizenship or resident status.\nA poll in 2012 revealed that racist attitudes are embraced by a large majority of Israelis. 59% of Jews said they wanted Jews to be given preference in admission to public employment, 50% wanted the state to generally treat Jews better than Arabs, and over 40% wanted separate housing for Jews and Arabs. According to the poll, 58% supported the use of the term apartheid to represent Israeli policies against Arabs. The poll also showed that the majority of Israeli Jews would not want voting rights extended to Palestinians if the West Bank were annexed by Israel.\nIn 2013, Nazareth Illit mayor Shimon Gafsou declared that he would never allow that an Arab school, a mosque, or a church be built in his city, despite the fact that Arabs account for 18 percent of its population.\nOn July 2, 2014, 16-year-old Palestinian Mohammed Abu Khdeir was kidnapped, beaten and burned alive, after three Israeli teenagers were kidnapped and killed in the West Bank. Khdeir's family members have blamed Israeli Government anti-Arab hate speech for inciting the murder and rejected the PM's condolence message, as well as a visit by then President Shimon Peres. Two Israeli minors were found guilty of Khdeirs' murder and sentenced to life and 21 years imprisonment respectively.\nDuring the 2015 Israeli legislative election, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu complained, in a video statement to supporters, that his left-wing opponents were supposedly sending Israeli Arabs to vote in droves, in a statement that was widely condemned as racist, including by the US government. Netanyahu went on to win the elections against poll predictions, and several commentators and pollster imputed his victory to his last-minute attack on Israeli Arab voters. During election campaign, then Foreign Affairs Minister Avigdor Lieberman proposed beheading Israeli Arabs that are \"disloyal\" to the state.\nLebanon.\nPhoenicianism, a political doctrine that defends a direct link between Phoenicians and Christian Lebanese, is based on the idea that Arab identity is incompatible with the profession of Christian faith, linking this ethnic group with the Islamic religion. Therefore, the Lebanese Civil War had at its crossroads both religious (Christian vs. Muslim) and ethnic (Arab/Muslim vs. Christian/anti-Arab) elements, with many acts of anti-Arab agressions, like the Sabra and Chatila Massacre. Christian parties like Lebanese Renewal Party or the Guardians of the Cedars, in their programmes, are openly Anti-arabic.\nNiger.\nIn October 2006, the government of Niger announced that it would deport the Mahamid Baggara Arabs living in the Diffa region of eastern Niger to Chad. This population numbered about 150,000. While the government was rounding Arabs in preparation for the deportation, two girls died, reportedly after fleeing government forces, and three women suffered miscarriages. Niger's government had eventually suspended the controversial decision to deport Arabs.\nTurkey.\nTurkey has a history of strong anti-Arabism. During the Ottoman Empire, the Arabs were treated as just second-class subjects and suffered from immense discrimination by the Ottoman Turkish rulers, in addition, most of government's main positions were either held by Turks or non-Arab people, except for the Emirate of Hejaz under Ottoman rule. Future policy of anti-Arab sentiment, including the process of Turkification, led to the Arab Revolt against the Ottomans.\nBecause of the Syrian refugee crisis, anti-Arabism has intensified. Haaretz reported that anti-Arab racism in Turkey mainly affects two groups; tourists from the Gulf who are characterized as \"rich and condescending\" and the Syrian refugees in Turkey. Haaretz also reported that anti-Syrian sentiment in Turkey is metastasizing into a general hostility toward all Arabs including the Palestinians. Deputy Chairman of the Good Party warned that Turkey risked becoming \"a Middle Eastern country\" because of the influx of refugees.\nOutside historical enmity, anti-Arabism is also widespread in Turkish media, as Turkish media and education curriculum associating Arabs with backwardness. This has continued influencing modern Turkish historiography and the crusade of Turkish soft power, with Arabs being frequently stereotyped as evil, uncivilized, terrorists, incompetent, etc. This depiction is frequently used in contrast to the alleged depiction of Turkic people as \"noble, generous, fearsome, loyal, brave and spirited warriors\".\nAnti-Arab sentiment is also further fueled by ultranationalist groups, including the Grey Wolves and pan-Turkist nationalist parties, who called for invasions on the Arab World's Syria and Iraq, to prevent the ongoing Arab persecution of its Turkic populations in many Arab countries of the Middle East. Subsequently, Turkey has begun a series of persecuting its Arab population, as well as desire to recreate the new Turkish border.\nIn recent years, anti-Arabism has been linked with various attempts by Arab leaders to meddle into Turkish affairs, Turkey's alliance with Israel, which led to the discrimination against Arabs in Turkey grow.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 2008, a Qatari 16-year-old was killed in a racially motivated attack in Hastings, East Sussex.\nUnited States.\nWilliam A. Dorman, writing in the compendium \"The United States and the Middle East: A Search for New Perspectives\" (1992), notes that whereas \"anti-Semitism is no longer socially acceptable, at least among the educated classes[, n]o such social sanctions exist for anti-Arabism.\" Public opinion polls demonstrate that anti-Arabism in the United States is increasing significantly.\nProminent Russian-American Objectivist author, scholar and philosopher Ayn Rand, in her 1974 Ford Hall Forum lecture, explained her support for Israel following the Yom Kippur War of 1973 against a coalition of Arab nations, expressing strong anti-Arab sentiment, saying: \"The Arabs are one of the least developed cultures. They are typically nomads. Their culture is primitive, and they resent Israel because it's the sole beachhead of modern science and civilization on their continent. When you have civilized men fighting savages, you support the civilized men, no matter who they are.\"\nDuring the 1991 Gulf War, hostility toward Arabs increased in the United States. Arab Americans have experienced a backlash as result of terrorist attacks, including events where Arabs were not involved, like the Oklahoma City bombing, and the explosion of TWA Flight 800. According to a report prepared by the Arab American Institute, three days after the Oklahoma City bombing \"more than 200 serious hate crimes were committed against Arab Americans and American Muslims. The same was true in the days following September 11.\"\nAccording to a 2001 poll of Arab Americans conducted by the Arab American Institute, 32% of Arab Americans reported having been subjected to some form of ethnic-based discrimination during their lifetimes, while 20% reported having experienced an instance of ethnic-based discrimination since the September 11 attacks. Of special concern, for example, is the fact that 45% of students and 37% of Arab Americans of the Muslim faith report being targeted by discrimination since September 11.\nAccording to the FBI and Arab groups, the number of attacks against Arabs and Muslims, as well as others mistaken for them, rose considerably after the 9/11 attacks. Hate crimes against people of Middle Eastern origin or descent increased from 354 attacks in 2000, to 1,501 attacks in 2001. Among the victims of the backlash was a Middle Eastern man in Houston, Texas who was shot and wounded after an assailant accused him of \"blowing up the country\", and four immigrants shot and killed by a man named Larme Price, who confessed to killing them as revenge for the September 11 attacks. Although Price described his victims as Arabs, only one was from an Arab country. This appears to be a trend; because of stereotypes of Arabs, several non-Arab, non-Muslim groups were subjected to attacks in the wake of 9/11, including several Sikh men attacked for wearing their religiously mandated turban.\nEarl Krugel and Irv Rubin, two leaders of the Jewish Defense League (JDL), described by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security as a terrorist organization, planned to bomb Arab-American Congressman Darrell Issa's office and the King Fahd Mosque in Culver City, California. The two were arrested as part of a sting operation when they received a shipment of explosives at Krugel's home in Los Angeles. Krugel was murdered in November 2005 while in the custody of the Federal Bureau of Prisons in Phoenix. His conviction, which was under appeal at that time, was dismissed in U.S. District Court. Rubin committed suicide in 2002 while in Federal Bureau of Prisons custody in Los Angeles. Although the JDL was suspected in the 1985 bombing death of ADC leader Alex Odeh, no arrest has been made in that case.\nStephen E. Herbits, the Secretary-General of the New York\u2013based World Jewish Congress (WJC) made several racist remarks and ethnic slurs in an internal memo against the president of the European Jewish Congress Pierre Besnainou: \"He is French. Don't discount this. He cannot be trusted ... He is Tunisian. Do not discount this either. He works like an Arab.\" The WJC in Israel has condemned the statements as both hateful and racist. \"It appears that the struggle in the World Jewish Congress has now turned racist, said Knesset member Shai Hermesh (Kadima), who heads the Israeli board of the WJC. Instead of creating unity among the Jewish people, this organization is just creating division and hatred.\"\nIn 2004, American radio host Michael Savage described Arabs as \"non-humans\", said that Americans want the U.S. to \"drop a nuclear weapon\" on an Arab country, and advocated that people in the Middle East be \"forcibly converted to Christianity\" to \"turn them into human beings\". Savage characterized Israel as \"a little country surrounded by racist, fascist bigots who don't want anyone but themselves living in that hell hole called the Middle East\". Expressions of anti-Arabism in the United States intensified following the 2009 Fort Hood shooting, which was perpetrated by Nidal Hasan, a Palestinian Arab American. In 2010, the proposed development of an Islamic community center containing a mosque near the World Trade Center site provoked further widespread expressions of virulent anti-Arabism in the United States.\nWestern media.\nParts of Hollywood are regarded as using a disproportionate number of Arabs as villains and of depicting Arabs negatively and stereotypically. According to Godfrey Cheshire, a critic on the \"New York Press\", \"the only vicious racial stereotype that's not only still permitted but actively endorsed by Hollywood\" is that of Arabs as crazed terrorists.\nLike the image projected of Jews in Nazi Germany, the image of Arabs projected by western movies is often that of \"money-grubbing caricatures that sought world domination, worshipped a different God, killed innocents, and lusted after blond virgins\".\nThe 2000 film \"Rules of Engagement\" drew criticism from Arab groups and was described as \"probably the most racist film ever made against Arabs by Hollywood\" by the ADC. Paul Clinton of \"The Boston Globe\" wrote \"at its worst, it's blatantly racist, using Arabs as cartoon-cutout bad guys\".\nJack Shaheen, in his book \"Reel Bad Arabs\", surveyed more than 900 film appearances of Arab characters. Of those, only a dozen were positive and 50 were balanced. Shaheen writes that \"[Arab] stereotypes are deeply ingrained in American cinema. From 1896 until today, filmmakers have collectively indicted all Arabs as Public Enemy #1 \u2013 brutal, heartless, uncivilized religious fanatics and money-mad cultural \"others\" bent on terrorizing civilized Westerners, especially [Christians] and [Jews]. Much has happened since 1896\u00a0... Throughout it all, Hollywood's caricature of the [Arab] has prowled the silver screen. He is there to this day \u2013 repulsive and unrepresentative as ever.\"\nAccording to \"Newsweek\" columnist Meg Greenfield, anti-Arab sentiment presently promotes misconceptions about Arabs and hinders genuine peace in the Middle East.\nIn 1993, the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee confronted Disney about anti-Arab racist content in its animated film \"Aladdin\". At first Disney denied any problems but eventually relented and changed two lines in the opening song. Members of the ADC were still unhappy with the portrayal of Arabic characters and the referral to the Middle East as \"barbaric\".\nIn 1980, \"The Link\", a magazine published by Americans for Middle East Understanding, contained an article \"The Arab Stereotype on Television\" which detailed negative Arab stereotypes that appeared in TV shows including \"Woody Woodpecker\", \"Rocky and Bullwinkle\", \"Jonny Quest\" and an educational children's show on PBS.\nArab advocacy organisations.\nUnited States.\nThe American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC) was founded in 1980 by United States Senator James Abourezk. The ADC claims that it is the largest Arab-American grassroots civil rights organization in the United States. Warren David is the national president of ADC On March 1, 2010, Sara Najjar-Wilson replaced former Democratic US Congresswoman Mary Rose Oakar as president. ADC claims that is at the forefront in addressing anti-Arabism - discrimination and bias against Arab Americans.\nFounded in 1985 by James Zogby, a prominent Democrat, the Arab American Institute (AAI) states that it is a partisan non-profit, membership organization and advocacy group based in Washington, D.C. that focuses on the issues and interests of Arab-Americans nationwide. The AAI also conducts research related to anti-Arabism in the United States. The Anti-Defamation League identifies the Arab American Institute as an anti-Israel protest organization. According to an AAI 2007 poll of Arab-Americans:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Experiences of discrimination are not uniform within the Arab American community, with 76% of young Arab Americans (18 to 29 years old) and 58% of Arab American Muslims reporting that they have \"personally experienced discrimination in the past because of [their] ethnicity,\" as opposed to 42% of respondents overall... . Comparisons with previous AAI polls in which this same question was asked indicate a rise in experiences of discrimination amongst young Arab Americans.\nThe Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) is an Islamic organization in North America that was created in June 1994. It has been active against anti-Arabism as well.\nThe Anti-Defamation League (ADL), which was founded to combat antisemitism and other forms of bigotry, actively investigated and spoke out against the rise in anti-Arab hate crimes following the September 2001 terrorist attacks. In 2003, the ADL urged the Speaker of the United States' House of Representatives to approve a resolution condemning bigotry and violence against Arab-Americans and American Muslims. The American Jewish Committee, and American Jewish Congress have issued similar responses. In 2004, the ADL national director issued the following statement: \"we are disturbed that a number of Arab Americans and Islamic institutions have been targets of anger and hatred in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks.\"\nIn the 1990s, the Anti-Defamation League clashed with the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee in a legal dispute regarding sensitive information the ADL had collected about ADC members' positions on the Arab-Israeli conflict. In 1999, the dispute was finally settled out of court without any finding of wrongdoing. In 2001, the ADL attempted to bar Arab members of CAIR from attending a conference on multicultural inclusion. In 2007 the ADL accused the Council on American-Islamic Relations of having a \"poor record on terrorism.\" CAIR, in turn, accused the ADL of \"attempting to muzzle the First Amendment rights of American Muslims by smearing and demonizing them\". When the case was settled, Hussein Ibish, director of communications for the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC), stated that the ADL had gathered data \"systematically in a program whose clear intent was to undermine civil rights and Arab-American organizations\".\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn Britain, the Greater London Council (GLC) and Labour Committee on Palestine (LCP) have been involved in fighting anti-Arabism through the promotion of Arab and Palestinian rights. The LCP funded a conference on anti-Arab racism in 1989. The National Association of British Arabs also works against discrimination.\nUnited Nations.\nThe outcome document of the Durban Review Conference organized by the UN Human Rights Council, April 21, 2009, \"Deplores the global rise and number of incidents of racial or religious intolerance and violence, including Islamophobia, anti-Semitism, Christianophobia and anti-Arabism\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65787", "revid": "29616321", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65787", "title": "Admiral", "text": "Highest rank of naval officer\nAdmiral is one of the highest ranks in many navies. In the Commonwealth nations and the United States, a \"full\" admiral is equivalent to a \"full\" general in the army or the air force. Admiral is ranked above vice admiral and below admiral of the fleet, or fleet admiral.\nEtymology.\nThe word in Middle English comes from Anglo-French , \"commander\", from Medieval Latin , . These evolved from the Arabic () \u2013 () (), \"king, prince, chief, leader, nobleman, lord, a governor, commander, or person who rules over a number of people\" and (), the Arabic definite article meaning \"the.\" In Arabic, admiral is also represented as (), where al-Ba\u1e25r (\u0627\u0644\u0628\u062d\u0631) means the sea.\nThe 1818 edition of Samuel Johnson's \"A Dictionary of the English Language\", edited and revised by the Rev. Henry John Todd, states that the term: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] has been traced to the Arab. emir or amir, lord or commander, and the Gr. \u1f04\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, the sea, q. d. \"prince of the sea\". The word is written both with and without the d, in other languages, as well as our own. Barb. Lat. admirallus and amiralius. V. Ducange. Barb. Gr\u00e6c. \u1f04\u03bc\u03b7\u03c1\u03b1\u03bb\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2. V. Meursii Gloss. Gr\u00e6co-Barbarum, edit. 1610. p. 29. Fr. admiral and amiral. Dan. the same. Germ. ammiral. Dutch, admirael or ammirael. Ital. ammiraglio. Sp. almirante. Minsheu, in his Spanish Dictionary, says 'almiralle is a king in the Arabian language.' Amrayl is used by Robert of Gloucester, in the sense of a prince, or governour.\nThe quote from John Minsheu's Dictionarie in Spanish and English (1599), given in Johnson's Dictionary, has been confirmed as being accurate. Additionally, the definition of Am\u012br (\u0623\u0645\u064a\u0631), as given in Edward William Lane's Arabic-English Lexicon, concurs, in part, with Minsheu's definition, stating that the term means \"One having, holding, or possessing, command; a commander; a governor; a lord; a prince, or king.\"\nWhile other Greek words of the period existed to indicate \"belonging to the sea,\" or \"of the sea,\" the now obsolete Gr. mentioned in Johnson's Dictionary is expressly defined as \"of the sea, Lat. marinus, epith. of sea-gods, nymphs, etc.\"\nThough there are multiple meanings for the Arabic Am\u012br (\u0623\u0645\u064a\u0631), the literal meaning of the phrase Am\u012br al-Ba\u1e25r (\u0623\u0645\u064a\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0628\u062d\u0631) is \"Prince of the Sea.\" This position, versus \"commander of the sea,\" is demonstrated by legal practices prevailing in the Ottoman Empire, whereas it was only possible for Phanariots to qualify for attaining four princely positions, those being grand dragoman, dragoman of the fleet, and the voivodees of Moldavia and Wallachia. Those Phanariots who attained the princely position of dragoman of the fleet served under the Ottoman admiral having administration of the Aegean islands and the Anatolian coast.\nModern acknowledgement of the phrase Am\u012br-al-Ba\u1e25r (\u0623\u0645\u064a\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0628\u062d\u0631) meaning \"Prince of the Sea\" includes a speech made in an official U.S. military ceremony conducted in an Arabic port, and a news article published by an Arabic news outlet: On 24 May 2012, in a change of command ceremony aboard aircraft carrier USS Enterprise (CVN 65), while docked at Khalifa Bin Salman Port, Bahrain, U.S. Marine Corps Gen. James Mattis, Commander, U.S. Central Command, introduced Vice Admiral Mark I. Fox as \"Admiral Fox, the prince of the sea, emir of the sea \u2013 to translate 'admiral' from the Arabic to English;\" On 04 Feb 2021, in an announcement of his coronavirus-related death, the Arabic news website Saudi 24 News referred to Admiral Edmond Chagoury by the title \"Prince of the Sea.\"\nOne alternate etymology proposes that the term admiral evolved, instead, from the title of Am\u012br al-Umar\u0101\u02be (\u0623\u0645\u064a\u0631 \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0645\u0631\u0627\u0621). Under the reign of the Buyid dynasty (934 to 1062) of Iraq and Iran, the title of Am\u012br al-Umar\u0101\u02be, which means prince of princes, came to denote the heir-apparent, or crown prince.\nThis alternate etymology states that the term was in use for the Greco-Arab naval leaders (e.g. Christodulus) in the Norman-Arab-Byzantine culture of Norman Sicily, which had formerly been ruled by Arabs, at least by the early 11th century. During this time, the Norman Roger II of Sicily (1095\u20131154) employed a Greek Christian, known as George of Antioch, who previously had served as a naval commander for several North African Muslim rulers. Roger styled George in Abbasid fashion as , or Am\u012br al-Umar\u0101\u02be, with the title becoming Latinized in the 13th century as .\nThe Sicilians and later the Genoese took the first two parts of the term from their Aragon opponents and used them as one word, . . The French gave their sea commanders similar titles while in Portuguese and Spanish the word changed to . As the word was used by people speaking Latin or Latin-based languages it gained the \"d\" and endured a series of different endings and spellings leading to the English spelling in the 14th century and to \"admiral\" by the 16th century.\nIt is important to note that the etymology of a word does not suggest the antiquity of the word as it may have appeared in other languages with entirely different pronunciations. The Greek \u03bd\u03b1\u03cd\u03b1\u03c1\u03c7\u03bf\u03c2, for instance, which is pronounced \"na\u00faarkhos\", existed from very ancient times in Greece. While \u03bd\u03b1\u03cd\u03b1\u03c1\u03c7\u03bf\u03c2 may be defined as \"admiral\" as used by Plutarch in his \"Parallel Lives\", the very pronunciation of \u03bd\u03b1\u03cd\u03b1\u03c1\u03c7\u03bf\u03c2 demonstrates that it is not a part of the etymology for the English word \"admiral.\"\nHistory.\nThe word \"admiral\" has come to be almost exclusively associated with the highest naval rank in most of the world's navies, equivalent to the army rank of general. However, this was not always the case; for example, in some European countries prior to the end of World War II, admiral was the third highest naval rank after general admiral and grand admiral.\nThe rank of admiral has also been subdivided into various grades, several of which are historically extinct while others remain in use in most present-day navies. The Royal Navy used the colours red, white, and blue, in descending order to indicate seniority of its admirals until 1864; for example, Horatio Nelson's highest rank was vice-admiral of the white. The generic term for these naval equivalents of army generals is flag officer. Some navies have also used army-type titles for them, such as the Cromwellian \"general at sea\".\nNATO code.\nWhile the rank is used in most of NATO countries, it is ranked differently depending on the country.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65790", "revid": "1164638801", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65790", "title": "Taikonaut", "text": ""}
{"id": "65791", "revid": "628775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65791", "title": "Shenzhou (spacecraft)", "text": "Class of crewed spacecraft from China\nShenzhou (, ; see ) is a Chinese spacecraft developed for the nation's crewed space program. Its design was based on Russia's Soyuz, but larger and modernized. Like Soyuz, Shenzhou is a single-use vehicle composed of three modules; a descent module which houses the crew during launch and reentry, an orbital module which provides additional living space and storage during orbit, but is jettisoned before reentry, and a service module responsible for propulsion and power, also discarded before reentry. For added safety and aerodynamics, the spacecraft is encased within a fairing and fitted with a launch escape system during liftoff.\nIts maiden uncrewed flight, Shenzhou 1, was on 19 November 1999, with the first crewed mission, Shenzhou 5, taking flight on 15 October 2003. It is slated for replacement by the next-generation Mengzhou, currently in development, with a two module configuration.\nEtymology.\nThe literal meaning of the native name (p: Sh\u00e9nzh\u014du; ) is \"the Divine vessel [on the Heavenly River]\", to which Heavenly River () means the Milky Way in Classical Chinese. is a pun and neologism that plays on the poetic word referring to China, , meaning \"Divine realm\", which bears the same pronunciation. For further information, refer to Chinese theology, Chinese astronomy and names of China.\nHistory.\nChina's first efforts at human spaceflight started in 1968 with a projected launch date of 1973. Although China successfully launched an uncrewed satellite in 1970, its crewed spacecraft program was cancelled in 1980 due to a lack of funds.\nThe Chinese crewed spacecraft program was relaunched in 1992 with Project 921. The Phase One spacecraft followed the general layout of the Russian Soyuz spacecraft, with three modules that could separate for reentry. China signed a deal with Russia in 1995 for the transfer of Soyuz technology, including life support and docking systems. The Phase One spacecraft was then modified with the new Russian technology. The general designer of Shenzhou-1 through Shenzhou-5 was Qi Faren ((), 26 April 1933), and from Shenzhou-6 on, the general design was turned over to Zhang Bainan ((), 23 June 1962).\nThe first uncrewed flight of the spacecraft was launched on 19 November 1999, after which Project 921/1 was renamed Shenzhou, a name reportedly chosen by Jiang Zemin. A series of three additional uncrewed flights were carried out. The first crewed launch took place on 15 October 2003 with the Shenzhou 5 mission. The spacecraft has since become the mainstay of the Chinese crewed space program, being used for both crewed and uncrewed missions.\nDesign.\nShenzhou consists of three modules: a forward orbital module (), a reentry module () in the middle, and an aft service module (). This division is based on the principle of minimizing the amount of material to be returned to Earth. Anything placed in the orbital or service modules does not require heat shielding, increasing the space available in the spacecraft without increasing weight as much as it would if those modules were also able to withstand reentry.\nOrbital module.\nThe orbital module () contains space for experiments, crew-serviced or crew-operated equipment, and in-orbit habitation. Without docking systems, Shenzhou 1\u20136 carried different kinds of payload on the top of their orbital modules for scientific experiments.\nThe Chinese spacecraft docking mechanism (beginning with Shenzhou 8) is based on the Androgynous Peripheral Attach System (APAS).\nUp until Shenzhou 8, the orbital module of the Shenzhou was equipped with its own propulsion, solar power, and control systems, allowing autonomous flight. It is possible for Shenzhou to leave an orbital module in orbit for redocking with a later spacecraft, a capability which Soyuz does not possess, since the only hatch between the orbital and reentry modules is a part of the reentry module, and orbital module is depressurized after separation. For future missions, the orbital module(s) could also be left behind on the planned Chinese project 921/2 space station as additional station modules.\nIn the uncrewed test flights launched, the orbital module of each Shenzhou was left functioning on orbit for several days after the reentry modules return, and the Shenzhou 5 orbital module continued to operate for six months after launch.\nReentry module.\nThe reentry module () is located in the middle section of the spacecraft and contains seating for the crew. It is the only portion of Shenzhou which returns to Earth's surface. Its shape is a compromise between maximizing living space and allowing for some aerodynamic control upon reentry.\nService module.\nThe aft service module () contains life support and other equipment required for the functioning of Shenzhou. Two pairs of solar panels, one pair on the service module and the other pair on the orbital module, have a total area of over , indicating average electrical power over 1.5\u00a0kW (\"Soyuz\" have 1.0\u00a0kW).\nComparison with Soyuz.\nAlthough the Shenzhou spacecraft follows the same layout as the Russian Soyuz spacecraft, it is approximately 10% larger and heavier than Soyuz. It also has a bigger cylindrical orbital module and four propulsion engines. There is enough room to carry an inflatable raft in case of a splashdown, whereas Soyuz cosmonauts must jump into the water and swim. The commander sits in the center seat on both spacecraft. However, the pilot sits in the left seat on Shenzhou and the right seat on Soyuz.\nLaunch records.\nThe records information is all from Gunter's space page. All times are in Coordinated Universal Time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65793", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65793", "title": "Amarillo Dillas", "text": "The Amarillo Dillas were a professional baseball team based in Amarillo, Texas, in the United States. The Dillas were a member of United League Baseball, an independent professional league which is not affiliated with Major League Baseball or Minor League Baseball. From 1994 to 2010, the Dillas played their home games at historic Potter County Memorial Stadium, nicknamed the \"Dilla Villa.\"\nHistory.\nThe Amarillo Dillas were a charter member of the independent Texas\u2013Louisiana League, which was formed in 1994. The Dillas were a strong team in the early years of the Texas\u2013Louisiana League, claiming the regular season champion title in 1995, 1998, and 2000. They would win the first half championship in 1997 and were the 1999 Texas\u2013Louisiana League champions. The Texas\u2013Louisiana League was renamed the Central Baseball League in 2002, and several new teams were added. The Dillas struggled with attendance after the expansion, only averaging 846 fans in their championship series appearance in 2004. A neglected stadium and erosion of local fan support resulted in the Dillas being dropped from the Central League following the 2004 season in favor of the El Paso Diablos.\nThe Amarillo Dillas were brought back in 2006 as one of six charter members of the independent United League Baseball (ULB). The new Amarillo Dillas management renovated the entire stadium, including a new field and new seats. The Amarillo Dillas just missed the playoffs in their first two seasons in the new league. In 2008, the Dillas posted a 54\u201337 record, claiming first-half champion honors. In the playoffs, Amarillo defeated Alexandria for their first league championship since 1999. Amarillo would continue their success in 2009 with a 44\u201335 record and another championship, defeating San Angelo for the title. The Dillas would win the title again in 2010, becoming the first United League three-peat champions.\nIn October 2010, the Dillas were evicted from Potter County Memorial Stadium. Reunion Sports Group, the parent company of the Dillas, could not pay the $75,000 lease on the stadium. In November 2010, Potter County commissioners awarded the bid for the 2011 use of the stadium to Scott Berry, owner of Southern Independent Baseball and franchisee with the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball. The Dillas were replaced by the Amarillo Sox in the 2011 season.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nwww.myamarillodillas.com/ Amarillo Dillas website (Dead Link)"}
{"id": "65796", "revid": "1008048", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65796", "title": "Jackson Senators", "text": "Minor league baseball team based in Jackson, Mississippi (USA)\nThe Jackson Senators was the name of at least two minor league baseball teams that played in Jackson, Mississippi.\nFirst team.\nThe first known Jackson Senators club competed in the Delta League in 1904. \nIn 1951, club president Emmet Vaughey announced that the club would be disbanded, after the dissolution of the Southeastern League.\nJackson also played as a member of the Cotton States League before 1953. This was a class C minor-league club, and was the last team to represent the city of Jackson before the arrival of the class AA Jackson Mets for the 1975 season.\nSecond team.\nThe second Jackson Senators team was a member of the independent Central Baseball League from 2002 to 2005, a league that was not affiliated with Major League Baseball. The Senators won the CBL title in 2003. After the CBL disbanded, the Senators were left without a league for the 2006 season.\nOn January 24, 2006, officials with the team's ownership group, Mississippi Baseball Club LLC, announced that they would not be operating a professional independent team in Jackson for the 2006 season after running the team alongside the Mississippi Braves for the 2005 season, who had relocated to suburban Pearl from Greenville (South Carolina).\nThe team played at Smith-Wills Stadium.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65798", "revid": "9768311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65798", "title": "Wang tile", "text": "Square tiles with a color on each edge\nWang tiles (or Wang dominoes), first proposed by mathematician, logician, and philosopher Hao Wang in 1961, is a class of formal systems. They are modeled visually by square tiles with a color on each side. A set of such tiles is selected, and copies of the tiles are arranged side by side with matching colors, \"without\" rotating or reflecting them.\nThe basic question about a set of Wang tiles is whether it can tile the plane or not, i.e., whether an entire infinite plane can be filled this way. The next question is whether this can be done in a periodic pattern.\nDomino problem.\nIn 1961, Wang conjectured that if a finite set of Wang tiles can tile the plane, then there also exists a \" periodic\" tiling, which, mathematically, is a tiling that is invariant under translations by vectors in a 2-dimensional lattice. This can be likened to the periodic tiling in a wallpaper pattern, where the overall pattern is a repetition of some smaller pattern. He also observed that this conjecture would imply the existence of an algorithm to decide whether a given finite set of Wang tiles can tile the plane. The idea of constraining adjacent tiles to match each other occurs in the game of dominoes, so Wang tiles are also known as Wang dominoes. The algorithmic problem of determining whether a tile set can tile the plane became known as the domino problem.\nAccording to Wang's student, Robert Berger,\nThe Domino Problem deals with the class of all domino sets. It consists of deciding, for each domino set, whether or not it is solvable. We say that the Domino Problem is \"decidable\" or \"undecidable\" according to whether there exists or does not exist an algorithm which, given the specifications of an arbitrary domino set, will decide whether or not the set is solvable.\nIn other words, the domino problem asks whether there is an effective procedure that correctly settles the problem for all given domino sets.\nIn 1966, Berger solved the domino problem in the negative. He proved that no algorithm for the problem can exist, by showing how to translate any Turing machine into a set of Wang tiles that tiles the plane if and only if the Turing machine does not halt. The undecidability of the halting problem (the problem of testing whether a Turing machine eventually halts) then implies the undecidability of Wang's tiling problem.\nAperiodic sets of tiles.\nCombining Berger's undecidability result with Wang's observation shows that there must exist a finite set of Wang tiles that tiles the plane, but only \"aperiodically\". This is similar to a Penrose tiling, or the arrangement of atoms in a quasicrystal. Although Berger's original set contained 20,426 tiles, he conjectured that smaller sets would work, including subsets of his set, and in his unpublished Ph.D. thesis, he reduced the number of tiles to 104. In later years, ever smaller sets were found. For example, a set of 13 aperiodic tiles was published by Karel Culik II in 1996.\nThe smallest set of aperiodic tiles was discovered by Emmanuel Jeandel and Michael Rao in 2015, with 11 tiles and 4 colors. They used an exhaustive computer search to prove that 10 tiles or 3 colors are insufficient to force aperiodicity. This set, shown above in the title image, can be examined more closely at .\nGeneralizations.\nWang tiles can be generalized in various ways, all of which are also undecidable in the above sense. For example, \"Wang cubes\" are equal-sized cubes with colored faces, and side colors can be matched on any polygonal tessellation.\nCulik and Kari have demonstrated aperiodic sets of Wang cubes. Winfree et al. have demonstrated the feasibility of creating molecular \"tiles\" made from DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) that can act as Wang tiles. Mittal et al. have shown that these tiles can also be composed of peptide nucleic acid (PNA), a stable artificial mimic of DNA.\nApplications.\nWang tiles have been used for procedural synthesis of textures, heightfields, and other large and nonrepeating bi-dimensional data sets; a small set of precomputed or hand-made source tiles can be assembled very cheaply without too obvious repetitions and periodicity.\nIn this case, traditional aperiodic tilings would show their very regular structure; much less constrained sets that guarantee at least two tile choices for any two given side colors are common because tileability is easily ensured and each tile can be selected pseudorandomly.\nWang tiles have also been used in cellular automata theory decidability proofs.\nIn popular culture.\nThe short story \"Wang's Carpets\", later expanded to the novel \"Diaspora\", by Greg Egan, postulates a universe, complete with resident organisms and intelligent beings, embodied as Wang tiles implemented by patterns of complex molecules.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65799", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65799", "title": "San Angelo Colts", "text": "The San Angelo Colts were a professional baseball team based in San Angelo, Texas, in the United States. The Colts were most recently a member of United League Baseball, an independent professional league which was not affiliated with Major League Baseball or Minor League Baseball. The Colts played their home games at Foster Field.\nThe team experienced declining attendance in later years and announced on July 2, 2014 that it had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Although it was stated at the time that operations would not be affected, the team announced on August 11, 2014 that the final 8 games of the 2014 season would not be played.\nThe combination of the Colts' financial issues, the loss of the home stadium of the Fort Worth Cats and low attendance led to the folding of United League Baseball, and all of its member teams, in January 2015.\nLeague All-Stars.\nPlayers.\n2000\n2001\n2002\n2006\n2007\n2008\nCoaches.\n2000\u20132001\n2006\n2008\u20132009\nHistorical use of the name.\nThe original San Angelo Colts played in the Class D West Texas League in 1922. The team had started out as the San Angelo Bronchos the year before.\nIn 1948, another team using the Colts name began play in the Longhorn League. When the league changed names to the Southwestern League in 1956, the Colts stayed on board, but folded before the start of the 1957 season.\nThe Colts had been a part of independent baseball since 2000 with the Texas\u2013Louisiana League (2000\u20132001), Central Baseball League (2002\u20132005), United League Baseball (2006\u20132010) and North American League (2011\u20132012).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65800", "revid": "44220290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65800", "title": "Springfield-Ozark Mountain Ducks", "text": "The Springfield-Ozark Mountain Ducks was an unaffiliated minor league team that previously played in Ozark, Missouri, a suburb of Springfield. The team was a member of the Texas-Louisiana League, later named the Central Baseball League from 1999 to 2003. The team played in Price Cutter Park, now known as Ozark Mountain Sports Complex.\nHistory.\nIn April 1998, Texas-Louisiana League president and co-founder Byron Pierce announced that the league would put a new team in Ozark pending financing for a new ballpark. In August the funding was secured. Construction on the stadium started in late fall and took four months to complete.\nThe peculiar team name and mascot was picked from a name-the-team contest in 1998. The winning entry\u2014by Craig Cremer of Ozark\u2014was picked out of 65,000 submissions. Cremer says the kid-friendly name was derived from a combination of the Ozark Mountains and the Ride the Ducks boat ride in Branson\nThe Mountain Ducks played their inaugural game on May 27, 1999 on the road, a 7-4 loss to the Amarillo Dillas. Their first home game came two weeks later on June 10 in front of 4,764 people, a 5-2 loss, also against Amarillo.\nSuccess on the field was hard to come by for the team. The Mountain Ducks only made the postseason one time during its tenure, a first round exit in 2000.\nTwo players with Major League experience played for Springfield-Ozark: Outfielder Mel Hall (2002) played 13 seasons, mostly with the Cleveland Indians and New York Yankees and Pitcher Mike Smith (1999-2001). Smith played in 15 games over two seasons with the Baltimore Orioles.\nThe team joined the Frontier League in 2004. The Mountain Ducks rights to the club's spot in the CBL were sold in 2004 to the Pensacola Pelicans of the discontinued Southeastern League.\nThe Ducks only played one season in the Frontier League. Its time in Ozark ended for good after hotel magnate John Q. Hammons purchased the rights to the El Paso Diablos in the Texas League (AA), moved them to nearby downtown Springfield and renamed them the Cardinals. The franchise moved east to Ohio/Indiana and were renamed the Ohio Valley Redcoats.\nTeam Record.\nThe Mountain Ducks had a combined record of 261-312 over six seasons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65806", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65806", "title": "Thebes, Greece", "text": "City in Boeotia, Greece\nThebes ( ; , \"Th\u00edva\" ; , \"Th\u00eabai\" ) is a city in Boeotia, Central Greece, and is one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world. It is the largest city in Boeotia and a major center for the area along with Livadeia and Tanagra.\nIt played an important role in Greek myths, as the site of the stories of Cadmus, Oedipus, Dionysus, Heracles and others. One myth had the city founded by Agenor, which gave rise to the (now somewhat obscure) name \"Agenorids\" to denote Thebans. Archaeological excavations in and around Thebes have revealed a Mycenaean settlement and clay tablets written in the Linear B script, indicating the importance of the site in the Bronze Age.\nThebes was the largest city of the ancient region of Boeotia and was the leader of the Boeotian confederacy. It was a major rival of ancient Athens, and sided with the Persians during the 480 BC invasion under Xerxes I. Theban forces under the command of Epaminondas ended Spartan hegemony at the Battle of Leuctra in 371 BC, with the Sacred Band of Thebes, an elite military unit of male lovers, celebrated as instrumental there. Macedonia would rise in power at the Battle of Chaeronea in 338 BC, bringing decisive victory to Philip II over an alliance of Thebes and Athens. Thebes was a major force in Greek history prior to its destruction by Alexander the Great in 335 BC, and was the dominant city-state at the time of the Macedonian conquest of Greece. During the Byzantine period, the city was famous for its silks.\nThe modern city contains an archaeological museum, the remains of the Cadmea (Bronze Age and forward citadel), and scattered ancient remains. The Holy Church of Luke the Evangelist is also in Thebes and contains Luke's tomb and relics. Modern Thebes is the largest town of the regional unit of Boeotia.\nMunicipality.\nIn 2011, as a consequence of the Kallikratis reform, Thebes was merged with Plataies, Thisvi, and Vagia to form a larger municipality, which retained the name Thebes. The other three became units of the larger municipality.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nArchaeological excavations in and around Thebes have revealed cist graves dated to Mycenaean times containing weapons, ivory, and tablets written in Linear B. Its attested name forms and relevant terms on tablets found locally or elsewhere include , \"te-qa-i\", understood to be read as *\"T\u02b0\u0113g\u02b7ai\u032es\" (Ancient Greek: , \"Th\u0113bais\", i.e. \"at Thebes\", \"Thebes\" in the dative-locative case), , \"te-qa-de\", for *\"T\u02b0\u0113g\u02b7asde\" (, \"Th\u0113basde\", i.e. \"to Thebes\"), and , \"te-qa-ja\", for *\"T\u02b0\u0113g\u02b7aja\" (, \"Th\u0113baia\", i.e. \"Theban woman\").\nThe central area of Thebes, known as the Cadmea, shows signs of destruction towards the end of the Mycenaean era and much of the site was abandoned. In the words of Richard Hope Simpson, \"The decline of Thebes after the end of the LH IIIB period recalls the Hypothebai (or \"sub-Thebes\") of the Homeric Catalogue of the Ships (\"Iliad\" ii 505), but we have no reliable indications as to where this residual \"lower town\" may have been located.\" The Homeric Hypothebai may have been the seed of the Archaic and Classical polity of Thebes when the city was reestablished in earnest.\nArchaic and classical periods.\nAs attested already in Homer's \"Iliad\", Thebes was often called \"Seven-Gated Thebes\" (\u0398\u1fc6\u03b2\u03b1\u03b9 \u1f11\u03c0\u03c4\u03ac\u03c0\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf\u03b9, \"Thebai heptapyloi\") (\"Iliad\", IV.406) to distinguish it from \"Hundred-Gated Thebes\" (\u0398\u1fc6\u03b2\u03b1\u03b9 \u1f11\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03cc\u03bc\u03c0\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf\u03b9, \"Thebai hekatompyloi\") in Egypt (\"Iliad\", IX.383).\nIn the late 6th century BC, the Thebans were brought for the first time into hostile contact with the Athenians, who helped the small village of Plataea to maintain its independence against them, and in 506 BC repelled an inroad into Attica. The aversion to Athens best serves to explain the apparently unpatriotic attitude which Thebes displayed during the Persian invasion of Greece (480\u2013479 BC). Though a contingent of 400 was sent to Thermopylae and remained there with Leonidas before being defeated alongside the Spartans, the governing aristocracy soon after joined King Xerxes I of Persia with great readiness and fought zealously on his behalf at the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC. The victorious Greeks subsequently punished Thebes by depriving it of the presidency of the Boeotian League and an attempt by the Spartans to expel it from the Delphic amphictyony was only frustrated by the intercession of Athens.\nIn 457 BC Sparta, needing a counterpoise against Athens in central Greece, reversed her policy and reinstated Thebes as the dominant power in Boeotia. The great citadel of Cadmea served this purpose well by holding out as a base of resistance when the Athenians overran and occupied the rest of the country (457\u2013447 BC). In the Peloponnesian War, the Thebans, embittered by the support that Athens gave to the smaller Boeotian towns, and especially to Plataea, which they vainly attempted to reduce in 431 BC, were firm allies of Sparta, which in turn helped them to besiege Plataea and allowed them to destroy the town after its capture in 427 BC. In 424 BC, at the head of the Boeotian levy, they inflicted a severe defeat on an invading force of Athenians at the Battle of Delium, and for the first time displayed the effects of that firm military organization that eventually raised them to predominant power in Greece.\nAfter the downfall of Athens at the end of the Peloponnesian War, the Thebans, having learned that Sparta intended to protect the states that Thebes desired to annex, broke off the alliance. In 404 BC, they had urged the complete destruction of Athens; yet, in 403 BC, they secretly supported the restoration of its democracy in order to find in it a counterpoise against Sparta. A few years later, influenced perhaps in part by Persian gold, they formed the nucleus of the league against Sparta. At the Battle of Haliartus (395 BC) and the Battle of Coronea (394 BC), they again proved their rising military capacity by standing their ground against the Spartans. The result of the war was especially disastrous to Thebes, as the general settlement of 387 BC stipulated the complete autonomy of all Greek towns and so withdrew the other Boeotians from its political control. Its power was further curtailed in 382 BC, when a Spartan force occupied the citadel by a treacherous \"coup de main\". Three years later, the Spartan garrison was expelled and a democratic constitution was set up in place of the traditional oligarchy. In the consequent wars with Sparta, the Theban army, trained and led by Epaminondas and Pelopidas, proved itself formidable (see also: Sacred Band of Thebes). Years of desultory fighting, in which Thebes established its control over all Boeotia, culminated in 371 BC in a remarkable victory over the Spartans at Leuctra. The winners were hailed throughout Greece as champions of the oppressed. They carried their arms into Peloponnesus and at the head of a large coalition, permanently crippled the power of Sparta, in part by freeing many helot slaves, the basis of the Spartan economy. Similar expeditions were sent to Thessaly and Macedon to regulate the affairs of those regions.\nDecline and destruction.\nThe predominance of Thebes was short-lived, as the states that it protected refused to subject themselves permanently to its control. Thebes renewed its rivalry with Athens, which had joined with them in 395 BC in fear of Sparta, but since 387 BC had endeavoured to maintain the balance of power against its ally, preventing the formation of a Theban empire. With the death of Epaminondas at the Battle of Mantinea (362 BC), the city sank again to the position of a secondary power.\nIn the Third Sacred War (356\u2013346 BC) with its neighbor Phocis, Thebes lost its predominance in central Greece. By asking Philip II of Macedon to crush the Phocians, Thebes extended the former's power within dangerous proximity to its frontiers. The revulsion of popular feeling in Thebes was expressed in 338 BC by the orator Demosthenes, who persuaded Thebes to join Athens in a final attempt to bar Philip's advance on Attica. The Theban contingent lost the decisive battle of Chaeronea and along with it every hope of reassuming control over Greece.\nPhilip was content to deprive Thebes of its dominion over Boeotia; but an unsuccessful revolt in 335 BC against his son Alexander the Great while he was campaigning in the north was punished by Alexander and his Greek allies with the destruction of the city (except, according to tradition, the house of the poet Pindar and the temples), and its territory divided between the other Boeotian cities. Moreover, the Thebans themselves were sold into slavery.\nAlexander spared only priests, leaders of the pro-Macedonian party and descendants of Pindar. The end of Thebes cowed Athens into submission. According to Plutarch, a special Athenian embassy, led by Phocion, an opponent of the anti-Macedonian faction, was able to persuade Alexander to give up his demands for the exile of leaders of the anti-Macedonian party, and most particularly Demosthenes and not sell the people into slavery.\nHellenistic period.\nAncient writings tend to treat Alexander's destruction of Thebes as excessive. Plutarch, however, writes that Alexander grieved after his excess, granting them any request of favors, and advising they pay attention to the invasion of Asia, and that if he failed, Thebes might once again become the ruling city-state. Although Thebes had traditionally been antagonistic to whichever state led the Greek world, siding with the Persians when they invaded against the Athenian-Spartan alliance, siding with Sparta when Athens seemed omnipotent, and famously derailing the Spartan invasion of Persia by Agesilaus. Alexander's father Philip had been raised in Thebes, albeit as a hostage, and had learnt much of the art of war from Pelopidas. Philip had honoured this fact, always seeking alliances with the Boeotians, even in the lead-up to Chaeronea. Thebes was also revered as the most ancient of Greek cities, with a history of over 1,000 years. Plutarch relates that, during his later conquests, whenever Alexander came across a former Theban, he would attempt to redress his destruction of Thebes with favours to that individual.\nRestoration by Cassander.\nFollowing Alexander the Great's death in 323 BC, Thebes was re-established in 315 BC by Cassander, one of the diadochi who was ruling in Greece. In restoring Thebes, Cassander sought to rectify the perceived wrongs of Alexander \u2013 a gesture of generosity that earned him much goodwill throughout Greece. In addition to currying favor with the Athenians and many of the Peloponnesian states, Cassander's restoration of Thebes provided him with loyal allies in the Theban exiles who returned to resettle the site.\nCassander's plan for rebuilding Thebes called for the various Greek city-states to provide skilled labor and manpower, and ultimately it proved successful. The Athenians, for example, rebuilt much of Thebes's wall. Major contributions were sent from Megalopolis, Messene, and as far away as Sicily and Italy.\nDespite the restoration, Thebes never regained its former prominence. The death of Cassander in 297 BC created a power vacuum throughout much of Greece, which contributed, in part, to Thebes's besiegement by Demetrius Poliorcetes in 293 BC, and again after a revolt in 292 BC. This last siege was difficult and Demetrius was wounded, but finally he managed to break down the walls and to take the city once more, treating it mildly despite its fierce resistance. The city recovered its autonomy from Demetrius in 287 BC, and became allied with Lysimachus, the king of Thrace, and the Aetolian League.\nRoman and Byzantine period.\nAfter the dissolution of the Boeotian League after the Achaean War of 146 BC, Thebes came under Roman rule. In 27 BC, the city was included in the newly established Province of Achaia. Thebes was assigned to the Eastern Roman Empire after the imperial division of 395. During the early Byzantine period it served as a place of refuge against foreign invaders. In the late 7th century, Justinian II created the Theme of Hellas with Thebes as the capital. The Holy church of Luke the Evangelist was built around the 10th century to commemorate the saint's tomb and relics at the location of his death. During the Byzantine\u2013Bulgarian war of 913\u2013927, Thebes was sacked by Simeon I of Bulgaria.\nFrom the 11th century, Thebes became a centre of the new silk trade, its silk workshops boosted by imports of soaps and dyes from Athens. The growth of this trade in Thebes continued to such an extent that by the middle of the 12th century, the city had become the biggest producer of silks in the entire Byzantine empire, surpassing even the Byzantine capital, Constantinople. The women of Thebes were famed for their skills at weaving. Theban silk was prized above all others during this period, both for its quality and its excellent reputation. This prosperity made it a target for the Normans of Sicily. In 1147, they attacked Boeotia and plundered Thebes. They also captured skilled craftsmen and relocated them to Palermo to develop the sicilian silk industry. Nonetheless, the city quickly regained its prosperity, attracting Venetian merchants who negotiated advantageous privileges to purchase local silk from the imperial government.\nBenjamin of Tudela visited Thebes around 1161 or 1162. At that time, the city served as a regional administrative center, home to a local elite, a major producer of silk textiles, and an important regional market, all of which contributed to urban and demographic growth. Although there is no specific data on Thebes's overall population, estimates suggest it housed between 20,000 and 30,000 inhabitants, typical for a major Byzantine provincial city. Benjamin of Tudela reported that Thebes had a Jewish population of 2,000, the largest Jewish community in any Byzantine city of the 12th century, except for Constantinople.\nIn 1205, Thebes was conquered by the Latins of the Fourth Crusade.\nLatin period.\nThanks to its wealth, the city was selected by the Frankish dynasty de la Roche as its capital, before it was permanently moved to Athens. After 1240, the Saint Omer family controlled the city jointly with the de la Roche dukes. The castle built by Nicholas II of Saint Omer on the Cadmea was one of the most beautiful of Frankish Greece. After its conquest in 1311 the city was used as a capital by the short-lived state of the Catalan Company.\nIn 1379, the Navarrese Company took the city with the aid of the Latin Archbishop of Thebes, Simon Atumano.\nOttoman period.\nLatin hegemony in Thebes lasted to 1458, when the Ottomans captured it. The Ottomans renamed Thebes \"\u0130stefe\" and managed it until the Greek War of Independence (1821, nominally to 1832) except for a Venetian interlude between 1687 and 1699.\nModern town.\nIn the modern Greek State, Thebes was the capital of the prefecture of Boeotia until the late 19th century, when Livadeia became the capital.\nToday, Thebes is a bustling market town, known for its many products and wares. Until the 1980s, it had a flourishing agrarian production with some industrial complexes. However, during the late 1980s and 1990s the bulk of industry moved further south, closer to Athens. Tourism in the area is based mainly in Thebes and the surrounding villages, where many places of interest related to antiquity exist such as the battlefield where the Battle of Plataea took place. The proximity to other, more famous travel destinations, like Athens and Chalkis, and the undeveloped archaeological sites have kept the tourist numbers low. A notable portion of the inhabitants of Thebes are Arvanites.\nIn Greek myth.\nThe record of the earliest days of Thebes was preserved among the Greeks in an abundant mass of legends that rival the myths of Troy in their wide ramification and the influence that they exerted on the literature of the classical age. Five main cycles of story may be distinguished:\nThe Greeks attributed the foundation of Thebes to Cadmus, a Phoenician king from Tyre (now in Lebanon) and the brother of Queen Europa. Cadmus was famous for teaching the Phoenician alphabet and building the Acropolis, which was named the Cadmeia in his honor and was an intellectual, spiritual, and cultural center.\nGeography.\nThebes is situated in a plain, between Lake Yliki (ancient \"Hylica\") to the north, and the Cithaeron mountains, which divide Boeotia from Attica, to the south. Its elevation is above mean sea level. It is about northwest of Athens, and southeast of Lamia. The A1 motorway and the Athens\u2013Thessaloniki railway connect Thebes with Athens and northern Greece. The municipality of Thebes covers an area of , the municipal unit of Thebes and the community .\nClimate.\nAccording to the nearby weather station of Aliartos, Thebes has a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\") with hot, dry summers and cool, wet winters. During the winter months, Thebes is sometimes affected by the Aegean sea-effect snow, with snow depths reaching over on several occasions. Due to its inland location, Thebes may also record very low minimums. In recent years, as registered by the meteorological station operated by the National Observatory of Athens within the city limits, the record minimum temperature is , recorded on 10 January 2017. In contrast, the city can be very hot in the summer during heat waves, having reached a record high of on 3 August 2021.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65810", "revid": "3599078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65810", "title": "Aarhus Historic Shipwreck", "text": "Shipwreck in Queensland, Australia\nIn Australia, \"Aarhus\" Historic Shipwreck is a historical site preserving one of the victims of Smith's Rock. The \"Aarhus\" was a 668 ton sailing barque built in 1875 in Hamburg, Germany. The vessel measured in length.\nWhile carrying a general cargo including kerosene from New York to Brisbane, Australia, they hit Smith's Rock, which lies about two nautical miles (4\u00a0km) north-east of Cape Moreton, and sank on 24 February 1894.\nThe remains of the ship now lie upright in 20 metres of water, though most of the ship has been reduced to plates and ribs sticking out of the sand. It has been gazetted under Section 7 of the \"Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976\" which provides for a special protected zone of 200m around the wreck. The \"Historic Shipwrecks Act\" 1976 was superseded in 2019 with the \"Underwater Cultural Heritage\" Act 2018 Any disturbance activity is prohibited; divers are required to apply to the Department of the Environment and Science (QLD State) for a permit to access the wreck.\nThis site has much interesting sea-life, from small to large batfish at cleaning stations everywhere. Another point of interest is the large mast-like object that is actually the bowsprit. This area reportedly has a cat shark inhabiting the bowsprit and a large wobbegong shark under the scoured out section. The site can have very good visibility but a strong current makes it hard to see the entire wreck in one dive.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65811", "revid": "41524894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65811", "title": "Thebes, Egypt", "text": "Ancient Egyptian city\nThebes (, , \"Th\u0113bai\"), known to the ancient Egyptians as Waset, was an ancient Egyptian city located along the Nile about south of the Mediterranean. Its ruins lie within the modern Egyptian city of Luxor. Thebes was the main city of the fourth Upper Egyptian nome (Sceptre nome) and was the capital of Egypt for long periods during the Middle Kingdom and New Kingdom eras. It was close to Nubia and the Eastern Desert, with its valuable mineral resources and trade routes. It was a religious center and the most venerated city during many periods of ancient Egyptian history.\nThe site of Thebes includes areas on both the eastern bank of the Nile, where the temples of Karnak and Luxor stand and where the city was situated; and the western bank, where a necropolis of large private and royal cemeteries and funerary complexes can be found. In 1979, the ruins of ancient Thebes were classified by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site.\nToponymy.\nThe Egyptian name for Thebes was \"w\ua723s.t\", \"City of the \"w\ua723s\"\", the sceptre of the pharaohs, a long staff with an animal's head and a forked base. From the end of the New Kingdom, Thebes was known in Egyptian as \"njw.t-jmn\", the \"City of Amun\", the chief of the Theban Triad of deities whose other members were Mut and Khonsu. This name of Thebes appears in the Tanakh as the \"N\u014d\u02bc \u02bc\u0100m\u00f4n\" () in the Book of Nahum and also as \"No\" () mentioned in the Book of Ezekiel and Jeremiah.\n\"Thebes\" is sometimes claimed to be the Latinised form of , the hellenized form of Demotic Egyptian \"t\ua723 jpt\" (\"the temple\"), referring to \"jpt-swt\". Today, the temple is known as Karnak, and is located on the northeast bank of the city. Since Homer refers to the metropolis by this name, and since Demotic script did not appear until a later date, the etymology is doubtful. As early as Homer's \"Iliad\", the Greeks distinguished the Egyptian Thebes as \"Thebes of the Hundred Gates\" (, \"Th\u0113bai hekat\u00f3mpyloi\") or \"Hundred-Gated Thebes\", as opposed to the \"Thebes of the Seven Gates\" (, \"Th\u0113bai hept\u00e1pyloi\") in Boeotia, Greece.\nIn the , Amun was rendered as Zeus Ammon. The name was therefore translated into Greek as Diospolis, \"City of Zeus\". To distinguish it from the numerous other cities by this name, it was known as the \"Great Diospolis\" (, \"Diospolis Meg\u00e1l\u0113\"; ). The Greek names came into wider use after the conquest of Egypt by Alexander the Great, when the country came to be ruled by the Macedonian Ptolemaic dynasty.\nCharacteristics.\nGeography.\nThebes was located along the banks of the Nile River in the middle part of Upper Egypt about 800\u00a0km south of the Delta. It was built largely on the alluvial plains of the Nile Valley, which follows a great bend of the Nile. As a natural consequence, the city was laid in a northeast\u2013southwest axis parallel to the contemporary river channel. Thebes had an area of , which included parts of the Theban Hills in the west that culminates at the sacred al-Qurn. In the east lies the mountainous Eastern Desert with its wadis draining into the valley. Significant among these wadis is Wadi Hammamat near Thebes. It was used as an overland trade route going to the Red Sea coast. Wadi Hammamat was the primary trade route linking Egypt to the Red Sea since Pre-Dynastic times. During the 4th millennium BCE, elements of the Uruk civilization were transmitted to Egypt along this corridor. It is the likely that Thinis, the capital of the First Dynasty, was located in the same region as Thebes for this reason. Both cities were at a crossroad region in Upper Egypt between the Nile in the north to south direction and Saharan caravan routes connecting to Red Sea maritime routes via Wadi Hammamat in the East West direction. The Wadi el-Hol is also located near Thebes; this valley connected Thebes to an oasis on the Western Desert. It is notable for the first Proto-Sinatic alphabet inscription, which appeared shortly after Thebes became the capital of Egypt.\nNearby towns in the fourth Upper Egyptian nome were Per-Hathor, Madu, Djerty, Iuny, Sumenu and Imiotru.\nDemographics.\nAccording to George Modelski, Thebes had about 40,000 inhabitants in 2000 BC (compared to 60,000 in Memphis, the largest city in the world at the time). By 1800 BC, the population of Memphis was down to about 30,000, making Thebes the largest city in Egypt at the time. Historian Ian Morris has estimated that by 1500 BC, Thebes may have grown to be the largest city in the world, with a population of about 75,000, a position it held until about 900 BC, when it was surpassed by Nimrud (among others).\nShomarka Keita reported that a 2005 study on mummified remains found that \"some Theban nobles had a histology which indicated notably dark skin\".\nEconomy.\nThe archaeological remains of Thebes offer a striking testimony to Egyptian civilization at its height. The Greek poet Homer extolled the wealth of Thebes in the \"Iliad\", Book 9 (c.\u20098th Century BC): \"...\u00a0in Egyptian Thebes the heaps of precious ingots gleam, the hundred-gated Thebes.\"\nCulture.\nMore than sixty annual festivals were celebrated in Thebes. The major festivals among these, according to the Edfu Geographical Text, were: the Beautiful Feast of Opet, the Khoiak (Festival), Festival of I Shemu, and Festival of II Shemu. Another popular festivity was the halloween-like Beautiful Festival of the Valley.\nHistory.\nOld Kingdom.\nThebes was inhabited from around 3200 BC. It was the eponymous capital of Waset, the fourth Upper Egyptian nome. At this time it was still a small trading post, while Memphis served as the royal residence of the Old Kingdom pharaohs. Although no buildings survive in Thebes older than portions of the Karnak temple complex that may date from the Middle Kingdom, the lower part of a statue of Pharaoh Nyuserre of the 5th Dynasty has been found in Karnak. Another statue dedicated by the 12th Dynasty king Senusret may have been usurped and re-used, since the statue bears a cartouche of Nyuserre on its belt. Since seven rulers of the 4th to 6th Dynasties appear on the Karnak king list, perhaps at the least there was a temple in the Theban area that dated to the Old Kingdom.\nFirst Intermediate Period.\nBy 2160 BC, a new line of pharaohs (the Ninth and Tenth Dynasties) consolidated control over Lower Egypt and northern parts of Upper Egypt from their capital in Herakleopolis Magna. A rival line (the Eleventh Dynasty), based at Thebes, ruled the remaining part of Upper Egypt. The Theban rulers were apparently descendants of the prince of Thebes, Intef the Elder. His probable grandson Intef I was the first of the family to claim in life a partial pharaonic titulary, though his power did not extend much further than the general Theban region.\nMiddle Kingdom.\nFinally by c.\u20092050 BC, Intef III's son Mentuhotep II (meaning \"Montu is satisfied\"), took the Herakleopolitans by force and reunited Egypt once again under one ruler, thereby starting the period now known as the Middle Kingdom. Mentuhotep II ruled for 51 years and built the first mortuary temple at Deir el-Bahri, which most likely served as the inspiration for the later and larger temple built next to it by Hatshepsut in the 18th Dynasty. After these events, the 11th Dynasty was short-lived, as less than twenty years had elapsed between the death of Mentuhotep II and that of Mentuhotep IV, in mysterious circumstances.\nDuring the 12th Dynasty, Amenemhat I moved the seat of power North to Itjtawy. Thebes continued to thrive as a religious center as the local god Amun was becoming increasingly prominent throughout Egypt. The oldest remains of a temple dedicated to Amun date to the reign of Senusret I. Thebes was already, in the Middle Kingdom, a town of considerable size. Excavations around the Karnak temple show that the Middle Kingdom town had a layout with a grid pattern. The city was roughly 250 hectares in area. Remains of two palatial buildings were also detected.\nStarting in the later part of the 12th Dynasty, a group of Canaanite people began settling in the eastern Nile Delta. They eventually founded the 14th Dynasty at Avaris in c.\u20091805 BC or c.\u20091710 BC. By doing so, the Asiatics established hegemony over the majority of the Delta region, subtracting these territories from the influence of the 13th Dynasty that had meanwhile succeeded the 12th.\nSecond Intermediate Period.\nA second wave of Asiatics called Hyksos (from \"Heqa-khasut\", \"rulers of foreign lands\" as Egyptians called their leaders) immigrated into Egypt and overran the Canaanite center of power at Avaris, starting the 15th Dynasty there. The Hyksos kings gained the upper hand over Lower Egypt early into the Second Intermediate Period (1657\u20131549 BC). When the Hyksos took Memphis during or shortly after Merneferre Ay's reign (c.\u20091700 BC), the rulers of the 13th Dynasty fled south to Thebes, which was restored as capital.\nTheban princes (now known as the 16th Dynasty) stood firmly over their immediate region as the Hyksos advanced from the Delta southwards to Middle Egypt. The Thebans resisted the Hyksos' further advance by making an agreement for a peaceful concurrent rule between them. The Hyksos were able to sail upstream past Thebes to trade with the Nubians and the Thebans brought their herds to the Delta without adversaries. The status quo continued until Hyksos ruler Apophis (15th Dynasty) insulted Seqenenre Tao (17th Dynasty) of Thebes. Soon the armies of Thebes marched on the Hyksos-ruled lands. Tao died in battle and his son Kamose took charge of the campaign. After Kamose's death, his brother Ahmose I continued until he captured Avaris, the Hyksos capital. Ahmose I drove the Hyksos out of Egypt and the Levant and reclaimed the lands formerly ruled by them.\nNew Kingdom and the height of Thebes.\nAhmose I founded a new age for a unified Egypt with Thebes as its capital. The city remained as capital during most of the 18th Dynasty (New Kingdom). It also became the center for a newly established professional civil service, where there was a greater demand for scribes and the literate as the royal archives began to fill with accounts and reports. At the city the favored few of\nNubia were reeducated with Egyptian culture, to serve as administrators of the colony.\nWith Egypt stabilized again, religion and religious centers flourished and none more so than Thebes. For instance, Amenhotep III poured much of his vast wealth from foreign tribute into the temples of Amun. The Theban god Amun became a principal state deity and every building project sought to outdo the last in proclaiming the glory of Amun and the pharaohs themselves. Thutmose I (reigned 1506\u20131493 BC) began the first great expansion of the Karnak temple. After this, colossal enlargements of the temple became the norm throughout the New Kingdom.\nQueen Hatshepsut (reigned 1479\u20131458 BC) helped the Theban economy flourish by renewing trade networks, primarily the Red Sea trade between Thebes's Red Sea port of Al-Qusayr, Elat and the land of Punt. Her successor Thutmose III brought to Thebes a great deal of his war booty that originated from as far away as Mittani. The 18th Dynasty reached its peak during his great-grandson Amenhotep III's reign (1388\u20131350 BC). Aside from embellishing the temples of Amun, Amenhotep increased construction in Thebes to unprecedented levels. On the west bank, he built the enormous mortuary temple and the equally massive Malkata palace-city, which fronted a 364-hectare artificial lake. In the city proper he built the Luxor temple and the Avenue of the Sphinxes leading to Karnak.\nFor a brief period in the reign of Amenhotep III's son Akhenaten (1351\u20131334 BC), Thebes fell on hard times; the city was abandoned by the court, and the worship of Amun was proscribed. The capital was moved to the new city of Akhetaten (Amarna in modern Egypt), midway between Thebes and Memphis. After his death, his son Tutankhamun returned the capital to Memphis, but renewed building projects at Thebes produced even more glorious temples and shrines.\nWith the 19th Dynasty the seat of government moved to the Delta. Thebes maintained its revenues and prestige through the reigns of Seti I (1290\u20131279 BC) and Ramesses II (1279\u20131213 BC), who still resided for part of every year in Thebes. Ramesses II carried out extensive building projects in the city, such as statues and obelisks, the third enclosure wall of Karnak temple, additions to the Luxor temple, and the Ramesseum, his grand mortuary temple. The constructions were bankrolled by the large granaries (built around the Ramesseum) that concentrated the taxes collected from Upper Egypt; and by the gold from expeditions to Nubia and the Eastern Desert. During Ramesses's long 66-year reign, Egypt and Thebes reached an overwhelming state of prosperity that equaled or even surpassed the earlier peak under Amenhotep III.\nThe city continued to be well kept in the early 20th Dynasty. The Great Harris Papyrus states that Ramesses III (reigned 1187\u201356) donated 86,486 slaves and vast estates to the temples of Amun. Ramesses III received tributes from all subject peoples including the Sea Peoples and Meshwesh Libyans. The whole of Egypt was experiencing financial problems, however, exemplified in the events at Thebes's village of Deir el-Medina. In the 25th year of his reign, workers in Deir el-Medina began striking for pay and there arose a general unrest of all social classes. Subsequently, an unsuccessful Harem conspiracy led to the executions of many conspirators, including Theban officials and women.\nUnder the later Ramessids, Thebes began to decline as the government fell into grave economic difficulties. During the reign of Ramesses IX (1129\u20131111 BC), about 1114 BC, a series of investigations into the plundering of royal tombs in the necropolis of western Thebes uncovered proof of corruption in high places, following an accusation made by the mayor of the east bank against his colleague on the west. The plundered royal mummies were moved from place to place and at last deposited by the priests of Amun in a tomb-shaft in Deir el-Bahri and in the tomb of Amenhotep II. (The finding of these two hiding places in 1881 and 1898, respectively, was one of the great events of modern archaeological discovery.) Such maladministration in Thebes led to unrest.\nThird Intermediate Period.\nControl of local affairs tended to come more and more into the hands of the High Priests of Amun, so that during the Third Intermediate Period, the High Priest of Amun exerted absolute power over the South, a counterbalance to the 21st and 22nd Dynasty kings who ruled from the Delta. Intermarriage and adoption strengthened the ties between them, daughters of the Tanite kings being installed as God's Wife of Amun at Thebes, where they wielded greater power. Theban political influence receded only in the Late Period.\nBy around 750 BC, the Kushites (Nubians) were growing their influence over Thebes and Upper Egypt. In 721 BC, King Shabaka of the Kushites defeated the combined forces of Osorkon IV (22nd Dynasty), Peftjauawybast (23rd Dynasty) Bakenranef (24th Dynasty) and reunified Egypt yet again. His reign saw a significant amount of building work undertaken throughout Egypt, especially at the city of Thebes, which he made the capital of his kingdom. In Karnak he erected a pink granite statue of himself wearing the Pschent (the double crown of Egypt). Taharqa accomplished many notable projects at Thebes (i.e. the Kiosk in Karnak) and Nubia before the Assyrians started to wage war against Egypt.\nLate Period.\nIn 667 BC, attacked by the Assyrian king Ashurbanipal's army, Taharqa abandoned Lower Egypt and fled to Thebes. After his death three years later his nephew (or cousin) Tantamani seized Thebes, invaded Lower Egypt and laid siege to Memphis, but abandoned his attempts to conquer the country in 663 BC and retreated southwards. The Assyrians pursued him and took Thebes, whose name was added to a long list of cities plundered and destroyed by the Assyrians, as Ashurbanipal wrote:\nThis city, the whole of it, I conquered it with the help of Ashur and Ishtar. Silver, gold, precious stones, all the wealth of the palace, rich cloth, precious linen, great horses, supervising men and women, two obelisks of splendid electrum, weighing 2,500 talents, the doors of temples I tore from their bases and carried them off to Assyria. With this weighty booty I left Thebes. Against Egypt and Kush I have lifted my spear and shown my power. With full hands I have returned to Nineveh, in good health.\nThebes never regained its former political significance, but it remained an important religious centre. Assyrians installed Psamtik I (664\u2013610 BC), who ascended to Thebes in 656 BC and brought about the adoption of his own daughter, Nitocris I, as heiress to God's Wife of Amun there. In 525 BC, Persian Cambyses II invaded Egypt and became pharaoh, subordinating the kingdom as a satrapy to the greater Achaemenid Empire.\nGraeco-Roman Period.\nThe good relationship of the Thebans with the central power in the North ended when the native Egyptian pharaohs were finally replaced by Greeks, led by Alexander the Great. He visited Thebes during a celebration of the Opet Festival. In spite of his welcoming visit, Thebes became a center for dissent. Towards the end of the third century BC, Hugronaphor (Horwennefer), possibly of Nubian origin, led a revolt against the Ptolemies in Upper Egypt. His successor, Ankhmakis, held large parts of Upper Egypt until 185 BC. This revolt was supported by the Theban priesthood. After the suppression of the revolt in 185 BC, Ptolemy V, in need of the support of the priesthood, pardoned them.\nHalf a century later the Thebans rose again, elevating a certain Harsiesi to the throne in 132 BC. Harsiesi, having helped himself to the funds of the royal bank at Thebes, fled the following year. In 91 BC, another revolt broke out. In the following years, Thebes was subdued, and the city turned into rubble.\nDuring the Roman occupation (30 BC\u2013641 AD), the remaining communities clustered around the pylon of the Luxor temple. Thebes became part of the Roman province of \"Thebais\", which later split into \"Thebais Superior\", centered at the city, and \"Thebais Inferior\", centered at Ptolemais Hermiou. A Roman legion was headquartered in Luxor temple at the time of Roman campaigns in Nubia. Building did not come to an abrupt stop, but the city continued to decline. In the first century AD, Strabo described Thebes as having been relegated to a mere village.\nMajor sites.\nEastern Thebes:\nWestern Thebes:\nCultural heritage.\nThe two great temples\u2014Luxor Temple and Karnak\u2014and the Valley of the Kings and the Valley of the Queens are among the greatest achievements of ancient Egypt.\nFrom 25 October 2018 to 27 January 2019, the Museum of Grenoble organized with the support of the Louvre and the British Museum, a three-month exhibition on the city of Thebes and the role of women in the city at that time.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the novel \"The Egyptian\" (1945) by Mika Waltari, there are elaborate descriptions of how Thebes looked during the 18th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt.\nThebes is a setting in the films \"The Mummy\" (1999) and \"The Mummy Returns\" (2001). It is said to be the \"Land of the Living\". (In real history, there was no such name given to it.) The films feature scenes taking place in ancient Egypt in its prime, which affect the story in the modern setting some 3000 years later.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65821", "revid": "49360259", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65821", "title": "Pastiche", "text": "Art genre based on imitating the style or character of other artists' work\nA pastiche (; ) is a work of visual art, literature, theatre, music, or architecture that imitates the style or character of the work of one or more other artists. Unlike parody, pastiche pays homage to the work it imitates, rather than mocking it.\nThe word is the French borrowing of the Italian noun , which is a p\u00e2t\u00e9 or pie-filling mixed from diverse ingredients. Its first recorded use in this sense was in 1878. Metaphorically, and describe works that are either composed by several authors, or that incorporate stylistic elements of other artists' work. Pastiche is an example of eclecticism in art.\nAllusion is not pastiche. A literary allusion may refer to another work, but it does not reiterate it. Allusion requires the audience to share in the author's cultural knowledge. Allusion and pastiche are both mechanisms of intertextuality.\nBy art.\nLiterature.\nIn literary usage, the term denotes a literary technique employing a generally light-hearted tongue-in-cheek imitation of another's style; although jocular, it is usually respectful. The word implies a lack of originality or coherence, an imitative jumble, but with the advent of postmodernism, pastiche has become positively construed as a deliberate, witty homage or playful imitation.\nFor example, many stories featuring Sherlock Holmes, originally penned by Arthur Conan Doyle, have been written as pastiches since the author's time. Ellery Queen and Nero Wolfe are other popular subjects of mystery parodies and pastiches.\nA similar example of pastiche is the posthumous continuations of the Robert E. Howard stories, written by other writers without Howard's authorization. This includes the Conan the Barbarian stories of L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter.\nDavid Lodge's novel \"The British Museum Is Falling Down\" (1965) is a pastiche of works by Joyce, Kafka, and Virginia Woolf. In 1991, Alexandra Ripley wrote the novel \"Scarlett\", a pastiche of \"Gone with the Wind\", in an unsuccessful attempt to have it recognized as a canonical sequel.\nIn 2017, John Banville published \"Mrs. Osmond\", a sequel to Henry James's \"The Portrait of a Lady\", written in a style similar to that of James. In 2018, Ben Schott published \"Jeeves and the King of Clubs\", an homage to P. G. Wodehouse's character Jeeves, with the blessing of the Wodehouse estate.\nMusic.\nCharles Rosen has characterized Mozart's various works in imitation of Baroque style as pastiche, and Edvard Grieg's \"Holberg Suite\" was written as a conscious homage to the music of an earlier age. Some of Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky's works, such as his \"Variations on a Rococo Theme\" and \"Serenade for Strings\", employ a poised \"classical\" form reminiscent of 18th-century composers such as Mozart (the composer whose work was his favorite). Perhaps one of the best examples of pastiche in modern music is that of George Rochberg, who used the technique in his String Quartet No. 3 of 1972 and Music for the Magic Theater. Rochberg turned to pastiche from serialism after the death of his son in 1963.\n\"Bohemian Rhapsody\" by Queen is unusual as it is a pastiche in both senses of the word, as there are many distinct styles imitated in the song, all \"hodge-podged\" together to create one piece of music. A similar earlier example is \"Happiness is a Warm Gun\" by the Beatles. One can find musical \"pastiches\" throughout the work of the American composer Frank Zappa. Comedian/parodist \"Weird Al\" Yankovic has also recorded several songs that are pastiches of other popular recording artists, such as Devo (\"Dare to Be Stupid\"), Talking Heads (\"Dog Eat Dog\"), Rage Against the Machine (\"I'll Sue Ya\"), and The Doors (\"Craigslist\"), though these so-called \"style parodies\" often walk the line between celebration (pastiche) and send-up (parody). Acclaimed Alternative rock band Ween, known for their eclectic catalog of inspirations, have been argued to have created pastiches superior to their source inspirations.\nA \"pastiche Mass\" is a musical Mass where the constituent movements come from different Mass settings. Most often, this convention has been chosen for concert performances, particularly by early-music ensembles. Masses are composed of movements: Kyrie, Gloria, Credo, Sanctus, Agnus Dei; for example, the \"Missa Solemnis\" by Beethoven and the \"Messe de Nostre Dame\" by Guillaume de Machaut. In a pastiche Mass, the performers may choose a Kyrie from one composer, and a Gloria from another; or choose a Kyrie from one setting of an individual composer, and a Gloria from another.\nMusical theatre.\nIn musical theatre, pastiche is often an indispensable tool for evoking the sounds of a particular era for which a show is set. For the 1971 musical \"Follies\", a show about a reunion of performers from a musical revue set between the World Wars, Stephen Sondheim wrote over a dozen songs in the style of Broadway songwriters of the 1920s and 1930s. Sondheim imitates not only the music of composers such as Cole Porter, Irving Berlin, Jerome Kern, and George Gershwin but also the lyrics of writers such as Ira Gershwin, Dorothy Fields, Otto Harbach, and Oscar Hammerstein II. For example, Sondheim notes that the torch song \"Losing My Mind\" sung in the show contains \"near-stenciled rhythms and harmonies\" from the Gershwins' \"The Man I Love\" and lyrics written in the style of Dorothy Fields. Examples of musical pastiche also appear in other Sondheim shows including \"Gypsy\", \"Saturday Night\", \"Assassins\", and \"Anyone Can Whistle\".\nFilm.\nPastiche can also be a cinematic device whereby filmmakers pay homage to another filmmaker's style and use of cinematography, including camera angles, lighting, and mise en sc\u00e8ne. A film's writer may also offer a pastiche based on the works of other writers (this is especially evident in historical films and documentaries but can be found in non-fiction drama, comedy and horror films as well). Italian director Sergio Leone's \"Once Upon a Time in the West\" is a pastiche of earlier American Westerns. Another major filmmaker, Quentin Tarantino, often uses various plots, characteristics, and themes from many films to create his films, among them from the films of Sergio Leone, in effect creating a pastiche of a pastiche. Tarantino has openly stated that \"I steal from every single movie ever made.\" Director Todd Haynes' 2002 film \"Far from Heaven\" was a conscious attempt to replicate a typical Douglas Sirk melodrama\u2014in particular \"All That Heaven Allows\".\nArchitecture.\nIn discussions of urban planning, the term \"pastiche\" may describe developments as imitations of the building styles created by major architects: with the implication that the derivative work is unoriginal and of little merit, and the term is generally attributed without reference to its urban context. Many 19th and 20th century European developments can in this way be described as pastiches, such as the work of Vincent Harris and Edwin Lutyens who created early 20th century Neoclassical and Neo-Georgian architectural developments in Britain, or of later pastiche works based on the architecture of the modernist Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and the Bauhaus movement. The term itself is not pejorative. Alain de Botton described it as \"an unconvincing reproduction of the styles of the past\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65823", "revid": "39494265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65823", "title": "Snake Jailbird", "text": ""}
{"id": "65824", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65824", "title": "Eukaryotic", "text": ""}
{"id": "65825", "revid": "15959320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65825", "title": "Caenorhabitis elegans", "text": ""}
{"id": "65827", "revid": "50649442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65827", "title": "Silicone", "text": "Family of polymers\nIn organosilicon and polymer chemistry, a silicone or polysiloxane is a polymer composed of repeating units of siloxane (, where \"R\" stands for an organic group). They are typically colorless oils or rubber-like substances. Silicones are used in sealants, adhesives, lubricants, medicine, cooking utensils, thermal insulation, and electrical insulation. Some common forms include silicone oil, grease, rubber, resin, and caulk.\nSilicone is often confused with one of its constituent elements, silicon, but they are distinct substances. Silicon is a pure chemical element, a metalloid, which forms a dark-grey semiconducting crystalline solid. In its crystalline form it is used to make integrated circuits (\"electronic chips\") and solar cells. In contrast, silicone is formed by the polymerization of the siloxane molecule, which itself is made up of a variable combination of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and silicon atoms. Depending on the chemical makeup and polymer structure of a particular silicone product, it can possess a variety of physical properties, ranging from an oily liquid to a rubbery resin.\nHistory.\nF. S. Kipping coined the word \"silicone\" in 1901 to describe the formula of polydiphenylsiloxane, (Ph = phenyl, ), by analogy with the formula of the ketone benzophenone, (his term was originally \"silicoketone\"). Kipping was well aware that polydiphenylsiloxane is polymeric whereas benzophenone is monomeric and noted the contrasting properties of and . The discovery of the structural differences between Kipping's molecules and the ketones means that \"silicone\" is no longer the correct term (though it remains in common usage) and that the term \"siloxane\" is preferred according to the nomenclature of modern chemistry.\nJames Franklin Hyde was an American chemist and inventor. He has been called the \"Father of Silicones\" and is credited with the launch of the silicone industry in the 1930s. His most notable contributions include his creation of silicone from silicon compounds and his method of making fused silica, a high-quality glass later used in aeronautics, advanced telecommunications, and computer chips. His work led to the formation of Dow Corning, an alliance between the Dow Chemical Company and Corning Glass Works that was specifically created to produce silicone products.\nChemistry.\nAlfred Stock and Carl Somiesky examined the hydrolysis of dichlorosilane, a reaction that was proposed to initially give the monomer :\nWhen the hydrolysis is performed by treating a solution of in benzene with water, the product was determined to have the approximate formula . Higher polymers were proposed to form with time.\nMost polysiloxanes feature organic substituents, e.g., and . All polymerized siloxanes or polysiloxanes, silicones consist of an inorganic silicon\u2013oxygen backbone chain () with two groups attached to each silicon center. The materials can be cyclic or polymeric. By varying the chain lengths, side groups, and crosslinking, silicones can be synthesized with a wide variety of properties and compositions. They can vary in consistency from liquid to gel to rubber to hard plastic. The most common siloxane is linear polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), a silicone oil. The second-largest group of silicone materials is based on silicone resins, which are formed by branched and cage-like oligosiloxanes.\nSynthesis.\nMost common are materials based on polydimethylsiloxane, which is derived by hydrolysis of dimethyldichlorosilane. This dichloride reacts with water as follows:\nThe polymerization typically produces linear chains capped with or (silanol) groups. Under different conditions, the polymer is a cyclic, not a chain.\nFor consumer applications such as caulks, silyl acetates are used instead of silyl chlorides. The hydrolysis of the acetates produces the less dangerous acetic acid (the acid found in vinegar) as the reaction product of a much slower curing process. This chemistry is used in many consumer applications, such as silicone caulk and adhesives.\nBranches or crosslinks in the polymer chain can be introduced by using organosilicone precursors with fewer alkyl groups, such as methyl trichlorosilane and methyltrimethoxysilane. Ideally, each molecule of such a compound becomes a branch point. This process can be used to produce hard silicone resins. Similarly, precursors with three methyl groups can be used to limit molecular weight, since each such molecule has only one reactive site and so forms the end of a siloxane chain.\nCombustion.\nWhen silicone is burned in air or oxygen, it forms solid silica (silicon dioxide, ) as a white powder, char, and various gases. The readily dispersed powder is sometimes called silica fume. The pyrolysis of certain polysiloxanes under an inert atmosphere is a valuable pathway towards the production of amorphous silicon oxycarbide ceramics, also known as polymer derived ceramics. Polysiloxanes terminated with functional ligands such as vinyl, mercapto or acrylate groups have been cross linked to yield preceramic polymers, which can be photopolymerised for the additive manufacturing of polymer derived ceramics by stereolithography techniques.\nProperties.\nSilicones exhibit many useful characteristics, including:\nSilicone can be developed into rubber sheeting, where it has other properties, such as being FDA compliant. This extends the uses of silicone sheeting to industries that demand hygiene, for example, food and beverage, and pharmaceuticals.\nApplications.\nSilicones are used in many products. \"Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry\" lists the following major categories of application: Electrical (e.g. insulation), electronics (e.g., coatings), household (e.g., sealants and cooking utensils), automobile (e.g. gaskets), airplane (e.g., seals), office machines (e.g. keyboard pads), medicine and dentistry (e.g. tooth impression molds), textiles and paper (e.g. coatings). For these applications, an estimated 400,000 tonnes of silicones were produced in 1991. Specific examples, both large and small are presented below.\nAutomotive.\nIn the automotive field, silicone grease is typically used as a lubricant for brake components since it is stable at high temperatures, is not water-soluble, and is far less likely than other lubricants to foul. DOT 5 brake fluids are based on liquid silicones.\nAutomotive spark plug wires are insulated by multiple layers of silicone to prevent sparks from jumping to adjacent wires, causing misfires. Silicone tubing is sometimes used in automotive intake systems (especially for engines with forced induction).\nSheet silicone is used to manufacture gaskets used in automotive engines, transmissions, and other applications.\nAutomotive body manufacturing plants and paint shops avoid silicones, as trace contamination may cause \"fish eyes\", which are small, circular craters which mar a smooth finish.\nAdditionally, silicone compounds such as silicone rubber are used as coatings and sealants for airbags; the high strength of silicone rubber makes it an optimal adhesive and sealant for high impact airbags. Silicones in combination with thermoplastics provide improvements in scratch and mar resistance and lowered coefficient of friction.\nAerospace.\nSilicone is a widely used material in the aerospace industry due to its sealing properties, stability across an extreme temperature range, durability, sound dampening and anti-vibration qualities, and naturally flame retardant properties. Maintaining extreme functionality is paramount for passenger safety in the aerospace industry, so each component on an aircraft requires high-performance materials.\nSpecially developed aerospace grades of silicone are stable from \u221270 to 220 \u00b0C, these grades can be used in the construction of gaskets for windows and cabin doors. During operation, aircraft go through large temperature fluctuations in a relatively short period of time; from the ambient temperatures when on the ground in hot countries to sub-zero temperatures when flying at high altitude. Silicone rubber can be molded with tight tolerances ensuring gaskets form airtight seals both on the ground and in the air, where atmospheric pressure decreases.\nSilicone rubber's resistance to heat corrosion enables it to be used for gaskets in aircraft engines where it will outlast other types of rubber, both improving aircraft safety and reducing maintenance costs. The silicone acts to seal instrument panels and other electrical systems in the cockpit, protecting printed circuit boards from the risks of extreme altitude such as moisture and extremely low temperature. Silicone can be used as a sheath to protect wires and electrical components from any dust or ice that may creep into a plane's inner workings.\nAs the nature of air travel results in much noise and vibration, powerful engines, landings, and high speeds all need to be considered to ensure passenger comfort and safe operation of the aircraft. As silicone rubber has exceptional noise reduction and anti-vibration properties, it can be formed into small components and fitted into small gaps ensuring all equipment can be protected from unwanted vibration such as overhead lockers, vent ducts, hatches, entertainment system seals, and LED lighting systems.\nSolid propellant.\nPolydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) based binders along with ammonium perchlorate () are used as fast burning solid propellants in rockets.\nBuilding construction.\nThe strength and reliability of silicone rubber are widely acknowledged in the construction industry. One-part silicone sealants and caulks are in common use to seal gaps, joints and crevices in buildings. One-part silicones cure by absorbing atmospheric moisture, which simplifies installation. In plumbing, silicone grease is typically applied to O-rings in brass taps and valves, preventing lime from sticking to the metal.\nStructural silicone has also been used in curtain wall building fa\u00e7ades since 1974 when the Art Institute of Chicago became the first building to receive exterior glass fixed only with the material. Silicone membranes have been used to cover and restore industrial roofs, thanks to its extreme UV resistance, and ability to keep their waterproof performance for decades.\n3D printing.\nSilicone rubber can be 3D printed (liquid deposition modelling, LDM) using pump-nozzle extrusion systems. Standard silicone formulations are optimized to be used by extrusion and injection moulding machines and are not applicable in LDM-based 3D printing. The rheological behavior and the pot life need to be adjusted for use with LDM.\n3D printing also requires the use of a removable support material that is compatible with the silicone rubber.\nCoatings.\nSilicone films can be applied to such silica-based substrates as glass to form a covalently bonded hydrophobic coating. Such coatings were developed for use on aircraft windshields to repel water and to preserve visibility, without requiring mechanical windshield wipers which are impractical at supersonic speeds. Similar treatments were eventually adapted to the automotive market in products marketed by Rain-X and others.\nMany fabrics can be coated or impregnated with silicone to form a strong, waterproof composite such as silnylon.\nA silicone polymer can be suspended in water by using stabilizing surfactants. This allows water-based formulations to be used to deliver many ingredients that would otherwise require a stronger solvent, or be too viscous to use effectively. For example, a waterborne formulation using a silane's reactivity and penetration ability into a mineral-based surface can be combined with water-beading properties from a siloxane to produce a more-useful surface protection product.\nCookware.\nAs a low-taint, non-toxic material, silicone can be used where contact with food is required. Silicone is becoming an important product in the cookware industry, particularly bakeware and kitchen utensils.\nSilicone is used as an insulator in heat-resistant potholders and similar items; however, it is more conductive of heat than similar less dense fiber-based products. Silicone oven gloves are able to withstand temperatures up to , making it possible to reach into boiling water.\nOther products include molds for chocolate, ice, cookies, muffins, and various other foods; non-stick bakeware and reusable mats used on baking sheets; steamers, egg boilers or poachers; cookware lids, pot holders, trivets, and kitchen mats.\nDefoaming.\nSilicones are used as active compounds in defoamers due to their low water solubility and good spreading properties.\nDry cleaning.\nLiquid silicone can be used as a dry cleaning solvent, providing an alternative to the traditional chlorine-containing perchloroethylene (perc) solvent. The use of silicones in dry cleaning reduces the environmental effect of a typically high-polluting industry.\nElectronics.\nElectronic components are sometimes encased in silicone to increase stability against mechanical and electrical shock, radiation and vibration, a process called \"potting\". Silicones are used where durability and high performance are demanded of components under extreme environmental conditions, such as in space (satellite technology). They are selected over polyurethane or epoxy encapsulation when a wide operating temperature range is required (\u221265 to 315\u00a0\u00b0C). Silicones also have the advantage of little exothermic heat rise during cure, low toxicity, good electrical properties, and high purity.\nSilicones are often components of thermal pastes used to improve heat transfer from power-dissipating electronic components to heat sinks.\nThe use of silicones in electronics is not without problems, however. Silicones are relatively expensive and can be attacked by certain solvents. Silicone easily migrates as either a liquid or vapor onto other components. Silicone contamination of electrical switch contacts can lead to failures by causing an increase in contact resistance, often late in the life of the contact, well after any testing is completed. Use of silicone-based spray products in electronic devices during maintenance or repairs can cause later failures.\nFirestops.\nSilicone foam has been used in North American buildings in an attempt to firestop openings within the fire-resistance-rated wall and floor assemblies to prevent the spread of flames and smoke from one room to another. When properly installed, silicone-foam firestops can be fabricated for building code compliance. Advantages include flexibility and high dielectric strength. Disadvantages include combustibility (hard to extinguish) and significant smoke development.\nSilicone-foam firestops have been the subject of controversy and press attention due to smoke development from pyrolysis of combustible components within the foam, hydrogen gas escape, shrinkage, and cracking. These problems have led to reportable events among licensees (operators of nuclear power plants) of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).\nSilicone firestops are also used in aircraft.\nJewelry.\nSilicone is a popular alternative to traditional metals (such as silver and gold) with jewelry, specifically rings. Silicone rings are commonly worn in professions where metal rings can lead to injuries, such as electrical conduction and ring avulsions. During the mid-2010's, some professional athletes began wearing silicone rings as an alternative during games.\nLubricants.\nSilicone greases are used for many purposes, such as bicycle chains, airsoft gun parts, and a wide range of other mechanisms. Typically, a dry-set lubricant is delivered with a solvent carrier to penetrate the mechanism. The solvent then evaporates, leaving a clear film that lubricates but does not attract dirt and grit as much as an oil-based or other traditional \"wet\" lubricant.\nSilicone personal lubricants are also available for use in medical procedures or sexual activity.\nMedicine and cosmetic surgery.\nSilicone is used in microfluidics, seals, gaskets, shrouds, and other applications requiring high biocompatibility. Additionally, the gel form is used in bandages and dressings, breast implants, testicle implants, pectoral implants, contact lenses, and a variety of other medical uses.\nScar treatment sheets are often made of medical grade silicone due to its durability and biocompatibility. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is often used for this purpose, since its specific crosslinking results in a flexible and soft silicone with high durability and tack. It has also been used as the hydrophobic block of amphiphilic synthetic block copolymers used to form the vesicle membrane of polymersomes.\nIllicit cosmetic silicone injections may induce chronic and definitive silicone blood diffusion with dermatologic complications.\nOphthalmology uses many products such as silicone oil used to replace the vitreous humor following vitrectomy, silicone intraocular lenses following cataract extraction, silicone tubes to keep a nasolacrimal passage open following dacryocystorhinostomy, canalicular stents for canalicular stenosis, punctal plugs for punctal occlusion in dry eyes, silicone rubber and bands as an external tamponade in tractional retinal detachment, and anteriorly-located break in rhegmatogenous retinal detachment.\nAddition and condensation (e.g. polyvinyl siloxane) silicones find wide application as a dental impression material due to its hydrophobic property and thermal stability.\nMoldmaking.\nTwo-part silicone systems are used as rubber molds to cast resins, foams, rubber, and low-temperature alloys. A silicone mold generally requires little or no mold-release or surface preparation, as most materials do not adhere to silicone. For experimental uses, ordinary one-part silicone can be used to make molds or to mold into shapes. If needed, common vegetable cooking oils or petroleum jelly can be used on mating surfaces as a mold-release agent.\nSilicone cooking molds used as bakeware do not require coating with cooking oil; in addition, the flexibility of the rubber allows the baked food to be easily removed from the mold after cooking.\nPersonal care.\nSilicones are ingredients widely used in skincare, color cosmetic and hair care applications. Some silicones, notably the amine functionalized amodimethicones, are excellent hair conditioners, providing improved compatibility, feel, and softness, and lessening frizz. The phenyl dimethicones, in another silicone family, are used in reflection-enhancing and color-correcting hair products, where they increase shine and glossiness (and possibly impart subtle color changes). Phenyltrimethicones, unlike the conditioning amodimethicones, have refractive indices (typically 1.46) close to that of a human hair (1.54). However, if included in the same formulation, amodimethicone and phenyltrimethicone interact and dilute each other, making it difficult to achieve both high shine and excellent conditioning in the same product.\nSilicone rubber is commonly used in baby bottle nipples (teats) for its cleanliness, aesthetic appearance, and low extractable content.\nSilicones are used in shaving products and personal lubricants.\nToys and hobbies.\nSilly Putty and similar materials are composed of silicones dimethyl siloxane, polydimethylsiloxane, and decamethyl cyclopentasiloxane, with other ingredients. This substance is noted for its unusual characteristics, e.g., that it bounces, but breaks when given a sharp blow; it will also flow like a liquid and form a puddle given enough time.\nSilicone \"rubber bands\" are a long-lasting popular replacement refill for real rubber bands in the 2013 fad \"rubber band loom\" toys at two to four times the price (in 2014). Silicone bands also come in bracelet sizes that can be custom embossed with a name or message. Large silicone bands are also sold as utility tie-downs.\nFormerol is a silicone rubber (marketed as Sugru) used as an arts-and-crafts material, as its plasticity allows it to be molded by hand like modeling clay. It hardens at room temperature and it is adhesive to various substances including glass and aluminum.\nOogoo is an inexpensive silicone clay, which can be used as a substitute for Sugru.\nIn making aquariums, manufacturers now commonly use 100% silicone sealant to join glass plates. Glass joints made with silicone sealant can withstand great pressure, making obsolete the original aquarium construction method of angle-iron and putty. This same silicone is used to make hinges in aquarium lids or for minor repairs. However, not all commercial silicones are safe for aquarium manufacture, nor is silicone used for the manufacture of acrylic aquariums as silicones do not have long-term adhesion to plastics.\nSpecial effects.\nSilicone is used in special effects as a material for simulating realistic skin, either for prosthetic makeup, prop body parts, or rubber masks. Platinum silicones are ideal for simulating flesh and skin due to their strength, firmness, and translucency, creating a convincing effect.\nSilicone masks have an advantage over latex masks in that because of the material properties, the mask hugs the wearers face and moves in a realistic manner with the wearer's facial expressions. Silicone is often used as a hypoallergenic substitute for foam latex prosthetics.\nMarketing.\nThe leading global manufacturers of silicone base materials belong to three regional organizations: the European Silicone Center (CES) in Brussels, Belgium; the Silicones Environmental, Health, and Safety Center (SEHSC) in Herndon, Virginia, US; and the Silicone Industry Association of Japan (SIAJ) in Tokyo, Japan. Dow Corning Silicones, Evonik Industries, Momentive Performance Materials, Milliken and Company (SiVance Specialty Silicones), Shin-Etsu Silicones, Wacker Chemie, Elkem Silicones, JNC Corporation, Wacker Asahikasei Silicone, and Dow Corning Toray represent the collective membership of these organizations. A fourth organization, the Global Silicone Council (GSC) acts as an umbrella structure over the regional organizations. All four are non-profit, having no commercial role; their primary missions are to promote the safety of silicones from a health, safety, and environmental perspective. As the European chemical industry is preparing to implement the Registration, Evaluation, and Authorisation of Chemicals (REACH) legislation, CES is leading the formation of a consortium of silicones, silanes, and siloxanes producers and importers to facilitate data and cost-sharing.\nSafety and environmental considerations.\nSilicone compounds are pervasive in the environment. Particular silicone compounds, cyclic siloxanes D4 and D5, are air and water pollutants and have negative health effects on test animals. They are used in various personal care products. The European Chemicals Agency found that \"D4 is a persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) substance and D5 is a very persistent, very bioaccumulative (vPvB) substance\". Other silicones biodegrade readily, a process that is accelerated by a variety of catalysts, including clays. Cyclic silicones have been shown to involve the occurrence of silanols during biodegradation in mammals. The resulting silanediols and silanetriols are capable of inhibiting hydrolytic enzymes such as thermolysin, acetylcholinesterase. However, the doses required for inhibition are by orders of magnitude higher than the ones resulting from the accumulated exposure to consumer products containing cyclomethicone.\nAt around in an oxygen-containing atmosphere, polydimethylsiloxane releases traces of formaldehyde (but lesser amounts than other common materials such as polyethylene). At this temperature, silicones were found to have lower formaldehyde generation than mineral oil and plastics (less than 3 to 48\u00a0\u03bcg\u00a0CH2O/(g\u00b7hr) for a high consistency silicone rubber, versus around 400\u00a0\u03bcg\u00a0CH2O/(g\u00b7hr) for plastics and mineral oil). By , copious amounts of formaldehyde have been found to be produced by all silicones (1,200 to 4,600\u00a0\u03bcg\u00a0CH2O/(g\u00b7hr)).\nSome persons have been found to develop silicone allergies or extreme sensitivity, particularly after prolonged exposure to certain types of silicone products such as cosmetics, medical equipment including CPAP masks and implanted medical devices.\nAlthough silicones are durable polymers, they have historically been difficult to recycle. Recent research from CNRS and the University Claude Bernard Lyon 1 has reported chemical depolymerization routes that convert crosslinked silicone materials back into reusable oils or monomers with reduced environmental impacts. In industrial practice, Elkem has reported pilot and commercial initiatives for circular silicones, including recycled\u2011content products for the label industry and broader solutions such as mechanical re\u2011incorporation of elastomers and the use of bio\u2011based carriers and solvents.\nSimilar substances.\nCompounds containing silicon\u2013oxygen double bonds, now called silanones, but which could deserve the name \"silicone\", have long been identified as intermediates in gas-phase processes such as chemical vapor deposition in microelectronics production, and in the formation of ceramics by combustion. However, they have a strong tendency to polymerize into siloxanes. The first stable silanone was obtained in 2014 by A. Filippou and others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65828", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65828", "title": "Smithsonian Institution", "text": "US group of museums and research centers\nThe Smithsonian Institution ( ; or simply the Smithsonian) is a group of museums, education and research centers, created by the United States federal government \"for the increase and diffusion of knowledge\". Founded on August 10, 1846, it operates as a trust instrumentality and is not formally a part of any of the three branches of the federal government. The institution is named after its founding donor, British scientist James Smithson. It was originally organized as the United States National Museum, but that name ceased to exist administratively in 1967.\nThe Smithsonian Institution has historical holdings of over 157\u00a0million items, 21 museums, 21 libraries, 14 education and research centers, a zoo, and historical and architectural landmarks, mostly located in Washington, D.C. Additional facilities are located in Maryland, New York, and Virginia. More than 200 institutions and museums in 47 states, Puerto Rico, and Panama are Smithsonian Affiliates. Institution publications include \"Smithsonian\" and \"Air &amp; Space\" magazines.\nAlmost all of the institution's 30\u00a0million annual visitors are admitted without charge, the exception being visitors to Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum in New York City, which charges an admissions fee. The Smithsonian's annual budget is around $1.25\u00a0billion, with two-thirds coming from annual federal appropriations. Other funding comes from the institution's endowment, private and corporate contributions, membership dues, and earned retail, concession, and licensing revenue. As of 2024, the institution's endowment had a total value of about $2.6 billion.\nFounding.\nIn many ways, the origin of the Smithsonian Institution can be traced to a group of Washington citizens who, being \"impressed with the importance of forming an association for promoting useful knowledge,\" met on June 28, 1816, to establish the Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences. Officers were elected in October 1816, and the organization was granted a charter by Congress on April 20, 1818 (this charter expired in 1838). Benjamin Latrobe, who was architect for the US Capitol after the War of 1812, and William Thornton, the architect who designed the Octagon House and Tudor Place, served as officers. Other prominent members, who numbered from 30 to 70 during the institute's existence, included John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, Henry Clay, Judge William Cranch, and James Hoban. Honorary members included James Madison, James Monroe, John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, and the Marquis de Lafayette. Operating expenses were covered from the $5 yearly dues collected from each member.\nThe institute proposed a number of undertakings. These included the study of plant life and the creation of a botanical garden on the National Mall, an examination of the country's mineral production, improvement in the management and care of livestock, and the writing of a topographical and statistical history of the United States. Reports were to be published periodically to share this knowledge with the greater public, but due to a lack of funds, this initially did not occur. The institute first met in Blodget's Hotel, later in the Treasury Department and City Hall, before being assigned a permanent home in 1824 in the Capitol building.\nBeginning in 1825, weekly sittings were arranged during sessions of Congress for the reading of scientific and literary productions, but this was continued for only a short time, as the number attending declined rapidly. Eighty-five communications by 26 people were made to Congress during the entire life of the society, with more than a half relating to astronomy or mathematics. Among all the activities planned by the institute, only a few were actually implemented. Two were the establishment of a botanical garden, and a museum that was designed to have a national and permanent status. The former occupied space where the present Botanic Garden sits.\nThe museum contained specimens of zoology, botany, archeology, fossils, etc., some of which were passed on to the Smithsonian Institution after its formation. The institute's charter expired in 1838, but its spirit lived on in the National Institution, founded in 1840. With the mission to \"promote science and the useful arts, and to establish a national museum of natural history,\" this organization continued to press Congress to establish a museum that would be structured in terms that were very similar to those finally incorporated into the founding of the Smithsonian Institution. Its work helped to develop an underlying philosophy that pushed for the pursuit and development of scientific knowledge that would benefit the nation, and edify its citizens at the same time.\nThe British scientist James Smithson (1765\u20131829) left most of his wealth to his nephew Henry James Hungerford. When Hungerford died childless in 1835, the estate passed \"to the United States of America, to found at Washington, under the name of the Smithsonian institution, an establishment for the increase &amp; diffusion of Knowledge among men\", in accordance with Smithson's . Congress officially accepted the legacy bequeathed to the nation and pledged the faith of the United States to the charitable trust on July 1, 1836. The American diplomat Richard Rush was dispatched to England by President Andrew Jackson to collect the bequest. Rush returned in August 1838 with 105 sacks containing 104,960 gold sovereigns. This is approximately $500,000 at the time, which is or . However, when considering the GDP at the time it may be more comparable to $220\u00a0million in the year 2007.\nOnce the money was in hand, eight years of congressional haggling ensued over how to interpret Smithson's rather vague mandate \"for the increase and diffusion of knowledge.\" The money was invested by the US Treasury in bonds issued by the state of Arkansas, which soon defaulted. After heated debate, Massachusetts representative (and former president) John Quincy Adams persuaded Congress to restore the lost funds with interest and, despite designs on the money for other purposes, convinced his colleagues to preserve it for an institution of science and learning. Finally, on August 10, 1846, President James K. Polk signed the legislation that established the Smithsonian Institution as a trust instrumentality of the United States, to be administered by a Board of Regents and a secretary of the Smithsonian.\nDevelopment.\nThough the Smithsonian's first secretary, Joseph Henry, wanted the institution to be a center for scientific research, it also became the depository for various Washington and U.S. government collections. The United States Exploring Expedition by the U.S. Navy circumnavigated the globe between 1838 and 1842. The voyage amassed thousands of animal specimens, an herbarium of 50,000 plant specimens, and diverse shells and minerals, tropical birds, jars of seawater, and ethnographic artifacts from the South Pacific Ocean. These specimens and artifacts became part of the Smithsonian collections, as did those collected by several military and civilian surveys of the American West, including the Mexican Boundary Survey and Pacific Railroad Surveys, which assembled many Native American artifacts and natural history specimens.\nIn 1846, the regents developed a plan for weather observation; in 1847, money was appropriated for meteorological research. The institution became a magnet for young scientists from 1857 to 1866, who formed a group called the Megatherium Club. The Smithsonian played a critical role as the US partner institution in early bilateral scientific exchanges with the Academy of Sciences of Cuba.\nMuseums and buildings.\nConstruction began on the Smithsonian Institution Building (\"the Castle\") in 1849. Designed by architect James Renwick Jr., its interiors were completed by general contractor Gilbert Cameron. The building opened in 1855.\nThe Smithsonian's first expansion came with the construction of the Arts and Industries Building in 1881. Congress had promised to build a new structure for the museum if the 1876 Philadelphia Centennial Exposition generated enough income. It did, and the building was designed by architects Adolf Cluss and Paul Schulze, based on original plans developed by Major General Montgomery C. Meigs of the United States Army Corps of Engineers. It opened in 1881.\nThe National Zoological Park opened in 1889 to accommodate the Smithsonian's Department of Living Animals. The park was designed by landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted.\nThe National Museum of Natural History opened in June 1911 to similarly accommodate the Smithsonian's United States National Museum, which had previously been housed in the Castle and then the Arts and Industries Building. This structure was designed by the D.C. architectural firm of Hornblower &amp; Marshall.\nWhen Detroit philanthropist Charles Lang Freer donated his private collection to the Smithsonian and funds to build the museum to hold it (which was named the Freer Gallery), it was among the Smithsonian's first major donations from a private individual. The gallery opened in 1923.\nMore than 40 years would pass before the next museum, the Museum of History and Technology (renamed the National Museum of American History in 1980), opened in 1964. It was designed by the world-renowned firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White. The Anacostia Community Museum, an \"experimental store-front\" museum created at the initiative of Smithsonian Secretary S. Dillon Ripley, opened in the Anacostia neighborhood of Washington, D.C., in 1967. That same year, the Smithsonian signed an agreement to take over the Cooper Union Museum for the Arts of Decoration (now the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum). The National Portrait Gallery and the Smithsonian American Art Museum opened in the Old Patent Office Building (built in 1867) on October 7, 1968. The reuse of an older building continued with the opening of the Renwick Gallery in 1972 in the 1874 Renwick-designed art gallery originally built by local philanthropist William Wilson Corcoran to house the Corcoran Gallery of Art.\nThe first new museum building to open since the National Museum of History and Technology was the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, which opened in 1974. The National Air and Space Museum, the Smithsonian's largest in terms of floor space, opened in June 1976.\nEleven years later, the National Museum of African Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery opened in a new, joint, underground museum between the Freer Gallery and the Smithsonian Castle. Reuse of another old building came in 1993 with the opening of the National Postal Museum in the 1904 former City Post Office building, a few city blocks from the Mall.\nIn 2004, the Smithsonian opened the National Museum of the American Indian in a new building near the United States Capitol. Twelve years later almost to the day, in 2016, the latest museum opened: the National Museum of African American History and Culture, in a new building near the Washington Monument.\nTwo more museums have been established and are being planned for eventual construction on the Mall: the National Museum of the American Latino and the Smithsonian American Women's History Museum.\nCapital campaigns.\nIn 2011, the Smithsonian undertook its first-ever capital fundraising campaign. The $1.5\u00a0billion effort raised $1\u00a0billion at the three-year mark. Smithsonian officials made the campaign public in October 2014 in an effort to raise the remaining $500\u00a0million. More than 60,000 individuals and organizations donated money to the campaign by the time it went public. This included 192 gifts of at least $1\u00a0million. Members of the boards of directors of various Smithsonian museums donated $372\u00a0million. The Smithsonian said that funds raised would go toward completion of the National Museum of African American History and Culture building, and renovations of the National Air and Space Museum, National Museum of American History, and the Renwick Gallery. A smaller amount of funds would go to educational initiatives and digitization of collections. As of September 2017, the Smithsonian claimed to have raised $1.79\u00a0billion, with three months left in the formal campaign calendar.\nSeparately from the major capital campaign, the Smithsonian has begun fundraising through Kickstarter. An example is a campaign to fund the preservation and maintenance of the ruby slippers worn by Judy Garland for her role as Dorothy Gale in the 1939 film \"The Wizard of Oz\".\nMuseums.\nNineteen museums and galleries, as well as the National Zoological Park, comprise the Smithsonian museums. Eleven are on the National Mall, the park that runs between the Lincoln Memorial and the United States Capitol. Other museums are located elsewhere in Washington, D.C., with two more in New York City and one in Chantilly, Virginia.\nThe Smithsonian has close ties with 168 other museums in 39 states, Panama, and Puerto Rico. These museums are known as Smithsonian Affiliated museums. Collections of artifacts are given to these museums in the form of long-term loans. The Smithsonian also has a large number of traveling exhibitions, operated through the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service (SITES). In 2008, 58 of these traveling exhibitions went to 510 venues across the country.\nCollections.\nSmithsonian collections include 156\u00a0million artworks, artifacts, and specimens. The National Museum of Natural History houses 145\u00a0million of these specimens and artifacts, which are mostly animals preserved in formaldehyde. The Collections Search Center has 9.9\u00a0million digital records available online. The Smithsonian Institution Libraries hold 2\u00a0million library volumes. Smithsonian Archives hold of archival material.\nThe Smithsonian Institution has many categories of displays that can be visited at the museums. In 1912, First Lady Helen Herron Taft donated her inauguration gown to the museum to begin the First Ladies' Gown display at the National Museum of American History, one of the Smithsonian's most popular exhibits. The museum displays treasures such as the Star-Spangled Banner, the stove pipe hat that was worn by President Abraham Lincoln, the ruby slippers worn by Judy Garland in \"The Wizard Of Oz\", and the original Teddy Bear that was named after President Theodore Roosevelt. In 2016, the Smithsonian's Air &amp; Space museum curators restored the large model \"Enterprise\" from the original \"\" TV series.\nFollowing international debates about the decolonisation of museums and the legal and moral justifications of their acquisitions, the Smithsonian adopted a new \"ethical returns policy\" on April 29, 2022. This will permit the deaccession and restitution of items collected under circumstances considered unethical by contemporary standards and thus places moral over legal arguments. A month before, the Smithsonian's National Museum of African Art had announced the planned return of most of its 39 Benin Bronzes to Nigeria, as well as of other cultural items to Turkey.\nOn October 11, 2022, Benin Bronzes from the National Museum of African Art, as well as the National Gallery of Art, were formally returned to Nigerian cultural officials in a ceremony held in Washington, D.C. The Nigerian Minister of Information and Culture, Lai Mohammed, and Prince Aghatise Erediauwa, representing the Oba of Benin Kingdom, spoke at the ceremony. Mohammed said the \"decision to return the timeless artworks is worth emulating.\"\nOpen access.\nIn February 2020, the Smithsonian made 2.8\u00a0million digital items available to the public under a Creative Commons Zero Public Domain Dedication, with a commitment to release further items in the future.\nResearch centers.\nThe Smithsonian has eight research centers, located in Washington, D.C.; Front Royal, Virginia; Edgewater, Maryland; Suitland, Maryland; Fort Pierce, Florida; Cambridge, Massachusetts; and Panama. Formerly two separate entities, the Smithsonian Libraries and Smithsonian Archives merged into a single research center in 2020.\nCultural centers.\nThe Smithsonian Institution includes three cultural centers among its units:\nSmithsonian Latino Center.\nIn 1997, the Smithsonian Latino Center was created as a way to recognize Latinos across the Smithsonian Institution. The primary purpose of the center is to place Latino contributions to the arts, history, science, and national culture across the Smithsonian's museums and research centers.\nThe center is a division of the Smithsonian Institution. As of May 2016, the center is run by an executive director, Eduardo D\u00edaz.\nHistory.\nAt the time of its creation, the Smithsonian Institution had other entities dedicated to other minority groups: National Museum of the American Indian, Freer-Sackler Gallery for Asian Arts and Culture, African Art Museum, and the National Museum of African-American Heritage and Culture.\nThe opening of the center was prompted, in part, by the publishing of a report called \"Willful Neglect: The Smithsonian and U.S. Latinos\".\nAccording to documents obtained by \"The Washington Post\", when former Latino Center executive director Pilar O'Leary first took the job, the center faced employees who had \"serious performance issues\". No performance plans existed for the staff and unfulfilled financial obligations to sponsors existed. The website's quality was poor, and the center did not have a public affairs manager, a programs director, adequate human resources support, or cohesive mission statement.\nAfter difficult times in the first few years, the center improved. According to the Smithsonian, the center \"support[s] scholarly research, exhibitions, public and educational programs, web-based content and virtual platforms, and collections and archives. [It] also manage[s] leadership and professional development programs for Latino youth, emerging scholars and museum professionals.\" Today, the website features a high-tech virtual museum including self-guided virtual tours of past and present exhibits.\nYoung Ambassadors Program.\nThe Smithsonian Latino Center's Young Ambassadors Program (YAP) is a program within the Latino Center that reaches out to Latino high school students with the goal of encouraging them to become leaders in arts, sciences, and the humanities.\nStudents selected for the program travel to Washington, D.C. for an \"enrichment seminar\" that lasts approximately five days. Afterwards, students return to their communities to serve in a paid, one-month internship.\nPilar O'Leary launched the program when she served as executive director of the Smithsonian Latino Center. According to the Latino Center, O'Leary told the press in 2007: \"Our goal is to help our Young Ambassadors become the next generation of leaders in the arts and culture fields. This program encourages students to be proud of their roots and learn more about their cultural heritage to inspire them to educate the public in their own communities about how Latinos are enriching America's cultural fabric.\"\nPublications.\nThe institution publishes \"Smithsonian\" magazine monthly and \"Air &amp; Space Quarterly\". \"Smithsonian\" was the result of Secretary of the Smithsonian S. Dillon Ripley asking the retired editor of \"Life\" magazine Edward K. Thompson to produce a magazine \"about things in which the Smithsonian Institution is interested, might be interested or ought to be interested\". Another Secretary of the Smithsonian, Walter Boyne, founded \"Air &amp; Space\". \"Air &amp; Space\" magazine was published bimonthly from 1986 to 2022.\nThe organization publishes under the imprints Smithsonian Institution Press, Smithsonian Books, and Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press.\nAwards.\nThe Smithsonian makes a number of awards to acknowledge and support meritorious work. \nAdministration.\nThe Smithsonian Institution was established as a trust instrumentality by act of Congress. More than two-thirds of the Smithsonian's workforce of some 6,300 persons are employees of the federal government. The Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services oversees security at the Smithsonian facilities and enforces laws and regulations for National Capital Parks together with the United States Park Police.\nThe president's 2011 budget proposed just under $800\u00a0million in support for the Smithsonian, slightly increased from previous years. Institution exhibits are free of charge, though in 2010 the Deficit Commission recommended admission fees.\nAs approved by Congress on August 10, 1846, the legislation that created the Smithsonian Institution called for the creation of a Board of Regents to govern and administer the organization. This seventeen-member board meets at least four times a year and includes as \"ex officio\" members the chief justice of the United States and the vice president of the United States. The nominal head of the institution is the chancellor, an office which has traditionally been held by the chief justice. In September 2007, the board created the position of chair of the Board of Regents, a position currently held by Risa Lavizzo-Mourey.\nOther members of the Board of Regents are three members of the U.S. House of Representatives appointed by the speaker of the House; three members of the Senate, appointed by the president \"pro tempore\" of the Senate; and nine citizen members, nominated by the board and approved by the Congress in a joint resolution signed by the president of the United States. Regents who are senators or representatives serve for the duration of their elected terms, while citizen Regents serve a maximum of two 6-year terms. Regents are compensated on a part-time basis.\nThe chief executive officer (CEO) of the Smithsonian is the secretary, who is appointed by the Board of Regents. The secretary also serves as secretary to the Board of Regents but is not a voting member of that body. The secretary of the Smithsonian has the privilege of the floor at the United States Senate. The fourteenth and current secretary is Lonnie Bunch, who was appointed in 2019 after serving as the founding director of the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American History and Culture.\nCurrent Board of Regents.\nThe current board members as of \u00a0, 2025[ [update]]:\nSecretaries of the Smithsonian Institution.\nThe following persons have served as secretary of the Smithsonian Institution:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nControversies.\n\"Enola Gay\" display.\nIn 1995, controversy arose over the exhibit at the National Air and Space Museum with the display of the \"Enola Gay\", the Superfortress used by the United States to drop the first atomic bomb used in World War II. The American Legion and Air Force Association believed the exhibit put forward only one side of the debate over the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and that it emphasized the effect on victims without discussing its use within the overall context of the war. The Smithsonian changed the exhibit, displaying the aircraft only with associated technical data and without discussion of its historic role in the war.\nCensorship of \"Seasons of Life and Land\".\nIn 2003, a National Museum of Natural History exhibit, Subhankar Banerjee's \"Seasons of Life and Land\", featuring photographs of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, was censored and moved to the basement by Smithsonian officials. They were concerned that its subject matter was too politically controversial.\nIn November 2007, \"The Washington Post\" reported internal criticism has been raised regarding the institution's handling of the exhibit on the Arctic. According to documents and e-mails, the exhibit and its associated presentation were edited at high levels to add \"scientific uncertainty\" regarding the nature and impact of global warming on the Arctic. Acting Secretary of the Smithsonian Cristi\u00e1n Samper was interviewed by the \"Post\", and claimed the exhibit was edited because it contained conclusions that went beyond what could be proven by contemporary climatology. The Smithsonian is now a participant in the U.S. Global Change Research Program.\nCopyright restrictions.\nThe Smithsonian Institution provides access to its image collections for educational, scholarly, and nonprofit uses. Commercial uses are generally restricted unless permission is obtained. Smithsonian images fall into different copyright categories; some are protected by copyright, many are subject to license agreements or other contractual conditions, and some fall into the public domain, such as those prepared by Smithsonian employees as part of their official duties. The Smithsonian's terms of use for its digital content, including images, are set forth on the Smithsonian Web site.\nIn April 2006, the institution entered into an agreement of \"first refusal\" rights for its vast silent and public domain film archives with Showtime Networks, mainly for use on the Smithsonian Channel, a network created from this deal. Critics contend this agreement effectively gives Showtime control over the film archives, as it requires filmmakers to obtain permission from the network to use extensive amounts of film footage from the Smithsonian archives.\nTrump executive order.\nOn March 27, 2025, President Donald Trump signed an executive order titled \"Restoring Truth and Sanity to American History\", referencing the Smithsonian Institution. The order directed Vice President JD Vance, in his capacity as a member of the Smithsonian Board of Regents, to review Smithsonian content for what it described as \"improper, divisive, or anti-American\" ideology. As of June 2025, no official actions or institutional changes at the Smithsonian have been publicly announced in response. In July 2025, \"The American Presidency: A Glorious Burden\" exhibit at the National Museum of American History removed a temporary label from 2021 in a section on impeachments addressing the two impeachments of Donald Trump. The Smithsonian told \"The Washington Post\" that it was done to harmonize with the rest of the section, which otherwise had not been updated since 2008, and that an updated section would cover all impeachments. A source told \"The Washington Post\" that change came as a review implemented in response to pressure from the Trump administration to remove a museum director.\nAs of August 12, 2025, the White House sent a letter to Lonnie Bunch, the Smithsonian Institution Secretary, ordering a review of all of the Smithsonian's public-facing content, including social media, text in exhibitions, and educational materials, to \u201cassess tone, historical framing, and alignment with American ideals\u201d.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65831", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65831", "title": "Soviet submarine K-162", "text": ""}
{"id": "65832", "revid": "50597647", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65832", "title": "Soviet submarine K-222", "text": "Nuclear-powered cruise-missile submarine\nK-222 was the sole Project 661 \"Anchar\" (Cyrillic: ) (NATO reporting name: Papa class) nuclear-powered cruise-missile submarine of the Soviet Navy during the Cold War. Although the Soviets saw \"K-222\" as an unsuccessful design, upon completion it was the world's fastest submarine and the first to be built with a titanium hull. \nThe submarine was given several names over the course of its construction and service: she was originally designated \"K-18\", named K-162 while under construction, and renamed to \"K-222\" in 1978.\nThe Soviet government and Navy was dissatisfied with the Echo class of nuclear submarines, which had to surface to fire their missiles. In 1958 construction was authorized for an exceedingly ambitious program; the requirements called for a very fast boat equipped with missiles that could be launched while submerged. It accepted the preliminary design two years later and construction began in 1963; work proceeded very slowly as techniques for working titanium had to be developed and quality control was inconsistent. The program's objectives were generally satisfied, but the government had failed to include a requirement to minimize the submarine's acoustic signature which meant that \"K-222\" was easily detectable at high speed. The Soviet Navy rejected a plan to place the design into series production as its flaws outweighed its advantages, but it pioneered the technology needed to work with titanium on a large scale, which enabled the subsequent construction of more successful designs using titanium, such as Projects 705 \"Lira\", 945 \"Barrakuda\", and 945A \"Kondor\".\nCommissioned in 1969, the-then \"K-162\" was armed with 10 short-range, anti-ship cruise missiles and four torpedo tubes to carry out her mission of destroying American aircraft carriers. These missiles could be fitted with either conventional or nuclear warheads. The submarine served in the Soviet Red Banner Northern Fleet through the 1970s, but the discovery of hull cracks led to a lengthy repair period from 1972 to 1975. After an accident with \"K-222\"'s nuclear reactor in 1980, the submarine went on her final operational patrol in 1981. She was removed from service in 1988 and scrapped in 2010.\nBackground.\nThe Soviets were well aware of the drawbacks of the large SS-N-3 Shaddock family of missiles, notably its need to be launched from the surface and its complicated target-acquisition process, both of which rendered the submarines launching the missiles vulnerable to the carriers that they were intended to attack. The Council of Ministers issued a resolution on 28 August 1958 calling for a very ambitious submarine development program that called for a doubling of speed, a 50 percent increase in diving depth, smaller nuclear reactors and steam turbines, and a long-range missile system of small dimensions able to be fired while submerged, and new materials, among other objectives. Design bureau TsKB-16 began development of Project 661, an experimental cruise-missile submarine, later that year in response to the resolution. Chief designer N. N. Isanin decided to begin a clean-slate design that would use existing technology as little as possible. By July 1959 a sketch design was ready for a submarine capable of and the State Committee for Shipbuilding had to make decisions about what the submarine's hull would be constructed of and what type of nuclear reactor would be used.\nAluminium was quickly rejected as unsuitable because of its poor resistance to corrosion and poor performance under high pressure at high speeds. While new alloys of steel were still under development, titanium had some major advantages. It was much stronger than steel for a given weight, resisted corrosion better and was non-magnetic. This would help protect it against magnetic mines and registering on magnetic anomaly detectors of anti-submarine aircraft. Disregarding the extremely high cost of titanium compared to steel and that titanium could not be welded in an oxygen atmosphere, the committee selected it. Two types of reactor were potentially available at this time, pressurized water or lead-bismuth eutectic. The Soviets had some experience with the former, but none with the latter; this proved to be the deciding factor as the committee was unwilling to wait for the lead-bismuth reactor to be developed even though it promised to be smaller for the same amount of power output. \"K-222\" would be the first submarine built with a titanium hull.\nThese decisions produced a design that had an underwater speed of 38 knots and was capable of carrying 10\u201312 missile launchers forward of the sail, but was larger than the specified displacement if fitted with two propeller shafts. The committee considered using a single shaft, but ultimately rejected it, preferring the redundancy of two reactors. It did delete the auxiliary diesel generator that earlier nuclear-powered submarines had been equipped with to compensate for using two shafts when it accepted the sketch design and authorized preliminary design work in February 1960. The final design was approved three months later. To reduce the technical risk of many of the advanced components chosen, the navy modified five existing submarines to test various systems such as the P-70 \"Ametist\" (NATO reporting name: SS-N-7 Starbright), GRAU designation: 4K66; 'Amethyst') missiles, sonars and other electronics.\nDescription.\n\"K-222\" was a double-hulled design that displaced on the surface and submerged. The boat had an overall length of , a beam of and a draft of . The submarine's inner hull had nine watertight compartments and had an unusual configuration at the bow where the first two compartments were narrower than the rest of the hull and were superimposed in a figure 8 shape; the upper compartment housed the torpedo tubes while the lower contained the massive sonar system and some of the batteries. The third compartment was as narrow as the first two () while the rest of the compartments widened to a diameter of . \"K-222\" had a test depth of and a design depth of . The crew numbered 82 officers and enlisted men.\nThe submarine was powered by a pair of VM-5M reactors, each supplying steam for the GTZA-618 steam turbine driving each propeller shaft. The turbines produced a total of that was intended to propel \"K-222\" at a speed of 38 knots. The boat was equipped with two turbogenerators; two banks of 152-cell silver-zinc batteries were fitted in lieu of a diesel generator. The boat made on the surface, and proved to be much faster than planned underwater and reached a top speed of at 90 percent power during her sea trials in December 1969. During this 12-hour full-speed test, some of the external hull fittings were ripped off and portions of the grills protecting the water intakes broke loose and were ground up by the water-circulation pumps. One account of the trial wrote:\nthe biggest thing was the noise of the water going by. It increased together with the ship's speed, and when was exceeded, it was like the noise of a jet aircraft. ... In the control room was not heard simply the roar of an aircraft, but the thunder of \"the engine room of a diesel locomotive\". Those present believed that the noise level was greater than 100 decibels.\nOn a subsequent trial in 1970 at full power, \"K-222\" reached , the fastest speed attained underwater by a manned object and making \"K-222\" the world's fastest submarine. The submarine carried enough supplies to stay at sea for 70 days.\nArmament, sensors and fire control.\nThe submarine's primary armament consisted of 10 P-70 missiles in individual tubes between the inner and outer hulls forward of the sail. The tubes were positioned upwards at an angle of 32.5 degrees. As the missile used four solid-propellant boosters, it could be launched underwater at a maximum depth of . No more than five missiles could be fired in one volley and the second volley could be fired three minutes later. The narrowness of the bow compartment prevented \"K-222\" from being fitted with more than four torpedo tubes, although she stowed eight reloads for them. The torpedoes could be fired down to a depth of .\nThe massive cylindrical Rubin MGK-300 sonar system occupied the nose of the lower inner hull and measured in diameter and in height. It was fitted with both active and passive transducers and was intended to detect carrier battle groups at long ranges. It would transmit the data to the missiles for its initial targeting. Locating targets accurately was initially limited to about with the missiles requiring a mid-course update if attacking targets further away. Later upgrades to the sonar allowed it to extend its range to the full limit of the P-70 missiles. Once fired, the submarine did not have to provide any further targeting data as the missile was equipped with a radar of its own. \"K-222\" was also fitted with an Albatros RLK-101 search radar (NATO reporting name: Snoop Tray) and a Molniya (NATO reporting name: Pert Spring) satellite-communications system.\nConstruction and career.\nAs large-scale fabrication of titanium was unknown anywhere in the world, techniques and equipment had to be developed from scratch by the Soviets at great cost. The Sevmash shipyard had to invest in new equipment capable of shaping plates up to thick and retrain its workers to weld in an argon atmosphere and a cleanroom environment to prevent contamination of the welds. As part of that process two half-scale sections were constructed, one for testing in a pressure chamber and the other to evaluate shock resistance in Lake Ladoga. The collapse of the section under hydraulic pressure and the presence of cracks in the welds of both structures revealed that the welders at the Severodvinsk shipyard failed to follow the strict cool down time requirements. Further consultations with metallurgical experts reached the conclusion that the steel tools used to fabricate the sections were not suitable for use with titanium.\nThe first titanium plates were delivered in late 1961 which allowed the submarine (initially designated as \"K-18\" and then renamed to \"K-162\" on 27 January 1965) to be laid down on 28 December 1963. Construction of the submarine was delayed by the delivery of plates for the outer hull by the Kommunar Metallurgical Plant that were contaminated by hydrogen and cracked easily. About 20 percent of the plates for the outer hull had to be replaced which contributed to the lengthy period that the submarine remained on the slipway before being launched on 21 December 1968. Shortly afterwards, testing of the submarine revealed that 10 ballast tanks were not watertight despite careful examination and that non-titanium components were not properly isolated from the titanium hull, causing corrosion. Within the Soviet Navy, \"K-162\" was commonly referred to as the \"Golden Fish\", in reference to her development and construction costs. \nCommissioned on 13 December 1969 and assigned to the Soviet Red Banner Northern Fleet, the boat spent most of the next two years conducting sea trials. \"K-162\" made her first operational patrol in the North Atlantic in September\u2013December 1971. During this patrol, the submarine trailed an American battle group centered around the carrier at high speed as it returned to the United States from the Mediterranean. During a lengthy refit that lasted from October 1972 to January 1975, the shipyard discovered a large number of cracks that required repair. Three years later, \"K-162\" was renamed \"K-222\".\nDuring this time, the Soviets assessed the possibility of series production of more boats of the class and concluded that the design would have to be modified with longer-range missiles and more torpedoes to improve its combat worthiness. In addition the excessive noise at high speed eliminated the sonar system's ability to acquire targets and needed to be remedied. Coupled with the submarine's high cost, lengthy building time, and the limited resources available, the navy decided not to proceed with any more boats. Thus the design studies for derivatives like the improved Project 661M, the Project 661A armed with P-120 Malakhit (NATO designation: SS-N-9 Siren) missiles and the Project 661B armed with R-29 Vysota (NATO codename: SS-N-8 Sawfly) ballistic missiles were cancelled. Although \"K-222\" was not regarded as a successful design, the technology developed for the build enabled the Soviet Union to construct the titanium-hulled and attack submarines.\nWhile having her reactor refueled in November 1980, \"K-222\"'s crew lost the unique tools required to handle the nuclear fuel rods and the Severodvinsk facility had to refuel the boat without them. During the procedure, the entire crew decided to go to lunch ashore on 30 November, violating naval regulations as only shipyard workers remained aboard. This became a problem because the automatic safety system for the control rods had been shut down and they started to lift, causing the reactor to generate more heat without any water flowing to cool the core of the reactor. No one was monitoring the core's temperature and the workers only realized that there was a problem when an alarm sounded after a condenser ruptured and radioactive steam and water entered the machinery compartment. They were able to prevent the steam from spreading and turned on the main pumps to get water cooling the core. The commission investigating the incident recommended that the reactors be replaced by more modern ones and that an emergency diesel generator be installed, but the recommendations were rejected and the navy decided to simply repair the damage. After the repairs and decontamination, \"K-222\" made her last operational patrol in 1981. \nIn 1988, the boat was placed in reserve at the naval base in Belomorsk, not far from Severodvinsk. Having lost the tools to handle the fuel rods, the navy could not find a company or organization willing or able to defuel the submarine. By 2008 cracks started appearing in the hull and the ballast tanks started taking on water. In March 2010 Sevmash began scrapping \"K-222\" with the reactors and nuclear fuel still on board, and this was completed by 4 June.\nIn popular culture.\n\"In the Tom Clancy novel Red Storm Rising,\" \"K222 Papa is sunk by Jerry \"The Hammer\" O'Malley, flying an ASW helicopter from the Frigate USS Reuben James, while attacking a convoy.\" \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65833", "revid": "5715662", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65833", "title": "Crayola LLC", "text": ""}
{"id": "65834", "revid": "44144402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65834", "title": "Schindler's List", "text": "1993 film by Steven Spielberg\nSchindler's List is a 1993 American epic historical drama film directed and produced by Steven Spielberg and written by Steven Zaillian. It is based on the historical novel \"Schindler's Ark\" (1982) by Thomas Keneally. The film follows Oskar Schindler, a German industrialist who saved more than a thousand mostly Polish\u2013Jewish refugees from the Holocaust by employing them in his factories during World War II. It stars Liam Neeson as Schindler, Ralph Fiennes as SS officer Amon G\u00f6th, and Ben Kingsley as Schindler's Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern.\nIdeas for a film about the \"Schindlerjuden\" (Schindler Jews) were proposed as early as 1963. Poldek Pfefferberg, one of the \"Schindlerjuden\", made it his life's mission to tell Schindler's story. Spielberg became interested when executive Sidney Sheinberg sent him a book review of \"Schindler's Ark\". Universal Pictures bought the rights to the novel, but Spielberg, unsure if he was ready to make a film about the Holocaust, tried to pass the project to several directors before deciding to direct it himself.\nPrincipal photography took place in Krak\u00f3w, Poland, over 72 days in 1993. Spielberg shot in black and white and approached the film as a documentary. Cinematographer Janusz Kami\u0144ski wanted to create a sense of timelessness. John Williams composed the score, and violinist Itzhak Perlman performed the main theme.\n\"Schindler's List\" premiered on November 30, 1993, in Washington, D.C., and was released on December 15, 1993, in the United States. The film received widespread critical acclaim, particularly for the performances of Neeson and Fiennes, Williams' musical score, Kaminski's cinematography, Zaillian's screenplay, and Spielberg's direction. It was a box office success, earning $322.2\u00a0million worldwide on a $22\u00a0million budget.\n\"Schindler's List\" earned multiple accolades, including seven Academy Awards (including Best Picture), seven BAFTAs and three Golden Globes. It is often listed as one of the greatest films ever made. The film was deemed \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\" by the Library of Congress in 2004 and selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry. In 2007, the American Film Institute ranked \"Schindler's List\" 8th on its list of the 100 greatest American films.\nPlot.\nIn German-occupied Krak\u00f3w during World War II, the Nazis forced local Polish Jews into the overcrowded Krak\u00f3w Ghetto. Oskar Schindler, a German Nazi Party member from Czechoslovakia, arrives in the city, hoping to make his fortune. He bribes Wehrmacht (German armed forces) and SS officials, acquiring a factory to produce enamelware. Schindler hires Itzhak Stern, a Jewish official with contacts among black marketeers and the Jewish business community; he handles administration and helps Schindler arrange financing. Stern ensures that as many Jewish workers as possible were deemed essential to the German war effort to prevent them from being taken by the SS to concentration camps or killed. Meanwhile, Schindler maintains friendly relations with the Nazis and enjoys his new wealth and status as an industrialist.\nSS-\"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" (second lieutenant) Amon G\u00f6th arrives in Krak\u00f3w to oversee construction of the P\u0142asz\u00f3w concentration camp. When the camp is ready, he orders the ghetto liquidated: two thousand Jews are transported to P\u0142asz\u00f3w, and two thousand others are killed in the streets by the SS. Schindler witnesses the massacre and is profoundly affected. He particularly notices a young girl in a red coat who hides from the Nazis and later sees her body on a wagonload of corpses. Schindler is careful to maintain his friendship with G\u00f6th and continues to enjoy SS support, mostly through bribery. G\u00f6th brutalizes his Jewish maid, Helen Hirsch, and randomly shoots people from the balcony of his villa; the prisoners are in constant fear for their lives. As time passes, Schindler's focus shifts from making money to trying to save as many lives as possible. To better protect his workers, Schindler bribes G\u00f6th into allowing him to build a sub-camp at his factory.\nAs the Germans begin losing the war, G\u00f6th is ordered to ship the remaining Jews at P\u0142asz\u00f3w to Auschwitz concentration camp. Schindler asks G\u00f6th for permission to move his workers to a munitions factory he plans to build in Br\u00fcnnlitz near his hometown of Zwittau. G\u00f6th reluctantly agrees but charges a huge bribe. Schindler and Stern prepare a list of people to be transferred to Br\u00fcnnlitz instead of Auschwitz. The list eventually includes 1,100 names.\nAs the Jewish workers are transported by train to Br\u00fcnnlitz, the women and girls are mistakenly redirected to Auschwitz-Birkenau; Schindler bribes Rudolf H\u00f6ss, the commandant of Auschwitz, for their release. At the new factory, Schindler forbids the SS guards from entering the production area without permission and encourages the Jews to observe the Sabbath. Over the next seven months, he spends his fortune bribing Nazi officials and buying shell casings from other companies. Due to Schindler's machinations, the factory produces no usable armaments. He runs out of money in 1945, just as Germany surrenders.\nAs a Nazi Party member and war profiteer, Schindler must flee the advancing Red Army to avoid capture. The SS guards at the factory have been ordered to kill the Jewish workforce, but Schindler persuades them not to do so. Bidding farewell to his workers, he prepares to head west, hoping to surrender to the Americans. The workers give him a signed statement attesting to his role in saving Jewish lives and present him with a ring engraved with a Talmudic paraphrase: \"Whoever saves one life saves the world entire.\" Schindler breaks down in tears, feeling he should have done more, and is comforted by the workers before he and his wife leave in their car. When the \"Schindlerjuden\" awaken the next morning, a mounted Soviet officer announces they have been liberated but warns them not to go east because \"they hate you there.\" The Jews then walk into the countryside.\nAn epilogue reveals that G\u00f6th was executed via hanging for crimes against humanity; Schindler and his wife were declared Righteous Among the Nations and a tree was planted in his honor in the Garden of the Righteous Among the Nations. Many of the surviving \"Schindlerjuden\" and the actors portraying them visit Schindler's grave and place stones on its marker (a traditional Jewish sign of respect for the dead), after which Liam Neeson lays two roses.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Liam Neeson as Oskar Schindler\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nPoldek Pfefferberg, one of the \"Schindlerjuden\", made it his life's mission to tell the story of his savior. Pfefferberg attempted to produce a biographical film of Oskar Schindler with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) in 1963, with Howard Koch writing, but the deal fell through. In 1982, Thomas Keneally published his historical novel \"Schindler's Ark\", which he wrote after a chance meeting with Pfefferberg in Los Angeles in 1980. MCA president Sid Sheinberg sent director Steven Spielberg a \"New York Times\" review of the book. Spielberg, astounded by Schindler's story, jokingly asked if it was true. \"I was drawn to it because of the paradoxical nature of the character,\" he said. \"What would drive a man like this to suddenly take everything he had earned and put it all in the service of saving these lives?\" Spielberg expressed enough interest for Universal Pictures to buy the rights to the novel. At their first meeting in spring 1983, he told Pfefferberg he would start filming in ten years. In the end credits of the film, Pfefferberg is credited as a consultant under the name Leopold Page.\nSpielberg was unsure if he was mature enough to make a film about the Holocaust, and the project remained \"on [his] guilty conscience.\" Spielberg tried to pass the project to director Roman Polanski, but he refused Spielberg's offer. Polanski's mother was killed at Auschwitz, and he had lived in and survived the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto. Polanski eventually directed his own Holocaust drama \"The Pianist\" (2002). Spielberg also offered the film to Sydney Pollack and Martin Scorsese, who was attached to direct \"Schindler's List\" in 1988. However, Spielberg was unsure of letting Scorsese direct the film, as \"I'd given away a chance to do something for my children and family about the Holocaust.\" Spielberg offered him the chance to direct the 1991 remake of \"Cape Fear\" instead. Scorsese would later admit in an interview that while he believed his version of the film might've been good, he had no regrets passing it to Spielberg stating that \"it would not have been the hit that it became.\" Billy Wilder expressed an interest in directing the film as a memorial to his family, most of whom were murdered in the Holocaust. Brian De Palma also refused an offer to direct.\nSpielberg finally decided to take on the project when he noticed that Holocaust deniers were being given serious consideration by the media. With the rise of neo-Nazism after the fall of the Berlin Wall, he worried that people were too accepting of intolerance, as they were in the 1930s. Sid Sheinberg greenlit the film on condition that Spielberg made \"Jurassic Park\" first. Spielberg later said, \"He knew that once I had directed \"Schindler\" I wouldn't be able to do \"Jurassic Park\".\" The picture was assigned a small budget of $22\u00a0million, as Holocaust films are not usually profitable. Spielberg forwent a salary for the film, calling it \"blood money\", and believed it would fail.\nIn 1983, Keneally was hired to adapt his book, and he turned in a 220-page script. His adaptation focused on Schindler's numerous relationships, and Keneally admitted he did not compress the story enough. Spielberg hired Kurt Luedtke, who had adapted the screenplay of \"Out of Africa\", to write the next draft. Luedtke gave up almost four years later, as he found Schindler's change of heart too unbelievable. During his time as director, Scorsese hired Steven Zaillian to write a script. When he was handed back the project, Spielberg found Zaillian's 115-page draft too short and asked him to extend it to 195 pages. Spielberg wanted more focus on the Jews in the story, and he wanted Schindler's transition to be gradual and ambiguous instead of a sudden breakthrough or epiphany. He also extended the ghetto liquidation sequence, as he \"felt very strongly that the sequence had to be almost unwatchable.\"\nCasting.\nLiam Neeson auditioned as Schindler early on in the film's development. He was cast in December 1992 after Spielberg saw him perform in \"Anna Christie\" on Broadway. Warren Beatty participated in a script reading, but Spielberg was concerned that he could not disguise his accent and that he would bring \"movie star baggage.\" Kevin Costner and Mel Gibson expressed interest in portraying Schindler, but Spielberg preferred to cast the relatively unknown Neeson so that the actor's star quality would not overpower the character. Neeson felt Schindler enjoyed outsmarting the Nazis, who regarded him as somewhat na\u00efve. \"They don't quite take him seriously, and he used that to full effect.\" To help him prepare for the role, Spielberg showed Neeson film clips of Time Warner CEO Steve Ross, who had a charisma that Spielberg compared to Schindler's. He also located a tape of Schindler speaking, which Neeson studied to learn the correct intonations and pitch.\nFiennes was cast as Amon G\u00f6th after Spielberg viewed his performances in \"\" and \"Emily Bront\u00eb's Wuthering Heights\". Spielberg said of Fiennes' audition that \"I saw sexual evil. It is all about subtlety: there were moments of kindness that would move across his eyes and then instantly run cold.\" Fiennes put on to play the role. He watched historic newsreels and talked to Holocaust survivors who knew G\u00f6th. In portraying him, Fiennes said \"I got close to his pain. Inside him is a fractured, miserable human being. I feel split about him, sorry for him. He's like some dirty, battered doll I was given and that I came to feel peculiarly attached to.\" Doctors Samuel J. Leistedt and Paul Linkowski of the Universit\u00e9 libre de Bruxelles describe G\u00f6th's character in the film as a classic psychopath. Fiennes looked so much like G\u00f6th in costume that when Holocaust survivor Mila Pfefferberg met him, she trembled with fear.\nThe character of Itzhak Stern (played by Ben Kingsley) is a composite of the accountant Stern, factory manager Abraham Bankier, and G\u00f6th's personal secretary, Mietek Pemper. The character serves as Schindler's alter ego and conscience. Dustin Hoffman was offered the role but he refused it.\nOverall, there are 126 parts with dialogue in the film. Thousands of extras were hired during filming. Spielberg cast Israeli and Polish actors specially chosen for their Eastern European appearance. Many of the German actors were reluctant to don the SS uniform, but some of them later thanked Spielberg for the cathartic experience of performing in the film. Halfway through the shoot, Spielberg conceived the epilogue, where 128 survivors pay their respects at Schindler's grave in Jerusalem. The producers scrambled to find the \"Schindlerjuden\" and fly them in to film the scene.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began on March 1, 1993, in Krak\u00f3w, Poland, with a planned schedule of 75 days. The crew shot at or near the actual locations, though the P\u0142asz\u00f3w camp had to be reconstructed in a nearby abandoned quarry, as modern high rise apartments were visible from the site of the original camp. Interior shots of the enamelware factory in Krak\u00f3w were filmed at a similar facility in Olkusz, while exterior shots and the scenes on the factory stairs were filmed at the actual factory. The production received permission from Polish authorities to film on the grounds of the Auschwitz-Birkenau State Museum, but objections to filming within the actual death camp were raised by the World Jewish Congress. To avoid filming inside the actual death camp, the film crew constructed a replica of a portion of the camp just outside the entrance of Birkenau.\nThere were some antisemitic incidents. A woman who encountered Fiennes in his Nazi uniform told him: \"The Germans were charming people. They didn't kill anybody who didn't deserve it.\" Antisemitic symbols were scrawled on billboards near shooting locations, while Kingsley nearly entered a brawl with an elderly German-speaking businessman who insulted the Israeli actor Michael Schneider. Nonetheless, Spielberg said that, at Passover, \"all the German actors showed up. They put on yarmulkes and opened up Haggadas, and the Israeli actors moved right next to them and began explaining it to them. And this family of actors sat around and race and culture were just left behind.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was hit in the face with my personal life. My upbringing. My Jewishness. The stories my grandparents told me about the Shoah. And Jewish life came pouring back into my heart. I cried all the time.\u2014\u200a\nShooting \"Schindler's List\" was deeply emotional for Spielberg, as the subject matter forced him to confront elements of his childhood, such as the antisemitism he faced. He was surprised that he did not cry while visiting Auschwitz; instead, he found himself filled with outrage. He was one of many crew members who could not force themselves to watch during the shooting of the scene where aging Jews are forced to run naked while being selected by Nazi doctors to go to Auschwitz. Spielberg commented that he felt more like a reporter than a film maker \u2014 he would set up scenes and then watch events unfold, almost as though he were witnessing them rather than creating a film. Several actresses broke down when filming the shower scene, including one who was born in a concentration camp. Spielberg, his wife Kate Capshaw, and their five children rented a house in suburban Krak\u00f3w for the duration of filming. He later thanked his wife \"for rescuing me ninety-two days in a row\u00a0... when things just got too unbearable.\" Robin Williams called Spielberg to cheer him up, given the profound lack of humor on the set.\nSpielberg spent several hours each evening editing \"Jurassic Park\", which was scheduled to premiere in June 1993.\nSpielberg occasionally used German and Polish language dialogue to create a sense of realism. He initially considered making the film entirely in those languages, but decided \"there's too much safety in reading [subtitles]. It would have been an excuse [for the audience] to take their eyes off the screen and watch something else.\"\nCinematography.\nInfluenced by the 1985 documentary film \"Shoah\", Spielberg decided not to plan the film with storyboards, and to shoot it like a documentary. Forty percent of the film was shot with handheld cameras, and the modest budget meant the film was shot quickly over seventy-two days. Spielberg felt that this gave the film \"a spontaneity, an edge, and it also serves the subject.\" He filmed without using Steadicams, elevated shots, or zoom lenses, \"everything that for me might be considered a safety net.\" This matured Spielberg, who felt that in the past he had always been paying tribute to directors such as Cecil B. DeMille or David Lean.\nSpielberg decided to use black and white to match the feel of documentary footage of the era. Cinematographer Janusz Kami\u0144ski compared the effect to German Expressionism and Italian neorealism. Kami\u0144ski said that he wanted to give the impression of timelessness to the film, so the audience would \"not have a sense of when it was made.\" Universal chairman Tom Pollock asked him to shoot the film on a color negative, to allow color VHS copies of the film to later be sold, but Spielberg did not want to accidentally \"beautify events.\" However, scenes with the girl in the red coat were shot in color, and later rotoscoped over by hand to remove all color except for the coat.\nMusic.\nJohn Williams, who frequently collaborates with Spielberg, composed the score for \"Schindler's List\". The composer was amazed by the film, and felt it would be too challenging. He said to Spielberg, \"You need a better composer than I am for this film.\" Spielberg responded, \"I know. But they're all dead!\" Itzhak Perlman performs the theme on the violin.\nIn the scene where the ghetto is being liquidated by the Nazis, the folk song \"Oyfn Pripetshik\" (, 'On the Cooking Stove') is sung by a children's choir. The song was often sung by Spielberg's grandmother, Becky, to her grandchildren. The clarinet solos heard in the film were recorded by Klezmer virtuoso Giora Feidman. Williams won an Academy Award for Best Original Score for \"Schindler's List\", his fifth win. Selections from the score were released on a soundtrack album.\nThemes and symbolism.\nThe film explores the theme of good and evil, using as its main protagonist a \"good German\", a popular characterization in American cinema. While G\u00f6th is portrayed as an almost completely dark and evil person, Schindler gradually evolves from Nazi supporter to rescuer and hero. Thus a second theme of redemption is introduced as Schindler, a disreputable schemer on the edges of respectability, becomes a father figure responsible for saving the lives of more than a thousand people.\nThe girl in red.\nWhile the film is shot primarily in black and white, a red coat is used to distinguish a little girl in the scene depicting the liquidation of the Krak\u00f3w ghetto. Later in the film, Schindler sees her exhumed dead body, recognizable only by the red coat she is still wearing. Spielberg said the scene was intended to symbolize how members of the highest levels of government in the United States knew the Holocaust was occurring, yet did nothing to stop it. He said: \"It was as obvious as a little girl wearing a red coat, walking down the street, and yet nothing was done to bomb the German rail lines. Nothing was being done to slow down;... the annihilation of European Jewry. So that was my message in letting that scene be in color.\" Andy Patrizio of \"IGN\" notes that the point at which Schindler sees the girl's dead body is the point at which he changes, no longer seeing \"the ash and soot of burning corpses piling up on his car as just an annoyance.\" Professor Andr\u00e9 H. Caron of the Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al wonders if the red symbolizes \"innocence, hope or the red blood of the Jewish people being sacrificed in the horror of the Holocaust.\"\nThe girl was portrayed by Oliwia D\u0105browska, three years old at the time of filming. Spielberg asked D\u0105browska not to watch the film until she was eighteen, but she watched it when she was eleven, and says she was \"horrified.\" Upon seeing the film again as an adult, she was proud of the role she played. Roma Ligocka, who says she was known in the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto for her red coat, feels the character might have been based on her. Ligocka, unlike her fictional counterpart, survived the Holocaust. After the film was released, she wrote and published her own story, \"The Girl in the Red Coat: A Memoir\" (2002, in translation). Alternatively, according to her relatives who were interviewed in 2014, the girl may have been inspired by Krak\u00f3w resident Genya Gitel Chil.\nCandles.\nThe opening scene features a family observing Shabbat. Spielberg said that \"to start the film with the candles being lit\u00a0... would be a rich bookend, to start the film with a normal Shabbat service before the juggernaut against the Jews begins.\" When the color fades out in the film's opening moments, it gives way to a world in which smoke comes to symbolize bodies being burnt at Auschwitz. Only at the end, when Schindler allows his workers to hold Shabbat services, do the images of candle fire regain their warmth through color. For Spielberg, they represent \"just a glint of color, and a glimmer of hope.\" Sara Horowitz, director of the Koschitzky Centre for Jewish Studies at York University, sees the candles as a symbol for the Jews of Europe, killed and then burned in the crematoria. The two scenes bracket the Nazi era, marking its beginning and end. She points out that normally, the woman of the house lights the Sabbath candles. In the film, it is men who perform this ritual, demonstrating not only the subservient role of women, but also the subservient position of Jewish men in relation to Aryan men, especially G\u00f6th and Schindler.\nOther symbolism.\nTo Spielberg, the black and white presentation of the film came to represent the Holocaust itself: \"The Holocaust was life without light. For me the symbol of life is color. That's why a film about the Holocaust has to be in black-and-white.\" Robert Gellately notes the film in its entirety can be seen as a metaphor for the Holocaust, with early sporadic violence increasing into a crescendo of death and destruction. He also notes a parallel between the situation of the Jews in the film and the debate in Nazi Germany between making use of the Jews for slave labor or exterminating them outright. Water is seen as giving deliverance by Alan Mintz, Holocaust Studies professor at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York. He notes its presence in the scene where Schindler arranges for a Holocaust train loaded with victims awaiting transport to be hosed down, and the scene in Auschwitz, where the women are given an actual shower instead of receiving the expected gassing.\nRelease.\n\"Schindler's List\" opened in theaters on December 15, 1993, in the United States and December 25 in Canada. Its premiere in Germany was on March 1, 1994. Its American network television premiere was on NBC on February 23, 1997. Shown uncut and without commercials, it ranked No. 3 for the week with a 20.9/31 rating/share, the highest Nielsen rating for any film since NBC's broadcast of \"Jurassic Park\" in May 1995. The film aired on public television in Israel on Holocaust Memorial Day in 1998.\nThe film was released in a THX widescreen VHS format on September 9, 1997. The DVD was released on March 9, 2004, in widescreen and full screen editions, on a double-sided disc with the feature film beginning on side A and continuing on side B. Special features include a documentary introduced by Spielberg. Also released for both formats was a limited edition gift set, which included the widescreen version of the film, Keneally's novel, the film's soundtrack on CD, a senitype, and a photo booklet titled \"Schindler's List: Images of the Steven Spielberg Film\", all housed in a plexiglass case. The laserdisc gift set was a limited edition that included the soundtrack, the original novel, and an exclusive photo booklet. As part of its 20th anniversary, the film was released on Blu-ray Disc on March 5, 2013. The film was digitally remastered in 4K, Dolby Vision and Atmos and was reissued into theaters on December 7, 2018, for its 25th anniversary. The film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on December 18, 2018.\nFollowing the success of the film, Spielberg founded the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation, a nonprofit organization with the goal of providing an archive for the filmed testimony of as many survivors of the Holocaust as possible, to save their stories. He continues to finance that work. Spielberg used proceeds from the film to finance several related documentaries, including \"Anne Frank Remembered\" (1995), \"The Lost Children of Berlin\" (1996), and \"The Last Days\" (1998).\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Schindler's List\" received acclaim from both film critics and audiences, with Americans such as talk show host Oprah Winfrey and President Bill Clinton urging others to see it. World leaders in many countries saw the film, and some met personally with Spielberg. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has received an approval rating of 98% based on 137 reviews, with an average rating of 9.20/10. The website's critical consensus reads, \"\"Schindler's List\" blends the abject horror of the Holocaust with Steven Spielberg's signature tender humanism to create the director's dramatic masterpiece.\" Metacritic gave the film a weighted average score of 95 out of 100, based on 30 critics. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a rare average grade of \"A+\" on an A+ to F scale.\nStephen Schiff of \"The New Yorker\" called it the best historical drama about the Holocaust, a film that \"will take its place in cultural history and remain there.\" Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" gave the film four stars out of four and described it as Spielberg's best, \"brilliantly acted, written, directed, and seen.\" Ebert and Gene Siskel named it the best film of 1993. Terrence Rafferty, also with \"The New Yorker\", admired the film's \"narrative boldness, visual audacity, and emotional directness.\" He noted the performances of Neeson, Fiennes, Kingsley, and Davidtz as warranting special praise, and calls the scene in the shower at Auschwitz \"the most terrifying sequence ever filmed.\" In the 2013 edition of his \"Movie and Video Guide\", Leonard Maltin awarded the picture a four-out-of-four-star rating; he described the film as a \"staggering adaptation of Thomas Keneally's best-seller\u00a0... with such frenzied pacing that it looks and feels like nothing Hollywood has ever made before\u00a0... Spielberg's most intense and personal film to date.\" James Verniere of the \"Boston Herald\" noted the film's restraint and lack of sensationalism, and called it a \"major addition to the body of work about the Holocaust.\" In his review for \"The New York Review of Books\", British critic John Gross said his misgivings that the story would be overly sentimentalized \"were altogether misplaced. Spielberg shows a firm moral and emotional grasp of his material. The film is an outstanding achievement.\" Mintz notes that even the film's harshest critics admire the \"visual brilliance\" of the fifteen-minute segment depicting the liquidation of the Krak\u00f3w ghetto. He describes the sequence as \"realistic\" and \"stunning.\" He points out that the film has done much to increase Holocaust remembrance and awareness as the remaining survivors pass away, severing the last living links with the catastrophe. The film's release in Germany led to widespread discussion about why most Germans did not do more to help.\nCriticism of the film also appeared, mostly from academia rather than the popular press. Sara Horowitz points out that much of the Jewish activity seen in the ghetto consists of financial transactions such as lending money, trading on the black market, or hiding wealth, thus perpetuating a stereotypical view of Jewish life. Horowitz notes that while the depiction of women in the film accurately reflects Nazi ideology, the low status of women and the link between violence and sexuality is not explored further. History professor Omer Bartov of Brown University notes that the physically large and strongly drawn characters of Schindler and G\u00f6th overshadow the Jewish victims, who are depicted as small, scurrying, and frightened \u2013 a mere backdrop to the struggle of good versus evil.\nHorowitz points out that the film's dichotomy of absolute good versus absolute evil glosses over the fact that most Holocaust perpetrators were ordinary people; the film does not explore how the average German rationalized their knowledge of or participation in the Holocaust. Author Jason Epstein commented that the film gives the false impression that if people were smart enough or lucky enough, they could survive the Holocaust. Spielberg responded to criticism that Schindler's breakdown as he says farewell is too maudlin and even out of character by pointing out that the scene is needed to drive home the sense of loss and to allow the viewer an opportunity to mourn alongside the characters on the screen.\nBartov wrote that the \"positively repulsive kitsch of the last two scenes seriously undermines much of the film's previous merits.\" He describes the humanization of Schindler as \"banal\", and is critical of what he describes as the \"Zionist closure\" set to the song \"Jerusalem of Gold.\"\nAssessment by other filmmakers.\n\"Schindler's List\" was very well received by many of Spielberg's peers. Filmmaker Billy Wilder wrote to Spielberg saying, \"They couldn't have gotten a better man. This movie is absolutely perfection.\" Polanski, who turned down the chance to direct the film, later commented, \"I certainly wouldn't have done as good a job as Spielberg because I couldn't have been as objective as he was.\" He cited \"Schindler's List\" as an influence on his 1994 film \"Death and the Maiden\". Martin Scorsese, who passed the film back to Spielberg and stated his version had different ideas from the final film including a different ending, would later comment \"I admired the film greatly.\" The success of \"Schindler's List\" led filmmaker Stanley Kubrick to abandon his own Holocaust project, \"Aryan Papers\", which would have been about a Jewish boy and his aunt who survive the war by sneaking through Poland while pretending to be Catholic. According to scriptwriter Frederic Raphael, when he suggested to Kubrick that \"Schindler's List\" was a good representation of the Holocaust, Kubrick commented, \"Think that's about the Holocaust? That was about success, wasn't it? The Holocaust is about 6 million people who get killed. \"Schindler's List\" is about 600 who don't.\"\nFilmmaker Jean-Luc Godard accused Spielberg of using the film to make a profit out of a tragedy while Schindler's wife, Emilie Schindler, lived in poverty in Argentina. Keneally disputed claims that she was never paid for her contributions, \"not least because I had recently sent Emilie a check myself.\" He also confirmed with Spielberg's office that payment had been sent from there. Filmmaker Michael Haneke criticized the sequence in which Schindler's women are accidentally sent off to Auschwitz and herded into showers: \"There's a scene in that film when we don't know if there's gas or water coming out in the showers in the camp. You can only do something like that with a naive audience like in the United States. It's not an appropriate use of the form. Spielberg meant well \u2013 but it was dumb.\"\nClaude Lanzmann, the director of the nine-hour Holocaust documentary \"Shoah\" (1985), called \"Schindler's List\" a \"kitschy melodrama\" and a \"deformation\" of historical truth. \"Fiction is a transgression, I am deeply convinced that there is a ban on depiction [of the Holocaust]\", he said. Lanzmann also criticized Spielberg for viewing the Holocaust through the eyes of a German, saying \"it is the world in reverse.\" He said: \"I sincerely thought that there was a time before \"Shoah\", and a time after \"Shoah\", and that after \"Shoah\" certain things could no longer be done. Spielberg did them anyway.\"\nReaction of the Jewish community.\nAt a 1994 \"Village Voice\" symposium about the film, historian Annette Insdorf described how her mother, a survivor of three concentration camps, felt gratitude that the Holocaust story was finally being told in a major film that would be widely viewed. Hungarian Jewish author Imre Kert\u00e9sz, a Holocaust survivor, feels it is impossible for life in a Nazi concentration camp to be accurately portrayed by anyone who did not experience it first-hand. While commending Spielberg for bringing the story to a wide audience, he found the film's final scene at the graveyard neglected the terrible after-effects of the experience on the survivors and implied that they came through emotionally unscathed. Rabbi Uri D. Herscher found the film an \"appealing\" and \"uplifting\" demonstration of humanitarianism. Norbert Friedman noted that, like many Holocaust survivors, he reacted with a feeling of solidarity towards Spielberg of a sort normally reserved for other survivors. Albert L. Lewis, Spielberg's childhood rabbi and teacher, described the film as \"Steven's gift to his mother, to his people, and in a sense to himself. Now he is a full human being.\"\nBox office.\nThe film grossed $96.1\u00a0million ($ in 2024) in the United States and Canada and over $321.2\u00a0million worldwide. In Germany, the film was viewed by over 100,000 people in its first week alone from 48 screens and was eventually shown in 500 theaters (including 80 paid for by municipal authorities), with a total of six million admissions and a gross of $38\u00a0million. Its 25th anniversary showings grossed $551,000 in 1,029 theaters.\nAccolades.\nSpielberg won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing \u2013 Feature Film for his work, and shared the Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture with co-producers Branko Lustig and Gerald R. Molen. Steven Zaillian won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. The film also won the National Board of Review for Best Film, along with the National Society of Film Critics for Best Film, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor, and Best Cinematography. Awards from the New York Film Critics Circle were also won for Best Film, Best Supporting Actor, and Best Cinematographer. The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the film for Best Film, Best Cinematography (tied with \"The Piano\"), and Best Production Design. The film also won numerous other awards and nominations worldwide.\nControversies.\nIn Malaysia, the film was initially banned. The Film Censorship Board of Malaysia wrote to the film's distributor, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The story reflects the privilege and virtues of a certain race only... The theme of the film is to reveal the brutality and cruelty of the Nazi soldiers to the Jews. It seems the illustration is propaganda with the purpose of asking for sympathy as well as to tarnish the other race.\nThe Prime Minister of Malaysia at the time, Mahathir Mohamad, said that Malaysians \"have the right to ban any movie.\" He went on to say, \"I'm not antisemitic... I'm anti-Zionist expansion (and) the conquest of Arab territories by Zionists.\"\nThe film was also banned in Indonesia, where the Committee for World Muslim Solidarity described it as \"nothing but Zionist propaganda.\"\nIn the Philippines, chief censor Henrietta Mendez ordered cuts of three scenes depicting sexual intercourse and female nudity before the film could be shown in cinemas. Spielberg refused, and pulled the film from screening in Philippine cinemas, which prompted the Senate to demand the abolition of the censorship board. President Fidel V. Ramos himself intervened, ruling that the film could be shown uncut to anyone over the age of 15.\nAccording to Slovak filmmaker Juraj Herz, the scene in which a group of women confuse an actual shower with a gas chamber is taken directly, shot by shot, from his film \"Zastihla m\u011b noc\" (\"The Night Overtakes Me\", 1986). Herz wanted to sue, but was unable to fund the case.\nThe song \"Yerushalayim Shel Zahav\" (\"Jerusalem of Gold\") is featured in the film's soundtrack and plays near the end of the film. This caused some controversy in Israel, as the song (which was written in 1967 by Naomi Shemer) is widely considered an informal anthem of the Israeli victory in the Six-Day War. In Israeli prints of the film, the song was replaced with \"Halikha LeKesariya\" (\"A Walk to Caesarea\") by Hannah Szenes, a World War II resistance fighter.\nFor the 1997 American television showing, the film was broadcast virtually unedited. The telecast was the first to receive a TV-M (now TV-MA) rating under the TV Parental Guidelines that had been established earlier that year. Tom Coburn, then an Oklahoma congressman, said that in airing the film, NBC had brought television \"to an all-time low, with full-frontal nudity, violence and profanity\", adding that it was an insult to \"decent-minded individuals everywhere.\" Under fire from both Republicans and Democrats, Coburn apologized, saying, \"My intentions were good, but I've obviously made an error in judgment in how I've gone about saying what I wanted to say.\" He clarified his opinion, stating that the film ought to have been aired later at night when there would not be \"large numbers of children watching without parental supervision.\"\nControversy arose in Germany for the film's television premiere on ProSieben. Protests among the Jewish community ensued when the station intended to televise it with two commercial breaks of 3\u20134 minutes each. Ignatz Bubis, head of the Central Council of Jews in Germany, said: \"It is problematic to interrupt such a movie by commercials.\" Jerzy Kanal, chairman of the Jewish Community of Berlin, added \"It is obvious that the film could have a greater impact [on society] when broadcast unimpeded by commercials. The station has to do everything possible to broadcast the film without interruption.\" As a compromise, the broadcast included one break consisting of a short news update framed with commercials. ProSieben was also obliged to broadcast two accompanying documentaries to the film, showing \"The daily lives of the Jews in Hebron and New York\" prior to broadcast and \"The survivors of the Holocaust\" afterwards.\nLegacy.\n\"Schindler's List\" featured on a number of \"best of\" lists, including the \"TIME\" magazine's Top Hundred as selected by critics Richard Corliss and Richard Schickel, \"Time Out\" magazine's 100 Greatest Films Centenary Poll conducted in 1995, and Leonard Maltin's \"100 Must See Movies of the Century.\" The Vatican included \"Schindler's List\" in its list of 45 important films \u2013 the latest-released entry to make the list. A Channel 4 poll named \"Schindler's List\" the ninth greatest film of all time, and it ranked fourth in their 2005 war films poll. The film was named the best of 1993 by critics such as James Berardinelli, Roger Ebert, and Gene Siskel. Deeming the film \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\", the Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry in 2004. The film was shown at the Berlinale Film Festival in February 2023, at which Spielberg received an honorary Golden Bear award.\nDue to the increased interest in Krak\u00f3w created by the film, the city bought Oskar Schindler's Enamel Factory in 2007 to create a permanent exhibition about the German occupation of the city from 1939 to 1945. The museum opened in June 2010.\nA portion of Schindler's Br\u00fcnnlitz factory became the Museum of Survivors, opening in May 2025, 80 years after the end of World War II. Daniel L\u00f6w-Beer, whose family owned the factory starting in 1854, started the Arks Foundation in 2019 to raise funds for the museum. Other buildings may also be restored.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "65835", "revid": "21778972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=65835", "title": "Please Please Me", "text": "1963 studio album by the Beatles\nPlease Please Me is the debut studio album by English rock band the Beatles. Produced by George Martin, it was released in the United Kingdom on EMI's Parlophone label on 22\u00a0March 1963. The album's 14 tracks include cover songs and original material written by the partnership of band members John Lennon and Paul McCartney.\nThe Beatles had signed with EMI in May 1962 and been assigned to the Parlophone label run by Martin. They released their debut single \"Love Me Do\" in October, which surprised Martin by reaching number 17 on what would become the official UK singles chart. Impressed, Martin suggested they record a live album and helped arrange their next single, \"Please Please Me\", which topped the \"NME\" singles chart. Finding the Cavern Club, the band's venue in their native Liverpool, unsuitable for recording, Martin switched to a simple studio album. The Beatles recorded \"Please Please Me\" in one day at EMI Studios on 11\u00a0February 1963, with Martin adding overdubs to \"Misery\" and \"Baby It's You\" nine days later. The A-sides and B-sides of two previously released singles were added to the album.\nThe album was well-received in Britain, where it remained in the Top 10 for over a year, a record for a debut album that stood for half a century. The presence of several songs written by band members Lennon\u2013McCartney (credited as \"McCartney\u2013Lennon\" at the time) was unusual and marked the emergence of a \"self-contained rock band\". On the other hand, the album was not released in the US, where the band sold poorly for most of 1963; after the stateside emergence of Beatlemania, Vee-Jay Records released a mild abridgment of the album as \"Introducing... The Beatles\" in early 1964, while EMI's American label Capitol Records divided the material from \"Please Please Me\" across multiple albums. Other countries also received different versions of the album, which continued until 1987, when the entirety of the Beatles catalogue was brought to CD and internationally standardised to the UK albums. \"Please Please Me\" remains critically acclaimed; it was voted 39th on \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\" in 2012, and number 622 in the third edition of Colin Larkin's \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\" in 2000.\nBackground.\nThe Beatles originated in the skiffle scene of Liverpool in the late 1950s, and by 1961 had solidified their lineup with John Lennon on rhythm guitar, Paul McCartney on bass, George Harrison on lead guitar, and Pete Best on drums. The band mostly played cover songs, although Lennon and McCartney had a budding songwriting partnership that also contributed material. After a stint in Hamburg backing English singer Tony Sheridan and releasing a single with Sheridan, \"My Bonnie\", on which they were credited as \"The Beat Brothers\", they returned to Liverpool in late 1961. Shortly after their return they were approached by Brian Epstein, a music store manager who recognized the group's local popularity and became the group's new manager. After a failed audition at Decca Records at the beginning of 1962, Epstein was eventually able to sign the group to EMI that May.\nEMI offered the Beatles a recording contract on its Parlophone label run by George Martin. Though Martin was drawn to the Beatles' personalities and charisma, he was initially unconvinced that they could write hit songs. Their first session, on 6 June, with Best on drums, resulted in no recordings suitable for release. Martin reacted negatively to Best's presence and insisted on the use of a session drummer in his stead; although this was standard procedure at the time, the band took this as a cue to drop Best in favour of Rory Storm and the Hurricanes drummer Ringo Starr. Their second session, on 4 September and now with Starr on drums, produced \"Love Me Do\", which became their first single several weeks later, and an early version of \"Please Please Me\". On 11 September, the band re-recorded \"Love Me Do\" with session drummer Andy White and recorded \"P.S. I Love You\", which became the B-side to \"Love Me Do\". They also recorded a sped-up version of \"Please Please Me\", which Martin believed had hit potential but required more work.\nMartin doubted the commercial appeal of \"Love Me Do\" and was surprised when it reached No. 17 on the British charts in November. Now convinced that the Beatles could write hits, Martin met the Beatles on 16 November and made two suggestions for their upcoming work. First, he suggested that they re-record \"Please Please Me\" and issue it as the Beatles' second single. Next, he proposed that they record a full album\u2014a recommendation Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn deemed \"genuinely mind-boggling\" because the Beatles were so new to the music scene and because the album market was dominated by adult buyers, not teenagers. On 26 November, the Beatles held another session for \"Please Please Me\" (to be backed with \"Ask Me Why\"), after which Martin predicted that they had just made their first number one record.\nAs the Beatles had extensive stage experience and a large following of local fans in Liverpool, Martin proposed the band could record a live album, primarily of Lennon\u2013McCartney songs at their resident venue, the Cavern Club, in December. Martin planned to attend the Beatles' 18 November Cavern concert to gauge its suitability for recording, though he postponed this visit until 12 December. Upon his visit to the Cavern, Martin decided the acoustics would be unsuitable and decided to record a traditional studio album in February 1963; as the Beatles had already recorded four songs for release, they would record another ten to complete the album. In the meantime, Martin also solicited the Beatles' input for album names; McCartney suggested \"Off the Beatle Track\".\nThe single \"Please Please Me\" was released on 11 January 1963 and reached number one on the \"NME\", \"Melody Maker\", and \"Disc\" charts. In early February, the group undertook their first national tour, and they planned to record their album during a break in the tour on 11 February.\nRecording.\nMartin asked the band if they had any songs that they could record quickly. According to Martin, \"It was a straightforward performance of their stage repertoire \u2013 a broadcast, more or less.\" Initially, a morning and afternoon session only were booked; the evening session was added later. Mark Lewisohn later wrote: \"There can scarcely have been 585 more productive minutes in the history of recorded music\". Martin oversaw each session on the day, with Norman Smith as first engineer and Richard Langham as second engineer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWe didn't rehearse our first album. In my head, it was done \"live\". We did the songs through first, so they could get some sort of sound on each one; then we had to just run, run them down.\n\u2014Ringo Starr\nOn 11February 1963, the Beatles arrived with John Lennon suffering from a bad cold, which he attempted to treat with a steady supply of throat lozenges. They began their morning session at 10 am with \"There's a Place\" and \"Seventeen\" (the working title of what became \"I Saw Her Standing There\"). The band rehearsed during their lunch break and then proceeded with their afternoon session. In that session, Paul McCartney recorded a double-tracked vocal for \"A Taste of Honey\" (a standard later covered by renowned soul artists such as The Supremes, Four Tops, and Mel Carter), George Harrison sang lead on \"Do You Want to Know a Secret\", and Lennon and McCartney sang co-lead on \"Misery\". During the evening session, the band recorded covers of \"Anna (Go to Him)\", \"Boys\" (Ringo Starr's sole vocal), \"Chains\" and \"Baby It's You\". The song \"Hold Me Tight\" was also recorded during the evening session, but proved \"surplus to requirements\" and was not included on the album.\nAt 10\u00a0pm, with the studios set to close soon, the day ended with a cover of \"Twist and Shout\". The song was picked after a discussion in the studio canteen in which numerous songs were suggested before \"Twist and Shout\" was chosen. The performance, caught on the first take, prompted Martin to say: \"I don't know how they do it. We've been recording all day but the longer we go on the better they get.\" Lennon later remarked, \"The last song nearly killed me. My voice wasn't the same for a long time after; every time I swallowed, it was like sandpaper.\"\nAt the end of the evening session at 10:30 pm, the Beatles attended a full tape playback in the studio control room. Lennon reflected, \"Waiting to hear that LP played back was one of our most worrying experiences. ... As it happens, we were very happy with the result. The Beatles were not present during an overdub session on 20 February, during which Martin overdubbed piano on \"Misery\" and celesta on \"Baby It's You\".\nThe day of recording cost approximately \u00a3400 (). Martin said: \"There wasn't a lot of money at Parlophone. I was working to an annual budget of \u00a355,000.\" This budget had to cover all of the artists on Martin's roster. Individually, under a contract with the Musicians' Union, each Beatle collected a session fee of \u00a37 10s (\u00a37.50; equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023) for each three-hour session (10:00 am \u2013 1:00 pm / 2:30 pm \u2013 5:30 pm / 7:30 pm \u2013 10:30 pm).\nBefore deciding on the title \"Please Please Me\", Martin considered calling the album \"Off the Beatle Track\", a title he would later use for his own orchestral album of Beatles songs. The album was recorded on a two-track BTR tape machine with most of the instruments on one track and the vocals on the other, allowing Martin to better balance the two in the final mono mix. A stereo mix was also made with one track on the left channel and the other on the right, as well as an added layer of reverb to better blend the two tracks together. The two tracks generally divided the instrumental track from the vocals, with the exception of \"Boys\", in which the close proximity of Ringo's drums to his vocal microphone placed the drums (but not the other instruments) on the vocal channel.\nTwo tracks, \"Love Me Do\" and \"P.S. I Love You\", were only mixed for mono for the single's release and no stereo versions were made, so, for the stereo version of the album, during the mixing sessions on 25 February 1963, Martin created \"mock stereo\" versions by emphasising low frequencies on one side and high frequencies on the other. These versions would continue to be made available via compilation albums (such as \"1962\u20131966\"), and on Mobile Fidelity Sound Labs' half-speed mastered vinyl releases (catalogue number MFSL-1-101) sourced from EMI's original stereo master tapes, until the Beatles' catalogue was standardised and issued on compact disc in 1987, starting with the first four UK albums being issued in their mono versions. However, when Capitol Records issued the second volume of American Beatles albums on compact disc (\"The Capitol Albums, Volume 2\") in 2006, the same mock stereo versions that appeared on \"The Early Beatles\" were included. When the entire catalogue was remastered for release in 2009, the mono mixes were chosen for inclusion on the stereo reissues, and appear on all releases since, including newer compilations and variations.\nArtwork and packaging.\nGeorge Martin was an honorary fellow of the Zoological Society of London, which owns London Zoo, and he thought that it might be good publicity for the zoo to have the Beatles pose outside the insect house for the cover photography of the album. However, the society turned down Martin's request, and instead, Angus McBean was asked to take the distinctive colour photograph of the group looking down over the stairwell inside EMI's London headquarters in Manchester Square. Martin was to write later: \"We rang up the legendary theatre photographer Angus McBean, and bingo, he came round and did it there and then. It was done in an almighty rush, like the music. Thereafter, though, the Beatles' own creativity came bursting to the fore.\" In 1969, the Beatles asked McBean to recreate this shot. Although the 1969 photograph was originally intended for the then-planned \"Get Back\" album, it was not used when that project saw eventual release in 1970 as \"Let It Be\". Instead, the 1969 photograph, along with an unused photograph from the 1963 photo shoot, was used in 1973 for the Beatles' retrospective albums \"1962\u20131966\" and \"1967\u20131970\". Another unused photograph from the 1963 photo shoot was used for \"The Beatles (No. 1)\" (EP released 1 November 1963).\nThe Beatles' press officer Tony Barrow wrote extensive sleeve notes, which included a brief mention of their early 1960s rivals the Shadows.\nRelease.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis album was one of the main ambitions in our lives. We felt that it would be a showcase for the group, and it was tremendously important for us that it sounded bang on the button. As it happened, we were pleased. If not, sore throats or not, we'd have done it all over again. That was the mood we were in. It was break or bust for us.\n\u2014Paul McCartney\nParlophone released \"Please Please Me\" in the UK on 22 March 1963. As was typical for the time, the LP was initially released in mono, with a stereo release following on 26 April. Singles remained the dominant format for pop music, made up mostly of teenage buyers, while more expensive LPs were typically reserved for genres like classical music and jazz, whose listeners could more easily afford the format. Author Barry Miles suggested the album's cover design, promising \"Please Please Me\", \"Love Me Do\" and \"12 Other Songs\", indicated EMI's desire to promote the album towards \"die-hard supporters\" excited by the two earlier singles.\n\"Please Please Me\" hit the top of the UK album charts in May 1963 and remained there for 30 weeks before being replaced by \"With the Beatles\". This was an unprecedented achievement for a pop album. At the time, the UK album charts tended to be dominated by film soundtracks and easy listening vocalists. \"Please Please Me\" was the first non-soundtrack album to spend more than one year (62 weeks) consecutively inside the top ten of what became the Official UK Albums Chart. This record run of consecutive weeks in the top ten for a debut album stood until April 2013, when Emeli Sand\u00e9's \"Our Version of Events\" achieved a 63rd consecutive week.\nIn the 30 March 1963 issue of \"Record Mirror\", Norman Jopling reviewed the album in depth, providing track-by-track reviews for the ten songs that had not been previously released. He concludes that, for a debut, the LP is \"surprisingly good and up to standard\", and contained many tracks that could have been released as singles, such as \"I Saw Her Standing There\" and \"Misery\". Jopling further highlighted the LP's packaging, writing that its cover image and sleeve notes provided extra value. Author Jonathan Gould suggests in retrospect that the album's packaging majorly contributed to its success, promising fans \"glossy cover art\" and a greater companion to the music than the plain paper packaging then offered by singles.\nInternational and CD releases.\nIn addition to the UK, \"Please Please Me\" was released, un- or lightly-modified, in India, continental Europe, Australia, and New Zealand. In New Zealand, the album first appeared only in mono on the black Parlophone label. The following year (1964) EMI (NZ) changed from black to a blue Parlophone label and the album was again available only in mono. Due to constant demand, it was finally made available in stereo, first through the World Record Club on their \"Young World\" label in both mono and stereo, and finally on the blue Parlophone label. The album was released in Japan in 1969 with a different cover and a significantly shuffled tracklist.\nEMI's American subsidiary Capitol Records had been offered the opportunity to release Beatles material since the 1962 release of \"Love Me Do\", but turned it down. Vee-Jay Records, a smaller label unaffiliated with EMI, took the initiative of bringing the Beatles to the United States, releasing the \"Please Please Me\" single on 25 February 1963. Despite its success in Britain, \"Please Please Me\" failed to chart in the US, and the May release of \"From Me to You\" was similarly lacklustre, leading Vee-Jay to lose interest in the Beatles. Originally planning on releasing the \"Please Please Me\" album unaltered in July, it ended up trimming \"Please Please Me\" and \"Ask Me Why\" to fit the standard American album length and releasing it as \"Introducing... The Beatles\" in January 1964. Capitol remained unimpressed with the group until the rapid success of \"I Want to Hold Your Hand\" in Christmas 1963. Buoyed by the resultant Beatlemania and aware of their previous rejection of the Beatles, Capitol released a modified version of the group's second album \"With the Beatles\", coming out with \"Meet the Beatles!\" shortly after Vee-Jay had released \"Introducing... The Beatles\". \"Meet the Beatles!\" contains \"I Saw Her Standing There\", which Capitol released as the American B-side of \"I Want to Hold Your Hand\". Finally acquiring the rights to early Beatles recordings back from Vee-Jay in late 1964, Capitol released most of the other tracks from \"Please Please Me\" on \"The Early Beatles\" in March 1965, although \"Misery\" and \"There's a Place\" remained unreleased by Capitol until 1980's \"Rarities\".\nIn Canada, the majority of the album's songs were included upon the Canadian-exclusive release \"Twist and Shout\", which featured \"From Me to You\" and \"She Loves You\" in place of \"I Saw Her Standing There\" and \"Misery\".\nThe album was released on CD on 26 February 1987, in mono, as were their three subsequent albums, \"With the Beatles\", \"A Hard Day's Night\" and \"Beatles for Sale\". It was not released on vinyl or tape in the US until five months later when it was issued for the first time in the US on LP and cassette on 21 July 1987.\n\"Please Please Me\" was remastered and re-released on CD in stereo, along with all the other original UK studio albums, on 9 September 2009. The 2009 remasters replaced the 1987 remasters. A remastered mono CD was also available as part of \"The Beatles in Mono\" box set.\nRetrospective assessment.\nIn a 1987 review coinciding with the album's CD reissue, \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's Steve Pond recommended \"Please Please Me\" \"for the Beatles' unfettered joy at making music\". Senior AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine summarised, \"Decades after its release, the album still sounds fresh\", serving as an effective encapsulation of the band's early influences, further finding the covers \"impressive\" and the originals \"astonishing\".\n\"Rolling Stone\" magazine cited Lennon\u2013McCartney's original compositions as early evidence of the Beatles' \"[invention of] the idea of the self-contained rock band, writing their own hits and playing their own instruments\".\nThe album's 2009 remaster attracted a number of reviewers. \"Pitchfork\"'s Tom Ewing described the album as \"a raw, high-energy run-through of their early live set\" that acts as \"the sound of rock'n'roll finding a suddenly large, new audience.\" He praised the album's cohesiveness, where the \"evening with the band\" mood sets it apart from the band's other cover-heavy works, creating a non-filler track experience with great covers and originals and, above all, great vocal performances. The same year, Mark Kemp was positive reviewing the band's entire remastered catalogue for \"Paste\", commending the band for infusing African American musical styles with \"chirpy harmonies\" from girl groups like the Shirelles to create \"a sound the pop world had never heard\". \"The Telegraph\" writer Neil McCormick praised the band's performances throughout the record, contending that \"the sheer accomplishment of their tight, syncopated playing and perfect harmony singing is astonishing to behold.\" Alex Young described the album as a dance masterpiece in \"Consequence of Sound\", finding the remaster an improvement over the original mix.\nWriting for BBC Music in 2010, Mike Diver contended that although not regarded as their most critically acclaimed release, \"Please Please Me\" stands as a \"vital moment\" in the band's history, as it \"set in motion the wheels that would carry them to the very peak of public recognition, and subsequently into realms of sonic experimentation that would create a template for so much rock and pop music since.\" Diver further argued that the album's long reign at the top of the UK charts provided a rebuttal to Decca Records' stance that guitar groups were \"on the way out\". The writers of \"Rolling Stone\" agreed in \"The Rolling Stone Album Guide\", writing that \"Please Please Me\" acted as a blueprint for \"everything the Beatles would ever do\".\nIn \"Ultimate Classic Rock\", Michael Gallucci praised \"Please Please Me\" as a cohesive debut album that established a rough blueprint in the Beatles' working methods over the next few years, despite finding some tracks did not work as well as others, concluding: \"\"Please Please Me\" proved that the music that everyone was ignoring was uniformly great.\" Gallucci had assessed one year earlier that the album was \"the sound of rock 'n' roll at the crossroads.\" He explained: \"On one hand, many of its songs are rooted in the '50s (and earlier) music the group revered. On the other hand, this is the '60s taking shape.\"\nReflecting on the album in 2016, the \"NME\"'s Hamish MacBain found it imperfect, but commended the ensemble for creating a record of excellent covers and originals that displayed \"flashes of brilliance\". MacBain acknowledged the band would make better records, but concluded that \"the resulting, snapshot nature\" of their debut outing \"is exactly what makes it so great\".\nRankings.\n\"Please Please Me\" has made appearances on several best-of lists. In 2012, it was voted 39th on \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. It was ranked first among the Beatles' early albums, and sixth of all of the Beatles' albums, with \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\", \"Revolver\", \"Rubber Soul\", \"The Beatles\" (also known as \"The White Album\") and \"Abbey Road\" ranked higher. English writer Colin Larkin listed \"Please Please Me\" at number 622 in the third edition of his book \"All Time Top 1000 Albums\" (2000). \"Rolling Stone\" also placed two songs from the album on its 2004 edition of the \"500 Greatest Songs of All Time\": \"I Saw Her Standing There\" at number 140, and \"Please Please Me\" at number 186.\nSeveral publications, including \"NME\", have named \"Please Please Me\" one of the best debut albums of all time, with \"Rolling Stone\" and \"Uncut\" both ranking it number 17. In 2015, \"Ultimate Classic Rock\" ranked it the Beatles' eighth best album and included it in their list of the top 100 rock albums from the 1960s.\n50th anniversary.\nIn 2013, the album's 50th anniversary was celebrated by modern artists re-recording the album in just one day, as the Beatles recorded it 50 years earlier. Stereophonics recorded a cover of the album's opening track, \"I Saw Her Standing There\". This and the other recordings were broadcast on BBC Radio 2, and a documentary about the re-recording of the Beatles' debut album was broadcast on BBC Television.\nTrack listing.\nAll songs written by McCartney\u2013Lennon, except where noted. Track lengths per Jean-Michel Guesdon and Philippe Margotin and lead vocals per Ian MacDonald.\nPersonnel.\nAccording to Ian MacDonald and Mark Lewisohn:\nThe Beatles\nAdditional musicians and production\nCharts.\nWeekly charts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCertifications and sales.\n\u2020 BPI certification awarded only for sales since 1994.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
